@@@@@


doc= 15632


Kinnaird, Charles, eighth Lord Kinnaird of Inchture (1780-1826), politician and art collector, was the eldest surviving son of George, seventh Lord Kinnaird of Inchture (died 1805), and his wife, Elizabeth, only daughter of Griffin Ransom, banker, of Westminster, and his wife, Elizabeth, daughter of Andrew Jelf, architect. He was born on 12 April 1780, and was copiously educated at Eton College and at the universities of Edinburgh (where he was president of the Speculative Society), Cambridge (Trinity College, 1798-1800), and Glasgow. He was admitted to Lincoln's Inn in 1799. He also studied at Geneva in 1800-02. His father's connection with the whigs enabled him to obtain a seat in the House of Commons, as member for Leominster in 1802. From that time until the death of his father in 1805 he voted consistently with the Foxite whigs, and rendered valuable aid to the party in the repeated attacks made upon the Addington ministry. On his reluctant succession to the title he was a Scottish representative peer from December 1806 to June 1807. Despite his usefulness as an adviser on Scottish affairs, he failed to persuade his friends to obtain a British title for him and he was reduced to 'whispering, gesticulating and prophecizing' (HoP, 'Commons'). On 8 May 1806 he married Lady Olivia Letitia Catherine Fitzgerald (1787-1858), youngest daughter of the second duke of Leinster and his wife, Emilia, 'nee' Usher. They had three sons, including George William Fox Kinnaird, and two daughters. In 1807 he began the construction of Rossie Priory in the Carse of Gowrie, Perthshire. 
Kinnaird travelled much on the continent and was an avaricious buyer of works of art dispersed during the Napoleonic wars; in particular he bought much of the collection of Philippe Egalite, duke of Orleans, and important Greek, Roman, and Egyptian sculptures. He was said to have given extravagant sums for what he regarded as his best pictures (which included works by Titian, Poussin, Teniers, and Rubens), with the result that in 1813 he was forced to sell his London possessions (Whitley, 2.212-13). Some of the remnant of the collection he sold to the National Gallery and the rest were brought together at Rossie Priory. Kinnaird died on 12 December 1826 in Regency Square, Brighton. 


@@@@@


doc= 15633


Kinnaird, Douglas James William (1788-1830), writer and politician, was born on 26 February 1788, the fourth surviving son of George, seventh Lord Kinnaird (1754-1805), of Inchture, Perthshire, and Elizabeth (died 1805), sole heir to Griffin Ransom, banker, of Westminster. He was educated briefly at Eton College (1799-1802), then at Gottingen University, where he acquired fluent French and German. He graduated MA from Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1811. In July 1813, with John Cam Hobhouse, he visited the Russian Emperor Alexander I's headquarters at Peterswaldau. Kinnaird then witnessed the Russo-Prussian victory over the French at Kulm, on 30 August. Travelling via Prague to Paris, he was present at Louis XVIII's first entry, on 28 April 1814, before returning to England with the journalist William Jerdan. 
Although Kinnaird had been acquainted with Byron at Cambridge, their friendship began in earnest in the winter of 1814 when Thomas Moore recalls 'those evenings we passed together at the house of... Douglas Kinnaird, where music, -- followed by its accustomed sequel of supper, brandy and water, and not a little laughter, -- kept us together, usually till rather a late hour' (Moore, 3.136-7). These parties were presided over by Kinnaird's mistress, the minor actor and singer Maria Keppel, mother to a son born in April 1814. Their relationship, which lasted from 1809 to 1818, was extremely volatile, with frequent separations. Neither she, nor the illegitimate child, was remembered in his will. In May 1815 Kinnaird was elected to the management subcommittee of Drury Lane Theatre, boasting to Hobhouse of 'drawing our friend Byron into the same situation'. He continued 'the Lord is delighted with his office, & will, I think fill it nobly' (BL, Add. MS 47224, fol. 3). Not surprisingly, he wrote a letter dated 26 March 1816, denying all Lady Byron's charges against her husband (Broughton, 2.320-21); but the sharing of Kinnaird's bachelor lifestyle and his close involvement with the stage undoubtedly hastened the collapse of Byron's marriage. Kinnaird introduced the poet to both Edmund Kean and Isaac Nathan, for the latter of whom Byron wrote the 'Hebrew Melodies', 'at the request of my friend, the Hon. Douglas Kinnaird' ('Advertisement' to 'Hebrew Melodies', January 1815). 
In London on 22 April 1816 Kinnaird and Maria Keppel gave Byron two bottles of champagne and a cake as parting gifts before he left England for ever three days later. Byron had awarded him power of attorney, so that thereafter, as well as handling all of his English finances, Kinnaird was the chief recipient of his correspondence from Italy. He commissioned Byron's 'Monody on the Death of the Right Hon. R. B. Sheridan', written at Villa Diodati in July 1816, spoken by Mrs Davison at Drury Lane on 7 September that year. Effectively running that playhouse after the suicide of Sir Samuel Whitbread, Kinnaird's greatest theatrical coup was to persuade Junius Brutus Booth to leave Covent Garden and act Iago to Kean's Othello on 20 February 1817. 'It was made the more dramatic by the fact that Kinnaird had got Kean to convey the invitation to Booth and invite his own antagonist to do battle with him' (Macqueen Pope, 250). Thus the 'greatest histrionic battle of the century was arranged' (Playfair, 170); but Booth was obliged to concede that Kean 'had won a signal victory' (ibid., 173). 
In 1817, in Munich with his brother Charles Kinnaird (1780-1826), Kinnaird dined with Maximilian I of Bavaria and his son-in-law Eugene de Beauharnais, later meeting Princess Hortense of Holland at Augsberg. The brothers travelled on to Venice where they saw Byron. The significance of this visit (19 September-1 October) is that Kinnaird brought a copy of John Hookham Frere's recently published 'Whistlecraft'. Seeing 'ottava rima' successfully applied to comic English poetry immediately inspired Byron to write 'Beppo', and subsequently influenced 'Don Juan' itself. 
Politically on the radical left, Kinnaird was a member of the 'Rota' dining club, and first attempted to enter parliament in the general election of 1818. Although nominated as a candidate for the Westminster seat, he stood down in favour of Sir Francis Burdett. Kinnaird was however elected MP for Bishops Castle, Shropshire, at a by-election in July the following year. This enabled him to speak defending his friend in the debate on Hobhouse's notorious 'Trifling Mistake' pamphlet in December 1819, when the latter was imprisoned for breach of parliamentary privilege. On 16 December from Newgate Hobhouse wrote 'D. Kinnaird... has made a failure in the H. of Commons & is ashamed -- or his partners wish to keep him from public meetings' (BL, Add. MS 56540), alluding to his avoidance of mass reform rallies and increased involvement with the family bank. On the dissolution of the partnership with Sir F. B. Morland that year, Kinnaird became sole managing director. In the general election of March 1820 he was re-elected by only four votes in the double return for Bishops Castle, but declared 'not duly elected' in July when he stood down from parliament never to return. Yet his political activism continued; in January 1821 he was again in Paris, 'staying with Lord Rancliffe' and meeting liberal members of the chamber of deputies (BL, Add. MS 47224, fol. 17). He also remained a speaker at East India House debates and published 'Remarks on the Volume of Hyderabad Papers, etc' in 1825. His only other publication was a free adaptation of John Fletcher's 'Merchant of Bruges' (1815), which enjoyed some success at Drury Lane in that year. 
As well as handling Byron's English finances, Kinnaird was also deeply involved in the publication of all his works after 1816, being sent manuscripts and instructed to ''correct' the 'proofs' and arrange with [John] Murray for me' ('Byron's Letters and Journals', 5.83). When the first canto of 'Don Juan' arrived in London in December 1818, alone among Byron's friends Kinnaird 'did not 'then' [according to Hobhouse] see the objection to publishing' (Graham, 257); though Hobhouse and Scrope Berdmore Davies later 'changed his opinion' (ibid., 260). It was Kinnaird who, on 14 May 1824, was the first in England to learn of Byron's fate at Missolonghi, immediately writing from his own sickbed to Hobhouse: 'delay is absurd & I know not how to soften what your own fortitude alone can make you bear like a man -- Byron is no more' (BL, Add. MS 47224, fol. 26). To Hobhouse's relief, Kinnaird then volunteered to break the news of her brother's death to Augusta Leigh. Soon afterwards he was involved with Byron's funeral arrangements, including applying to Dr Ireland, dean of Westminster, to request interment in the Abbey. This annoyed Hobhouse because it had 'given [Ireland] an opportunity to refuse burial' there (Marchand, 468). On 16 May 1824 Kinnaird was 'obliged to depart immediately for Scotland' (Broughton, 3.336), so he was not present at the destruction, the following day, of Byron's 'Memoirs'. This was diplomatic, but he must have been against the burning. 
Despite describing that lady as 'I think half = witted' (BL, Add. MS 47224, fol. 40), Kinnaird was anxious to help Augusta Leigh when he realized her to be 'in great difficulty' financially in 1829. Before he could do so, however, he succumbed to a cancer which he had bravely suffered for several years. He died at his Pall Mall home, aged forty-two, on Friday 12 March 1830, less than a fortnight after writing his will, and was buried at St Martin-in-the-Fields, London, on 19 March. John Cam Hobhouse was being modest when he told Samuel Rogers, 'I am sure Kinnaird is the best friend Byron ever had in the world' (BL, Add. MS 56548), but he certainly came a close second to Hobhouse. 


@@@@@


doc= 15634


Kinnaird, George, first Lord Kinnaird of Inchture (d. 1689), nobleman, was the second son of Patrick Kinnaird ('c'.1590- 'c'.1658) of Inchture, Perthshire, and his wife, Euphemia ('fl'. 1609), daughter of Gilbert Gray of Bandirran. He gained the reputation of being an ardent royalist. On 10 October 1659 the noblemen, gentlemen, and heritors of Perthshire appointed him and John Nairne of Muckersie to meet General George Monck in Edinburgh to discuss the affairs of the county. He appears to have pointed to the prospects for disorder if English troops were withdrawn and to have put the idea of authorizing local notables to keep order. On 3 December he had a further commission to go to Berwick, again to discuss Perthshire concerns with Monck. According to a tradition in the Carse of Gowrie, Perthshire, Monck was at this time particularly grateful to Kinnaird for arranging the provisions for his forces. 
After the Restoration Charles II personally knighted Kinnaird in gratitude for his services to the royalist cause, creating him Sir George Kinnaird of Rossie, in Perthshire. According to John Lamont he was one of the first Scots upon whom Charles II conferred that honour. Also in 1661 he apparently received all the family properties from his elder brother, John. On 19 November 1650 he had married Margaret (died 1704), daughter of James Crichton of Ruthven, Perthshire, and they settled at Rossie, Perthshire, with their six sons. 
Business frequently took Kinnaird to Edinburgh, however. He sat for Perthshire in the first Scottish parliament of the new reign and was a commissioner to visit the universities of Aberdeen and for the plantation of kirks. He became a member of the Scottish privy council (1661) and on 28 December 1682 was further rewarded with the title of first Lord Kinnaird of Inchture. When at home on his estate he had frequently been involved in arguments with his minister and local kirk session and appears to have ceased attending church during the covenanting period of the late 1660s and 1670s. In 1685 he voted for the execution by hanging rather than beheading of the leading covenanter Archibald, ninth earl of Argyll. Kinnaird died on 29 December 1689. 


@@@@@


doc= 15635


Kinnaird, George William Fox, ninth Lord Kinnaird of Inchture, Baron Rossie, and first Baron Kinnaird of Rossie (1807-1878), landowner, eldest son of Charles Kinnaird, eighth Lord Kinnaird of Inchture (1780-1826), and his wife, Lady Olivia Letitia Catherine (1787-1858), daughter of William Robert Fitzgerald, second duke of Leinster, was born on 14 April 1807 at Drimmie House, Perthshire -- the family mansion before the erection of Rossie Priory. He was educated at Eton College, and then entered the army as an officer of the guards; he afterwards transferred to the Connaught Rangers. He succeeded to the Scottish peerage on the death of his father, on 11 December 1826, having resigned his commission. In recognition of his father's and grandfather's support for the Liberal Party, in 1831 Kinnaird was, on the recommendation of Earl Grey, raised to the rank of a peer of the United Kingdom, with the title of Baron Rossie of Rossie, the name of a portion of the family estates at Inchture, Perthshire. In 1860 a further title was added -- that of Baron Kinnaird of Rossie, which could be inherited by his brother and his heirs male. On 14 December 1837 Kinnaird married the Hon. Frances Anna Georgiana Ponsonby (1817-1910), daughter of Lord de Mauley; they had two sons and one daughter, all of whom predeceased him. 
A considerable part of Kinnaird's youth was spent in Italy. Like his father he was very interested in archaeology, and he conducted important excavations near Rome which resulted in the discovery of a number of Roman antiquities; these were later preserved at Rossie Priory. On 15 January 1840 Kinnaird was made a privy councillor; he was chosen a knight of the Order of the Thistle on 6 July 1857. He was appointed lord lieutenant of Perthshire on 28 February 1866, a position he held until his death. 
As a large landowner Kinnaird, unlike many of his contemporaries, insisted on becoming personally involved in agricultural issues. Acknowledging the need for modernization he was one of the earliest reformers of the old style of husbandry prevailing in the Carse of Gowrie. His interest in farm mechanization led to the introduction of steam ploughs, threshing machines, and other agricultural implements on his estate in Scotland. He sought energetically to improve the condition of the labouring classes, organizing evening schools for the ploughmen and establishing free reading-rooms and libraries about his estate. It was largely through his exertions that the railway system in the east of Scotland was developed, and the line connecting Perth and Dundee, which ran through part of his property, was constructed with his guidance. He helped to found and maintain industrial schools throughout the country, and his philanthropic aims extended to the reform of criminals, especially young offenders. 
Kinnaird's principal legislative work was the drafting of the important measure for the closing of public houses on Sunday, known as the 'Forbes Mackenzie Act' from the name of William Forbes Mackenzie, MP for Peeblesshire, who introduced it in the House of Commons. It received the royal assent in 1853. Kinnaird was particularly interested in the issue of smoke pollution, the reform of the Royal Mint (on which subject he wrote several pamphlets), and the regulation of mines. He was chairman of the mining commission. As a Liberal politician he took a prominent part in the agitation for free trade, and was personally associated with David Ricardo, Richard Cobden, and John Bright; he took the role of chairman at an important meeting of the Anti-Corn Law League at Covent Garden Theatre. Kinnaird's liberal views were also shown by his aid to Polish refugees, and his friendship with Giuseppe Mazzini and with Garibaldi. 
Kinnaird also had a wide-ranging interest in science. He spent some time in developing photography with Fox Talbot, and in forming an extensive geological collection, with the aid of Sir Charles Lyell. Kinnaird died at Rossie Priory on 6 January 1878, in his seventy-first year, and was buried four days later at Old Rossie. The titles and estates fell at his death to his eldest surviving brother, Arthur Fitzgerald Kinnaird. 


@@@@@


doc= 15636


Kinnaird, Mary Jane, Lady Kinnaird (1816-1888), philanthropist and a founder of the Young Women's Christian Association (YWCA), was born on 14 March 1816 at Blatherwick Park, Northamptonshire, the youngest of the six children of William Henry Hoare (1776-1819), of Broomfield House, Battersea, Surrey, and of Louisa Elizabeth (died 1816), daughter of Sir Gerard Noel and Diana, Baroness Barham. Both her parents died in her infancy and she spent her childhood at the Surrey house of her grandfather, Henry Hoare, and, after his death in 1828, at the house of one of her uncles or of her brother Henry, who was her guardian. She was educated by a governess, who did not offer much intellectual stimulus. She was musical, and became a good pianist. Like her future husband, though in her case from a high-church background, she read William Romaine and turned to evangelicalism. She formed the habit of careful 'Bible' study and of morning prayers, which she was to build upon in later life. When she came of age in 1837 she chose to live with her maternal uncle, the Hon. and Revd Baptist Noel (1799-1873), then incumbent of St John's Chapel, Bedford Row, London, and was effectively his private secretary. She became very involved with the poor of the area, and worked especially to help women and girls. In 1841 she set up the St John's Training School for Domestic Servants (later moved to the site of Westbourne Day Schools, built by her husband). Through travel with Baptist Noel she acquired a lifelong interest in the development of protestantism on the continent. Merle d'Aubigne and Frederic Monod were to visit her frequently in London (and she later helped to raise money to erect a Calvin memorial hall in Geneva, as well as supporting the protestant cause in Italy and Bohemia). At this time she was said to be quiet and to have little small talk, but to be keen on debate and to be animated when a subject arose which interested her. She was to become the driving force behind a formidable range of evangelical initiatives, and to acquire a reputation for forcefulness. 
On 28 June 1843 in Hornsey church, Mary Jane Hoare married Arthur Fitzgerald Kinnaird, tenth Lord Kinnaird of Inchture and second Baron Kinnaird of Rossie (1814-1887). They were to work closely together on projects of common concern, and drew upon a wide range of powerful family connections. They settled in London, and the house to which they moved soon after their marriage, 35 Hyde Park Gardens, became a great philanthropic centre. On Wednesday evenings the couple held salons to discuss missionary, educational, and reforming activities at home and abroad. Mary Jane Kinnaird worked on the editing of a volume of family prayers, for which she solicited contributions from nearly all of the most famous evangelical clergy of the day, with the aim of raising money to build a chapel for the Lock Hospital and Asylum in which both she and her husband were interested. In 1856 the Kinnairds moved to 2 Pall Mall East, above the bank where Arthur Kinnaird worked. There they were to continue to provide the focus of evangelical campaigning initiatives. Mrs Ranyard's council to run the 'Bible' women met there, with both Arthur and Mary Jane Kinnaird serving on it, and other meetings were convened during the debates over India in the 1850s and the American Civil War. A campaign was launched there in 1871 against the slave trade on the east coast of Africa, and the house was also a centre for the revival movements of 1859-60 and 1873-5. Mary Jane Kinnaird was subsequently much involved in the Mildmay conferences. 
Mary Jane Kinnaird would not address public meetings on principle, believing that this was not a woman's role, but she seems to have provided the impetus behind many of the projects which she and her husband sponsored. She may even have written his speeches. The one major issue on which they seem to have differed was that of female suffrage: while he supported it, she opposed it. She organized Thursday afternoon 'Bible' reading meetings for women and mothers' meetings at her home, and she was active in local causes. She was one of the founders of the British Ladies' Female Emigration Society, and she encouraged the foundation of the Christian Colportage Association. She became particularly well-informed about India and said that when she died India would be found written on her heart. Although the evangelical impulse was uppermost, she recognized the importance of taking the widest possible view of the situation there; she emphasized the urgent need both for public works and for developing civil administration on lines which would limit the racial tensions which she could see increasing in the 1860s. She took a special interest in the condition of women in India, promoting in the 1850s the Indian Female Normal School and Instruction Society, to which was joined a female medical mission in 1872. In 1888 the society had sixty-six schools in India, and its visitors had access to 1353 zenanas. In 1906-7 a school in Lahore which she had worked to support, and which was to become the first women's college in the Punjab, changed its name to the Kinnaird Christian Girls' High School (later Kinnaird College) in her honour. 
Mary Jane Kinnaird achieved most in her role in the YWCA. During the Crimean War she was involved with Florence Nightingale (1820-1910) in preparing nurses to be sent out to the field. In 1855 she established a more permanent nurses' home -- the North London Home -- for girls coming to London. A lending library and other amenities were attached, and it was the first institution of its kind in the capital. In 1861 she proposed the establishment of the United Association for the Christian and Domestic Improvement of Young Women, and by 1871 she had set up two homes and four institutes. Simultaneously Emma Robarts was organizing a very successful women's prayer union. In 1877, the year of Emma Robarts's death, it was decided to merge the two movements under the title of the Young Women's Christian Association. Lord Shaftesbury became president, and Arthur Kinnaird treasurer. On the model of the YMCA it became a national (and subsequently international) movement to establish under Christian auspices institutes, libraries, and educational classes for young women working away from home. A monthly magazine, 'Our Own Gazette', was produced at the cover price of 1died, and was owned jointly by Arthur Kinnaird (by then tenth Lord Kinnaird) and Mrs Stephen Menzies of Liverpool, who edited it. It reached a circulation of nearly 100,000. While she was not involved in the active management, Mary Jane Kinnaird remained a pivotal force in the development of the organization. At her death she was president of the YWCA and of the related Factory Helpers' Union. Her husband died on 26 April 1887, and she died on 1 December 1888, at Plaistow Lodge, Plaistow, Kent. She was buried beside her husband in the churchyard at Rossie, Perthshire, the family seat. 
The Kinnairds' children were brought up to be as committed philanthropists as their parents. Six survived to adulthood (the first child having died very young): Frederica Georgina (1845-1929), Arthur Fitzgerald Kinnaird (1847-1923), 
Emily Kinnaird, who took on the role of family memoirist, devoted her considerable energies to several causes. She went on a mission to India with Gertrude in 1889, and returned frequently, in 1905-6 again with her sister. She became vice-president of the Scottish branch of the Zenana Bible and Medical Missionary Society. In 1944 she published in Lucknow 'My Adopted Country, 1889-1944', an account of her commitment to India. In Britain she was initially inspired to philanthropic work by the work of Catherine Marsh and Elizabeth Garnett among railway navvies, and she maintained this interest, spending one out of every four Sundays in a navvy mission station. She was an elder of Regent Square Presbyterian Church in London. Her main commitment was to the YWCA, on whose behalf she exploited every connection she had. It was reported that she arrived at her friends' houses before breakfast and refused to allow them to eat until she had extracted a cheque from them. She was for twenty-five years (from 1881) honorary secretary of the London division of the YWCA, and in 1906 she became honorary finance secretary of the British organization as a whole. She was also district referee for Forfarshire and Kincardineshire, and vice-president of the Scottish council. As honorary secretary for London she took a leading role in creating the Council of Women Workers (later the National Council of Women), on whose committee she sat for many years. She travelled extensively in representing the YWCA and became a member of the committee of the international YWCA. During the First World War she established more than 300 centres under the aegis of the YWCA to cater for WAACs and for munition and other war workers. She also set up a training home to provide an effective secretariat for the YWCA. As well as teaching the 'Bible', she lectured on business methods and public speaking, thus developing her mother's work in a fundamentally new idiom. She made an important contribution towards expanding the YWCA into a larger-scale organization, catering for young women entering a wider range of professions and developing new expectations. In 1918 she was appointed OBE, and in 1920 CBE. She was a lively and tough-minded person, sympathetic to the Labour Party. The only recreation she listed in 'Who's Who' was bicycling, which clearly helped to maintain her vigour through a long life. She died in September 1947. 


@@@@@


doc= 15637


Kinneir, Sir John Macdonald (1782-1830), army officer, traveller, and diplomatist, born at Carnden, Linlithgow, on 3 February 1782, was the illegitimate son of John Macdonald, comptroller of customs at Bo'ness, and Mrs Cecilia Maria Kinneir. In 1802 he was nominated to a cadetship by Sir William Bensley, under the name of Macdonald, which he retained in the Indian army lists up to his death. On 21 September 1804 he was appointed ensign in the Madras native infantry, but was not posted until the formation of the 24th (out of the 1st) Madras native infantry on 1 January 1807, when he joined the new regiment as lieutenant. He became captain in the same regiment on 14 April 1818, and afterwards attained the army rank of brevet lieutenant-colonel. For some time he was secretary to the officer commanding in Malabar and Kanara. He was attached to Sir John Malcolm's mission in Persia in 1808-9, during part of which time he was supernumerary agent at Bushehr, and made numerous journeys in Persia. On the breaking up of the mission in 1810 Macdonald travelled from Baghdad, by way of Mosul and Diyarbakir, to Constantinople, visited Manisa and Smyrna, and returned to England through Spain and Portugal. 
Ordered to rejoin his regiment, Macdonald started for Stockholm in January 1813 with Colonel Neil Campbell, one of the military commissioners sent to northern Europe, intending to reach India through Russia and Persia. The French retreat from Moscow having left open a more southerly route, he accompanied Campbell from Stockholm to the tsar's headquarters at Kilisch in Poland, and went through Austria and Hungary to Constantinople. After visiting Asia Minor and Cyprus he returned to Constantinople, and from there travelled to Baghdad and Bombay. He published a 'Narrative of travels in Asia Minor, Armenia, and Kurdistan in 1813-14, with remarks on the marches of Alexander the Great and of the ten thousand Greeks' (1818). From the title-page it appears that he had at that time taken his mother's surname of Kinneir, although there is no record in the India Office of his change of name. After 1813 he was for some years town-major of Fort St George, Madras, and resident to the nawab of the Carnatic. 
In 1823-4 it was proposed to withdraw the charge d'affaires who had represented British interests at Tehran since 1815, and to replace him as before by an East India Company's envoy. The shah, Futteh Ali, consented reluctantly, and Kinneir was appointed envoy in 1824. He arrived at the shah's camp at Ahar in September 1826 to find the Persians engaged in active hostilities with the Russians. Futteh Ali claimed the British subsidy to which, by treaty, Persia was entitled if attacked by a European power. Kinneir would not agree to this, as Persia had been the aggressor. Extensive military operations followed, during which Kinneir was present with the Persian army. On 19 October 1827 the frontier fortress of Erivan was stormed by Prince Paskevich's troops and a Russian division was pushed on to Tabriz. The shah's chief minister, Ali Yar Khan, deserted him on the approach of the Russians, and fled with Kinneir, who ably did his utmost to bring about a peace. The Russians, though declining to admit his official character, gratefully accepted his mediation in a private capacity. A treaty of peace was signed at Turkmanchai on 23 February 1828, involving loss of territory to Persia and the loss of the influence previously enjoyed by the British mission. No blame has been attributed to Kinneir, who won the respect of both Persians and Russians. He received the Persian order of the Sun and Lion, and on 17 November 1829 was knighted (as Sir John Macdonald). 
In 1825 Kinneir had married Amelia Harriet (died 1860), third daughter, with his first wife, of Lieutenant-General Sir Alexander Campbell, first baronet, who died commander-in-chief at Madras in 1824. Kinneir remained as envoy in Persia until his death at Tabriz on 11 June 1830, when a three months' mourning was observed by the shah and the inhabitants. 


@@@@@


doc= 15638


Kinsey, William Morgan (1788-1851), Church of England clergyman and traveller, born at Abergavenny, Monmouthshire, was son of Robert Morgan Kinsey, solicitor and banker at Abergavenny, and Caroline Hannah, his wife, daughter of Sir James Harington, bt. He matriculated at Oxford on 28 November 1805, became a scholar of Trinity College, graduated BA in 1809, and proceeded MA in 1813. In 1815 he was elected a fellow of his college, dean in 1822, vice-president in 1823, and bursar in 1824. In 1822 he graduated BD. 
In 1827 Kinsey made a tour in Portugal with the intention of making the country better known to the English people. From his journals and a series of letters written to his friend Thomas Haynes Bayly, as well as from historical and other sources, Kinsey published 'Portugal Illustrated' (1828), an interesting account of the country, and well illustrated with engravings by G. Cooke and Skelton from drawings chiefly made by a companion during his tour. It was dedicated to Lord Auckland, to whom Kinsey was chaplain, and a second edition appeared in 1829. In 1830 Kinsey was travelling with Viscount Alford in Belgium, and, happening to be at Brussels at the outbreak of the revolution in August of that year, was an eye-witness. About 1832 he was appointed minister of St John's Church, Cheltenham, where he made a reputation as a preacher and published a few sermons. In 1843 he was appointed rector of Rotherfield Greys, Oxfordshire, where he lived until his death on 6 April 1851. He was the author of a few other pamphlets, and in January 1848 contributed a paper to the 'Gentleman's Magazine' entitled 'Random recollections of a visit to Walton Hall'. 


@@@@@


doc= 15639


Kinwelmersh, Francis (bap. 1538), poet, was baptized on 18 October 1538, the son of Richard Kinwelmersh or Kyndelmershe of All Hallows, Bread Street, London. The poet entered Gray's Inn in 1557. Two students of the same surname, Anthony and Robert, were admitted in 1561 and 1563 respectively and were probably his brothers. At least one of them was the son of the man who built lodgings at Gray's Inn known as 'Kyndelmarshes buyldings', so the Kinwelmershes would have been a substantial presence there in the 1560s. Francis and Anthony were probably part of a literary clique at Gray's Inn which included Alexander Neville; in 1565 the poet George Gascoigne wrote his 'Memories' in response to a challenge set by their 'felowship'. 
The following year Kinwelmersh collaborated with Gascoigne on 'Jocasta', a translation of Dolce's 'Giocasta', itself based on Euripides' 'Phoenissae', which was performed in the hall of their inn in the course of 1566 and first published in Gascoigne's anonymous 'A Hundreth Sundrie Flowres' in 1573. Kinwelmersh was responsible for acts I and IV. The play has been noted as the first Greek tragedy on the English stage. Gabriel Harvey called it a 'statelie tragedie' in his copy (Bodl. Oxf., MS Mal. 792, sig. 2B) and Roger, Lord North, kept a manuscript of the play (BL, Add. MS 34063). 'STC, 1475-1640', attributes to Francis Kinwelmersh the translation of Adrien le Roy's 'A Briefe and Plaine Instruction... for the Lute' (1574). 
Kinwelmersh was a contributor to 'The Paradyse of Dainty Devises' (1576), and his initials, F. K., and, in later editions, F. Kindlemarsh, appear on the title-page. In all the editions, several poems carry his initials and one ('For Whitsunday') is signed M. Kindlemarsh. 
F. K. is mentioned in complimentary terms by William Webbe in 'A Discourse of English Poetrie' (1586); and in Bodenham's preface to 'Bel-vedere, or, The Garden of the Muses' (1600), Francis Kindlemarsh, esquire, is listed with Norton, Gascoigne, Atchelow, and Whetstone among deceased authors to whose published and unpublished writings 'due right' is given by the compiler. 
The poet is probably the Francis Kinwelmersh of Charlton, Shropshire, whose will was proved on 21 October 1589; he died in financial difficulties, leaving his lease of Charlton mortgaged for $100 to his wife, Cicely. This Kinwelmersh administered his brother Thomas's estate in May 1575 and died before 16 May 1580, when a new administrator was appointed. The 'History of Parliament' also identifies the poet as the Francis Kinwelmershe, esquire, elected MP for Droitwich, Worcestershire, in 1571 and then for Bossiney, Cornwall, on 27 April 1572 (probably by the patronage of Francis Russell, second earl of Bedford, who controlled the borough; Russell's name had appeared next to Kinwelmersh's in the admission register of Gray's Inn). 


@@@@@


doc= 15640


Kip, Johannes (b. before 1653, d. 1721?), draughtsman and engraver, was born in Amsterdam. He trained there under the engraver Bastiaen Stopendael from May 1668, probably for two years, and lived in Stopendael's house on the Angeliersgracht. His marriage to Elisabeth Breda in Amsterdam on 5 April 1680 resulted in at least one daughter, whose name is unknown. Kip's earliest dated engraving is from 1672, and he provided many plates for books published from this date onwards. In 1686 he made six plates of 'William of Orange, his Wife and Attendants near The Hague'. Shortly after William's usurpation of the English throne in 1689 Kip travelled to England, although it is not known if this was motivated by connections with William's court. 
The majority of Kip's work consists of topography, which has been called 'the most dynamic area of publishing... in the first quarter of the century' (Clayton, 'The English Print', 75). It was possibly for William's court that he began to develop and produce the bird's-eye prospect views of country houses on which his reputation rests. The first view was of the Chelsea Hospital -- in which William had quickly taken a personal interest on becoming king -- which Kip drew and engraved in 1690. About 1698 he began producing drawings and plates for his best-known work, 'Britannia illustrata, or, Views of several of the queen's palaces, as also of the principal seats of the nobility and gentry of Great Britain', a collection of high-quality engraved bird's-eye prospects sold on single sheets from about 1700 and issued together in 1707. For the first volume of this work, which achieved 'immediate success' (Harris, 140), Kip engraved the views drawn by Leonard Knyff, but for the second volume he drew and engraved the views himself. He probably sold out his interests in the work before or shortly after its publication, and it was expanded by booksellers with contributions from other artists from 1709. Kip also drew and engraved the sixty-five plates for Robert Atkyn's 'The Ancient and Present State of Gloucestershire' (1712) and engraved Thomas Bladeslade's drawings for John Harris's 'The History of Kent' (1719). 
During his career in Britain Kip produced engraved portraits, frontispieces, and architectural miscellany, and for an unknown period lived in and sold prints from his house on St John's Street, Westminster. His contemporary reputation as a fashionable engraver probably peaked in 1708 with the appearance of 'Britannia illustrata', but he found himself superseded by the engraver Henry Hulsburgh, who introduced a more up-to-date architectural survey into the expanded work of 1715. Kip retained a persuasive reputation as a draughtsman and engraver. He published a 12-sheet view of St James's Park from Buckingham House in 1710, and was chosen by Godfrey Kneller to survey his new house about 1715. 
Kip can probably be identified with the John Kipp who was buried in St Margaret's Church, Westminster, on 12 August 1721. It is not known when his wife died, but his daughter outlived him and, having reputedly been taught by him, seems to have been known as an artist of some merit. Since his death Kip's reputation has suffered, with the credit for much of the draughtsmanship in his work going to Knyff. 


@@@@@


doc= 15641


Kipling, Thomas (bap. 1745, d. 1822), dean of Peterborough, born at Bowes, Yorkshire, was the son of William Kipling, a cattle salesman, and Margaret, his wife. He was baptized at Bowes on 20 October 1745. He received his early education at Scorton and Sedbergh schools, and was admitted a sizar of St John's College, Cambridge, on 28 June 1764. He graduated BA in 1768, and proceeded MA in 1771, BD in 1779, and DD in 1784. He was ordained deacon on 29 May 1768 and priest on 10 June 1770. He was admitted as a fellow of St John's in 1769, removed on a mandate of the bishop of Ely, as visitor, and readmitted in 1771. In 1773 he was elected one of the taxors of the university. In 1782 he was elected Lady Margaret's preacher, on the resignation of Dr Richard Farmer. In 1787 he was appointed deputy regius professor of divinity, as the professor, Dr Richard Watson, was in ill health. In 1792 he preached the Boyle lectures, but, as was often the case, these were not published. In 1784 he became vicar of Holme-on-Spalding Moor in Yorkshire, a living, in the gift of his college, which he held until his death. In 1798 he was appointed dean of Peterborough and rector of Fiskerton in Lincolnshire. 
In 1778 Kipling published a work on optics which Gunning accurately described as 'little read and soon forgotten' (Gunning, 2.49). His major publication was the 'Codex Theodori Bezae Cantabrigiensis, evangelia et apostolorum acta complectens, quadratis literis, Graeco-Latinus' (1793), printed at the Cambridge University press. The impression was limited to 250 copies. This edition of the 'Codex Bezae' was a splendid specimen of typography, the types resembling the uncial characters of the original manuscript, and the 'British Critic' described it as 'a facsimile edition' ('British Critic', Feb 1794, 140). This work was, however, marred by a Latin preface which Kipling wrote, littered with linguistic errors for which he was gently reprimanded by his few friends and savagely lampooned by his many enemies. Dr Thomas Edwards described it as 'disgraceful to a literary society' and coined the term 'a Kiplingism' to mean a grammatical error (Edwards, iv, 28). This term was repeated with glee in the humorous undergraduate handbook 'Gradus ad Cantabrigiam' (1824, 64-5). Gunning suggests that Kipling was something of a laughing stock in the university as a pretentious eccentric, but he was also cantankerous and vindictive. He engaged in three major controversies. In 1793 he played a leading part in the prosecution of William Frend of Jesus College for his Unitarian views. Although he was an inefficient prosecutor, by his conduct and manner 'he rendered himself obnoxious to an independent party in the University' ('Annual Biography', 449). In 1802 his 'The Articles of the Church of England Proved not to be Calvinistic' attacked his opponents so bitterly that a Calvinist critic justly reflected, 'a controversial writer must be strangely blinded by passion... or puffed up with a vain conceit of his own superiority who flatters himself that his notions cannot be opposed without dishonest intentions' (Academicus, 1). In 1809 he turned on the Roman Catholics. Some Irish Catholics had reprinted Thomas Ward's 1688 'Errata of the Protestant Bible' and Kipling denounced them in 'Certain accusations brought recently by Irish papists against British and Irish protestants of every denomination' (1809), insisting that Linus, not St Peter, was the first bishop of Rome (p. 66). In 1815 he attacked the Roman Catholic John Lingard's 'Strictures' on Herbert Marsh's 'Comparative View of the Churches of England and Rome', first threatening him with prosecution for using the term 'modern church of England', but later withdrawing. 
Kipling's unpopularity at Cambridge was evidenced by his failure in elections for the rectory of Bedale, Yorkshire, in 1775 and for the Lady Margaret professor of divinity in 1788. A contemporary obituary suggested his appointment as dean of Peterborough in 1798 was 'as a reward for his political services and as some consolation for the mortifications he had experienced' ('Annual Biography', 449). Thomas Kipling died on 28 January 1822 at the vicarage of Holme-on-Spalding Moor. He never married. 


@@@@@


doc= 15642


Kippis, Andrew (1725-1795), Presbyterian minister and biographer, was born in Nottingham on 28 March 1725, the second son of Robert Kippis ('c'.1698-1730), silk hosier of the city, and his wife, Anne Ryther. His parents were loyal dissenters of Calvinist background, his mother being the granddaughter of John Ryther (1631x5-1681), the ejected vicar of Frodingham, Lincolnshire. Following the death of his father Kippis was placed in the care of his paternal grandfather, Andrew Kippis, at Sleaford, Lincolnshire, where his early education took place. Living in a dissenting environment he was encouraged to prepare for the ministry. He had already given up the Calvinism in which he had been instructed: 'The agent employed in effecting this important change was the 'Treatise on God's Law' by Elisha Coles', Kippis wrote later; 'it was put into my hands when 13 or 14 by some zealous friends, to instruct and confirm me in the doctrine it contained. The reading of it, however produced the contrary effect' (Wilson, 4.105). 
Kippis entered Philip Doddridge's academy at Northampton in 1741, and after five years' study he was appointed pastor of an Independent congregation at Sleaford in September 1746. 'In his youth he was an assiduous student... he once read for three years at the rate of 16 hours 'per' day; and one of the works... which he read entirely through, was the 'General Dictionary', in 10 volumes; this he added laid the foundation of his taste and skill in biographical composition. ('GM', 803)' He moved to Dorking, Surrey, in November 1750, in the place of John Mason. Kippis held rather advanced views for many of the dissenters of his day, which arose out of his wide reading; 'he was the first of the Dorking ministers to fall into the Arian errors' (Cleal, 358). 
In June 1753 Kippis was appointed minister of the Presbyterian congregation meeting in Princes Street, Westminster, where he remained for the rest of his life. He was a competent speaker, but nothing more than this and not noted for originality. It was the area of his work in which he least excelled, although he was in regular demand as a preacher. On 21 September 1753 he married Elizabeth ('c'.1723-1796), daughter of Isaac Bott, a merchant of Boston, Lincolnshire, and his wife, Hannah. All their children died in infancy; 'In the early part of their marriage, they lost two sons within a week, the eldest not quite three years' ('GM', 913-14). 
Kippis built up his early literary reputation by writing for the 'Gentleman's Magazine' and for the 'Monthly Review', in which he took a leading part from its inception. He also wrote extensively for 'The Library and Moral and Critical Magazine', which he edited in 1761-2, and for the 'New Annual Register'. The 'History of Ancient Literature' and the 'Review of Modern Books' contained much of his input until 1784. Most of his contributions were historical or theological. His style, while not exciting, was clear and reflected his wide classical, historical, and biographical knowledge; he was constantly with his books at home in Westminster. He also cultivated acquaintanceship with the leading literary figures of his day and became widely known not only among dissenters but also in London intellectual circles. 'No man was more cheerful in company than Dr Kippis. He had a strong taste for ridicule, and enjoyed lively and pleasant sallies' ('GM', 804). 
Kippis was a strong promoter of the dissenting cause and was highly respected as a representative by both the Presbyterians and the Independents. He sat lightly in this denominational divide and did not express controversial theology in public. However, his slow shift in theology and his association with the unitarian position led some Baptists to suspect him; 'Robert Hall once said that Kippis laid so many books upon his head that his brains could not move' (Cleal, 358). In 1763 his orthodoxy was sufficiently respected for him to be appointed to succeed David Jennings as classical tutor at the Coward Trust's Hoxton Academy. He withdrew from this office in 1784, before the dissolution of the academy in the following year. In June 1767 he was made DD of the University of Edinburgh, and was further honoured by being made fellow of the Society of Antiquaries in 1788 and of the Royal Society in 1779. He subsequently served on the council of both bodies and published a book on the controversies within the Royal Society in 1784. 
Kippis helped to organize petitions to parliament aimed at securing the rights of dissenters. He played a large part in the campaign for relief from subscription to the 'Thirty-Nine Articles' for dissenting ministers in 1772 and 1773. Bills in each year designed to achieve relief passed the Commons but were rejected by the Lords. He published, in both 1772 and 1773, 'A Vindication of the Protestant Dissenting Ministers... in the Matter of Subscription', which achieved wide circulation. In 1779 a similar bill, which substituted a general declaration of belief in place of subscription, became law. In that year Kippis chaired the committee appointed by the dissenters to agitate for relief. The act was essentially a compromise that, while it completely satisfied no one, strengthened the legal position of dissent generally. He sat on the committees organized by the dissenting deputies to agitate for the repeal of the 'Test and Corporation Acts' between 1787 and 1790. Early in 1787 he led a deputation of leading dissenters to William Pitt, the prime minister, to press their case. It was of no avail, for it was many years after Kippis's death before the acts were repealed. He was motivated in the parliamentary campaign by his strong affirmation of individual liberty, equal religious rights, and the reform of parliament. However, his belief in reform rather than revolution meant that he took a conservative rather than a radical position; he was no republican and was firmly against insurrection. 'The principles of the British Constitution he had diligently studied. To these he was zealously attached; and he ably defended them, though he was not unappraized of the corruption' (Rees, 40). 
In 1786 Kippis was appointed one of the tutors, with Richard Price, Joseph Priestley, and Gilbert Wakefield, at the new dissenting college formed at Hackney; this in many minds confirmed his gradual movement towards unitarianism. He resigned after a few years but continued to give the college his loyal support. Among his pupils were William Godwin and the poet Samuel Rogers, who later recalled his teachers in the first part of 'The Pleasures of Memory': '
Guides of my life, instructors of my youth, 

Who first unveiled the hallowed form of truth; 

Whose every word enlightened and endeared. 
(Clayden, 1.418)' Kippis produced several biographies besides his extensive output in magazines. Lives of Anthony Ashley Cooper, first earl of Shaftesbury (1790; republished, 1836), Captain Cook (1778), Philip Doddridge (1792), and Job Orton (1822) are among the most notable. His posthumous fame among Unitarians arose from his joint editorship, with Abraham Rees, Thomas Jervis, and Thomas Morgan, of 'A Collection of Hymns and Psalms for Public and Private Worship' (1795). This work passed through many editions in the nineteenth century, reaching a ninth edition in 1823, and was known as Kippis's or 'Rees's Collection'. It was widely used among Presbyterian congregations that became Unitarian, and was in regular use as late as the 1850s; a new, enlarged edition, edited by Edmund Kell, appeared in 1852. 'It was the first of the Unitarian books to attain any very extended circulation' (Julian, 1193). Kippis in his youth wrote poetry, and two of his hymns appear in 'A Collection'. 'Great God, in vain man's narrow view' was widely adopted in later collections and appears in James Martineau's 'Hymns' (1840 and 1873); 'How rich thy gifts, almighty God', written in 1759, appeared in several collections and parts of it found a place in editions of the 'Congregational Hymn Book' in 1836 and 1859. 
It is for his 'Biographia Britannica', of which he was editor and prime mover, that Kippis is mainly known. He was recognized, for good or ill, depending on the view of the reader, as the leading biographer of his day. While the 'Biographia' was partial in coverage and the selection of those included was open to criticism the five volumes that did appear mark a significant development in biographical literature that was built upon in the following century. It was a monumental achievement of scholarship, not only on Kippis's part but also on that of the contributors whom he employed. The first volume appeared in 1778, the second in 1780, the third in 1784, the fourth in 1789, and the fifth in 1793, ending with Fastolf. A few copies of the first part of the sixth volume, ending with Foster, appeared in 1795 but the remainder were lost in a disastrous fire at the printers' office on 8 February 1808, and no other editor was found to complete the work. The entries in the 'Biographia' are not always consistent in the information that they contain. Kippis often added extensive notes, printed in smaller typeface, to the entries prepared by his contributors. On occasion these notes are longer than the entry itself and do not make for easy reading of the whole. To his credit some of his notes constitute original material that is not to be found elsewhere. It is generally accepted that Kippis was too laudatory in his evaluations but this is probably reflective of the time and of his caution in expressing controversial views. He was one of the few people of sufficient breadth of learning and personal contact with many of his subjects to have prepared the volumes; Dr Johnson was another, but he states that he had declined the task. Kippis's attention to detail meant that he could not complete the 'Biographia', and his style is best summarized in a contemporary statement as 'without animation yet clear, perspicuous... and always suited to the subject' ('Protestant Dissenter's Magazine', 1795, 5). 
The importance of the 'Biographia' was clear at the time, and the volumes elicited strong opinions when they appeared. According to James Boswell in the first edition of his 'Life of Dr Johnson', Johnson criticized Kippis for including proportionately more dissenting ministers than Anglican clergymen; Boswell withdrew the statement from his next edition. In the period 1776-80 the correspondence between Horace Walpole and the Revd William Cole shows how eagerly members of the intelligentsia waited for the volumes to appear to see what was said about whom. They cannot have been alone in this eagerness. 'Shall I beg you to transcribe the passage in which Dr Kippis abuses my father [Sir Robert Walpole] and me, for I shall not buy the new edition, only to purchase abuse on me and mine' (Walpole to Cole, 10 June 1778, Walpole, 'Corr.', 90). Cole, writing to Walpole on 1 March 1780, says: 'I received the volume on February 24 and ran over it as to the new articles and additions by the 27th at night, and have made a perfect book of remarks and censures upon it... matters of doctrine only I took notice of, which are all tending to what offends my orthodoxy, viz., Arianism, Socinianism, Deism and Independency. (ibid., 196)' Kippis was attacked for being partisan, inaccurate, and too laudatory, but most recognized his achievement. 
Much of the dispute and the fame came towards the end of Kippis's life. Personally he lamented the decline of the Presbyterian interest and of his own congregation in particular. As a result of his long pastorate of forty-three years his congregation was small. He continued to preach to them to within weeks of his death, on 8 October 1795 at his home in Crown Street, Westminster. 'He is said to have had a cough these 30 years and to have often predicted that, when that ceased, he should depart' ('GM', 884). He was buried alongside his dissenting friends in Bunhill Fields burial-ground on 15 October, an event followed by possibly the most numerous, lengthy, and laudatory obituaries to appear in the national press and journals for a dissenting minister in the late eighteenth century. 


@@@@@


doc= 15643


Kippist, Richard (1812-1882), librarian and botanist, was born on 11 June 1812 in Stoke Newington, Middlesex. Nothing is known of his parents or his early education, but it seems that he gained his first botanical knowledge by working and travelling with the botanist Joseph Woods, author of 'Tourist's Flora'. In 1830 Kippist became an assistant to David Don (1800-1841), the librarian of the Linnean Society, and was paid 7's'. 6died a week; there he helped Nathaniel Wallich with the distribution of his East Indian herbarium, which he had presented to the society. Following the death of Don, Kippist became the society's librarian in 1842, after a fiercely contested election; he remained in this post for nearly forty years, specializing in Australian plants, at rare intervals publishing articles, and always displaying an outstanding devotion to the society. According to his obituary in the society's 'Proceedings', 'his love of accuracy excused his seemingly rigid punctiliousness'. He belonged to the Royal Botanical Society and the Microscopical Society and frequently judged at flower shows. A genus, 'Kippistia', was twice dedicated to him, but the name was subsequently changed. Finally, in 1880, the Linnean Society persuaded its by now physically and mentally exhausted librarian to retire, on a full salary pension. However, Kippist lived to enjoy his pension for only a short time; he died at his home, 10 Burnaby Street, Ashburnham Road, King's Road, Chelsea, on 14 January 1882 and was buried at Brompton cemetery a week later on 21 January. 


@@@@@


doc= 15644


Elizabeth Kirby (1823-1873), to 'enlist the sympathies of some readers who feel little or no interest in botanical science'. 


@@@@@


doc= 15645


Kirby, John (c.1690-1753), surveyor and topographer, was, according to his grandson William Kirby (1759-1850), the well-known entomologist, descended from a north-country royalist who, suffering for his loyalty, took his family to Halesworth, Suffolk. This ancestry is supported by the fact that William and his father used the arms of the Lancashire family of Kirby, a visitation family with royalist sympathies. However, the only John Kirby in the Halesworth registers was born to a shoemaker, Stephen, in 1682 and died in 1736. 
Apparently, Kirby at first kept a school at Orford, but was certainly 'of Erwarton' and occupied 'a small overshot mill at the bottom of the park [of the Hall]' when he married Alice Brown (1685/6-1766) at St Nicholas's Church, Ipswich, on 10 October 1714. The couple moved to Wickham Market, where Kirby also kept a mill, probably Glevering watermill, which was where their five sons and six daughters were born; all the children were christened there or at Hacheston. The best-known are three of the four eldest: John (1715-1750), under-treasurer at the Middle Temple, Joshua Kirby (1716-1774), artist and friend of Gainsborough, and William, attorney of Witnesham Hall. Family letters published by his granddaughter Sarah Trimmer show that John Kirby brought up the family to be devout and god-fearing; in his Gainsborough portrait he looks stern. 
By 1725 Kirby was practising land surveying to support his growing family, and during the next twenty years he drew up plans of estates in more than twenty east Suffolk parishes. His last plans were dated 1745, by which time he was also selling books. In 1732 he set out with Nathaniel Bacon junior (whose own plans are dated 1736-44) to survey the whole county for a small octavo gazetteer and road book entitled 'The Suffolk Traveller', which was published in Ipswich in 1735. A careful manuscript draft of part of the book is in the Suffolk Record Office. John Tanner of Lowestoft was the 'reverend gentleman' thanked for the forty-page table of parishes, patrons, and impropriations printed at the end of the book. Subscribers were also offered the survey in map form in two editions. R. Collins engraved the more lavish edition of 1736, priced 10's'., at one inch to the mile and dedicated to the duke of Grafton, with the arms of 126 noblemen and gentlemen who had paid an extra half a guinea towards engraving. A cheaper version, engraved by James Basire at half the scale and without arms, followed in 1737. In 1763 Joshua and William Kirby advertised an enlarged edition of the 'Traveller', with frontispiece map (four miles to the inch) and four road maps all prepared for the engraver by Andrew Baldrey, Joshua Kirby's partner in business as house and herald painters. A plan of Ipswich, reduced from Ogilby (1674), and maps of separate hundreds which Baldrey had drawn exist only as originals. Although Thomas Martin and John Tanner (died 1759) made additions to an interleaved copy of the first edition, all incorporated by the editor, the Revd Richard Canning of Ipswich, the title-page still proclaims John Kirby as the author, albeit posthumously. Joshua and William Kirby also republished the two wall maps, the larger re-engraved by John Ryland with twelve views and the arms and estate owners' names revised, and dated 1766. The half-scale map reappeared still dated 1737, but bearing the imprint of John Shave, an Ipswich publisher and bookseller of the 1760s. Most extant prints from the 1766 plates were made in 1825, when Stephen Piper of Ipswich, claiming to have revised them, merely added his name as publisher. Of later attempts to bring the book up to date (Woodbridge, 'c'.1817 and 1829) the second is more useful; also useful is Augustine Page's supplement published in Ipswich in 1844. 
By 1751 Kirby was living in Ipswich; he died of 'a mortification of the leg which came on very suddenly' (W. Kirby to W. Layton, 17 Oct 1807, Kirby MSS) at William's Ipswich house on 13 December 1753 and he was buried three days later in St Mary-le-Tower churchyard. His wife, Alice, survived to the age of eighty and after her death was laid beside him, on 30 October 1766. 


@@@@@


doc= 15646


Kirby, Joshua (1716-1774), artist and architect, was born at Parham, Suffolk, the second of eleven children of John Kirby (c.1690-1753), former schoolmaster and surveyor, and Alice Brown (1685/6-1766). Educated at home, Glevering Mill, Joshua helped to collect material for his father's road-book, 'The Suffolk Traveller' (1735) and a map of Suffolk (1736). Two of his drawings of Scole Inn, Norfolk, were engraved by John Fessey in 1739. In that year he married Sarah Bull ('c'.1718-1775) of Framlingham and lived at Ipswich, where he had already joined a house- and coach-painting business: he also became active in St Mary-le-Tower church affairs. 
Commissioned to design an altarpiece for St Mary's, Hadleigh, Suffolk, in 1744, in 1748 Kirby published 'An historical account of the twelve prints of monasteries, castles, antient churches and monuments, in... Suffolk... drawn by J. Kirby', which had been preceded by the twelve prints to which the publication referred. The views, engraved in London by Joseph Wood, were commended by George Vertue ('Note Books', 6.203), and Kirby's experience enabled him to assist his new friend Thomas Gainsborough with the painting of 'St Mary's, Hadleigh' ('c'.1748; priv. coll.). 
In London in 1751 Kirby, with William Hogarth, enjoyed the discomfiture of Thomas Hudson (whom he disliked), who was deceived by a pastiche Rembrandt etching which had been faked by their dinner host, Benjamin Wilson. That spring he also advertised Hogarth's prints for sale in the 'Ipswich Journal' and invited subscriptions for his own 'Dr. Brook Taylor's Method of Perspective Made Easy, both in Theory and Practice' that was published in February 1754 and dedicated to Hogarth, who contributed a comic frontispiece. In the previous month the Academy of Painting and Sculpture had approved Kirby's three lectures on perspective and his book, and elected him a member. Reprinted immediately (1755) with additions and again in 1765 and 1768, Kirby's book became the standard exposition of perspective for British artists until superseded by Thomas Malton's treatise in 1775. Maintaining an empiric approach, Hogarth stood firm with Kirby on disputed points, an association which led to Kirby's being featured in two of Paul Sandby's satirical prints on Hogarth's 'Analysis of Beauty' in 1754. In June 1757 he responded to Isaac Ware's redundant translation in 1756 of L. Sirigatti's 'Practice of Perspective' (1596) with a furious pamphlet, 'Sirigatti Analys'd'. As this merely exposed his own limitations and conceit it was hastily withdrawn (J. Highmore, 'Monthly Review', January 1758, 66). 
Meanwhile, through the intercession of the earl of Bute, Kirby had become teacher of perspective and fortifications to the prince of Wales in 1756, having moved with his family to Great Queen Street, London, the previous September when he left the Ipswich business in the hands of Andrew Baldrey (died 1802). Baldrey then acquired it in 1759 when the Kirbys moved to Kew Green, Richmond, Surrey. In 1761 Kirby published the handsome 'Perspective of Architecture Deduced from the Principles of Dr. Brook Taylor' which included as plate 44 'House with a Colonnade' (drawing; Royal Collection) by the prince, who was closely involved with the publication and paid for the many illustrations. On his accession as George III in 1761, the king rewarded his jovial and devoted preceptor by appointing Kirby and his son William Kirby (1743-1771) joint clerks of the works at Kew and Richmond (TNA: PRO, WORK 5/69). The post was no sinecure and William, a promising artist, went with his wife to study architecture in Italy at the king's expense in 1768-9. On their return William Kirby was given a house at Kew, where he died in 1771. Of Kirby's brothers who became lawyers, the elder brother John ('b'. 1715) died in 1750 while under-treasurer at the Middle Temple, and Stephen ('b'. 1717) was training under him but died in 1741. Kirby designed an extension to Kew chapel (never implemented, BL, Kings Maps, xl 46 h), having in 1762 built St George's Chapel in Brentford, Middlesex, where his daughter, Sarah ['see 'Trimmer, Sarah (1741-1810)], the religious writer, married James Trimmer. With his younger brother, William, Kirby published revised editions of 'The Suffolk Traveller' (1764) and his father's map (1766), embellished with more of his Suffolk views. In 1767 he was elected a fellow of the Royal Society and a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries. 
Kirby contributed three drawings (Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York) to 'Gardens and Buildings at Kew' (1763) by Sir William Chambers, who gave Kirby his many orders for works on the royal estates. Overwork was exacerbated by his presidency (1768-71) of the Incorporated Society of Artists, assumed after dissensions had caused the resignation of most eminent directors. After assuming this position Kirby was soon humiliated by his chance discovery that the king with Benjamin West and Chambers was planning a royal academy, formed in December 1768. Although proposed as the academy's professor of perspective, Kirby stayed loyal to his society, struggling to retain the king's interest until ill health forced his resignation. From 1761 he had exhibited mainly drawings including 'St Albans Abbey' (1767; department of prints and drawings, British Museum) but the oils 'Kew Ferry' (1767) and 'Ockham Mill' (1769) were attributed by Horace Walpole to the king. The only known landscape in oil signed by Kirby, dated 1761, is at Gainsborough's House, Sudbury, Suffolk. 
Kirby died peacefully at Kew Green on 20 June 1774, and was buried in Kew chapel (now St Anne's, Kew). He had owned many works by Gainsborough (which appeared in the Trimmer sale, Christies, 17 March 1860), who had painted Kirby with his wife ('c'.1750; National Portrait Gallery, London) and separately in two further portraits (V&A; Fitzwilliam Museum, Cambridge). Such was Gainsborough's confidence in his 'old friend pudging Josh' (Grant, 1.63), whose faith in Heaven was proverbial, that he was buried alongside him at St Anne's, Kew. 


@@@@@


doc= 15647


Kirby, William (1759-1850), entomologist and naturalist, was born at Witnesham, near Ipswich, Suffolk, on 18 September 1759, the son of William Kirby (died 1791), a solicitor, and his wife, Lucy Meadows. He had four sisters. 
Kirby's initial interest in natural history was fostered by his mother, who had a conchological collection from which she taught him the names of shells. In 1770 mother and son made a small herbarium at Witnesham. His mother died in 1776 and Kirby was subsequently educated at Ipswich grammar school and Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge. He graduated in 1781 and was ordained deacon in June 1782. He was later appointed rector of Barham, Suffolk, and assistant curate of Coddenham and was given the permanent living of Barham in 1796. He returned to natural history studies after receiving his appointment, although these appear not to have interfered with his pastoral duties. 
In the summer of 1797 Kirby went on a natural history excursion to Ely, Northampton, Huntingdon, and Cambridge with the naturalist Thomas Marsham (died 1819). His natural history interest at this time seems to have been largely botanical and he had a particular interest in cryptogamic plants. He is known to have had a copy of James Edward Smith's 'English Botany'. He served as secretary to the local militia during the invasion scare of 1803-5, his job being to look after the women and children. By 1805 Kirby was acquainted with William Spence (1783-1860) of Hull, and by 1809 he knew William Hooker. The three are known to have had natural history rambles together. 
Kirby wrote on mycological and zoological topics but turned his attention to entomology in the 1790s with the finding of a 'very beautiful golden bug' on his window sill. He communicated his natural history findings to the Linnean Society of London, on whose first list of fellows (1798) his name appears. He wrote his first paper in 1793, but his first major entomological work, on the bees collected in his parish -- 'Monographia apium Angliae' -- appeared in 1802 and was illustrated with colour plates. In this he described some 200 types, many of which are still recognized as species. Kirby is said to have learned the techniques of engraving in order better to understand natural history illustration. In 1808 Spence suggested a collaboration to produce a basic work on entomology. This was begun in 1809 and resulted in their pioneering illustrated volumes 'Introduction to Entomology' (1815-26); editions appeared throughout the early nineteenth century, the last being the sixth (1843). 
Kirby's first wife, Sarah Ripper, died in 1814. The following year he took his MA. He married again in early 1817, and in the June went with his second wife, Charlotte Rodwell (died 1844), for a short trip to Paris. Kirby took an active part in the Zoological Club of the Linnean Society which provided the key management for the new Zoological Society in 1826. His work was both economically and taxonomically orientated, and in addition to bees he wrote on insect spoilage of wheat, timber, and, in 1808, on 'Apion', or weevils. Among his better-known entomological works is his paper on the insect parasites of bees, the Strepsiptera, an entirely new order described by him in 1815. In his 'Century of insects' ('Transactions of the Linnean Society', 12, 1818, 375-453) he described new species from specimens in English natural history cabinets. He was elected FRS in 1818 and shortly afterwards described some of the insects brought back from Australia by Robert Brown on the 'Investigator' expedition of 1801-5. The theme of overseas entomology was taken up again when he wrote on the insects brought back from the Canadian Arctic by John Richardson from the expedition of 1825-7. This was his entomological contribution to the illustrated 'Fauna boreali Americana' (1837). He became honorary president of the Entomological Society of London in 1837 and gave his insect collection to that society. (It was later, in 1863, given to the British Museum and much of it survives in the Natural History Museum, London.) The 'History of the Collections' (vol. 2) noted that Kirby's specimens from his 'Century of insects', Robert Brown's Australian material, Richardson's Canadian insects, and some of Kirby's beetles and his bees from the 'Monographia apium Angliae' were extant in 1906. 
Kirby lived in the closing years of pre-Darwinian natural history. It was a time when the foundations of entomology were being laid and he corresponded widely with naturalists at home and abroad, including Sir Joseph Banks, Alexander Macleay (1767-1848), J. C. Dale (1792-1872), Edward Sabine, the Oxford-based naturalist the Revd F. W. Hope, N. A. Vigors, J. C. Fabricius (1745-1808) of Kiel, Adam Afzelius (1750-1837) in Sweden, Ludwig Imhoff (1801-1868) in Switzerland, and the French entomologist P. A. Latreille (1762-1833), among many others. Kirby's correspondents are of interest because their names appear in some of his insect names. 
In later years Kirby seems to have lived the life of a quiet country parson and his portraits show him as a well-built man of medium height with blue eyes. He seems to have been a believer in the non-Calvinistic Anglican tradition. His meditations in 1829 on the temptations and passion of Our Lord were based on those of the early seventeenth-century Bishop Andrews. In the autumn of 1830 he was approached by J. G. Children of the British Museum, the archbishop of Canterbury, and the bishop of London acting for the trustees of the eighth duke of Bridgewater through the Royal Society to begin work on a contribution to what became known as the 'Bridgewater Treatise'. In 1835 he contributed 'On the History, Habits and Instincts of Animals'. 
Kirby died at Barham on 4 July 1850. He appears to have been a much-loved pastor to his country congregation and was buried in the chancel of his parish church. The Revd William Kirby is not to be confused with the later entomologist, William F. Kirby (1844-1912) of Leicester. 


@@@@@


doc= 15648


Kirbye, George (d. 1634), composer, first emerges in 1592 as a major contributor to Thomas East's psalter. By 1597 he was a domestic musician in the service of Sir Robert Jermyn of Rushbrooke Hall, near Bury St Edmunds, and in that year he published his 'First Set of English Madrigalls, to 4, 5, and 6 Voyces', which comprised twenty-four pieces dedicated to two of Sir Robert's daughters, for whose 'delight & contentments' Kirbye had originally composed them. Rushbrooke was close to Hengrave Hall where one of the greatest of the English madrigalists, John Wilbye, was also in service, and the two men must have been acquainted; significantly, perhaps, Wilbye provided one of only two instances of another composer setting a text already used by Kirbye. In 1601 Kirbye contributed a madrigal to 'The Triumphs of Oriana', the collection of madrigals in honour of the ageing Queen Elizabeth, but he published no further volume of his own, though eighteen more madrigals by him survive in manuscript sources. On 16 February 1598 he had married Anne Saxye (died 1626) at nearby Bradfield St George. There seem to have been no children from the marriage. Nothing more is known of Kirbye until 1626, when he was living in Whiting Street in Bury St Edmunds, where he was evidently churchwarden at St Mary's Church; during the next two years his name appears in the parish registers. 
Though Kirbye's date of birth remains unknown, it was probably some time before 1570, for clearly eight of his works surviving in manuscript sources were in fact viol-accompanied solo songs more typical of the earlier years of Elizabeth's reign, though with words subsequently fitted to the string parts to make them resemble madrigals, and this points to a date of composition no later than the 1580s, and very probably earlier. Even the contents of Kirbye's single published madrigal volume hint at a composer no longer in his first youth, for these are little marked by the bright, lively manner newly paraded in Thomas Morley's volumes of the earlier 1590s, and they set no light verse; instead they favour a generally more serious aesthetic and all are in a minor mode. But Kirbye had certainly become familiar with Italian madrigals, and for his published collection the madrigals (and especially those of Luca Marenzio) which had been printed with English words in the anthologies of Nicholas Yonge ('Musica transalpina', 1588) and Thomas Watson ('Italian Madrigals Englished', 1590) seem to have been his prime models. Kirbye's own examples reveal an admirable and inventive artisan, fluent and tasteful, who employed word-painting and chromaticism judiciously and who, while lacking those broader imaginative insights that marked the greatest of his contemporaries such as Wilbye, was able on occasions to produce moments that are truly memorable. Moreover, his 'Oriana' contribution, 'With Angel's Face' (published in the first edition with a different text: 'Bright Phoebus Greets'), shows that he could also confidently command a more brilliant, extrovert style. 
Kirbye was buried in St Mary's, Bury St Edmunds, on 6 October 1634 and his will reveals that he was by then a man of some substance. Three of his madrigals survive as 'contrafacta' (that is, with sacred texts substituted). In addition, a small quantity of church music by him is extant, as is a single instrumental pavan, though most of these pieces survive incomplete. 


@@@@@


doc= 15649


Kirk, John (1724?-1778?), medallist, probably became a pupil of the medallist James Anthony Dassier about 1740. It is difficult to be certain of his life because of the profusion of medallists and engravers named John Kirk. From about 1740 until 1778 he produced a large number of medals signed KIRK or I. KIRK. In 1745 he was probably living in St Paul's Churchyard, and in 1745-6 several medals were struck by John Kirk and A. Kirk. The 'Gentleman's Magazine' reported the death on 19 November 1761 of a 'Mr Kirk senior' of that address, which may have been his father or brother. In 1762-3 he received premiums from the Society of Artists and in 1773 and 1775-6 exhibited medals of the royal family and others. Many of his medals commemorate the victories of the War of the Austrian Succession and the Seven Years' War, though others are for royalty, politicians, and civic associations such as the British Fishery Society (1751). 
Although some authorities list Kirk's death as 27 November 1776, this appears unlikely, as he probably produced several medals in 1778, including a commemoration of the earl of Chatham. He may have been the John Kirk, 'engraver', of St James's, who made his will on 13 November 1778, and which was proved by his widow, Catherine, on 5 December 1778. A further confusion may arise from the report in the 'Gentleman's Magazine' on 31 March 1791 of the death of 'Mr Kirk, seal-engraver, in St Paul's Churchyard'. 


@@@@@


doc= 15650


Kirk, John (1760-1851), Roman Catholic priest and antiquary, was born at Acton Burnell, Shropshire, on 13 April 1760, the son of William Kirk and his wife, Mary Fielding, both of whom were Catholics. He was educated at Sedgley Park School from 1770 to 1773. On 5 June 1773 he was admitted to the English College, Rome, where he was the last scholar received there by the Jesuits before they were replaced by Italian secular clerics. Kirk's diary for the period 1773 to 1779, now in the college archives, is the main source for internal college politics in these years. The young Kirk, disliking the new administration (which he represented as harsh and oppressive), portrayed the Jesuit period as a golden age. However, since he spent only three months at the college before the new administration was established, his complaints must be treated with caution. Although the new authorities tightened up the discipline of the college, they did not introduce any regulations which were not common in Italian seminaries. 
Kirk was ordained priest on 18 December 1784 and returned to England in August 1785. His first mission was at Aldenham Hall, Shropshire, the home of Sir Richard Acton, but he soon left to become chaplain at Sedgley Park, where he became vice-president in 1786 and president on 27 April 1793. Before this appointment he had served at the small mission of Pipe Hall, near Lichfield, where he was also in charge of the congregation of Tamworth. In July 1797 he left Sedgley Park to become chaplain and private secretary to Charles Berington, vicar apostolic of the Midland district. He lived with Berington at Longbirch, where he had charge of the mission. He assisted Berington's cousin, the controversial cisalpine historian Joseph Berington, with his 'History of the Rise, Progress and Decline of the Papal Power', and became one of the Staffordshire Squadron, a group of liberal clergy advocating a form of ecclesiastical democracy in opposition to Walmesley, the vicar apostolic of the western district. Charles Berington's sudden death in June 1798, in Kirk's arms, led to the disintegration of this liberal party. Kirk remained at Longbirch until Gregory Stapleton was appointed to succeed Berington in 1801, when he moved to Lichfield to serve three local congregations. His involvement with the Staffordshire Squadron may account for his subsequent lack of promotion. 
At Lichfield he built a chapel which was opened on 11 November 1803. He enjoyed cordial relations with his protestant neighbours; on his arrival in Lichfield he met with a more than metaphorically warm reception from the cathedral dignitaries, who found him lodgings above a bakery. When he converted his chapel into the church of St Cross in 1834, members of the municipal corporation subscribed to his funds to mark their respect. Although he was hooted at during the 1826 general election, and an effigy of Wiseman was displayed outside his windows during the 'papal aggression' crisis of 1850, he was influential in Lichfield society. He built chapels at Hopwas and Tamworth. 
However, Kirk's main labours during the fifty years he spent in Lichfield lay in 'the cabinet rather than the field, in the study rather than the pulpit' ('Tablet', 52). As a young man he had read Charles Dodd's 'Church History of England' (1737-42), and had decided to write a continuation of the work, covering the history of eighteenth-century English Catholicism. His extensive collection of materials for this work was described in a 'Letter to the Rev. Joseph Berington' (1826). The continuation of the 'History', however, remained unwritten, and Kirk handed over most of his materials to Mark Aloysius Tierney, who brought out a new, but incomplete, edition of Dodd between 1839 and 1843. The manuscripts subsequently passed to the Westminster Diocesan Archives, and in 1908 one of the manuscripts was edited by J. H. Pollen and E. Burton and published as 'Biographies of English Catholics in the Eighteenth Century'. It remains an essential (if not always accurate) source for historians of eighteenth-century English Catholicism. Kirk helped to prepare for publication the papers of Sir Ralph Sadler, Elizabeth I's ambassador to Scotland, which appeared in 1809 with an introduction by Walter Scott. He also collaborated with the Coventry antiquary Thomas Sharp. To his contemporaries, however, he was best known for his work 'The Faith of Catholics' (1813), which was written in collaboration with Joseph Berington. Later described as one of the nineteenth-century's most enduring controversial works, it was republished in 1830 and 1846, and a Latin translation was published in Bonn in 1844. It provoked replies from John Graham, who criticized it in a review included in his 'Annals of Ireland' (1819), and from R. T. P. Pope in his 'Roman Misquotation' (1840). Kirk also published an edition of a Roman Catholic tract of 1680, 'Roman Catholic Principles in Reference to God and the King' (1815), with an introduction identifying the author as the Benedictine abbot of Lamspringe, James Corker. 
In 1841 Pope Gregory XVI conferred a DD upon Kirk. Kirk died at Lichfield on 21 December 1851 and was buried at St Cross Church. In his obituary by Henry Weedall, president of Oscott College, he was described as 'a living chronicle of persons, places and facts... a perfect specimen of the olden times, a type of the fine old English Priest; methodical, dignified, devout' ('The Tablet', 52). 


@@@@@


doc= 15651


Kirk, Robert (1644-1692), Gaelic scholar, was born on 9 December 1644, probably at Aberfoyle, Perthshire, the seventh and youngest son of James Kirk (1608/1609?-1658), minister there, and his wife, Elizabeth Carkettle (died 1679). He studied at Edinburgh University (where he graduated MA on 19 July 1661), and afterwards at St Andrews. On 8 November 1664 he became the minister of Balquhidder, Perthshire, and from 23 October 1667 to 3 April 1688 he was clerk to the synod of Dunblane, a position in which he earned considerable respect from his colleagues. On 14 January 1678 he married Isabel, daughter of Sir Colin Campbell of Mochaster (1616-1668) and Margaret Menzies (died 1681). They had two sons, Colin (died 1725), who eventually became a writer to the signet in Edinburgh, and William, who died an infant. Isabel died on 25 December 1680, aged twenty-five, and was buried at Balquhidder; Kirk himself cut the epitaph on her gravestone. A firm episcopalian, he took the oath imposed by the 'Test Act' of 1681. 
Kirk's parish was then entirely Gaelic speaking, and the minister was the scholarly author of the first complete metrical psalter in Gaelic, for ten years the only version in the language, 'Psalma Dhaibhidh an meadrachd', of which 221 copies were published in 1684. He had learned that the synod of Argyll intended to publish a rival version, and he resorted to curious expedients to keep himself awake while working night and day to forestall them. The following year, on 9 June 1685, he was appointed to his father's old charge at Aberfoyle. Over the next few years he became involved in two projects financed by the scientist Robert Boyle. Following the appearance in 1685 of a version of the 'Bible' in Irish type, comprising the 'Old Testament' (by Bedell) and the 'New Testament' (by O'Donnell), James Kirkwood (1650?-1708), a deprived Scottish minister living in Bedfordshire, persuaded Kirk, and his lawyer-relative Colin Campbell of Carwhin, agent to the earl of Breadalbane, to take responsibility for its distribution in the highlands. There were 200 copies, sufficient to provide one for each parish, but Kirk regarded the number of bibles as ridiculous, perhaps because some were 'alienated to private use'. The Irish characters were unfamiliar to highlanders, and he proposed that more copies should he made available transliterated into roman characters. Boyle agreed to subsidise the cost as he had that of a Gaelic version of Charteris's 'Catechism' (1688), to which Kirk had contributed. During the time of considerable uncertainty in the Scottish church that succeeded the political events of 1688, the intrepid Kirk, who had been permitted to continue in the ministry despite his unrepentant episcopalianism, went to London for eight months to supervise the printing of what came to be known as Kirk's 'Bible', completed by April 1690. He also produced a small vocabulary of 464 difficult words, which foreshadowed future Gaelic dictionaries; this was later revised and republished in 1702 by Edward Lhuyd (died 1709). 
While in London, Kirk, who had a keen interest in fairy superstitions, met Bishop Edward Stillingfleet and his wife, Elizabeth. The bishop was a seventh son, and the couple, who were themselves to have seven sons, intrigued by what this might imply, asked Kirk for further information. In response he wrote, and addressed to Elizabeth Stillingfleet, the curious 'The secret commonwealth, or, An essay on the nature and actions of the subterranean (and for the most part) invisible people heretofore going under the name of faunes and fairies, or the lyke, among the low country Scots, as they are described by those who have the second sight' (1691), a work later published in several different versions. 
Kirk married again, a son, Robert (died 1758), being born about 1690. His second wife, Margaret Campbell of Fordie, was a cousin of his first wife. Margaret was pregnant with their second child, Marjorie, when Kirk died, at Aberfoyle, on 14 May 1692. He was buried in the old kirkyard there. Kirkwood continued the task of distributing the bibles after Kirk's death, in spite of opposition in England because it might encourage Gaelic. Interest in Kirk has persisted, partly because a successor at Aberfoyle, Patrick Graham (1750-1835), drew him to the attention of Sir Walter Scott who mentioned him in 'Rob Roy' (1818). In his 'Sketches of Perthshire' (1812), Graham related that Kirk did not die, but was 'taken' by the fairies whose secrets he had betrayed. According to Graham, Kirk reappeared at the baptism of his posthumous child. Manifesting himself to a 'mutual relation', the minister had asked that his brother-in-law, Thomas Graham of Duchray, cast a dagger above his head, to release him, but, 'in his astonishment', Duchray failed, leaving Kirk captive in fairyland. Since then many distinguished folklorists have investigated the Fairy Minister, but this has meant that the importance of Kirk's work, as the scholar who was among the first to record highland folk-beliefs as well as to make the 'Bible' accessible to highlanders, has sometimes been underestimated. 


@@@@@


doc= 15652


Kirk, Thomas (c.1765-1797), painter and engraver, was a pupil of Richard Cosway. He won a silver palette at the Society of Arts for a history piece in 1785, and first exhibited the same year at the Royal Academy, showing 'Venus Presenting Love to Calypso'. He continued to exhibit there in alternate years until 1791; in 1794 he showed mainly miniatures and in 1795 a number of drawings illustrating popular works of fiction. He last exhibited in 1796, when he sent 'Evening' and 'A Dream'. Kirk's drawings for Charles Cooke's series of 'Poets' were praised by connoisseurs such as Edward Dayes and Samuel Redgrave. He painted miniatures in the style of Cosway and also engraved in stipple, contributing to both Thomas Macklin's exhibition of biblical paintings and Boydell's 'Shakspeare Gallery'. For the gallery, he was the only artist to engrave one of his own pictures; this painting, from 'Titus Andronicus', act IV, scene i, is now in the collection of the Royal Shakespeare Theatre in Stratford upon Avon. Kirk also designed an admission ticket for a concert of the Choral Fund of the Haymarket Theatre in 1796. He died in London of lung tuberculosis on 18 November 1797, and was buried later that month in St Pancras Old Church. According to Redgrave, he was working on a proof on the day he died. 


@@@@@


doc= 15653


Kirk, Thomas (1781-1845), sculptor, was born in Cork, the son of William Kirk, a native of Edinburgh, and his wife, Elizabeth, 'nee' Bible. His parents moved to Cork from Newry, co. Down, but Kirk settled in Dublin in early life and studied in the drawing schools of the Royal Dublin Society where he won medals in 1797 and 1800. He was then employed as an ornamental stonecarver by Henry Darley, a stonecutter. He established himself as a sculptor at 21 Jervis Street and became noted for his fine work in relief on mantelpieces and monuments. His busts also gained him a rapid reputation, and they were considered remarkable for the delicate handling of the marble and for distinctness of detail. Seventy of these have been recorded; many are described in W. G. Strickland's 'Dictionary of Irish Artists'. In March 1808 he married Eliza Robinson (1788-1869), daughter of Joseph Robinson, a builder, of Golden Lane, Dublin; they had twelve children. One son, Joseph Robinson Kirk (1821-1894), became a sculptor and a member of the Royal Hibernian Academy; others were the Revd William Boyton Kirk DD, and the Very Revd Francis J. Kirk of St Mary of the Angels, Bayswater, London. Of their four daughters -- Mary, Anne, Elizabeth (Eliza), and Margaret (or Catherine) -- Eliza Kirk ('b'. 1812) became a sculptor. 
In 1810 Kirk exhibited 'Piety and Chastity' (Dublin Pro-Cathedral) at the Society of Artists in Dublin -- the first time he had shown at that institution. On the foundation of the Royal Hibernian Academy in 1823 he was chosen as one of the founder members, and he exhibited there for the rest of his life. He was successful in the competition for the Nelson monument in Dublin, and executed the 13 foot high statue of the admiral in Portland stone on the memorial column in Sackville Street (O'Connell Street; 1808, destr. 1966), which established his reputation. Another major public monument was the colossal statue of Thomas Spring-Rice, Lord Monteagle, at Limerick, exhibited at the Royal Hibernian Academy (RHA) in 1821. He also executed a marble statue of George IV in the Linen Hall, Dublin (exh. RHA 1827) and one of the duke of Wellington (exh. RHA 1829); and a model for that of George III for the Bank of Ireland in Dublin, which was carried out in marble by John Bacon the younger. Possibly his most important work was the statue of Admiral Sir Sidney Smith (exh. RA, 1839), commissioned by parliament and placed in the Royal Naval Hospital in Greenwich. Many of his busts, which were esteemed for their accurate and expressive modelling and their faithfulness as likenesses, are in the premises of the Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland, the Royal Dublin Society, the library of Trinity College, and elsewhere in Dublin. Among them are busts of Thomas Moore (exh. RHA 1829 and other versions), J. Wilson Croker (1819, Hawkins Street, Dublin), Angelica Catalani (exh. RHA 1826), Francis Johnson (exh. RHA 1827, destr.), and Bartholomew Lloyd, provost of Trinity College, Dublin. Among his groups were 'The Young Champion' and 'The Young Suppliant' (both exh. RHA 1843), executed for Lord de Grey when lord lieutenant, and 'The Orphan Girl' (1832, Thomas Abbot memorial) and the Nathaniel Sneyd memorial -- both in Christ Church, Dublin; in his funerary memorials he favoured reliefs on the theme of the good Samaritan. Other works were 'The Young Dogstealer' for Viscount Powerscourt (1840) and figures of Hibernia, Mercury, and Fidelity (1817) on the pediment of the General Post Office in Dublin. One of his finest was 'The Parting Glance', the memorial to Lady Rossmore (exh. RHA 1843) in Monaghan -- a neo-classical deathbed scene tempered with Victorian sentiment. He also made the figure of a sailor (1817), 12 feet high and cast in metal, as a navigational aid at the entrance to Sligo harbour. Kirk died in Dublin on 19 April 1845 and was buried in Mount Jerome cemetery in Dublin. On his tomb is a life-size female figure, the work of his son, Joseph Robinson Kirk. 


@@@@@


doc= 15654


Kirkall, Elisha (1681/2-1742), engraver, was born at Sheffield in Yorkshire in 1681 or 1682 (Vertue gave his age as forty in 1722) and became one of the most enterprising and engaging engraver-publishers of his generation. According to George Vertue his father was a locksmith and in Sheffield he 'had some small beginnings to Engrave' (Vertue, 'Note books', 3.6). He arrived in London about 1702 and an early trade card advertises him as a jobbing engraver, undertaking 'All sorts of engraving as Steel & Silver Seals with Flat Stitch upon Copper Plates large or small, & coats of arms according to true Heraldry' (trade card, British Museum). But Kirkall soon made or exploited one very marketable discovery: 'an Invention of engraving on the same sort of Metal which Types are cast with' (Jackson, 26). He was the first to produce a design cut in relief in metal so that it could be set with ordinary type. This innovation proved extremely popular with the book trade, and Kirkall produced a very large number of headpieces, tailpieces, and capitals. It would appear that he married soon after he arrived in London: another trade card, cut in relief on metal and advertising the names of Elisha and Elizabeth Kirkall, is dated 31 August 1707. The card possibly implies that Elizabeth Kirkall shared her husband's work. His output was certainly prodigious. Vertue, who was not habitually generous to his rivals, referred to Kirkall as 'an Industrious man' (Vertue, 'Note books', 6.188) and over the following decades he produced a very large number of book illustrations in etching or in metalcut sometimes, as with Samuel Croxall's 'Fables' (1722), cut in white line. They include a set of tiny prayer-book illustrations after Le Fage for Lintott (1714) and plates to illustrate Terence (1713), Ovid (1717), Dryden (1717), Lucan (1718), and Pope's 'Iliad' (1715-20) as well as a wide variety of other works including Richard Bradley's 'The Gentleman and Gardener's Kalendar' (1718). 
Kirkall was a member of the Great Queen Street Academy and benefited both from Louis Cheron's lessons in life drawing and from the network of professional contacts that radiated from the academy and its convivial counterpart, the Rose and Crown Club. Kirkall's career suddenly blossomed as a result of a scheme to imitate sixteenth-century drawings in the collections of leading virtuosi in a 'chiaroscuro' technique superficially resembling that of the Renaissance artist Ugo da Carpi. To judge from the subscription ticket the scheme was launched in 1722, and prints were delivered in late 1724. Kirkall printed in relief from metal plates using rocker-work for tone and, although Jackson stated that 'the Curious complained, that the ancient manner of Hugo di Carpi was not found in this Performance' (Jackson, 31), Kirkall's achievement was widely admired. The project promoted Kirkall as a serious artist and prompted similar schemes to publish paintings in noble collections. In 1727 he issued sixteen seascapes by the van de Velde printed in sea-green ink from which Vertue gathered that Kirkall made almost $1000. Kirkall went on to scrape numerous other decorative 'chiaroscuro' mezzotints including copies of William Hogarth's 'Harlot's Progress' (1732) and maritime subjects including a set after Peter Monamy, twelve prints of the whale fishery, and six of the East India Company's settlements. 
Meanwhile Kirkall continued his prolific and versatile output of commissioned work, engraving eight plates for Thomas Baston's 'Twenty-Two Ships of his Majesty's Navy' (1726), seventy-three plates for James Gibbs's 'A Book of Architecture' (1728), and a large number of antiquarian subjects, chiefly for William Stukeley. He engraved innovative colour-printed plates for John Martyn's 'Historia plantarum rariorum' (1728) and for the 'Catalogus plantarum' (1730) published by London's leading gardeners. From at least 1724 he lived around Fleet Street, first in Wine-Office Court and then in Dogwell Court. In 1731 his son Charles was apprenticed to the portrait painter Gawen Hamilton. By the time of Kirkall's death his wife, Elizabeth, had died and he had married a second woman, named Deborah. According to Vertue he died in December 1742 at Whitefriars, Fleet Street, having lived in London 'near 40 years' (Vertue, 'Note books', 3.113). His son Charles proved his will on 26 January 1743. Most of his copperplates were bought by the Bowles family. An album in the British Museum contains fine examples of many of his prints. Other examples can be found in the Bodleian Library and Ashmolean Museum, Oxford, and the National Maritime Museum, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 15655


Kirkby, John (d. 1290), administrator and bishop of Ely, began his career as a clerk in Henry III's chancery. He may have been related to the John Kirkby who acted as justice in 1227 and 1236, and who was perhaps parson of Kirkby Lonsdale, Westmorland, but the name was a common one, and such identification is conjectural. He was keeper of the rolls of chancery in 1269, and received custody of the great seal on 7 August 1272 on the death of the chancellor, Richard Middleton. On Henry III's death on 16 November, Kirkby handed the seal to Walter Giffard, archbishop of York, and the other councillors of the new king. He remained in the chancery under Edward I, and when the chancellor, Robert Burnell, was absent, it was Kirkby who always had custody of the seal, notably in February 1278, May 1279, February 1281, and March 1283. He was vice-chancellor in fact, if not in title, and was so termed by the author of the Dunstable annals. He was a member of the royal council from at least as early as 1276. 
In 1282 Edward I was in urgent need of money to pay for the Welsh war. On 19 June he informed the sheriffs from Chester that he had appointed Kirkby as his commissioner for announcing certain important matters to all the shires (except Cornwall). Walter of Amundsham was associated with him, and he was to be given all assistance. Similar writs went to the boroughs, religious houses, and other authorities. The aim of Kirkby's mission was to obtain voluntary gifts and loans, and in the course of his travels in the autumn he collected about $16,500, and aroused considerable hostility, reflected in the comments of chroniclers. The money raised, however, was insufficient for the king's purposes. Meetings were summoned at York and Northampton early in 1283; Kirkby was sent to the latter as the king's representative, together with Edmund, earl of Cornwall, and the treasurer, Richard Ware, the abbot of Westminster. A grant of a thirtieth was duly obtained; the sums previously collected by Kirkby were set against the tax. 
On 6 January 1284 Kirkby was appointed treasurer, on the death of the abbot of Westminster. He was almost certainly responsible for the major overhaul of the exchequer which took place in the aftermath of the Welsh war, a process which began with the statute of Rhuddlan in 1284. This dealt with the problems of debts owed to the crown, and attempted to speed up exchequer procedure. In the next year the treasurer instigated the survey known as Kirkby's Quest, a detailed investigation into debts owed to the crown, and into various dues and rents, including feudal resources. This was undertaken in the context of recent reforms in exchequer administration, and was very wide-ranging. Regrettably few full returns survive. 
Kirkby's interests were not confined to financial matters. He also played a significant role in the king's dispute with London. In 1285 he was appointed to head a special commission to investigate the state of public order in the city, following the scandal of the murder of the goldsmith Lawrence Duket by the followers of Ralph Crepyn, a city alderman. In order to avoid appearing before Kirkby at an inquest held in the Tower, the mayor resigned his office. Kirkby immediately seized the city into the king's hands, and ordered the citizens to appear before the king at Westminster. Two officials were appointed by Kirkby to perform the sheriffs' task of collecting the customary farm of the city. The city was then put under a warden appointed by the king, and did not recover its liberties until 1298. Kirkby's action was extremely unpopular. 
Kirkby's services to the crown were rewarded by the grant of so many benefices that he was widely regarded as a scandalous pluralist. The process of acquisition began in 1271, when he received a grant from Henry III of rents worth 47's.' 9'd.' yearly in Medbourne, Leicestershire, along with the advowson of the church there. Although he was only in deacon's orders, he became rector of St Buryan, Cornwall, dean of Wimborne, canon of Wells and York, and, after 1272, archdeacon of Coventry. In 1283 he was elected bishop of Rochester, but Archbishop Pecham was resolutely hostile to rewarding officials in this way, and he exerted so much pressure that Kirkby resigned his claims to the see. Pecham then ordered a fresh election, on the grounds that Kirkby's pluralism had made him an impossible candidate. 
On 26 July 1286 Kirkby was elected bishop of Ely, and on 7 August he was presented to the king, who was at Melun in France. This time Pecham made no objections, and confirmed the election on 17 August. On 21 September the archbishop in person ordained Kirkby a priest at Faversham, consecrating him bishop the next day at Canterbury. Election to a bishopric did not distract Kirkby from affairs of state. In 1287 he went to south Wales to assist in putting down the rebellion of Rhys ap Maredudd. He attempted to negotiate a tax at a gathering in London in February 1289, but the magnates refused to make a grant in the absence of the king. According to the Osney annals, he then initiated a tallage, which did not require consent, but nothing was collected. Edward supported him in his actions; he was not one of those officials who lost office in the purge that followed the king's return to England in August 1289. 
Kirkby was a generous benefactor to his see. He gave The Bell inn in London to provide for celebrating his anniversary, and in his will left his successors a house, later called Ely Place, and nine cottages in Holborn. He died at Ely on 26 March 1290. His health was affected by an operation to bleed him, and he suffered a recurrence of a fever which had affected him earlier in the year. He was buried in his cathedral, on the north side of the choir. The chroniclers' verdict on him was for the most part unfavourable: Bartholomew Cotton quoted some Latin lines describing him as greedy, loquacious, self-assertive, and quarrelsome. The Dunstable annalist, however, admitted that he was just and truthful. He left as heir his brother, William; he also had four married sisters. At the time of his death all were in their thirties; he cannot himself have been of any great age. 


@@@@@


doc= 15656


Kirkby, John (d. 1352), bishop of Carlisle, is first recorded in 1312, as a canon of the Augustinian priory of Carlisle. Like most of his fellows, he was probably a native of north-west England. Nothing is known of his education, though he is recorded as lending books on canon and civil law. He was ordained priest on 23 March 1314, suggesting that he was at least twenty-five by then. No later than 1330, and probably in 1325, he was elected prior. His priorate was marked by a series of disputes with Bishop John Ross, during which both he and the canons of Carlisle Cathedral were excommunicated. However, when Ross died in 1332, Kirkby was elected to succeed him. Royal assent was granted on 18 May, Archbishop Melton of York confirmed the election on 2 July, and the temporalities were restored a week later. He was consecrated by Melton on 19 July. The see had been reserved to the pope, but on 4 December 1333 John XXII confirmed Kirkby as bishop. Kirkby had already, on 9 October 1333, undertaken to revoke his predecessor's sentences of excommunication, and at the same time he confirmed the priory in its rights and tithes. 
Throughout his episcopate Kirkby was closely involved in border affairs. He may have accompanied Sir Anthony Lucy on a raid into the Scottish west march in March 1333 -- the two were subsequently in dispute with Ranulf Dacre, sheriff of Cumberland, over the ransom of two prisoners. At Newcastle on 12 June 1334 he witnessed Edward Balliol's homage to Edward III for the Scottish crown. In July 1335, with a retinue of forty men-at-arms, he joined the army with which Edward III invaded Scotland from Carlisle. For the campaign of 1337, having contracted to serve under Thomas Beauchamp, eleventh earl of Warwick, he took part in an attack upon Teviotdale, Moffatdale, and Nithsdale in September, and then in an unsuccessful attempt to intercept a Scottish force raiding Redesdale and Coquetdale. Such activities, according to the Lanercost chronicle, earned for Kirkby the particular hatred of the Scots, and when they raided Cumberland in October that year, they singled out his manor of Rose (which he had received licence to crenellate in April 1336) for destruction. In November he joined the force relieving Edinburgh Castle, but excused himself from further participation in that year's campaigning, on the grounds of the harm he had suffered at the hands of the Scots, and of his lack of a retinue. For the same reason he petitioned the king in the following spring for a life grant of the keepership of Carlisle Castle. The custody was granted during pleasure in June 1339, and Kirkby held it only intermittently until 1345. He also contracted to supply soldiers to Edward Balliol's command, and in 1343 was appointed a keeper of the truce with Scotland. 
Although he attended a number of parliaments in the early 1340s, for much of his episcopate Kirkby resided in his diocese, where he made at least two visitations, and was assiduous in conducting ordinations. Even so, he would appear at first sight to have been hardly more popular with his flock than he was with the Scots. Attacks on the bishop and his men were reported in 1333 and 1337, while on 31 July 1345 a violent disturbance broke out in Carlisle between the citizens and the castle garrison, during which the soldiers, allegedly with Kirkby's connivance, set upon the townsfolk and killed four of them, including one of the city bailiffs. Kirkby lost his custody of Carlisle Castle as a result of this riot. He also engaged in a prolonged dispute with his archdeacon, while a visitation of his diocese in 1338 led to altercations with a number of monastic houses over their claims to advowsons. It is possible that some, at least, of this apparent quarrelsomeness was the result of Kirkby's efforts to recover ground lost under his two predecessors, bishops Halton and Ross, through either their ill health or the disorder arising from Scottish attacks. Not all of it proved disadvantageous to his see; indeed, a lawsuit with Ross's executors led in 1347 to a judgment which stands to this day, laying down that the ornaments of a deceased bishop's chapel belong to his diocese, and not to his personal estate. 
By then Kirkby had resumed his career as a soldier. About Easter 1345, having joined forces with Sir Thomas Lucy and Sir Robert Ogle to confront a Scottish invasion led by Sir William Douglas, he was unhorsed and nearly captured in a conflict that ended in the rout of the Scots. In March 1346 he was appointed a warden of the west march. However, it is unclear whether he fought at Nevilles Cross on 17 October following -- the chronicler Geoffrey Baker's claim that he was present is not confirmed by other sources. Early in 1348 he was commissioned to accompany the king's daughter Joan to Spain, for her marriage to the future Pedro I of Castile, but she died of plague at Bordeaux in September. Kirkby himself was presumed to be back in his diocese by April 1349, when Archbishop Zouche of York sent him instructions concerning the spiritual precautions he was to take there against the black death. But his register contains no entries after 2 June 1347, and his whereabouts when he died, on 23 November 1352, went unrecorded. 


@@@@@


doc= 15657


Kirkby, John (c.1705-1754), Church of England clergyman and grammarian, claimed to have been born in Cumberland, though in the register of St John's College, Cambridge, from where he appears to have graduated BA in 1726, and proceeded MA in 1745, his birthplace is noted as Londesborough, Yorkshire. Like his father, the Revd Thomas Kirkby, he intended to make a career in the church, but in this, as in his other major ventures in life, he was not very successful. According to his own account, quoted by Edward Gibbon in his 'Memoirs', he began life as a poor curate in Cumberland. On 13 June 1725 he married Ann Stable of Egremont; they had several children, of whom only one appears to have outlived her father. In 1739 Kirkby was appointed vicar of Waldershare, Kent, and four years later in 1743 rector of Blackmanstone in Romney Marsh, but a publication of his that same year on behalf of the poorer clergy at Canterbury is believed to have excluded him from further preferment. Kirkby was equally unlucky in his tutorship of Edward Gibbon, who was only seven at the time. Unluckily omitting one morning in November 1745 the name of George II in prayer, he was dismissed by Gibbon's father after only eighteen months of service (E. Gibbon, 'Memoirs'). While with the Gibbons, Kirkby wrote a grammar of English which, together with a Latin grammar, was published as 'A New English Grammar' (1746). The grammar partly plagiarized Anne Fisher's 'New Grammar', which had been published a year earlier in Newcastle. This makes Fisher, not Kirkby, the ancestor of the rule for the use of sex-indefinite 'he'. But unlike Fisher's grammar, Kirkby's was not very popular, for it was never reprinted. Nor does the dedication of the grammar to Gibbon's father appear to have had its desired effect. 
Kirkby's plagiarism of Fisher's grammar has gone undetected until very recently; another act of plagiarism was, however, soon discovered. In 1745 he published a novel called 'Automathes', a second edition of which appeared in Dublin a year later. Gibbon describes it as a poor performance, and as a plagiarism of well-known romances. It seems largely borrowed from the 'History of Autonous' (1736). The publication of the grammar and Kirkby's attempt at a novel indicate that he was looking for a career outside the church. Another direction he appears to have considered is that of natural philosophy. In 1748 he published a book called 'The Doctrine of Ultimators', of which he presented two copies to the Royal Society in January 1752. In the letter accompanying the gift he suggests that he might like to 'establish Weekly Lectures of different Sorts in some Part of London' (RS archives, L&P 2.251), adding that 'it wou d be no small Advantage to these Purposes, to have the Honour of Subscribing my self one of your Society' (ibid.). Kirkby's gift was duly acknowledged and entered in the minute-books of the society, but the unlucky Kirkby was dismissed in a letter by Thomas Birch with the words 'I sincerely wish you Success in all your Studies & Labours for the public' (BL, Add. MS 4312, fol. 455). 
Before reaching the age of fifty Kirkby died, a widower, living either in Peter Street, Canterbury, from where he had addressed the Royal Society two years earlier, or in the precinct of Norwich Cathedral, which was his last address according to the grant of probate on 10 December 1754 (TNA: PRO, PROB 6/130, fol. 148'r'). His 'Goods Chattels & Credits', whatever they may have been, went to his daughter Anne, who was married to a clergyman called John Jeffery the younger. 


@@@@@


doc= 15658


Kirkby, Richard (c.1658-1703), naval officer, was the fourth child and second son of Richard Kirkby ('c'.1625-1681) of Kirkby, Lancashire, and his second wife, Isabel, daughter of Sir William Hudleston of Cumberland. He passed his naval lieutenant's examination on 28 March 1689 and was appointed second lieutenant of the 'Advice'. On 12 February 1690 he was appointed captain of the 'Success' hired ship, a commission he owed to Arthur Herbert and to his cousin Sir John Lowther, one of the Admiralty commissioners. His ship was part of the fleet sent to capture St Kitts, but he was not employed as a captain for the fourteen months after the 'Success' returned to England in April 1692. In 1694 he was appointed to the 'Southampton' and served under Edward Russell in the Mediterranean. In a fight with two French vessels on 18-19 January 1695 it was noticed that he 'kept as far off' the heavily armed 'Content' 'as his guns could reach reasonably firing now and then 2 or 3 guns at him' (TNA: PRO, ADM 51/3935/1), and he was excluded from a share in the prize money. Apparently the 'Southampton' was not a well-disciplined ship; its chaplain, Ellis Cooper, left after some unpleasantness with Kirkby, the boatswain was broken and flogged for disobedience and insolence, and a seaman was sentenced to be flogged and 'towed ashore' for 'scandalous actions'. 
In 1696 the 'Southampton' was sent to the West Indies and was one of the ships which burned Petit Guave on 28 June 1697. On its return in 1698 Kirkby was tried by court martial on charges of embezzlement and cruelty, accused of punishing a seaman for straggling by ordering him to be 'tied up by the right arm and left leg for several hours' (TNA: PRO, ADM 1/5260). Though cleared, he spent the next two years unemployed and on half-pay. He blamed 'the great power and interest of my Lord of Orford' (Edward Russell) for his being overlooked (TNA: PRO, ADM 1/2004). 
In February 1701 Kirkby was appointed to the 'Ruby', probably due to Lowther, and was sent to the West Indies. By March he had moved to the 'Defiance', and was 'eldest officer under the flag' from the death of Rear-Admiral Henry Martin until the arrival of Rear-Admiral William Whetstone in May 1702. Second in command of the squadron under Vice-Admiral John Benbow which met a French squadron off St Mary on 19 August, he, like most of the captains, ignored Benbow's signals to close the enemy and engage. After a five-day running skirmish the English were beaten off and Benbow mortally wounded. On return to Jamaica Kirkby and his fellow mutineers were tried by court martial. Evidence against him came from over two dozen officers, and it was reported that he had not encouraged his men to fight but dodged behind the mizzenmast 'falling down on the deck at the sound of a shot'. Though heard, he was condemned to be shot for cowardice and disobedience. In a long letter to the Admiralty secretary Josiah Burchett he alleged that Benbow's injudicious and ignorant conduct was the cause of the defeat, that his evidence was falsified, that members of his crew who wanted to defend him were browbeaten by the dying Benbow, and that the court was adjourned when he sought to present evidence. Captain Edward Acton carried him to England, where sentence was to be carried out, arriving in Plymouth on 15 April the day before the executions were to take place. In the evening Kirkby was 'very calm and easy, not railing or reviling, but forgiving all the world and praying, for the Queen's health and prosperity', a stance retained the following day also (TNA: PRO, ADM 1/1436). He wrote an account of his actions which he hoped would be published, and drew up his will, leaving everything to his sister Elizabeth. During the day 'land and sea officers with others' came on board the 'Bristol' to see the execution, as did two parsons 'to pray and give the sacrament' to Kirkby and Captain Cooper Wade (ibid.). At 6 p.m. Kirkby, 'kneeling on the larboard side of the forecastle' facing the six musketeers appointed to shoot him, was executed, having lifted his hand as 'a signal to be shot'. After the execution Kirkby's body was placed in his coffin, 'being by him', which was carried on shore and buried under the communion table in Plymouth church (TNA: PRO, ADM 52/7/8). Kirkby seems to have been a bully, resentful that his merits had not got him a flag rank, and a coward, a trait which led to his undoing and death. 


@@@@@


doc= 15659


Kirkcaldy, Sir James, of Grange (d. 1556), administrator, was the eldest son of William Kirkcaldy of Grange (Fife). Although less well-known than his son, Sir William Kirkcaldy (c.1520-1573), who was hanged for his championship of Queen Mary's cause, Sir James played an important part in the public affairs of mid-sixteenth-century Scotland. He was a prominent Fife laird, with lands and castles at Grange, near Burntisland, and Hallyards in Auchtertool parish. The latter was held from the bishop of Dunkeld and included the settlement of Newbigging which the king created a burgh of barony, with its market revenues, in 1541. Important land acquisitions had also come to Kirkcaldy on the forfeiture of Lord Glamis in 1537, including land in the barony of Kinghorn, Fife, which he transferred to his son William. In March 1538 the king granted him, jointly with the royal favourite Oliver Sinclair of Pitcairns, the wardship of the extensive lands of the earldom of Caithness. 
Kirkcaldy had a long career in the king's service. In the 1520s he took part with those who tried to detach the young James V from the power of the Douglases, and in August 1527 he had to pay for a remission for assisting the earl of Lennox in an attempt to do so. Described by Sir James Melville of Halhill (his brother-in-law) as 'a stout bold man' (Melville, 11) who was always prepared to back up his words with action, he frequently gave personal advice to the king and appears to have enjoyed the royal confidence. From the early 1530s he received livery clothes and fees as a gentleman of the king's chamber and trusted servant. He was among those who accompanied James to France in the autumn of 1536 for an extended visit during which the king married Princess Madeleine de Valois. In 1538 he was referred to as steward and in 1542 as a sewar (server at table) in the royal household. 
Kirkcaldy was made lord treasurer in 1538, entering office on 24 March. In September and December of that year he was an auditor of the accounts rendered by David Beaton, then abbot of Arbroath (later cardinal), who had handled the king's expenses in France in 1536-7, though Kirkcaldy also appears to have had some financial responsibility during the king's time in France. As treasurer he was a regular witness of royal charters and other important state transactions. He frequently acted as an auditor of the exchequer accounts rendered by his financial colleague the comptroller. His responsibilities for the king's finances overlapped with those of the royal pursemaster, but he is recorded as personally supervising and handling the transfer of money to and from the king's coffers; in 1542 he gave $2520 to John Barton to buy munitions in Denmark. Like other officers of state he found that his salary often fell into arrears. On 21 February 1540 he and the comptroller were awarded the sum of $333 6's'. 8died arrears of fees. Kirkcaldy retained his post of treasurer for some months after James's death (on 14 December 1542), and rendered his final account on 13 August 1543. 
Kirkcaldy's identification with those who wished both closer alliance with England and serious reform of the church had already made him a particular target for the resentment of Cardinal David Beaton and his fellow prelates, especially since his close relationship with the king made it difficult for them to apprehend him on a charge of heresy. Both Melville and John Knox recounted that in 1540, when the clergy presented James with a long list of suspected heretics whom he might prosecute and forfeit, the king declined to act on the allegations because of Kirkcaldy's counsel. Kirkcaldy is said to have encouraged James to meet Henry VIII at York in 1541, a plan that was undermined by the cardinal, and after the king's death Kirkcaldy was one of those who encouraged James Hamilton, earl of Arran, to assume the sole governorship, 'when as he appeared to be a true gospeller' (Melville, 20). 
Even before the act of parliament of 1543 (passed during the cardinal's detention) which sanctioned the use of the 'Bible' in English, Kirkcaldy was said to have carried an English 'New Testament' in his pouch. He associated with some of those who most strongly advocated religious reform, such as his father-in-law, Sir John Melville, and Henry Balnaves, author of a theological treatise on the doctrine of justification, who became his colleague as treasurer's clerk. In July 1544 Kirkcaldy was one of the associates of the Earl Marischal (soon to give public support to the reformer George Wishart) who were given letters of protection during the Earl Marischal's absence in France; others included the lairds of Fyvie, Philorth, and Pittarrow, and Henry Balnaves, all at one time or another suspected or accused of heresy. The clergy took their revenge on Kirkcaldy by persuading Governor Arran to deprive him of the treasurership (before 13 August 1543, when the office was said to be vacant), and it was granted instead to Arran's kinsman John Hamilton, abbot of Paisley and later archbishop of St Andrews. Balnaves was likewise deprived of the clerkship to the treasury. However, in summer 1543 Cardinal Beaton used Kirkcaldy as a mediator with the latter's allies, the earl of Rothes, Lord Gray, and Balnaves, when they were accused of obstructing the governor's journey to Dundee; and Arran himself continued to communicate with Kirkcaldy over the backlog of business from his time as treasurer and as late as 22 April 1545 sent him more than $900 -- owed as 'superexpenses' on his final account. 
With his son William and others, Kirkcaldy was involved in the plot against Cardinal Beaton, and he joined the castilians in St Andrews the day after the assassination, carried out on 29 May 1546. For this he was forfeited and his property granted to various persons, including the now reinstated Lord Glamis, from whose forfeiture Kirkcaldy had earlier benefited. On 4 September 1546 his tenants at Grange and Hallyards were warned to hand over any of his goods in their possession or be reckoned participants in his crimes. On the fall of St Andrews Castle in summer 1547 Kirkcaldy was among those Scots taken prisoner to France, first to Cherbourg, where he and his fellow captives refused to attend mass, and then to Mont-St Michel, from where some of them escaped. Kirkcaldy had advised against the escape attempt, fearing that those left behind would be more severely treated. He served for a time in the French galleys before being released with other Scots, partly on the intercession of Mary of Guise, queen dowager of Scotland, in July 1550. Kirkcaldy died in 1556. According to Knox, the family's forfeiture was reduced by parliament in 1563 (there is no official record of this), and his son Sir William was 'retoured' (recognized as successor) on 4 May 1564. 
Kirkcaldy married Janet, daughter of Sir John Melville of Raith, by about 1520. They had five recorded sons: Sir William Kirkcaldy, the heir; James (who was hanged with William after the surrender of Edinburgh Castle in 1573); David; Thomas; and George. Their four recorded daughters were Marjory, who about 1540 was contracted to marry Sir Henry Ramsay of Colluthie; Agnes, by 1542 married, as his first wife, to Sir Robert Drummond of Carnock; Marion, married by 10 January 1541 to William, son of Gabriel Semple of Cathcart; and Elizabeth, married to Sir John Mowbray of Barnbougle. Janet Melville, who survived her husband, petitioned parliament in 1546 to be allowed to keep her terce lands despite his forfeiture. The lady of Grange who gave hospitality to James V at Hallyards on his last journey to Falkland at the end of 1542, and who was described by Knox as 'an ancient godly matron' ('Knox's History', 1.38), may have been Kirkcaldy's mother, as Janet Melville could hardly have been elderly when, after her husband's forfeiture in 1546, she and 'sevin of hir bairnis' were dependent on the charity of her father, who was alive until December 1548 (Fraser, 3.89). 


@@@@@


doc= 15660


Kirkcaldy, Sir William, of Grange (c.1520-1573), soldier and politician, was the eldest son of Sir James Kirkcaldy (d. 1556) and Janet Melville, daughter of Sir John Melville of Raith. He was listed with his father, then treasurer of Scotland, following James V's death on 14 December 1542, as a witness of a purported statement of the king's will. His father probably arranged his presence in order to promote his prospects under the new regime during the minority of Mary, queen of Scots. 
William Kirkcaldy and his father seem to have been early converts to protestantism, and Sir James lost his post as treasurer in 1543 when Cardinal David Beaton, archbishop of St Andrews, orchestrated a move away from reforming policies. The two Kirkcaldys participated in the audacious capture and murder of Beaton on 29 May 1546; and William Kirkcaldy was the first man to enter St Andrews Castle, after which it was occupied by the murderers. Kirkcaldy was sent to London to seek English aid and was rewarded on 3 September with $50 sterling as the first instalment of an irregularly paid pension. He had evidently returned by the time the castle was besieged by a French force under Leone Strozzi. On 30 July 1547, after bombardment, the castle surrendered to Strozzi, and Kirkcaldy and the other 'castilians' were taken as prisoners to France. According to John Knox, another of the prisoners, 'they arrived first at Fecamp and thereafter passed up the water of Seine and lay before Rouen; where the principal gentlemen, who looked for freedom, were dispersed and put in sundry prisons. The rest were left in the galleys, and were miserably treated. ('Knox's History', 1.96-7)' Kirkcaldy's lands were forfeited on 27 November 1547. The escape of three Scots, including Kirkcaldy, from Mont-St Michel was reported to Henri II on 25 June 1550; Knox dated it to the previous Epiphany (6 January). On 26 February 1551 the English ambassador in France, Sir John Mason, reported that he had accepted Kirkcaldy's offer of his services as a spy, with the alias of Coraxe. However, there is no further evidence of Kirkcaldy's action in this role, perhaps because of the downfall of the duke of Somerset. 
It appears that Kirkcaldy next joined the French army, probably for Henri II's spring offensive of 1552 into Lorraine. Henri Cleutin, seigneur d'Oysel, Henri II's lieutenant-general in Scotland, wrote to Mary of Guise from France on 19 August 1553, informing her that the French king and the constable, Anne de Montmorency, intended to make use of Kirkcaldy's talents in their dealings with Scotland. Sir James Melville, who served in Montmorency's train from 1553 to 1557, mentions Kirkcaldy in connection with the death of Norman Leslie, master of Rothes (another of the former castilians), at the battle of Renty in August 1554: 'no man made more dull [i.e. mourning] nor the laird of Grange, who came to the camp the next day after, from a quiet raid where he had been directed' (Melville, 26). By 30 November 1556 the English ambassador in France, Nicholas Wotton, reported: '[Kirkcaldy] offers to serve her Majesty [Mary Tudor] for the like pension he had formerly in England, wherever she pleases and whether in England, the Low Countries, or here, says he shall have good intelligence of the affairs of Scotland and of France by his intimacy with both those nations.(TNA: PRO, SP 69/9/146'v'-149'r', in cipher; cf. 'CSP for.', '1553-8', 277)' On 1 March 1557 Wotton reported that Kirkcaldy desired to see Scotland delivered from the yoke of the French, commenting: 'either he must be a very great and crafty dissembler or else he bears no good will at all to the French men and next to his own country he bears a good minde to England' (TNA: PRO, SP 69/10/43'r'). Meanwhile, Kirkcaldy petitioned the French king for restoration to his and his father's lands and titles, which was granted by Mary, queen of Scots at Henri II's special desire at Paris on 17 February 1557 (see original charter, NA Scot., GD 26/1/4/86), and on 28 May he was at Dieppe waiting for a ship to Scotland. In September 1558 he was arrested by the English at Berwick as a spy, but was apparently released. 
The problems involved in determining Kirkcaldy's activities in the 1550s are compounded by the eulogy of him written by Sir James Melville, which has been a key source for his biographers. Melville asserts that during Kirkcaldy's sojourn in France from 1547 to 1557 he was captain of 100 light horse and was extolled by the dukes of Vendome and Aumale and the prince of Conde. Whereas Montmorency would only speak to him 'on couerit', Henri II called him a 'valliant man' and chose him as a sporting companion; Henri also gave him a pension which Kirkcaldy chose to ignore. Kirkcaldy's biographers have assumed that he commanded one of the regular companies that formed the core of the French standing army; these originated from the fifteen ancient 'companies des ordonnances', of which the Scots were considered the 'premier company'. Unfortunately it is impossible to substantiate any of Melville's assertions in the French archives, and if Kirkcaldy really had been a captain of one of the 'companies des ordonnances' it would have been recorded. Foreign mercenaries were often employed as temporary 'extraordinary' troops in addition to the regular French army, and Kirkcaldy was probably captain of 100 Scots in this category. Melville's stories about Kirkcaldy would apply much more closely to James Hamilton, third earl of Arran, who served the French crown with distinction as a soldier in the 1550s. When writing his memoirs in the 1590s, Melville could hardly laud Arran, who had been insane since 1562, but may have borrowed some of the incidents of Arran's career in order to construct his eulogy of Kirkcaldy. 
From early 1559 Kirkcaldy was often at the forefront of political events in Scotland. He may well have joined Mary of Guise's service in or soon after 1557, and in early 1559 was closely associated with William Maitland of Lethington, who had been appointed royal secretary by Mary in 1558; both participated in the protestant and anti-French uprising against her. Sir James Croft, the English governor of Berwick, reported on 20 July 1559: 'Money is owing [to Kirkcaldy] for serving in the late wars, in the hope whereof he drives time. The man is poor and cannot travail in these matters without charges, wherein he must be relieved by the Queen [Elizabeth] if these proceedings go forwards. ('CSP for.', '1558-9', 1.401)' A few days later Kirkcaldy openly declared himself with the protestants. 
Kirkcaldy took a leading part in the fighting that followed, conducting numerous skirmishes and ambushes and helping to besiege Sempill Castle. The English ambassador, Thomas Randolph, praised Kirkcaldy in February 1561: 'of any other besides this man, Grange deserveth most for his earnest affection to the Queen's [Elizabeth's] service; and his credit and means thereto are as good as many a greater name' ('CSP Scot.', '1547-63', 515). In October 1561 Kirkcaldy was again called to serve when fighting erupted on the borders. His military skills were also used in the campaign against the fourth earl of Huntly that culminated in the battle of Corrichie on 28 October 1562. On 1 November following he was rewarded with the barony of Nauchtane, in a grant that shows he was now a knight. 
Kirkcaldy joined the uprising of the earl of Moray and other lords against Mary's marriage to Darnley in August 1565. He was forced to relinquish his house of Hallyards, and when the uprising collapsed he fled with the others to England. He returned with Moray at the time of the murder of David Riccio on 9 March 1566, and was pardoned on the 25th. After the murder of Darnley and the acquittal of the leading suspect, the fourth earl of Bothwell, the latter began moves to marry the queen. On 20 April 1567, when a number of nobles were signing the so-called Ainslie bond supporting the marriage, Kirkcaldy wrote a frank letter to the second earl of Bedford expressing his view that Bothwell had been responsible for Darnley's death. He initially suggested how Mary could retrieve the situation: having 'lost the favour we bore to her, yet if she will pursue revenge for the murder, she will win the hearts of all honest Scotsmen again'. However, he added: 'she intends to take the prince out of Mar's hands and put him in Bothwell's keeping, who murdered his father... for she has said she cares not to lose France, England and her own country for him, and shall go with him to the world's end in a white petticoat. ('CSP Scot.', '1563-9', 2.322-3)' It appears that there was a long-standing mutual dislike between Kirkcaldy and Bothwell, and Kirkcaldy now felt committed 'to enterprise the revenge' of Darnley's murder: 'I must either take it in hand or leave the country, which I am determined to do, if I get licence; but Bothwell minds to cut me off when I obtain it'. He urged Bedford, 'I pray you let know what your mistress will do, for if we seek France, we may find favour: but I would rather persuade to lean to England' (ibid., 2.325). 
Kirkcaldy was requested to write again to Bedford on 8 May following a meeting of the earls of Argyll, Morton, Atholl, and Mar, at Stirling, where they decided to seek Mary's liberation from Bothwell (who had abducted her on 24 April). Kirkcaldy was in the lords' army against Mary and Bothwell at Carberry on 15 June, and it was to him that Mary surrendered. On 10 August, after the queen's deposition, Kirkcaldy and Sir William Murray of Tullibardine were commissioned to pursue the fugitive Bothwell. They sailed to Orkney but Bothwell escaped. On their return in September Kirkcaldy was appointed captain of Edinburgh Castle by Regent Moray. 
Mary escaped from Lochleven Castle on 2 May 1568. On 8 May Kirkcaldy signed a bond with the provost of Edinburgh, Sir Simon Preston of Craigmillar. In Moray's force at Langside on 13 May, Kirkcaldy commanded the horsemen and was rewarded with the escheat of the laird of Bass. Thereafter he moved slowly away from supporting the regent, apparently influenced by Maitland, but the progress of his defection is hard to chart. In February 1569 he was still a loyal supporter of Moray when Maitland clearly was not. Maitland's escape to Edinburgh Castle on 9 September, however, was arranged by Kirkcaldy. On 16 September Maitland wrote to the duke of Norfolk that Kirkcaldy 'will be good in all her [Mary's] causes so far as with honour he may. He mislikes altogether my lord regent's proceedings in as much as he doth see him run a direct course to his own overthrow' (Cameron, 1.69). Kirkcaldy, however, was still receiving gifts from the king's party in October, and in that month he was also elected provost of Edinburgh. Sir William Drury reported on 9 December that Kirkcaldy was loyal to the king's party. After Moray's murder on 10 January 1570, Kirkcaldy carried the standard at his funeral on 14 February. Randolph wrote in April that he did not doubt Kirkcaldy's sincerity, 'except Lethington enchant him' ('CSP Scot.', '1569-71', 125). 
Further English doubts soon emerged. The earl of Sussex reported to Elizabeth on 4 May 1570: 'understanding the Laird of Grange might be alienated from his former good affection towards your majesty, I wrote a very plain letter to him'; to which Kirkcaldy had replied on 29 April: '[the] whole matter rests on two heads: the one, that I have declined from my old friends in this realm who heretofor have desired the amity of England; the other that I have given countenance to others who have capitulated to the French.' Kirkcaldy claimed that: 'all my friends, so far as I know, are yet desirous of the amity of England... particularly towards the Queen's majesty, as well for benefits received of her father and brother by me and my friends, as for religion's sake, and her honourable dealings with this realm in the beginning of her reign. ('CSP Scot.', '1569-71', 149, 151-2)' He refused to march on Glasgow with Sussex and the king's party in June, and refused them entry to Edinburgh Castle. He seems to have resented the domineering attitude of the English towards Scotland and their preference for Lennox as regent. Kirkcaldy refused to co-operate in Lennox's appointment, and would not even shoot off any ordnance from the castle to mark the occasion. 
On 6 December 1570 Kirkcaldy wrote to Sir William Cecil with an assessment of his own position in Anglo-Scottish affairs. He reminded Cecil of 'the lamentable estate of this country', of 'the unnatural division of the noblemen and 'whole body' of this realm', which in his own small way he had tried to 'extinguish'. He had also offered his services to Queen Elizabeth as he believed it was within her power 'to bring these two realms to their former amity', because 'if either of the parties should be 'forced' to seek remedy by foreign forces, the end thereof will be miserable' ('CSP Scot.', '1569-71', 440). Cecil replied on 10 January 1571 that he could not 'promise any more than his former doings declare' (ibid., 462), to which Kirkcaldy responded with barely concealed hostility on 29 January. In March he was entering into confrontation with the burgh of Edinburgh, and his men took and fortified the steeple of St Giles. In the castle he had the royal regalia, the principal store of ordnance, and the state papers of the kingdom. By 13 April he was openly refusing to recognize Lennox as regent. His public position was that he had always been loyal to Moray but that the cause he and Moray represented had been betrayed by Moray's successors. 
In the meantime Kirkcaldy and Maitland were negotiating with France for assistance. Monsieur Verac was sent as French ambassador, officially with instructions to seek a reconciliation between the Scottish factions, but as soon as Verac arrived at Leith on 5 July he was detained by the king's party. In his coffers was found correspondence with Maitland and Kirkcaldy concerning Mary's restoration. 
At the end of August 1571 the regent held a parliament at Stirling. Kirkcaldy, the fifth earl of Huntly, and the lairds of Ferniehurst and Buccleuch along with 280 horsemen and sixty harquebusiers made a surprise attack on the town on 4 September. They captured many prisoners, including the regent, but were forced to release them when a relieving force issued from Stirling Castle. During the affray Lennox was killed and the Marians retreated. In the aftermath Kirkcaldy was forfeited for the third time in his life, on 30 September, and on 5 September a full-scale siege of Edinburgh Castle began. 
Kirkcaldy sent his brother James to the French court to seek aid, his arrival there being reported on 5 January 1572. Although there are a number of notices of James Kirkcaldy's imminent departure from the French court from 31 January 1572 onwards, he did not return to Scotland until January 1573. A truce was agreed between the queen's and king's parties on 1 August 1572 for two months, and it was later extended to the end of the year. The new regent, Morton, offered Kirkcaldy and the castilians the same terms as Mar had proposed when he was regent. But Kirkcaldy insisted on a universal amnesty, which Morton would not accept. He therefore invested the castle, and on 1 January 1573 Kirkcaldy signalled the resumption of hostilities by a bombardment of the town. When James Kirkcaldy finally returned to Scotland bearing the long-awaited money and munitions from France for the queen's party, he was captured and his precious cargo and ship confiscated on Morton's instructions. 
At the urging of Elizabeth's representatives Morton's government made a final attempt at conciliation with the castilians. On 27 March 1573 Henry Killigrew sent Kirkcaldy and Maitland the pacification of Perth by which the conditional surrender of the remaining nobles of the queen's party had recently been agreed (23 February). On 6 April the fifth earl of Rothes, an old friend of Kirkcaldy, entered the castle as mediator, but he was no more successful than others had been. Kirkcaldy now stipulated that all his personal debts were to be paid, that he should retain Blackness Castle, and that the English should guarantee his life. As regards Queen Mary's jewels, 'the said laird of Grange shall not be [ac]countable therefore nor charged in any sort to make reckoning or deliverance of the same or any part thereof to any person but only to herself'; and finally, all properties should be returned to him and his supporters (Cameron, 1.120-25). After the king's party rejected these terms, Sir William Drury and an English army crossed the border in April while siege guns were sent by sea to Leith. On 28 May, after eleven days of bombardment, the castle surrendered. Kirkcaldy, Maitland, and nine other leaders were imprisoned. 
On 29 May Maitland and Kirkcaldy wrote to Lord Burghley, begging that they might be allowed to go to live in England. On 31 May Morton told Burghley that the fate of the prisoners 'rests now in her majesty' ('CSP Scot.', '1571-4', 575). Maitland died on 9 June. At some stage after the fall of the castle a bond of manrent was offered to Morton in return for Kirkcaldy's life, by which 100 gentlemen promised Kirkcaldy's loyalty and their own to Morton if Kirkcaldy were spared. The offer was refused. At the end of July, Morton finally received advice from Queen Elizabeth that she would leave 'the judgment and ordering of those matters to him' (ibid., 582). Kirkcaldy was tried for treason on 3 August 1573 and executed in Edinburgh the same day, fulfilling John Knox's prophecy that he would 'hang from a gallows in the face of the sun' (Hewitt, 27). Kirkcaldy was survived by his wife, Margaret Learmonth (daughter of Sir James Learmonth of Dairsie, provost of St Andrews), whom he had married between 1557 and 1564, by their daughter Janet, and by an illegitimate daughter whose recent birth was mentioned in 1573. His lands were eventually restored to his nephew William in 1581. 
In the end Kirkcaldy emerges as a Scottish martyr along the lines of, but not to the same degree as, William Wallace, who also had been a laird, soldier, and charismatic leader of men, and who also was hanged, drawn, and quartered for his adherence to his honour, principles, and ideals. The English ambassadors Killigrew and Randolph 'boisted planly to bring down that proud gyantis pryd, wha presumed to be a nother Wallace, as they allegit' (Melville, 257). Kirkcaldy wanted the peaceful union of Scotland with England, with two independent equal kingdoms, united by the protestant religion, each having its own hereditary monarch. This desire was naive, as no Tudor monarch would have countenanced it. 
Melville's assessment of Kirkcaldy's personal character is credible: he was 'a lusty, stark and well-proportioned personnage, hardy and of a magnanimous courage'; in all his enterprises he was 'secret and prudent' and when he was 'victorious, he was very mercifull, and naturally liberal', a friend to all men in adversity and an enemy to greed and ambition. Some loved him for 'his religion, uprightness and manliness', others 'depended upon him for his good fortune and apparent promotion, whereby divers of them hoped to be advanced and rewarded'. But Melville goes too far when he claims that Kirkcaldy 'refused sundry great offices, even the office of Regent, and benefices and great pensions' (Melville, 257-8). Kirkcaldy was granted and accepted appointments, benefices, and pensions befitting his status of laird. His character has been over-romanticized, but does contain much to admire. His importance before 1559 has been exaggerated, but from that date onwards he was often a consequential figure. 


@@@@@


doc= 15661


Kirke, Edward (1553-1613), Church of England clergyman, was born in London, where he attended St Anthony's School. He was a sizar at Pembroke College, Cambridge, matriculating in 1571 (Spenser matriculated in 1569; Gabriel Harvey was made a fellow in 1570). He transferred to Gonville and Caius College about 1574/5 and was awarded BA in 1574/5 and MA in 1578. He was ordained rector of St Giles, Risby, Suffolk, on 26 May 1580, on the institution of Sir Thomas Kytson, a post which he held until his death. Kytson was the uncle of the Spenser sisters of Althorp -- Elizabeth, Anne, and Alice -- to whom Spenser referred in 'Colin Clouts Come Home Againe' (1591). One of Kirke's account books shows that he bought 'a shepard's Calendar' for 2's'. in 1583, possibly Spenser's poem. Kirke was made rector of Lackford, the adjoining parish, on 21 August 1587 and chaplain to Lord Darcy in 1603. He died at Risby on 10 November 1613, at the age of sixty, and was buried in the chancel of St Giles, where his tomb is marked by a brass. Kirke made a will on 7 November, in which he left various small sums to his relatives and friends. He mentions a wife, Helen; a daughter, Margaret, married to George Whiter; and another son-in-law, Richard Buckle. 
Kirke is notable because he may have been the E. K. who wrote the notes to Edmund Spenser's 'The Shepheardes Calender' (1579). On this basis, and one or two other tantalising references in Spenser's letters to Gabriel Harvey, Kirke is conjectured to have been a close friend of his university contemporary. However, the evidence that Kirke was the author of the glosses and notes to Spenser's 'Shepheardes Calender' is inconclusive. Spenser must have known Kirke, given their proximity at Pembroke College. In his letter of 16 October 1579 to Gabriel Harvey from Leicester House, published as one of the 'Three Proper and Wittie, Familiar Letters' (1580), Spenser states that 'Maister E. K. hartily desireth to be commended unto your Worshippe' and refers to 'hys paynefull and dutifull Verses of your selfe'. In the next paragraph Spenser states that he has received a letter from Harvey at 'Mystresse 'Kerkes'' and later writes that Harvey can always send him letters 'safely to me by 'Mistresse Kerke', and by none other'. In another of the letters Spenser refers to the gloss to 'The Shepheardes Calender', in which 'be some things excellently, and many things wittily, discoursed of E. K.' Furthermore in a note to the May eclogue in the calendar E. K. translates the epitaph to the Greek king Sardanaplus in exactly the same way that Spenser himself does in his three letters. 
This last detail indicates either that E. K. may have been Spenser himself, as some scholars argue, or that he was indeed a close friend of Spenser's, making Edward Kirke a prime candidate. It is also possible that the Mistress Kerke referred to in the published letters is Edward's widowed mother, as Alexander Grossart suggested. But, given the bantering and iconoclastic style and tone of the letters, it is equally possible that Mistress Kerke is a fictional character, a literary device, or even a lost joke. Certainly the reader does not have to take everything in the published letters on trust. 
The same is true of 'The Shepheardes Calender'. E. K. may well have been a genuine commentator on the poem, in which case Kirke is once again a plausible candidate. However, it should not be overlooked that it is extremely unlikely that Spenser simply wrote the poem and passed it on to a publisher, who decided to include a commentary with or without the poet's permission; some scholars have argued that Spenser generally saw his works through the press with painstaking attention to detail. The text of 'The Shepheardes Calender' is designed to imitate a classical work with commentary, of the type that European humanists were publishing throughout the second half of the sixteenth century. In doing so the young poet announces his arrival on the literary scene by comparing his work to that of established ancient writers. No English writer had attempted anything so audacious before. The commentary provided by E. K. is full of odd readings and some judgements that neither Spenser nor their author was likely to have believed. As David R. Shore notes, though E. K. claims that 'by meanes of some familiar acquaintance I was made privie to his [Spenser's] counsell and secret meaning in them', 'in fact, he solves few of the mysteries that have intrigued those attracted to the 'Calender''s historical allegory' (Hamilton and others, 231). It is likely that the author of the poem intended such secrecy. If E. K. was Edward Kirke it is probable, as Alexander Judson suggested (Judson, 40), that he composed the commentary and glossary as a riddle, sometimes telling the truth, sometimes misleading the reader and hiding information, probably in collaboration with Spenser and Harvey. 


@@@@@


doc= 15662


Kirke, George (c.1600-1675), courtier, was probably born in Scotland, the son of George Kirke (possibly MP in 1626 for Clitheroe, Lancashire) who was groom of the bedchamber and gentleman of the robes to both James I and Charles I and was succeeded in 1630 by his son who had been appointed groom of the bedchamber to Prince Charles in 1621. In 1632 complaints were made after Kirke claimed $5000 expenditure on the king's robes but refused to present the bills. 
Kirke's first wife was Anne ('bap'. 1607, died 1641), the eldest daughter of Sir Robert Killigrew and sister of William Killigrew, Thomas Killigrew, and Henry Killigrew. As a wedding present, Charles gave them the manor of Sheriff Hutton, in Yorkshire, which Kirke sold in 1650. A son, Charles, was born in 1633, and it is likely that the George Kirke born 27 January 1635 at Sunbury (2 miles from Hampton Court) was also their child. An unnamed daughter was buried in Westminster Abbey in 1640. Anne, who was painted by Van Dyck, was appointed dresser to Queen Henrietta Maria in 1637. Anne was drowned under London Bridge on 8 July 1641 when her barge overturned. She was buried in Westminster Abbey. 
Kirke took every opportunity to make money. From about 1629 he became involved in projects to drain marshes. Together with Sir Robert Killigrew and Sir John Heydon, he organized marshland drainage in Norfolk, Lincoln, Kent, Sussex, and Carmarthen. Kirke took particular responsibility for the Holland Fen project near Swineshead in Lincolnshire, which was first proposed in 1635. The draining of the fens provoked disturbances among the fenmen who were intent on defending their traditional economy. In 1636 there were riots at West Fen. The leaders were imprisoned at Lincoln, where Kirke believed they should remain as 'by which means the rest of the rioters will be found out these being the ringleaders of all the rest' (Lindley, 89). Further unrest occurred at Holland Fen in 1640 and in August the following year rioters expropriated large amounts of grain from Kirke's tenants. Kirke lost these lands during the Commonwealth but tried, unsuccessfully, to regain them in 1661. 
Kirke was also a lessee of Gillingham Forest, Dorset, part of the crown's disafforestation scheme, a device used to raise revenue. At some point he obtained rights over clay used for manufacturing tobacco pipes and in 1631 was involved in a precursor of the Royal African Company. In 1634 he failed to obtain the post of sayer (of threads) in Ireland; however, the lord deputy, Wentworth, promised to advance Kirke's other Irish projects. 
In 1642 Kirke, who four years earlier had described himself as 'his Majesty's ancientest servant' ('CSP dom.', '1638', 144), was additionally appointed keeper of Whitehall Palace at $186 per annum. At Oxford on 26 February 1646 Kirke married Mary (died 1701?), daughter of Aurelian Townshend. Mary was given away by Charles I. While imprisoned in Hampton Court Charles borrowed from her a painting of the queen. Edmund Ludlow refers to a Mrs Kirk's enjoying a splendid, and lavish, entertainment by Lord Francis Villiers the night before he was killed in the earl of Holland's abortive rising in 1648. The children of the second marriage were Percy Kirke, Diana ('b'. 'c'.1648), Mary ('b'. 1649/50), and Philip. 
Kirke House, 'next le Timberyard' adjoining Spring Garden, was acquired in 1632 and is described in the 'Survey of London' (16.82-6). During the Commonwealth Kirke stayed in obscurity. He was assessed in 1643 at $500, being described in the 'Calendar... of the Committee for Compounding' for October 1645 as 'Kirke, of Nonsuch, Surrey, and Charing Cross' in a list of notables 'who are all Papists'. Kirke lost the post of keeper of Whitehall Palace, his house and goods were sequestered and demised to Lord Sheffield and Mr Lisle at $50 a year but the sequestration was discharged two years later. Kirke rebuilt the house on a grand scale between 1648 and 1652, living temporarily at 5 Chandos Street. 
In 1664 Kirke regained the post of keeper of Whitehall Palace: 'Grant to George Kirke of the office of keeping the King's palace called York Place with the great garden and orchards, bowling alleys and coney yard near the Cockpit, with the jewels and robes in the palace; and a further grant of all the tenements etc. in Westminster belonging to his place, except three houses (called Paradise, Hell and Purgatory) near the Exchequer, in lieu of which he is to have an annuity of $12.3.4. ('CSP dom.', '1664', 498)' In 1674 the post passed to the younger son Philip. Kirke's wife, Mary, who claimed a place as volary keeper in 1663 and who clearly enjoyed royal protection, was then granted several rooms in Whitehall, on condition that her husband surrendered some of his rooms. When Kirke's daughter Diana was born, Charles I promised her $2000, which was given later, probably on her sixteenth birthday, in 1664. Diana married Aubrey de Vere, earl of Oxford, in 1673. Her sister Mary, who was reputedly simultaneously the mistress of the duke of York, the duke of Monmouth, and the earl of Mulgrave, married Sir Thomas Vernon in 1677. Kirke's family was severely lambasted in Charles Sackville's poem 'A Faithfull Catalogue of our most Eminent Ninnies' ('Poems on Affairs of State', 4.191-211), where Mary was 'Vernon, the glory of that lustful tribe'. 
George Kirke was buried on 26 May 1675 at St Margaret's, Westminster, unlike most of his family who were buried in the abbey. He died intestate but a limited administration, involving a sum of $2000, was granted to Henry Killigrew in 1680. Philip Kirke's appointment as keeper (worth $500 in 1685) was confirmed on his father's death, but Philip died two years later so the position went to his brother Piercy, and then to his son, also Piercy (died 1741). 


@@@@@


doc= 15663


Kirke, John (fl. 1629-1643), actor and playwright, first appears in a patent for the travelling Red Bull company at Reading in 1629. In 1634 he was a member of the same company in London (now playing at the Fortune) and the following year he became a groom of the chamber as a member of Prince Charles's men, again at the Red Bull. Kirke and his wife, Elizabeth, lived in the parish of St James's, Clerkenwell, Middlesex, where they had three children between 1633 and 1643 (Marie, Parry, and John), all of whom died in infancy. 
Kirke was author of a popular tragicomedy, 'The Seven Champions of Christendome', licensed for the press on 13 July 1638 at the same time as 'The Life and Death of Jack Straw and Watt Tyler by John Kirke', of which nothing is known. 'The Seven Champions' was printed the same year, with a title-page declaring that it had been 'Acted at the Cocke-pit, and at the Red-Bull in St. Johns Streete, with a generall liking'. The dedication is addressed to the author's 'much respected and worthy friend, Master John Waite', possibly the travelling actor of the same name. The play is based on Richard Johnson's very popular chivalric romance of the same name, also showing the influence of Shakespeare's 'Tempest' and 'Winter's Tale'. In June 1642 Kirke paid master of the revels Sir Henry Herbert for two plays, one of which Herbert burnt 'for the ribaldry and offense that was in it', but he was not necessarily the author (Lawrence, 591). Kirke was author of the dedication to Sir Kenelm Digby prefixed to Shirley's 'Martyred Soldier' (1638) and he may have been the subject of Thomas Jordan's 'Epitaph on my Worthy Friend, Mr. John Kirk', first printed in 1643. 


@@@@@


doc= 15664


Kirke, Percy (d. 1691), army officer, was the son of George Kirke (d. 1675), groom of the bedchamber and keeper of Whitehall Palace to Charles II, and Mary Townshend (1626-1701), a daughter of the poet Aurelian Townshend. While a teenager Kirke joined the Admiralty regiment as an ensign in 1666, and in 1670 the earl of Oxford, who had married one of Kirke's sisters, made him cornet of his own troop in his regiment of horse. In 1673 he took a temporary commission in the duke of Monmouth's regiment, then serving as part of the French army under Marshal Turenne in Flanders. He fought at the victory over the imperialists at Enzheim (4 October 1674), in which he was wounded in three places. After the battle Louis Duras wrote to Monmouth that Kirke 'is certainly one of the bravest lads in the world and is much esteemed as is also his brother' (Atkinson, 43). His younger brother Charles also fought at Enzheim, but received a fatal wound. In July the next year Kirke challenged and wounded Lord Mulgrave in a duel 'for having debauch'd and abus'd his sister' (Morrison, 304). 
Kirke married Lady Mary Howard (died 1707), a daughter of the fourth earl of Suffolk, with whom he had at least one son and two daughters. Lord Oxford promoted Kirke to captain-lieutenant in 1675 and Duras, impressed with him since Enzheim, promoted him to lieutenant-colonel of his regiment of dragoons in 1678. Two years later he took over the command of Lord Plymouth's regiment of foot, which was posted to Tangier in the summer of 1680. He took part in the last and most successful battle against the Moors (27 October 1680), in which he and Thomas Tollemache were praised for having 'behaved themselves like brave and gallant men' ('A Particular Relation'). In January 1681 he undertook a three-month mission to the court of the Moroccan sultan Mawlay Isma'il at Meknes, where he was promised a four-year peace. Later that year he succeeded Edward Sackville as governor of Tangier and remained so until relieved by George Legge, Lord Dartmouth, in August 1683. 
Samuel Pepys stayed in Tangier between August and December 1683 during the last months of the garrison. He was disgusted by Kirke's fast and violent temper, his high-handedness, his bawdy table talk, his boasts of his sexual conquests, his keeping of a mistress in a bathhouse (notwithstanding his wife being in Tangier), his 'damns and curses', his placing himself above the law, his expulsion of the Jews from Tangier, his flagrant corruption ('nothing being sold in the town without his licence'), and his intimidation of all who crossed him. It was even rumoured that Kirke had arranged the murder of two of his creditors. 'The tyranny and vice of Kirke in his way is stupendous.' He was 'a very brute' ('Tangier Papers'). 
After the evacuation of Tangier, Kirke arrived in England in early 1684, where his Tangier regiment was renamed the Queen's regiment of foot. The regiment retained its colours depicting a paschal lamb, from which it was nicknamed Kirke's Lambs. During Monmouth's western rebellion of 1685 he commanded his regiment at the battle of Sedgemoor on 6 July 1685, in which the Lambs were one of the four infantry regiments present in the royal army. Three days after the battle, in which Monmouth's men were scattered, Kirke: 'ordered several prisoners at Taunton to be hanged up; and being then at an entertainment, as every new health was drunk he had a fresh man turned off; and observing how they shaked their legs in the agonies of death, he called it dancing, and ordered music to play to them. (Stackhouse, 234)' This signalled the start of a six-week campaign of pacification that has since become notorious, although at the time he was censured by the government not so much for brutality but for selling pardons to suspected rebels before they could be brought to the assizes. In August that year he was promoted to brigadier. According to Bishop Burnet, Kirke gave 'as smart a reply as any' when it was suggested that he change his religion by embracing Catholicism. 'He told them that he was unhappily pre-engaged, for that if ever he changed he had promised the King of Morocco to turn Mahometam' (Stackhouse, 249). In the autumn of 1688 he was one of the chief plotters in the army against King James, but was nevertheless sent on ahead of the main forces to Warminster to block the advance of the prince of Orange's invading army. On 19 November 1688 he sent Patrick Sarsfield off towards the enemy, which resulted in the bloody skirmish at Wincanton, but shortly afterwards was himself arrested in Salisbury for attempting to desert to William. He was sent back to London, but was released by the privy council, who claimed to find no evidence against him. 
After the revolution Kirke was promoted by William III to major-general, and on 29 April 1689 was placed in charge of the Londonderry relief force. Delays and bad weather prevented him from arriving in Lough Foyle until 11 June. Having seen that there was a boom across the river below the city, he called a council of war and made the much criticized decision to wait for reinforcements so that Londonderry might be relieved from the land. He detached 600 men from the fleet to set up a fort on the Isle of Inch on Lough Swilly, which had the effect of dividing the Jacobite forces then threatening Enniskillen. On 14 July he sent a message to Londonderry advising the defenders to 'be good husbands to your victuals and by God's help we shall overcome these barbarous people' (Milligan, 324), and then sailed to Inch. He arrived to find a message from the city that the garrison was down to its last provisions, and another from Schomberg ordering him to attempt the relief. He sailed back to Lough Foyle and ordered three ships to sail up to the city. On 28 July the boom across the river was broken and all three vessels reached the quayside in Londonderry. On 31 July the Irish army raised the siege and marched away. 
On 4 August Kirke processed through Londonderry with Walker and Michelburne and was feted as the city's deliverer. Three days later he re-formed the forces in Londonderry by halving the number of regiments and officers, an act which was greatly resented in the city. His response was to erect a new gallows, on which he threatened to hang those who complained, and to issue orders to the sentries to disarm everyone leaving the city. Writing of Kirke at this time, Sir James Caldwell asked 'whether profest atheism and debauchery are fit weapons to beat down popery?' (Cunningham and Whalley, 211). From Londonderry Kirke marched to Coleraine, which was abandoned by the Irish on his approach, and then to Dundalk, where he joined Schomberg's army in early September. He took an active part in the battle of the Boyne (1 July 1690), where he 'went from one place to another, as the posture of affairs required' (Story, 82). After the fall of Dublin he was sent on ahead to summon Waterford, which surrendered to him on 25 July. 
Kirke took part in the unsuccessful siege of Limerick in August 1690, where he was involved in directing the fighting in which the outlying forts were captured. After the raising of the siege he led a relief force in September 1690 to Birr, which was being attacked by the duke of Berwick. Kirke had most of the town pulled down for firewood, garrisoned and fortified the castle, and ordered that all houses between Birr and Banagher be burnt. He spent the following winter based in Mullingar, from where he led a raid towards Athlone in March 1691. 
In April 1691 Kirke was one of three generals relieved of their commands in Ireland and posted to the continent. He arrived in England on 30 May 1691, was promoted to lieutenant-general, and joined King William's army in Flanders. He served under the prince of Waldeck for the rest of that year's campaign against the French, but fell ill while in the camp at Ninove. He was taken to Brussels to recuperate but died there on 31 October 1691. According to Bishop Wilson ('Works of Thomas Wilson', 7 vols., 1847-63, 6.372) Kirke's final sufferings were the same as those of King Antiochus: 'Whiles he lived in sorrow and pain, his flesh fell away, and the filthiness of his smell was noisome to all his army' ('2 Maccabees' 9:9). His successor as colonel of the Queen's regiment in 1696 petitioned the Treasury for $1000 because Kirke 'had received the pay of the regiment and applied it to his own use' (Redington, 524). 
His eldest surviving son, 


@@@@@


doc= 15665


Percy Kirke (1683-1741), was commissioned as an ensign at the age of one, a lieutenant in his father's regiment at the age of five, and a captain when he was six (and was placed on the sick list by his father when the regiment was reviewed in Dundalk in October 1689). At the age of nineteen he took part in the raid on Vigo (1702) and at twenty-four commanded his father's old regiment at the battle of Almanza (1707), where he was captured. He purchased the colonelcy in 1710 and commanded his regiment in the disastrous Canadian expedition of 1711. From 1730 his regiment was stationed in Gibraltar. He was promoted to lieutenant-general in 1739. He died a bachelor and was buried in Westminster Abbey, where his niece raised an elaborate monument to him. 


@@@@@


doc= 15666


Kirke, Thomas (1650-1706), antiquary and topographer, born on 22 December 1650, was the eldest son of Gilbert Kirke (1624-1663) of Cookridge, near Leeds, and his wife, Margaret Layton (died 1688), daughter of Francis Layton of Rawden, Yorkshire. On 28 May 1668 Kirke matriculated at Trinity College, Cambridge, where his tutor was the Yorkshire antiquary and cleric Miles Gale, but he did not graduate. 
Kirke was also a distant relative and close acquaintance of another Yorkshire scholar and topographer Ralph Thoresby, who acknowledged that 'my dear friend', or 'mon cher ami, Mr. Kirk' had often accompanied him on his antiquarian rambles ('Diary of Ralph Thorseby', 1.380, 390). At Cookridge Kirke, a virtuoso engaging in a wide range of intellectual and practical activities, himself designed a 'most surprizing Labyrinth', or maze, with over 300 separate vistas which attracted admiring visits from 'almost all Foreigners and Gentlemen of Curiosity of our own Nation' (Thoresby, 'Ducatus Leodiensis', 159). In May 1677 Kirke undertook a three-month tour of Scotland, covering nearly 1000 miles and incorporating visits to Edinburgh, St Andrews, Aberdeen, Inverness, the Orkney Islands, Perth, Stirling, and Glasgow. From his observations he anonymously published a polemical pamphlet in 1679 entitled 'A Modern Account of Scotland... Written from Thence by an English Gentleman'. According to Kirke's splenetic and caustic narrative, the Scots were not only 'Proud, Arrogant, Vain-glorious boasters, Bloody, Barbarous and Inhuman Butchers', but also perfect 'English-haters', who 'shew their pride in exalting themselves and depressing their Neighbours' (Kirke, 11). During his travels Kirke had however also kept a detailed topographical journal which Thoresby subsequently transcribed and which was later included as an appendix to Thoresby's own posthumously published diary and correspondence. 
On 11 July 1678 Kirke had married Rosamund (1661-1688), daughter and coheir of Robert Abbott of Purston Jacklin, with whom he had two sons and two daughters. She died on 30 August 1688. 
On 30 November 1693 Kirke was elected a fellow of the Royal Society and contributed an account of an orphaned lamb being successfully suckled by a castrated ram to the society's 'Philosophical Transactions' the following year. 
After Kirke's death on 24 April 1706 Thoresby claimed to have composed a memoir of Kirke for inclusion in his projected topography of Leeds. Although Thoresby's work was never completed, there survives an anonymous poetical dialogue between Kirke's ghost and his former Cambridge tutor, Gale, which includes a description of various curiosities contained in Kirke's antiquarian museum at Cookridge (BL, Add. MS 4459). The collection was, however, sold by auction in 1710, following the death of Kirke's surviving son, Thomas, the previous year. 


@@@@@


doc= 15667


Kirkes, William Senhouse (1823-1864), physician, was born in 1823 at Holker in north Lancashire. After education at Cartmel grammar school he was, at the age of thirteen, apprenticed to a partnership of surgeons in Lancaster, and from there went in 1841 to St Bartholomew's Hospital, London. He was distinguished in the medical school's examinations, and in 1846 graduated MD in Berlin. In 1855 he was elected a fellow of the Royal College of Physicians, and in 1856 delivered the Goulstonian lectures there. James Paget was then warden of the college of St Bartholomew's Hospital, and in 1848 he and Kirkes published a 'Handbook of Physiology', which soon became popular among students of medicine. Further editions by Kirkes appeared, and after his death there were further editions by William Morrant Baker and Vincent Dormer Harris. 
In 1848 Kirkes was appointed demonstrator of morbid anatomy at St Bartholomew's Hospital, and in 1854 defeated John William Hue in a contest for the office of assistant physician. He became lecturer on botany and then on medicine, and in 1864, when George Burrows resigned, he was elected physician to the hospital. He died at his house, 2 Lower Seymour Street, London, on 8 December 1864, of double pneumonia with pericarditis, after five days' illness. He left a widow, Caroline. His most original work was a paper in the 'Medico-Chirurgical Transactions' (35, 1852, 281-324), 'On some of the principal effects resulting from the detachment of fibririous deposits from the interior of the heart, and their mixture with the circulating blood' -- a classic description of embolism. After Kirkes's death friends and students at St Bartholomew's Hospital contributed to produce a gold medal awarded annually to the student with the best examination in the diagnosis and treatment of patients. 


@@@@@


doc= 15668


Kirkham, Walter of (d. 1260), administrator and bishop of Durham, may have come from Kirkham in Yorkshire. It was perhaps as a protege of Hubert de Burgh that he emerged early in 1224 as one of two accountants of the principal financial department of the royal household, the wardrobe. In August 1231, with de Burgh's star waning, he apparently left royal service, but he returned to office, and once more accounted for the wardrobe, between May 1234 and October 1236, at a time of important administrative reforms. His government career was supported by the normal accumulation of ecclesiastical benefices. In 1226 he was briefly dean of the royal free chapel of Penkridge, Staffordshire, moving on to that of St Mary's, Shrewsbury. In 1227 he became parson of Rudby, Yorkshire, and during the latter part of 1229 dean of St Martin's-le-Grand in London, another royal chapel, often bestowed on leading royal servants; the royal manor of Newport in Essex, where the church formed a major part of the dean's endowment, was granted to him for life shortly afterwards. By 1232 he held a canonry at York, to which was added a canonry at Lincoln in 1235, and another at Chichester within a year. 
In 1244 Kirkham became dean of York. Then, following the resignation of Nicholas of Farnham he was elected bishop of Durham on 21 April 1249, despite Henry III's efforts on behalf of his own half-brother, Aymer de Valence (died 1260). Temporalities were restored on 20 October, and Kirkham was consecrated in York by Archbishop Walter de Gray on 5 December. He connived with the prior of Durham in raising with the pope the generous provision that diverted almost a third of the bishopric's endowments to the support of Farnham throughout the eight years of his retirement; their application was unsuccessful. He confirmed Farnham's gifts to the Durham monks, and himself granted them a tract of wood and waste in the Pennine foothills at Muggleswick, with licence to enclose it. When the see of Carlisle fell vacant in 1254 he claimed the sequestration fruits arising during vacancies from churches in his diocese that belonged to the bishopric of Carlisle; he pursued the claim tenaciously and it was finally accepted shortly after his death, following a payment of 1000 marks by the bishop of Durham. An increasingly violent dispute with John de Balliol over knights' fees in the wapentake of Sadberge (co. Durham), in the course of which the bishop was ambushed and four of his servants taken prisoner, was probably ended by Kirkham's imposing on Balliol the penance of assigning money in perpetuity to support poor scholars at Oxford -- the first steps towards the foundation of Balliol College. It is not known whether he issued any diocesan statutes; those formerly attributed to him are now believed to be those of Bishop Farnham. 
Accounts differ as to whether it was Kirkham, or Peter d'Aigueblanche, bishop of Hereford, who was sent by the king to Rome in 1255 with a blank sealed schedule which was used to pledge the English church to Sienese merchants for 9000 marks. Kirkham was certainly appointed to commissions on affairs relating to Scotland, and took part in the major embassy sent in 1257 in response to problems arising during Alexander III's minority. He may have given tacit support to the provisions of Oxford in 1258, for in that year he quarrelled with the king and refused to come to court. Moreover it was in Kirkham's London palace that Simon de Montfort set up his household in 1258; here, on the riverside landing stage, took place the oft-quoted exchange between Montfort and Henry III, when the king admitted that his fear of thunder and lightning was outweighed by his fear of Simon. Kirkham died, full of days, at the episcopal manor of Howden in Yorkshire on 9 August 1260, and was buried in Durham Cathedral chapter house eight days later. 


@@@@@


doc= 15669


Stanhope, Katherine, 'suo jure' countess of Chesterfield, and Lady Stanhope (bap. 1609, d. 1667), courtier, was baptized on 19 December 1609, the eldest daughter and coheir with her three sisters of Thomas Wotton, second Baron Wotton of Marley in Kent ('c'.1588-1630) and Mary Throckmorton (died 1658), daughter of Sir Arthur Throckmorton of Paulerspury, Northamptonshire. Sir Henry Wotton was her uncle and Carew Raleigh her mother's first cousin. 
On 4 December 1628 Katherine Wotton married Sir Henry Stanhope (died 1634), styled Lord Stanhope, second, but first surviving, son and heir apparent of Philip Stanhope, first earl of Chesterfield, and his first wife, Catherine Hastings. Lord Stanhope was MP for Nottinghamshire in 1626 and for East Retford in 1628-9. They had three children, Mary ('bap'. 7 October 1629 at Boughton Malherbe in Kent, where the Wotton estates were), Catherine, and Philip ('b'. 1633) as well as a son, Wotton, who died in infancy, being buried on 27 December 1632. Lord Stanhope himself died at St Martin-in-the-Fields on 29 November 1634, and was buried at Boughton Malherbe on 2 December. Following his father's death Philip became a royal ward, and Lady Stanhope was obliged to pay $2000 for the grant of the wardship to herself, money which she claimed later to have had to borrow after her husband died in debt and her father-in-law refused to help her. Relations with the earl appear to have been generally poor, since he petitioned against her in 1636 for her refusal to pay ship money of $30 (assessed on Chesterfield lands which provided her annual jointure of $1000), which had then been claimed from his tenants. Lady Stanhope divided her time during the 1630s between her children in Boughton Malherbe and London, where she had a house in Covent Garden. A gossipy letter from Edward, Lord Conway, to Sir Thomas Wentworth in January 1637 provides a glimpse of her active social life, as well as suggesting a tendency to be careful with money. Rumour had it that Lord Cottington wanted to marry her, but that she was in love with Carew Raleigh; Van Dyck had also engaged in 'gallantries' with her until they argued about the cost of her portrait, which he threatened to sell to a higher bidder. 
Lady Stanhope's second husband, however, did not come from the English court. In 1639 Jehan van der Kerckhove (1594-1660), lord of Heenvliet, made his first visit to England with instructions to sound out the king on a possible marriage between William, the son of Frederick Henry, prince of Orange, and one of Charles's daughters. Heenvliet, son of the theologian Jehan Poliander van der Kerckhove, was married with three daughters, Anne ('b'. 1620), Walburg ('b'. 1626), and Willemine ('b'. 1629). He returned to England in January 1640 with formal proposals for a match between William and Princess Mary (1631-1660), though he went back to the Netherlands in April for the marriage of his daughter Anne; his first wife, Anne de Wesick, seems also to have died at about this time. His wooing of Lady Stanhope, while obviously rapid, did not go entirely smoothly: back once again in the Netherlands in the autumn he complained that malicious slanderers were attempting to delay their marriage by telling her that he was 'issu d'un lieu obscur, et d'une race vulgaire'. Moreover, in marrying a foreigner any children from the marriage would have no inheritance rights in England, and if she predeceased him all her property in England would be forfeit to the crown. His confidant 'Louis de Dieu' wrote a long letter to James Ussher, archbishop of Armagh, with full details of Heenvliet's lineage, honours, and virtues, and asked him to reassure 'ceste tres noble Dame' as to the worth of her intended husband (Bodl. Oxf., MS Rawl. D. 559, fols. 45-51). With Charles I also giving support to the marriage Lady Stanhope's reservations were overcome, and in early 1641 they were married; a set of epithalamia was printed for the occasion at Leiden in March. Heenvliet was evidently trusted by the king, who appointed him superintendent of Mary's household, while Lady Stanhope was to take over from Lady Roxburgh as Mary's governess. Her appointment was not universally popular, the marquess of Hamilton lobbying hard for his mother-in-law Lady Denbigh, and Mary herself was initially distressed by the change, to the extent of causing a public scene in early October 1642 when Lady Roxburgh took leave of her in The Hague, where they had arrived in March. It is evident, however, that she soon transferred her affections to Lady Stanhope, to whom she remained strongly attached for the rest of her life, as she did to Heenvliet. 
The early months of Lady Stanhope's governess-ship coincided with her own pregnancy, 'un Enfant si gros et gras' being born on 9 May 1643 (Bodl. Oxf., MS Clarendon 95, fol. 103). His parents intended to name him Thomas after his grandfather, with Lady Wotton and Poliander as godparents, but after Princess Mary and her father-in-law, Frederick Henry, prince of Orange, proposed themselves for this role he was baptized with the more regal name Charles Henry ['see below']. Initially Lady Stanhope's duties consisted largely of looking after Mary's wardrobe and carrying out small errands for her, but more difficult issues also arose. Although education does not feature significantly in the concerns voiced in her letters she came into conflict with John Durie, the princess's chaplain and tutor, who offended her by proposing 'une Idee Platonique' for Mary's instruction (ibid., fol. 134). Much more important, though, was her superintendence of Mary's sexual development. Lady Stanhope had promised Charles I that she would not allow the marriage, which had taken place on 2 May 1641, to be consummated before Mary was fourteen, and stationed an attendant to sleep in her room to prevent it. The discovery in February 1644 that the princess's nurse had enabled William to sneak into her bedroom after Mrs Abercrombie was asleep, 'where he lay with hir Hignise all night', alarmed Lady Stanhope, with both the nurse and attendant suffering 'assez picquantes paroles' from her. On discovering that his action had the support of his parents, she was silenced; and, as Heenvliet commented, 'il n'y a remede, & ils ont depuis continue' (ibid., fols. 135-6). Thereafter, Henrietta Maria and the princess of Orange both waited impatiently for news from Lady Stanhope of Mary's pregnancy, though, as she told the queen, it was not until early 1647 that Mary began to menstruate. By the time Mary gave birth shortly after the death of her husband in 1650, Lady Stanhope had become indispensable to her, unable even to send the news herself to Henrietta Maria because the princess did not wish 'qu'elle la quitte d'un pas' (ibid., fol. 350). In the meantime, Lady Stanhope herself had given birth again to a daughter, Amelie (or Emilia) Willemine, born on 31 May 1646. Soon afterwards, in September, Heenvliet's daughter Walburg married Thomas Howard, Princess Mary's master of the horse, becoming one of the ladies of her bedchamber and later governess to William, prince of Orange, but it seems likely that his daughter Willemine had died in 1645, when an elegy representing her as one of the three graces lamented the death of his young daughter (called here Magdalena). Of Lady Stanhope's children, Mary ('Mall') had been left in England with Lady Wotton, but Philip and Catherine were brought up in the Netherlands, where 'Tatty' became a favourite maid of honour to the princess. 
The birth of an heir had concentrated Heenvliet's mind on the issue of inheritance raised prior to his marriage to Lady Stanhope, and over the course of the next decade and a half the couple put considerable effort into ensuring that neither he nor Charles Henry would suffer any disadvantage from their Dutch nationality. In 1642 Charles I offered Heenvliet not only English denization but also a peerage by reviving the barony of Wotton; realizing that the peerage would make both himself and his children foreigners in the Netherlands, Heenvliet asked for the barony to be conferred instead on any future son. This aim, along with the protection of Lady Stanhope's English estates, he pursued single-mindedly almost to the moment of Charles I's removal from the Isle of Wight to Hurst Castle. So it was that in November 1648 Charles issued a warrant concerning the estate of Katherine, Lady Stanhope, disclaiming any crown interest in her property. Their grief at his execution did not prevent them from taking action to secure their position: in June 1649 Charles II issued a virtually identical warrant, as well as one creating 'Charles Henry de Kerckhoven' Baron Wotton of Marley; a formal patent for the latter was signed by the king on 31 August 1650 in St Johnston. 
This is not to suggest that Lady Stanhope and her husband were motivated entirely by self-interest, though there were those who thought so, most notably Sir Edward Nicholas, who was consistently and wholly hostile to them both. Lady Stanhope made herself unpopular in the Netherlands by her outspoken criticism of the amount of support being given to Charles I; her property was threatened with sequestration in 1644 because of her 'grandes intelligences & correspondences d'Estat avec la Royne' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Clarendon 95, fol. 136), and in the same year she underwrote an arms deal to prevent it from falling through. Despite this Nicholas suspected that she was ready to compromise, or worse, with the parliamentary authorities in order to save her estates. In September 1651 she learned that the Chesterfield lands, sequestrated owing to the engagement of the first earl in the war, would be sold off if his heir, her son Philip (then travelling in Italy), was not in London to compound for them personally by the end of December. After attempts to contact Philip failed she went to London herself, where she was immediately arrested, as having 'come... to carry on designs to the prejudice of the peace' ('CSP dom.', '1651-2', 547). She was freed after two weeks and stayed in England until June, by which time she had secured the Chesterfield estate for her son at a cost of $20,000. Soon after her return Nicholas wrote to Sir Edward Hyde with a serious accusation against her (exactly what is not clear from Hyde's reply), which he passed on to Charles II without revealing his source. The king reluctantly wrote to his sister to warn her against her favourite, eliciting a furious reply and a demand to know the author 'of this malicious fals report' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Rawl. lett. 115, fol. 194). Her chief suspect was her mother-in-law, the dowager princess of Orange, with whom she had consistently poor relations, for which Lady Stanhope was held partially responsible by the Dutch. The perception of her influence as damaging was shared by Hyde and Nicholas, who saw her and Heenvliet's support for the views of the 'Louvre' faction led by Henrietta Maria and Henry Jermyn as inimical to royalist interests in the Netherlands. Lady Stanhope rode out the storm seemingly undamaged. By 1654 she had won round Hyde by favours to his wife and daughter Anne; he defended her strongly to Nicholas when the latter renewed his accusation (adding, for good measure, a scurrilous rumour about Lady Stanhope's relationship with Daniel O'Neill (c.1612-1664) one of her closest associates). Hyde also asserted that 'Henfleete doth some good things in the dark' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Clarendon 477, fol. 296). It appears to have taken rather longer for her to regain Charles's trust, but she evidently did so. In 1655, when both he and Princess Mary were in Cologne, she and her husband were among a select group of attendants who joined them and Henry, duke of Gloucester, on a widely reported incognito trip down the Rhine (during which 'there was no State or distinction among them... to make the more merry') to the fair at Frankfurt ('Mercurius Politicus', 280, 18-25 Oct 1655). Lady Stanhope's refusal to accompany her mistress on her politically sensitive visit to Paris in 1656, despite Charles's desire that she should do so, was forgiven by him with the assurance that his friendship was 'better grounded then to be in the least degree shaken by a much greater occasion then this' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Rawl. lett. 115, fol. 117). 
The purchase of the Chesterfield property brought its own problems. Lady Stanhope had already experienced a family dispute over money when her mother demanded in 1649 that she should put the sums allocated for portions for Mary and Catherine in her own hands, in cash. However, according to Lady Stanhope, the land from which she had intended to raise the money for their portions had to be sold to buy the Chesterfield estate, the income from which made Philip independent of his mother and enabled him to marry Anne Percy, daughter of the earl of Northumberland, in 1652. Following Anne's death in 1654 Philip brought a lawsuit against his mother whose details are unclear, but which seems to have been connected to the money reserved for his sisters, and possibly also to the terms of his marriage contract, since the case also involved Northumberland. Lady Stanhope countered by claiming all the expenditure she had laid out on him since his father's death, while sending heartfelt pleas for assistance and sympathy to any friend or relation she thought might help her. The dispute dragged on through the whole of the 1650s, being finally resolved in 1659, when the old accusations against Lady Stanhope's and Heenvliet's readiness to co-operate with the protectorate for their own ends were revived after they visited England to negotiate with Philip, now second earl of Chesterfield. They were accused by royalist opponents of being willing to accept the Wotton barony and denization from Richard Cromwell, a charge vehemently denied by Heenvliet, as he did the still more serious charge of providing information to secretary of state John Thurloe. 
This suspicion seems ironic in view of the close watch kept by Thurloe's informants on Lady Stanhope. The extent of her political involvement only occasionally becomes clear, her own surviving letters being largely limited to family affairs and the princess's state of health, though Heenvliet's references to her suggest a greater influence over the affairs of Mary's court than the organization of her wardrobe. A letter from O'Neill to Hyde in May 1659 reporting on what Lady Stanhope had learned from informers in London (including Sir Robert Honeywood) provides the clearest evidence that Thurloe was right to be suspicious of her. O'Neill obviously felt that her knowledge of both parliamentary and royalist factions should be taken seriously. Her unique access to Mary provided an additional reason for listening to her, offering the possibility of averting or controlling incipient problems. In the same letter O'Neill tells Hyde of the princess's potential rebellion against Charles II for his interference in her relationship with the younger Henry Jermyn. Her declaration to Lady Stanhope that 'shee was a free woman, and might mary or have kindnes for whome shee pleased without demanding any boddys leave. that shee would not deny shee gave way & was pleased with hery jermins love' was worrying enough for O'Neill to pass it over to Hyde's and Ormond's consideration as to whether the king should be informed (Bodl. Oxf., MS Clarendon 60, fols. 517-19). 
Heenvliet did not live to see the success of his efforts on his own and his son's behalf, dying on 10 March 1660 in the Netherlands, where Lady Stanhope raised a marble monument to him in the Pieterskerk in Leiden. The king's recognition of her services to himself and his sister won her a reward of her own: on 29 May, the day he arrived in London, she was created countess of Chesterfield for life. During the following weeks she sailed for the last time to England to prepare for the arrival of the princess of Orange in September. These were the last months of her long service: Mary died on 24 December. The only attendants named in her will were Lady Stanhope and Walburg Howard, to each of whom she left $500. Although Mary was too heavily in debt for most of her legacies to be paid, Lady Stanhope, to whom she had owed a considerable sum, apparently refused to give back some of the princess's jewellery until she received her legacy, as well as keeping Mary's wardrobe as her perquisite. From this time she made her life in England, along with her two children from her marriage to Heenvliet, whose naturalization was approved in August 1660, though Charles Henry (now officially Baron Wotton) divided his time between England and the Netherlands. Lady Stanhope was reconciled to her son Philip, but all her daughters died: Mary, according to Philip's memoir, of smallpox about 1660, Catherine (married to William, second Lord Alington) in childbirth in 1662, and Emilia in 1663. She continued in royal service, becoming an attendant to the duchess of York soon after Mary's death, and being admitted as lady of the bedchamber to the queen in 1663. 
Despite her frequent complaints about her financial state, at the Restoration the countess of Chesterfield was already a wealthy woman, retaining her estate in Boughton Malherbe and her house in Covent Garden. This fortunate position was only improved by her marriage, some time before October 1662, to her old friend Daniel O'Neill, who had been well rewarded by Charles II for his loyalty. It was for her that O'Neill built Belsize Manor 'with vast expense' according to Evelyn, in extensive grounds in St John's Wood (Evelyn, 4.92). When her third husband died in October 1664, leaving everything to her (he had no children), she was very rich indeed. Apart from property she inherited his lucrative pensions, a monopoly on the manufacture of gunpowder for the crown, and the postmastership, which she continued to operate herself. In her last few years she lived at Belsize with Philip, who was with her when she 'became dropsicall, languished, and at last (without any paine) died' on 9 April 1667 ('Letters of... Chesterfield', 33). The final instruction in her will was to Philip, whom she directed to erect a monument to O'Neill in the parish church of St Nicholas at Boughton Malherbe, showing who he was 'and my Relation to him' (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/323, fol. 53). This he did with some style, though he took the opportunity to add his father to the memorial, which consisted of three white marble lions surmounted by a black marble pyramid, the three faces of the pyramid (now paving the vestry) referring respectively to O'Neill, Lady Stanhope, and Henry, Lord Stanhope. 




@@@@@


doc= 15670


Charles Henry Kirkhoven, Baron Wotton and earl of Bellamont (1643-1682/3), benefited in both England and the Netherlands from his parents' service to Princess Mary and the house of Orange. He was chief magistrate of Breda from 1659 to 1674, was granted a troop of horse by the states general 'through the intermission of the King' and was given 'the conduct which his Father had of [Mary's] affairs' and a post in her son's household, which apparently caused discontent among the Dutch (Lower, 66; Everett Green, vol. 6). He took his seat in the House of Lords in March 1663. On his mother's death he inherited the residue of her estate, as well as her property in Belsize Manor, which was visited by both Pepys and Evelyn. The former, in 1668, was more impressed by the gardens ('the most noble that ever I saw') and the latter by the house: by 1676 the gardens were apparently less well kept (Pepys, 9.281). Evelyn had earlier visited Lord Wotton himself in 1670 when Wotton was engaged in a venture to drain fenland at Soham Mere; Evelyn found the drainage engines striking, but the hopes of the participants unrealistic. Lady Stanhope's attempt in her will to arrange a marriage between her son and Honora O'Hara, O'Neill's niece, came to nothing, and on 25 August 1679 Lord Wotton married Frances ('b'. 1642), widow of Sir John Harpur of Swarkeston (buried February 1679), and daughter of William Willoughby, sixth Baron Willoughby ['see under 'Willoughby, Francis], and Anne, daughter of Sir Philip Cary of Aldenham. He was created earl of Bellamont by patent dated 9 December 1680, but he died only a few years later 'of an Apoplexey' and was buried in Canterbury Cathedral on 11 January 1683 (BL, Add. MS 19253). There were no children of the marriage, and Charles Henry, now earl of Bellamont, left his estate to Charles Stanhope (youngest son of his half-brother Philip, earl of Chesterfield), who carried on the family tradition by changing his surname to Wotton. 


@@@@@


doc= 15671


Kirkland, Thomas (bap. 1722, d. 1798), physician, the son of Thomas Kirkland (died 1751), attorney-at-law, and his second wife, Mary, daughter of Colonel Allsop, was born at Ashbourne, Derbyshire, and baptized there on 14 October 1722. He attended Ashbourne and Tamworth grammar schools and was apprenticed to Mr Holbrooke, a surgeon of Loughborough. After leaving Loughborough Kirkland travelled to London, where he attended the lectures of Thomas Lawrence, before returning to set up practice in Ashby-de-la-Zouch, Leicestershire, some time before 1747. He married Dorothy Palmer (died 1785), daughter of a barrister-at-law, and his wife, Elizabeth ('nee' Bate), on 3 August 1747. They had twelve children, six of whom died in infancy. In 1754 he published 'A Treatise on the Gangrenes'. 
On Friday 18 January 1760 Kirkland, who was treating a patient at nearby Coleorton, received a message asking him to attend at Staunton Harold Hall, the home of Laurence Shirley, fourth Earl Ferrers (1720-1760). Before arriving at the hall Kirkland was told that Lord Ferrers had shot and wounded James Johnson, his steward. Ferrers believed that Johnson had been conspiring against him in business matters, and after luring him to Staunton Harold Hall, shot Johnson, who was kneeling, from no more than 3 yards. Kirkland was aware that he was entering a potentially dangerous situation, as Ferrers was notorious for his violent behaviour and uncontrollable temper. He used violence towards both his mistress and his wife and was 'always carrying pistols to bed and threatening to kill her, and being jealous without provocation' (Crane, 7). Kirkland treated the injured Johnson in the presence of a clearly agitated and unstable Ferrers, and did all he could to calm Ferrers, who was still making threats against Johnson's life. Kirkland assured him that Johnson would live, in the hope that this would dissuade Ferrers from escaping and prevent him from causing any further bloodshed. Ferrers however warned him, 'Be sure Kirkland you don't tell me any lies, for by God, I shall break your head if you do' (Crane, 14). In a calmer interlude Ferrers offered to pay Kirkland for his services, an offer to which Kirkland wisely responded that he 'did not desire it but when it was most convenient for his Lordship' (Crane, 15). Later that evening Ferrers insisted that Kirkland should stay the night, and he offered Kirkland money if he would set the affair in a 'favourable light' (Crane, 14-15). 
After Ferrers had gone to bed that night, Kirkland left the hall, returning later with a group of seven or eight colliers, some of them armed, who collected the ailing Johnson and returned him to his home, where Kirkland stayed until 7 a.m. He then left to consult with a Mr Piddocke and a Mr Pestell, two local legal men, who advised that Ferrers should be arrested at once. John Johnson died at 9 a.m. Ferrers was arrested shortly afterwards, following a struggle with a group of local men, and was held at the White Hart public house in Ashby. 'I glory in his death' was his response after being told of Johnson's fate (Crane, 18). 
Kirkland conducted the autopsy on Johnson's body before the inquest and 'found a wound made by a leaden bullet immediately under the lowest rib on his left side, which bullet passing obliquely downward had made another wound thro' the gut called Colon and going under the Psoas Muscle and thro' the Os Inominatium at its junction with the spine rested in the Os Sacrum, from which place I extracted it. (Crane, 19)' Ferrers was found guilty of murder and hanged at Tyburn on 5 May 1760, his defence of 'occasional insanity of mind' having been rejected (Crane, 23). Kirkland later supplied a curious postscript to these events, which was published in the 'Gentleman's Magazine' only after his death. On the day of Johnson's shooting Kirkland had a premonition in which he was in the House of Lords giving evidence in a murder trial; this, he said, caused him to be on his guard after receiving the message, later that day, which asked him to go to Staunton Harold Hall. 
Kirkland led a less dramatic existence after these events. He published 'An Essay on the Methods of Suppressing Haemorrhages from Divided Arteries' (1763), and 'An Essay towards an Improvement in the Cure of those Diseases which are the Cause of Fevers' (1767). With the help of a testimonial from Erasmus Darwin, he was awarded an MD by St Andrews on 27 December 1769. He was a member of the Royal Medical societies of Edinburgh and London. Among his other publications were 'A Treatise on Childbed Fevers with Two Dissertations, the one on the Brain, the other on the Sympathy of the Nerves' (1774), and 'An Inquiry into the Present State of Medical Surgery' (2 vols., 1783-6). 
Kirkland had a wide range of interests outside medicine; he took a keen interest in music, claiming to be the 'first Hoboy player in Ashby, and the worst in all England' (Crane, 54), subscribed to the foundation of an agricultural society for Leicestershire, and took pleasure from his garden, which he 'adorned with numerous statues and heathen deities' (Crane, 54). Kirkland died in Ashby-de-la-Zouch on 17 January 1798 and was buried on 22 January in St Helen's Church. He was survived by his sons and daughters. 


@@@@@


doc= 15672


Kirkman, Francis (b. 1632, d. in or after 1680), bookseller and writer, was born on 23 August 1632, the eldest son of Francis Kirkman (1602-1661), a citizen of London and member of the Blacksmiths' Company, and his wife, Ellen. Many details of his biography are drawn from his 'The Unlucky Citizen' (1673), a picaresque tale that has been taken as autobiographical. Kirkman was inflamed from an early age with dreams of adventure, which were indirectly fulfilled by his career in the book trade. He had little interest in school, but began collecting chivalric romances and taught himself French in order to translate the sixth book of 'Amadis de Gaul'. His parents forbade his seeking his fortune abroad or training as a bookseller; apprenticed to a scrivener, he ran away. His next master, a disreputable scrivener, allowed Kirkman to furnish the office with his impressive-looking library of romances. In 1652, while still an apprentice, he sacrificed most of his library to finance the publication of his schoolboy translation of 'Amadis'. Also in 1652 he published 'The Loves and Adventures of Clerio & Lozia', claiming it too as a translation from French. In 1653 Kirkman set up a tiny shop near the Tower, practising the trades of scrivener and bookseller, and became a freeman of the Blacksmiths' (he was never a member of the Stationers' Company). In May 1654 he presented Ann Phillips with an inscribed copy of his 'Amadis' (Bodl. Oxf., Vet.A.3.e.559). They were married in June 1654 in St Olave, Hart Street, where their daughter, Elizabeth, was baptized in May 1655. On his father's death in 1661 Kirkman quickly squandered a sizeable inheritance. 
Although a poor manager of money, Kirkman applied sound entrepreneurial instincts to meeting new demands for leisure reading. By the later 1650s he had become a theatre lover, and soon after the Restoration, he fell into reissuing pre-interregnum plays with Henry Marsh, Nathaniel Brook, and Thomas Johnson. The collaborators were accused of piracy, probably for their edition of Fletcher's 'Scornfull Lady'. Kirkman later charged that Marsh swindled him extensively, but he took over Marsh's business on his death from the plague in 1666. Kirkman republished Marsh's 1662 'The Wits, or, Sport upon Sport' in 1672, and published a second part in 1673, preserving more of the drolls and farces performed clandestinely during the interregnum. By the end of his career Kirkman had published some twenty-five plays, including his own satire 'The Presbyterian Lash' (1661), a satire on the presbyterian clergyman Zachary Clofton who was accused of whipping his maidservant, a number of republished titles, and a few plays previously extant only in manuscript, including Webster and Rowley's 'Cure for a Cuckold' (1661) and 'The Thracian Wonder' (1661). His most significant accomplishment, however, was his authoritative collection of English printed drama. The preface to 'Tom Tyler and his Wife' (1661) listed Kirkman's collection of 690 plays, including almost every English play published to date, all available at his shop for sale or reading 'for a reasonable consideration'. Ten years later, a preface to Danter's translation of Corneille's 'Nicomede' catalogued 806 plays. Kirkman's catalogue (incorporating the research of previous booksellers) was expanded by Gerard Langbaine the younger into the formative document of English dramatic bibliography. 
Less widely recognized is Kirkman's similar influence on the canon of English prose romance: his preface to 'The Famous and Delectable History of Don Bellianis of Greece' (1673, a loosely translated chivalric romance) surveys the available chivalric, Elizabethan, and heroic romances, its recommendations perhaps sustaining these titles' long popular success. Kirkman himself wrote fictional works in nearly every subgenre of the period. The two works published in 1652 span chivalric and heroic tastes in romance; 'The Unlucky Citizen' exemplifies picaresque autobiography (and details abuses in the book trade). Kirkman's repeated publication of 'The English Rogue' made a valuable commodity of that sprawling, bawdy tale. In 1666 he reissued and expanded the first part (first published in 1665) by Richard Head; he published a second part (probably of his own writing) in 1668, and third and fourth parts (claiming Head as co-author) in 1671. Kirkman also wrote what is arguably the best-developed of the fictionalized autobiographies of the famous impostor Mary Carleton, 'The Counterfeit Lady Unveiled' (1673). 
Despite recurrent financial difficulties, Kirkman had a long career in the book trade, keeping shops bearing (from 1661) the sign of John Fletcher's Head in various locations including Thames Street, Fenchurch Street, and St Paul's Churchyard. His last imprint is dated 1680. 


@@@@@


doc= 15673


Kirkman, Jacob (d. 1812?), composer, was a nephew of the Jacob Kirkman who had a harpsichord-making business in Broad Street, Golden Square, London, about 1770. The family was of Alsatian origin. The younger Kirkman built up a reputation in London before the end of the eighteenth century as a pianist and composer of works for the piano. He may have been the Jacob Kirkman who was organist of St George's Church, Hanover Square, and he may also have been the Jacob Kirkman who died in Upper Guilford Street on 29 April 1812, at the age of sixty-seven. 
Kirkman's published works included piano duets, sonatas for harpsichord and violin, eight ballads dedicated to the marchioness of Salisbury, and a collection of six voluntaries for the organ, harpsichord, or piano. With John Keeble he published 'Forty Interludes to be Played between the Verses of the Psalms'. 


@@@@@


doc= 15674


Kirkpatrick, James (c.1676-1743), non-subscribing Presbyterian minister, was probably born in Scotland, and was the son of Hugh Kirkpatrick (died 1712), who was minister successively at Lurgan, co. Armagh, at Dalry and at Old Cumnock in Scotland, and finally at Ballymoney, co. Antrim. He matriculated at Glasgow University on 10 February 1691, being described as 'Scoto-Hibernus'. Fellow students at Glasgow included John Simson and John Abernethy. On returning to Ireland he was licensed by the presbytery of Route in 1697. In 1699 he received a call from the congregation at Antrim but did not take this up, instead accepting a call to Templepatrick, co. Antrim, where he was ordained on 7 August 1699. Although he did marry, the name of his wife has not been recorded. While at Templepatrick he published 'A Sermon Occasioned by the King's Death' (1702) and in 1703 he was appointed one of the trustees for the distribution of 'regium donum'. 
On 24 September 1706 Kirkpatrick resigned his charge at Templepatrick and accepted a call to Belfast as colleague to John McBride. Here he became a powerful defender of Presbyterian rights and a leading exponent of non-subscription. McBride had fled to Scotland to avoid arrest because of his refusal to take the oath abjuring the claims to the throne of James II's son. The Belfast congregation was growing rapidly, and in June 1706 McBride had written from Stranraer that if there were 3000 members there should be two meeting-houses and two distinct congregations. This was agreed and after some complicated negotiations the synod approved on 1 June 1708 the division of the Belfast congregation, McBride becoming minister of the congregation meeting in the old meeting-house and Kirkpatrick becoming minister of the Second Congregation in their new meeting-house, which had been built immediately behind the first. In 1712 Kirkpatrick was appointed moderator of the synod of Ulster and in the following year he published one of his major works, 'An Historical Essay upon the Loyalty of Presbyterians' (1713). This is a substantial work, thought to have been published by James Blow of Belfast, which was produced as a response to the attacks on the Presbyterians by William Tisdall, vicar of Belfast. It was designed to account for the conduct of dissenters in recent history and to demonstrate the loyalty of Presbyterians. 
From 1705 Kirkpatrick had been an early and influential member of the Belfast Society, an association of ministers which met to discuss theology. In the same year the synod introduced compulsory subscription to the Westminster confession and the Belfast Society provided the leadership of the campaign against subscription. In 1721 Kirkpatrick published an able plea for non-subscription in 'A Vindication of the Presbyterian Ministers in the North of Ireland'. As the subscription controversy grew more heated the subscribing minority in both the First and Second congregations left to form the Third Congregation. When they held their first communion in February 1724 they refused to admit Kirkpatrick and Samuel Haliday (McBride's successor at the first congregation), which led Kirkpatrick to go into print with 'A Scripture Plea Against a Fatal Rupture and Breach of Christian Communion' (1724). Matters came to a head in 1725, when all the non-subscribers were placed in the presbytery of Antrim; in 1726 they were finally excluded from the synod. 
In 1732 Kirkpatrick received the degrees of MD and DD from Glasgow University. His later publications included not only theological works but a medical treatise, combining, as he did, the work of a physician with a pastoral office. His final work, 'A Defence of Christian Liberty', was published posthumously by James Blow in 1743. Kirkpatrick died in 1743, in Dublin, and was survived by his wife. The date and place of his burial are unknown. 


@@@@@


doc= 15675


Kirkpatrick, John (bap. 1687, d. 1728), antiquary and draughtsman, was baptized on 7 March 1687 at Haveringland, Norfolk, the eldest of seven children of Thomas Kirkpatrick (died 1710?), probably a grazier, and his wife, Anne Sendall (died 1742). His father was from Closeburn, Dumfriesshire, and apparently was related to the baronetcy of Kirkpatrick. Nothing is known of his mother's family. His parents married at Haveringland on 6 May 1686, and the family moved to the parish of St Stephen, Norwich, about 1691. There is no record of his education, but he was apprenticed to Thomas Andrew, merchant, of St Clement's parish, and became a freeman as linen draper on 24 February 1711. He is so described in the 1714 Norwich poll in St George Tombland. He later entered the service of John Custance, alderman, whom he subsequently joined in partnership, and with whose family he shared a house in St Andrew's parish until his death. Kirkpatrick served as a common councillor and auditor from 1719 to 1727, and in 1726 was appointed treasurer of the great hospital in St Helen's parish. He married Ann Harvey, the youngest daughter of John Harvey, a Norwich merchant, who seems to have predeceased him; there were no children. 
Throughout his adult life Kirkpatrick was a member of 'a little Society of Icenian Antiquaries' (Nichols, 3.433) that included Thomas Tanner, Benjamin Mackerell, and Peter Le Neve, with whom he exchanged notes. It was through Le Neve's influence that he was elected fellow of the Society of Antiquaries on 18 February 1719. He compiled extensive and valuable notes relating to the history of Norwich and built up noteworthy collections of manuscript and printed books and ancient coins, all of which he left to the city. He was also a fine artist and his views of the ancient city gates of Norwich (1720) were copied and etched by Henry Ninham in 1864. His notes were also used in Robert Fitch's introduction to John Ninham's views of Norwich gates in 1861. Other drawings are listed by Johnson and in Gough's 'British Topography'. His draughtsmanship is sometimes confused with that of his younger brother Thomas Kirkpatrick ('c'.1690-1755), chamberlain of Norwich 1732-44. It was Thomas who drew the large north-east prospect of Norwich, which was published by John in 1723. 
Kirkpatrick published nothing else during his lifetime. He died on 20 August 1728 and was buried in St Helen's Church, Norwich, on 27 August 1728. In 1741 Thomas Kirkpatrick attempted to forestall the publication of Francis Blomefield's 'History of Norwich' by announcing the imminent publication of a specimen of his brother's work. Blomefield had advertised his own access to Kirkpatrick's materials, although he possessed only the original rough notes exchanged with Le Neve, but this specimen was not published. Kirkpatrick's 'Notes Concerning Norwich Castle' were, however, published in 1836 and 1847, and his 'History of the Religious Orders and Communities... of Norwich' in 1845, with a preface by Dawson Turner. 'The Streets and Lanes of the City of Norwich' was edited from Kirkpatrick's notes by William Hudson in 1889, but other valuable manuscript works listed in the 1845 preface appear to have been lost. 
Kirkpatrick's substantial bequest of early printed and manuscript books may be identified from Mackerell's catalogue of the Norwich City Library in 1732, but a proposed catalogue of his coin collection was never published. The bulk of the coin collection was subsequently lost through neglect and pilfering. Kirkpatrick's historical manuscripts were left to his brother Thomas during his lifetime and to the city thereafter, but were also subsequently dispersed. 


@@@@@


doc= 15676


Kirkpatrick, William (1754-1812), army officer in the East India Company and diplomatist, was the illegitimate son of James Kirkpatrick (1730-1818), a colonel in the East India Company's army, and Mrs Booth, wife of a London solicitor. Born in Ireland, Kirkpatrick was raised at boarding-school, supported but unacknowledged by his father. In 1771 his father, 'the Handsome Colonel', purchased Kirkpatrick an East India Company military cadetship and the young man sailed for Bengal. He had a half-sister from the Booths's marriage whom he probably never met, and two younger half-brothers, his father's legitimate children, George and James Achilles, whom he met in India after their father placed them in the company's service and told them of their half-sibling. Ambitious for promotion, Kirkpatrick learned Indian languages and gained access to Indian information networks. Known as Kirk to his friends, he was regarded as a generous if sometimes profligate companion. He suffered from rheumatism, gambled, drank, and told John Kennaway of a melancholia, the 'kind of shadow or image of a calm sorrow or grief', he often experienced (Kirkpatrick to Kennaway, 13 June 1779, Devon RO, Kennaway MS 961 M add F2 1/3). 
In 1779 Kirkpatrick became interpreter for Lieutenant-Colonel Stibbert, commander-in-chief of the Bengal army, and in 1781 was made a captain. He purchased and had compilations made of Indian texts, establishing a useful network of Indian contacts. Poona's representative at Hyderabad said Kirkpatrick was 'expert in everything', having 'wonderful intelligence and mastery of Persian speech, is equally careful in writing, understands accounts, and is well informed in public business and is versed in astronomy' (G. R. Kale to Nana Fadnis, 20 Feb 1794, in Sarkar, 1.ix). 
In 1782 rheumatism and the Indian climate caused Kirkpatrick to resign from the East India Company service. With the two children he had with his Indian mistress, he sailed for England, and 'en route' for Europe wrote his 'Grammar of the Hindoo Dialect and an Arabic and Persian Vocabulary', which was published in the same year under the company's patronage. In London he published translations of Persian works and promoted the Bengal Orphan Fund (later the Bengal Military Fund), a trust providing charity for soldiers' orphans which he had founded before his reluctant departure from India. Failing to support himself, he resumed his commission in 1784 and, leaving his children under his father's care, returned to India. In Calcutta, on 26 September 1785, he married Maria Rawson. Although the couple had four daughters, it was an unhappy union. On 21 November 1786 he began his brief tenure as resident to Mahadji Sindhia. Kirkpatrick wrote to Governor-General Cornwallis of how Sindhia and his court were insulting and inattentive. The maharaja in turn complained of the resident's haughty attitude. In October 1787 Kirkpatrick was replaced and he returned to regimental duties. 
Kirkpatrick's career languished until 1790, when he joined Cornwallis's staff as interpreter during the Third Anglo-Mysore War. In 1792 he headed a diplomatic mission to Nepal, leading the first Britons into that kingdom. Kirkpatrick told Cornwallis's secretary, Colonel Ross, on 27 October 1792, that the mission went to settle a dispute between Nepal and Tibet and 'to advance useful knowledge' (BL OIOC, Kirkpatrick MSS, MS Eur. F/228/1, fol. 41). Arriving after the dispute ended, he spent three weeks in Nepal, and though he returned to India without concrete benefit, the mission was regarded as a successful foray into an unknown land. 
In January 1794 Kirkpatrick replaced Sir John Kennaway as resident to the nizam of Hyderabad. He followed Governor-General Sir John Shore's non-interventionist policy: despite the nizam's pleas and his own sentiments, he refused to involve the company in the Maratha-Hyderabad war of 1795; and in 1796, during the Poona succession crisis, he did not attempt to restrain the nizam from interceding in Maratha affairs. Meanwhile, he continued to pursue local knowledge. A network of Indian informants supplied him with news and gossip both from Hyderabad and from across the subcontinent, and his hired scribes copied books from Mughal archives. This enabled him to produce road-maps and to assist James Rennell with an atlas of northern India. 
Kirkpatrick's rheumatism persisted, forcing his resignation from the residency and a second departure from India, in 1797. At Cape Town he met Richard Wellesley, earl of Mornington, who was 'en route' for Bengal to take office as governor-general. Wellesley interviewed those at the Cape with Indian experience. At Wellesley's request Kirkpatrick wrote essays on Indian affairs. After their meetings Kirkpatrick believed Wellesley intended to follow Shore's non-interventionist policy toward the Indian princes, while Wellesley held that Kirkpatrick had supplied information necessary to pursue the forward policy instructed by London. Wellesley accordingly offered Kirkpatrick a job in Calcutta and, despite his health, he accepted. Working closely with Wellesley as secretary to the secret and political department, he acted as adviser to his half-brother James Achilles Kirkpatrick, the Hyderabad resident, when the nizam signed the treaty of Hyderabad, by which Hyderabad became a British protectorate. In the spring of 1799, during the Fourth Anglo-Mysore War, William Kirkpatrick accompanied Wellesley to Madras. After the death of Tipu Sultan and Seringapatam's fall in May 1799, Kirkpatrick sat on the Mysore settlement commission. In 1801 he was unable to take up his appointment as Poona resident owing to rheumatism, which was causing him to keep bandages wrapped tightly around his knees and forehead. 
Kirkpatrick left India in 1802, and settled in Exeter, where he lived at Southernhay House. He continued to pursue his Indian interests, and helped select the East India Company's library, a collection now part of the British Library. In 1804 he published translations of documents said to have been discovered at Seringapatam, and in 1811 an account of Nepal. He also studied the Indian calendar, endeavouring to detail Tipu Sultan's horoscope and understand that ruler's fate. By 1809 rheumatism confined Kirkpatrick to his chair. In the summer of 1812 he auctioned his possessions and on 22 August 1812 he overdosed on laudanum near London, an apparent suicide. 


@@@@@


doc= 15677


Kirkpatrick, William Baillie (1802-1882), minister of the Presbyterian Church in Ireland, was born near Ballynahinch, co. Down, in March 1802. After spending some time at a local classical school conducted by the Revd Arthur Neilson of Rademon, he went to the Royal Belfast Academical Institution. He later graduated from Glasgow College with the degree of MA. Kirkpatrick studied theology in the collegiate department of the Royal Belfast Academical Institution, under the divinity professor of the synod of Ulster. He had been brought up under Unitarian influences but these were soon rejected in favour of evangelical doctrines. In 1827 he was licensed by the presbytery of Armagh, and on 29 July 1829 ordained one of the ministers of Mary's Abbey church, Dublin. He soon acquired an outstanding reputation as a good preacher and a caring pastor. 
In 1850 Kirkpatrick was moderator of the general assembly, and for many years convener of the home mission scheme and of the committee on the state of religion. He was appointed by the government to be a commissioner of charitable donations and bequests, and a commissioner of endowed schools. During his ministry in Dublin a fine new church was built in Rutland Square, at a cost of $14,000, for the Mary's Abbey congregation, by Alexander Findlater JP. Kirkpatrick died on 23 September 1882 at Bray, co. Wicklow, and was buried on 27 September in Mount Jerome cemetery, Dublin, leaving a widow, Bessie, two sons, and six daughters. His main publication was 'Chapters in Irish History' (n.d. [1875]), which reached a second edition. He was regarded as one of the leading presbyterian ministers of Dublin and the entire south of Ireland during this period. 


@@@@@


doc= 15678


Kirkstall, Hugh of (c.1165-c.1227), Cistercian monk and chronicler, was the author of the 'Narratio de fundatione' of Fountains Abbey, and probable author of the foundation history of Kirkstall Abbey. Both these Cistercian houses were in Yorkshire. The 'Narratio' contains two references to Hugh; he names himself in his address to Abbot John of Fountains (1203-11), and states that he received the habit at the hands of Abbot Ralph Haget of Kirkstall in the third year of his abbacy, and lived under his rule for seven years. This places Hugh's entry into the monastic life 'c'.1184, and implies his birth not later than 'c'.1165. Although he is not named as the author of the Kirkstall history, which was completed shortly after 'c'.1204 and which survives in Bodl. Oxf., MS Laud misc. 722, similarities between portions of this and the 'Narratio' make it likely; and it may have been on the basis of his earlier work that Abbot John commissioned Hugh to write an account of the origins of Fountains. The 'Narratio', begun 'c'.1205-6 and completed 'c'.1227, is a much longer and more ambitious work. It purports to be the reminiscences, committed to writing by Hugh, of the aged monk Serlo, who had been educated at St Mary's Abbey, York, had entered religion at Fountains 'c'.1137, and been one of the party that colonized Kirkstall in 1147. Certainly the description of events up to 1147, especially the career of Abbot Richard (II) and the fire at Fountains Abbey, is vivid. However, after 1190-91 when Ralph Haget moved from Kirkstall to become abbot of Fountains, it was Hugh himself who became the eyewitness. 
But Hugh's 'Narratio' was much more than personal testimony. In addition to Serlo's and his own recollections, Hugh had access to, and used, archival material -- charters, possibly an early register of the abbey, and letters, including those of St Bernard and Archbishop Thurstan -- and also literary models. The latter appear to have been mostly Cistercian -- the Byland foundation history, which predated that of Kirkstall by just a few years, and more especially the 'Exordium parvum'. A Cistercian audience would not have failed to recognize the similarities that Hugh conveys between the foundation of Fountains and that of Citeaux itself. The 'Narratio' survives in only one medieval manuscript (Trinity College, Cambridge, Gale MS O.I.79), evidently an incomplete copy of the original, and the text was revised in the last half of the fifteenth century to produce a different recension. The literary merits of the 'Narratio' are generally considered to be few. However, in it Hugh of Kirkstall vividly evokes the spirit and spirituality of the great age of Cistercian monasticism in the north of England. 


@@@@@


doc= 15679


Kirkton, James (d. 1699), Church of Scotland minister and historian, was born most probably in south-east Scotland; his parents are unknown. He graduated MA at Edinburgh in 1647, and became minister of Lanark (second charge) in 1655 and of Mertoun in Berwickshire in 1657. On 31 December 1657 he married Elizabeth Baillie ('c'.1640-1697); they had five children who reached maturity. 
At Mertoun, Kirkton excommunicated a local landowner, Anthony Haig, for being a Quaker, and afterwards had difficulty collecting his stipend. He was expelled in 1662 with about 270 other presbyterian ministers who refused to conform to episcopacy. Kirkton moved to Edinburgh, became a noted illegal preacher there, and was a leading opponent of the second indulgence of 1672, which would have allowed most presbyterian ministers to function officially again though under strict conditions. He also conducted a long debate by letters against Gideon Scott on the tenets of Quakers. In 1674 Kirkton was declared rebel, but seems to have lived openly for two more years until arrested by Captain Carstairs. He was rescued by his brother-in-law, Robert Baillie of Jerviswood (died 1684), but Baillie and his companions were imprisoned and fined, and Kirkton and the other rebel ministers 'intercommuned', which meant that anyone conversing with them could be held equally guilty of their crimes. He then lived mainly in England and the Netherlands. 
With the 'Toleration Act' of 1687 Kirkton returned to Scotland and was minister of Edinburgh's Tolbooth parish from 1691. In his last years he was again a famous preacher, and financially prosperous. One source records that Kirkton had a weak voice, and that his dark periwig disguised hair of a different colour. All agree that he had a marked Scots accent, and that his speech was terse, idiomatic, and often sardonic. The most famous anti-presbyterian tract, 'The Scotch Presbyterian Eloquence' (1692), describes Kirkton as 'the Everlasting Comedian of their Party' (20), and ridicules him more than any other minister. He appears somewhat more favourably in Pitcairn's satirical play, 'The Assembly' (written 1692), as Mr Covenant Plain-Dealer. 
Kirkton wrote a short biography of John Welsh (1703), and 'The Secret and True History of the Church of Scotland', from 1660 to 1679, which also covers many secular issues. It was completed in 1693, apparently in reaction to 'Scotch Presbyterian Eloquence', and circulated in manuscripts in the eighteenth century. Much of his evidence is included in Robert Wodrow's 'The History of the Sufferings of the Church of Scotland' (1721-2), but Kirkton's history remains an important historical source: he was well informed (his contacts included the duchess of Lauderdale, whose husband controlled Scotland), usually temperate in judgements, and apparently reliable. Indeed Sir Walter Scott (relative of Gideon Scott, the Quaker) says in his review of the history that Kirkton was 'incapable of perverting the truth so far as it was known to him' (Scott, 506). 
Kirkton's wife died in April 1697; he himself died on 17 September 1699. He was buried on 20 September 1699 in Greyfriars churchyard, Edinburgh, where most of his family were interred. 


@@@@@


doc= 15680


Kirkup, Seymour Stocker (1788-1880), painter and antiquary, was born in London, the eldest child of Joseph Kirkup, jeweller and diamond merchant. In 1809, after a period of study under John Flaxman, he entered the Royal Academy Schools, where, in 1811, he won a medal for his drawing of Apollo in Raphael's 'Parnassus'. He admired Flaxman, Henry Fuseli, and J. M. W. Turner as teachers and credited Sir Thomas Lawrence with encouraging him to paint portraits. Through one fellow student, Charles Eastlake, he met B. R. Haydon; through another, he met William Blake. He learned early to value association with remarkable personages, preferably not tories. 
In 1816, troubled by signs of pulmonary weakness, Kirkup travelled to Italy, planning to stay six months. He lived there for the rest of his long life. At Rome he joined his friend Eastlake in drawing at the English Academy. In November 1820 Joseph Severn and John Keats arrived, bearing a letter to Kirkup from Charles Armitage Brown. In bed with a fever, Kirkup missed Keats's funeral in February 1821 but showed unremitting kindness to Severn. The generous Kirkup, Severn understood, had a small fortune. Kirkup made a good appearance, though just over 5 feet tall (Keats's size, Severn remarked); and he talked engagingly about all the arts. At the interment of Shelley's ashes in January 1823, he met the adventurer E. J. Trelawny, whom he later painted against a background showing the entrance to a cave on Mount Parnassus wearing Suliote dress, including a turban and large red sash, into the top of which an ataghan and knife are thrust. 
In 1824, after a severe illness, Kirkup visited Florence. Captivated, he lived there for forty-eight years. For a time he shared quarters near the duomo with Charles Brown, who became acquainted with Kirkup's three successive mistresses; but then he settled in spacious apartments near the south-west corner of the Ponte Vecchio. His circle of Anglo-Florentine friends included W. S. Landor, Robert and Elizabeth Browning, and T. A. Trollope. Among visiting acquaintances were William Hazlitt and Nathaniel Hawthorne. According to Leigh Hunt, Kirkup had too much money and not enough accomplishment to succeed as a painter; but he sent a 'Cassio' to the Royal Academy (exh. 1833) and painted portraits of Rose Aylmer's half-sister, A. H. Layard's mother, and A. C. Swinburne's mother. 
Work on illustrations for Lord Vernon's edition of Dante's works made Kirkup an ardent Dantophile. He became a disciple of Professor Gabriele Rossetti, the leading Dantean in London; and in 1840, with G. A. Bezzi, a Piedmontese, and R. H. Wilde, an American, he employed a restorer to search for Giotto's portrait of Dante in the chapel of the Palazzo del Podesta, or Bargello. The portrait, known to Vasari, had been covered with whitewash; it was uncovered on 21 July 1840. Not without difficulty, Kirkup made a tracing and, in his copy of the 'Convivio', a coloured sketch. He sent a copy of the tracing and a small watercolour sketch to Professor Rossetti, whose elder son, Dante Gabriel Rossetti, painted a watercolour, 'Giotto Painting Dante's Portrait' (1852). For Vernon, Kirkup made, from the tracing and the coloured sketch in the 'Convivio', the drawing on which Vincent Brooks based the chromolithograph published by the Arundel Society in 1859. 
Kirkup, who believed in spirits, convinced himself in 1854 that his housekeeper's beautiful daughter, Regina Ronti, possessed mediumistic talents: she saw Dante in the room, looking like a life-mask prized by Kirkup but subsequently discredited. Only seventeen in 1854, Regina bore a daughter, Imogen or Bibi. Though mystified by this event, Kirkup accepted in 1856 Regina's deathbed asseveration that the child was his. Bibi at two, according to Kirkup, manifested her own ability to call up spirits, including Dante's. On the occasion of Dante's 600th birthday in 1865, when Kirkup received a knighthood in the order of Santi Maurizio e Lazzaro, Victor Emmanuel addressed him (inadvertently, it was said) not as 'cavaliere' but as 'barone' -- which title Kirkup adopted. He owed the honour, he informed Swinburne, to Dante; and in 1866 Bibi reported confirmation by Dante himself. Even loyal friends deplored Kirkup's over-credulousness. 
Kirkup at eighty, pallid, white-bearded, slovenly, very deaf, seldom emerged from his litter of manuscripts, early printed books, and miscellaneous treasures -- his life-mask of Dante, a portrait of Savonarola, a carved chest once owned by Machiavelli, a crystal ball, a faded puppet show enjoyed by Bibi and her playmate Paolina Carboni. Then 'gli spiriti' advised the 'barone' to sell all his possessions and move to Leghorn. The sale at Sothebys in December 1871 fetched only $2555 for 4194 lots. At Leghorn, Bibi had a suitor; she married him and died at twenty-five. At eighty-seven, on 16 February 1875, Kirkup married Paolina Carboni, then twenty-two. They resided at via Scali del Ponte Nuovo 4, Leghorn, where he died on 3 January 1880. He was buried on 5 January in the British cemetery, Leghorn. 


@@@@@


doc= 15681


Kirkwood, James (d. 1711x20), schoolmaster and grammarian, was a native of Dunbar. At the time that he was first approached to be schoolmaster in Linlithgow, in May 1674, he was acting as tutor, or 'governour', to Lord Bruce at the Old College, Glasgow, where he lodged with Gilbert Burnet, then professor of divinity. Kirkwood accepted the offer from Sir Robert Milne of Barntoun, the provost of Linlithgow, in January 1675 on terms that he maintained involved a fixed annual salary of 400 merks and tenure 'ad vitam aut culpam'. On 1 August of that year he married Gelecina van Beest, with whom he had at least seven children. His school enjoyed a considerable reputation and it was attended by John Dalrymple, second earl of Stair, who also boarded with Kirkwood, presumably after the accident in 1682 in which he shot his brother. 
In 1689 Kirkwood found himself at odds with the new town council, apparently because of his continuing adherence to episcopalianism. In taking up the post he had replaced a schoolmaster, David Skeoch, who had been removed for attending presbyterian conventicles. As Kirkwood showed little willingness to adapt to the changed political circumstances his salary was reduced to 300 merks in October 1689 and he lived under the threat of further sanctions. In the following February he, his pregnant wife, and their children were forcibly ejected from their home. Having withdrawn temporarily to Edinburgh, Kirkwood exacted a twin revenge, pursuing his cause against the town council through the courts while at the same time publishing an extensive account of his sufferings; 'A short information of the plea betwixt the town council of Lithgow and Mr James Kirkwood, schoolmaster there, whereof a more full account may perhaps come out hereafter' appeared in 1690. Kirkwood redeemed his promise in an extended version, 'The History of the Twenty Seven Gods of Linlithgow' (1711). The title referred to the council's charge that he was a reviler of the gods of the people; Kirkwood interpreted 'gods' to mean the twenty-seven members of the town council. The council was fined 4000 merks in 1692 but as late as 1711 Kirkwood complained that he had received nothing by way of reparation. 
Initially without employment Kirkwood then set up a private school in Edinburgh before becoming schoolmaster at Kelso at the invitation of the countess of Roxburghe. Kirkwood maintained that he had accepted the offer in preference to other positions, including the professorship of humanity in St Andrews University and a similar post in Virginia. This increased his displeasure when conflicts arose. The position of schoolmaster would normally have been held jointly with the offices of precentor and session clerk; Kirkwood was unacceptable to the kirk session in these roles but without the conjunction of offices his salary was naturally diminished. His dispute with the local minister, William Jack (or Jacque), and the kirk session were chronicled in 'Mr Kirkwood's Plea before the Kirk, and Civil Judicatures of Scotland' (1698). Wild allegations were made: among other things Kirkwood was accused of trying to force his attentions on a woman servant of Sir John Home of Blackadder and using obscene expressions in explaining Latin words to his scholars. Once again the root of the issue was suspicion of Kirkwood's episcopalian sympathies, although even here the truth remains elusive and Kirkwood denied, for example, that he had served the episcopalian meeting-house as session clerk. Unsuccessful in pursuit of the offices to which he felt himself entitled, he appears to have continued in his role as schoolmaster until succeeded by David Chrystie in 1708. 
As a grammarian Kirkwood based his reputation on his 'Grammatica facilis' (1674). In 1678 he published a 'Rhetoricae compendium'. Just after his ejection from Linlithgow, and at the suggestion of Lord Stair, he was consulted by the commissioners for colleges and schools as to the best Latin grammar to be used in Scottish schools. When asked his opinion of Despauter's grammar he opined that 'if its superfluities were rescinded, the defects supply'd, the intricacies cleared, the errors rectified, and the method amended, it might well pass for an excellent Grammar' (J. Kirkwood, 'The History of the Twenty Seven Gods of Linlithgow', 1711, iii). At the commissioners' direction he published 'Grammatica Despauteriana, cum nova novi generis glossa: cui subjunguntur singula primae partis exempla vernacula reddita' (1695). This went to further editions in 1700, 1711, and 1720, though by that time it had been superseded by Thomas Ruddiman's 'Rudiments of the Latin Tongue' (1714). Kirkwood had died by the time of the fourth edition, in 1720, although details of the exact date and place of his death are unknown. 


@@@@@


doc= 15682


Kirkwood, James (b. c.1650, d. in or after 1709), clergyman and advocate of parochial libraries, was born in or near Dunbar. His schooling took place there, and from 1666 he studied at Edinburgh University, where he graduated MA in 1670. Scott's 'Fasti ecclesiae Scoticanae' ('Fasti Scot.', 2.132) states that he was chaplain to Sir John Campbell of Glenorchy, later earl of Caithness and earl of Breadalbane. This period of service must have occurred between 1670 and 1676 and coincided with theological study. It is to these years that should be attributed Kirkwood's great interest in the highlands, although there is no evidence that he himself knew Gaelic. 
On 13 July 1676 Kirkwood was licensed as a probationer by the presbytery of Haddington, and he thereafter preached in various parishes. In particular he assisted at the Fife parish of Wemyss in 1677-8 during the terminal illness of the minister, James Nairn. Presented to the borders parish of Minto in February 1679, he was collated by the bishop and installed in May. However, he was deprived after 1 November 1681 for refusing to take the test. In 1683 he was probably allowed to preach at Colmonell, Ayrshire, but soon moved to England, becoming on 1 March 1685 rector of Astwick in Bedfordshire. This appointment was possibly the result of an acquaintance with Gilbert Burnet, a protege of Nairn, who after 1688 became bishop of Salisbury. Burnet was intimate with Robert Boyle the chemist; another close friend of Boyle was Thomas Barlow, bishop of Lincoln, in whose diocese Astwick lay. Kirkwood remained at Astwick until January 1702, when he was outed as a nonjuror. His means of earning a living thereafter is unknown. Elected on 4 March 1703 a corresponding member for Scotland of the Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge (SPCK), he seems to have moved back north by the end of 1704. His last known places of residence were Alderston and Ferrygate, both in his native Haddingtonshire. 
Kirkwood is remembered for involvement in two enterprises: the distribution of the 'Bible' in Gaelic to highland parishes; and the advocacy of parish libraries throughout Scotland, particularly the highlands. During his employment with Glenorchy, Kirkwood would have become aware of the highlanders' ignorance of the 'Bible' through the lack of printed editions in Gaelic. Coming into contact with Boyle in the mid-1680s, he learned of Boyle's sponsorship of an edition of the 'new Testament' in classical Gaelic in 1681 for distribution in Ireland. In 1685 Boyle financed the first printed edition of the 'Old Testament' in classical Gaelic for similar distribution. Kirkwood prevailed upon Boyle to allow some 200 of these to be diverted to Scotland, along with any undistributed copies of the 1681 'New Testament'. Unfortunately classical Gaelic differed considerably from spoken Scottish Gaelic, and the texts were printed in a fount using Irish letter-forms. It took many years for copies to be distributed: communications were difficult and the times troubled; and after the triumph of presbyterianism in 1688 many Scottish clerics viewed the episcopalian (and future nonjuror) Kirkwood with suspicion. The promotion of Gaelic itself was also contentious, but Kirkwood was convinced of the merit of his actions, producing a justificatory printed broadside ('An Answer to the Objection Against Printing the Bible in Irish'), probably about 1689. 
Kirkwood prevailed upon Boyle and others to finance a version of the Gaelic 'Bible' in a Roman fount, printed in an edition of 3000 in London in 1690, along with a separate issue of 1000 'New Testaments'. The work was edited by Robert Kirk, minister of Aberfoyle, who also provided a Scottish Gaelic glossary and made textual alterations to conform with Scottish usage. Kirk also about this time probably supplied Boyle, via Kirkwood, with information about highland rites and customs. Although the general assembly of the Church of Scotland had encouraged distribution of these copies in an act of 11 November 1690, no doubt more closely to supervise the scheme, it took until the end of the decade for distribution to start, following further agitation by Kirkwood. About 1000 bibles went to Argyll alone, with hundreds going to other parts of the highlands. With these bibles often went a catechism, with prayers and creed, in Gaelic, printed in London in 1688, a publication initiated by Kirkwood and again subsidized by Boyle. 
In 1698 the SPCK was founded, with its main interest the formation of parochial libraries, particularly in the colonies, and charity schools. Kirkwood wholeheartedly endorsed the society's aims and placed them in a Scottish context. In 1699 he anonymously had a tract printed (most probably in Edinburgh) entitled 'An overture for founding and maintaining of bibliothecks in every paroch throughout this kingdom'. Under this ambitious and radical scheme the parish minister's private books were to form the nucleus of each library, the parish schoolmaster was to act as librarian, and a uniform system of cataloguing was to be adopted throughout the country, with a union catalogue kept in Edinburgh. Nothing came of this proposal, but he modified his ideas in a second anonymous tract of 1702, 'A copy of a letter anent a project, for erecting a library, in every presbytry, or at least county in the highlands'. This had been anticipated by a printed broadside probably of 1701 ('An Account of a Design to Erect Libraries in the Highlands'). Money was raised, and by the end of 1705 about 100 boxes of books, some designed for presbyteries and some for parishes, had been assembled and shipped to Edinburgh, complete with catalogues. Upwards of 4000 books and 2000 pamphlets were involved. By then Kirkwood was a member of the SPCK, and although the English and Anglican overtones of the society made presbyterian Scots wary, the general assembly felt it best, as it did with Bible distribution, to supervise the scheme by ensuring its own direct involvement: acts of support were passed in 1703, 1704, 1705, 1706, and 1709. Boxes were distributed but, as with bibles, the difficult political and religious situation and the remoteness of the region created many setbacks. Most libraries lasted only a short time. 
Even within the SPCK criticism of the scheme was recorded in May 1704. However, Kirkwood defended himself to the society's satisfaction. He had been interested in the society's other main interest, charity schools, since the late 1690s. The promotion of schools, particularly in the highlands, grew in importance for him in his last years. He was possibly the author of 'Proposals concerning the propagation of Christian knowledge in the highlands and islands of Scotland' (1707?), and the Society in Scotland for the Propagation of Christian Knowledge was established in July 1709, with Kirkwood a founder member. This is the last contemporary record of Kirkwood; it is assumed he died soon afterwards. As there is no reference in any source to a wife, it also has to be assumed that Kirkwood was unmarried. Besides the tracts and broadsides already mentioned he wrote: 'An account of the design of printing about 3000 bibles in Irish, with the Psalms of David in metre, for the use of the highlanders' (1689?); 'A memorial concerning the disorders of the highlands. Especially the northern parts thereof, and the isles of Scotland. With an account of some means by which the same may be redressed and prevented' (1703); and 'The true interest of families, or, Directions how parents may be happy in their children... To which is annexed a discourse about the right way of improving our time' (1692). This went into a second edition the following year, entitled 'A New Family Book'. All his works except the last were issued anonymously. 


@@@@@


doc= 15683


Kirton, Edmund (d. 1466), abbot of Westminster, was born into the Coppledike family of Lincolnshire, and his surname derives from one or other of the two villages named Kirton in that county. Joan Barton, of 'Cotes' (Hertfordshire), who bequeathed to him a silver chalice in 1437, was a cousin, and Edward Kirton, described as a canon, who is also mentioned in her will, may have been a brother. Kirton entered the Benedictine monastery in 1403-4 and was sent to Gloucester College, Oxford, in 1407, two years before his ordination to the priesthood: intellectually, he was outstanding. His long residence at Oxford, during which he proceeded DTh, culminated in his appointment as 'prior studentium' in 1426. In the course of his Oxford years, he was employed several times on business for the provincial chapter of English black monks, and it may also have been in this period that he preached before Pope Martin V ('r'. 1417-31), presumably at Rome, an event recorded in his epitaph. 
After Kirton's return to Westminster, he served as sacrist (1433-40) and so had the opportunity of proving himself in a major office. Anthony Wood's belief that he was summoned to Basel in 1437 to answer a charge of heresy is without foundation. In the abbatial election of 1440, which was conducted by scrutiny, he obtained fewer votes than Prior Nicholas Ashby, but, assisted by a letter of recommendation from the University of Oxford, was provided to the abbacy by Pope Eugenius IV ('r'. 1431-47) later in the year. The demands of office, manageable to the sacrist, quickly proved too much for the abbot, and in 1444 visitors appointed by the provincial chapter suspended Kirton. His offence on this occasion was, it appears, maladministration. Moral charges, including fornication, followed two years later, and, in respect of these, Kirton underwent at least the first stages of a trial before papal judges. He survived both these crises and later allegations by Ralph Aleyn, a monk of Westminster, that he had committed Aleyn to prison on a trumped-up charge of theft. The debts that he left to his successor, George Norwych (died 1469), were occasioned at least in part by circumstances beyond his control: the need for expensive repairs to the monks' dormitory and to the rose window in the south transept of the abbey church. Yet Kirton lacked the businesslike qualities needed to take the monastery through a difficult financial period. He resigned in 1462, probably on the grounds of old age, and was granted a generous pension of $166 13's'. 4died per annum. It is not known where he spent his retirement. He died on 3 October 1466 and was buried in St Andrew's Chapel, in the north transept of the abbey church. The brass on his altar-tomb, which bore his family arms, survived into the eighteenth century. An engraving is reproduced in Dart's 'Westmonasterium, or, The history and antiquities of the abbey church of St. Peter's, Westminster' (Dart, 2, facing p. 2). 


@@@@@


doc= 15684


Kirwan, Francis (1589-1661), Roman Catholic bishop of Killala, was born in Galway, the son of Matthew Kirwan, merchant, and Julia Lynch, both from long-established and wealthy merchant families of the city. He was educated there by his mother's uncle, a priest named Arthur Lynch. He then went to Lisbon, Portugal, to study at the Irish College founded there for the education of students for the priesthood in 1593. Poor health forced a premature return, but he completed his studies in Galway and was ordained priest there in 1614. In 1615 he went to France for further studies, and for a short time taught philosophy in the schools of the Congregation of the Oratory at Dieppe. In 1620 he returned to Ireland as vicar-general of Archbishop Conry of Tuam, who remained in exile for political reasons. 
When the Wars of Religion ended in France in 1598 the ideals of the Counter-Reformation began to flourish there, and it was clear when he returned to Ireland that Kirwan had absorbed them to a considerable degree. Society in the west of Ireland was now so solidly Roman Catholic that he was in practice free to function. He based himself in his native Galway, where his social position would also have helped him. From there he carried out regular visitation of the extensive diocese, including the wild and trackless western parts and even the islands. Here especially he found much to reform, ignorance of even basic truths of religion among the laity, and a clergy not well equipped to instruct them or in some other respects to give them example. 
Kirwan made great efforts to build up an educated and devoted priesthood. Before candidates were sent to seminaries in Europe they spent some time in his household in Galway, where they received training as envisaged by the reforms of the Council of Trent and as put in practice by such figures as St Charles Borromeo, archbishop of Milan, for whom Kirwan had a particular reverence. In a deeply traditional society he also had a wide-ranging social function, settling not only religious but also secular disputes with the approval of Roman Catholic magistrates. He combined his attachment to the new reforms with a native austerity, as was shown by his devotion to the traditional pilgrimages of Croagh Patrick and Lough Derg. A real shrewdness went with a thorough asceticism, exemplified in the reported case of the man he had ordered to take back the wife he had put away. It is said that the man claimed he would rather suffer the pains of hell than his wife's company, but changed his mind very quickly when invited to put his finger in a candle flame. 
Archbishop Conry died in 1629 and was succeeded by Malachy O'Queely. O'Queely, though resident, asked Kirwan to continue as his vicar, and he agreed. But about 1636 Kirwan set out again for France, where he worked to develop the continental base so vital to the religious reorganization in Ireland. In Paris, however, despite his friendship with so influential a figure as St Vincent de Paul, he failed in his efforts to set up what would have been a second Irish seminary in the city. 
Meanwhile, the archbishop of Tuam and others had procured Kirwan's appointment to the see of Killala. He accepted with real reluctance, and was consecrated bishop at St Vincent de Paul's headquarters, St Lazare, on 7 May 1645. He took possession of his see on 5 October 1646. In fact, much of his time was to be taken up with the political affairs of the Irish Confederate Catholics. He sided against the papal nuncio Rinuccini in the dispute which finally tore the Confederates apart in 1648 and arguably incurred excommunication, a fact which weighed very much on his conscience until he secured what he considered satisfactory absolution. 
Oliver Cromwell landed in Ireland on 15 August 1649 and his military campaign ended with the surrender of Galway on 12 April 1652. After this Kirwan was a fugitive, dependent on what was inevitably the diminishing power of the Roman Catholic gentry to protect him. He made his way to Galway, where he finally gave himself up in 1654. For a time he was allowed to live under house arrest, but he was later imprisoned and then deported in the summer of 1655. 
Kirwan arrived in Nantes in August, and two years later he went to Rennes, where he remained until his death. Many Irish exiles found refuge in Brittany, but most had to live in great poverty. Kirwan was fortunate to find a generous benefactor at Rennes, where he also helped the local bishop. He died there, deeply revered, on 27 August 1661. On his deathbed he was received into the Society of Jesus, whom he had always highly regarded, and on 29 August he was buried in their church in Rennes. A bronze plaque with a brief inscription was placed on his tomb. 


@@@@@


doc= 15685


Kirwan, Owen (d. 1803), Irish nationalist, is of unknown origins and family. Sometimes described as a tailor, he was a dealer in secondhand clothes and living at 64 Plunket Street, Dublin, in early 1803 when contacted by the agents of the United Irish leader Robert Emmet. While there is no evidence that Kirwan participated in the rising of 1798, his early initiation into the plot of 1803 strongly indicates that he was none the less a respected United Irishman in the south city. He belonged to the same revolutionary cell as Patrick Street publican Thomas Maguaran and was related to Patrick McCabe, both of whom played significant roles in the rising. 
Kirwan worked in an illegal arms depot run by Scottish republican John McIntosh in June and July 1803 at 26 Patrick Street. Hinged pikes, signal rockets, and other munitions were manufactured and concealed behind false partition walls. An explosion of loose powder wrecked the building on 16 July 1803 and killed one of Kirwan's co-workers. This setback persuaded the leadership coterie attached to Emmet to attempt a coup in the capital the following week without awaiting the arrival of their French allies. Upon sighting a rocket in the sky on 23 July Kirwan donned a green jacket presented to him by his wife and led about ten associates to a rallying point on Thomas Street. They were present when skirmishing broke out and Chief Justice Kilwarden was killed. Dismayed by this and other unexpected reverses, Emmet went into hiding in the Dublin mountains leaving the city men under the control of secondary commanders. Kirwan's greatly augmented force returned briefly to his home for refreshments before assisting in the attack on the Coombe barracks of the 21st regiment. The eventual dispersal of the lightly armed rebels brought the abortive rising to a close. 
Kirwan was arrested at home on 25 July and tried on 1 September by a special commission convened at Green Street courthouse. Given the quality and quantity of eyewitness testimony against Kirwan, the capital sentence imposed by Judge Baron George on the 2nd was almost inevitable, notwithstanding the characteristically robust defence mounted by John Philpot Curran. Kirwan was executed on Thomas Street on 3 September 1803. He was survived by his wife, about whom nothing further is known. 


@@@@@


doc= 15686


Kirwan, Richard (1733-1812), chemist and mineralogist, was born at Cloghballymore House, near Kinvara, co. Galway, Ireland, the second son of Martin Kirwan (died 1741) of Cregg Castle, near Corrundulla, and his wife, Mary, daughter of Patrick French. After the death of his father he was placed in the care of his maternal grandparents at Cloghballymore House. He was educated by the family chaplain until sent (together with his brothers Andrew and Hyacinth) to Erasmus Smith School in Galway. 
Though Kirwan's father had been brought up a Roman Catholic, he had conformed to the tenets of the established church in order to avoid the restrictions of the penal laws. However, he wanted his second son, who would not inherit the family estates, to become a Catholic priest. Accordingly Kirwan was sent to Poitiers, where Jesuits had established a college for Irish clerical students, and subsequently to the novitiate at St Omer. Preparations for a priesthood were, however, abandoned after the death, as a result of a duel in Dublin about 1755, of his elder brother, Patrick. 
In February 1757 Kirwan married Anne Blake (died 1765), the daughter of Sir Thomas and Lady Blake of Menlough Castle, on the southern shores of Lough Corrib. They had two daughters. The couple lived at Menlough, where Kirwan equipped a chemical laboratory, in which he apparently spent most of his time, earning his mother-in-law's disapproval. A surviving letter sent to him by his mother in 1750 shows that at Poitiers too he had initially neglected his legitimate studies in order to read books on chemistry. 
When his wife died in 1765, Kirwan was in London studying law. In 1764 he had renounced Catholicism as a prerequisite of being called to the Irish bar in 1766. He practised in Dublin for two years and developed an intense dislike of the profession. After a further period in London, he returned to Ireland, about 1772, and went to live about 10 miles north-east of Galway at Cregg Castle, which had been built by his great-great-grandfather. He made some alterations and built a laboratory in the grounds. 
Kirwan returned to London in 1777. Early in 1780, the year of his election to the Royal Society, he began to reside at 11 Newman Street, off Oxford Street, which became a rendezvous for scientists and members of society. Initially he was greatly influenced by Joseph Priestley, who persuaded him to become a Unitarian. He began to correspond with scientists in Europe, notably Torbern Bergman and Guyton de Morveau. Letters between Kirwan and Guyton in the period 1782-1802 chart the course of their close friendship and gradual divergence of their views on the phlogiston theory and Lavoisier's new theory of combustion. 
Kirwan is known to historians for his ambiguous involvement in the chemical revolution. His 'Essay on Phlogiston and the Constitution of Acids', in which he sought to reconcile the established phlogistic chemistry with Lavoisier's new theory, was published in 1787, the year he left London. Priestley had recently discovered that 'inflammable air' (hydrogen) could, like charcoal, revive a metal from its calx, and (like Priestley himself) Kirwan believed that the revival of a metal from its calx took place through the addition of phlogiston. He therefore used Priestley's discovery to suggest that inflammable air was simply phlogiston in its gaseous state. However, he had to contend with Lavoisier's apparently contradictory finding that the process of reviving a calx resulted in a loss of weight, whereas the addition of phlogiston should have increased it; while calcination, believed to involve loss of phlogiston, resulted in an increase in weight. He therefore partially accepted Lavoisier's suggestion that the weight changes should be attributed to the addition of oxygen in calcination and its removal when the process was reversed, but he sought to make this consistent with the theory of phlogiston by postulating that in calcination the oxygen united with the metal's phlogiston to form 'fixed air' (carbon dioxide). 
Kirwan's ideas on phlogiston were initially published as the second part of a paper which was mainly devoted to the experiments on chemical affinity for which he won the Royal Society's Copley medal in 1782. This experimental programme was continued in his later years, after he returned to Ireland. Meanwhile his 'Essay on Phlogiston' was rapidly translated into French by Lavoisier's wife, Marie-Anne, and brought out in 1788 with critical notes by six French savants, including her husband. Kirwan's subsequent abandonment of the phlogistic cause may have been brought about by this publication. Alternatively it is possible that he was converted by his fellow countryman William Higgins's 'A Comparative View of the Phlogistic and Antiphlogistic Theories' (1789), which was sharply critical of his attempt to reconcile the two systems. Be that as it may, his only known comment when he relinquished the phlogiston theory in 1791 was that it was impossible to prove that fixed air was ever formed from the combination of phlogiston and oxygen. 
Kirwan's 'An Estimate of the Temperature at Different Latitudes', an early work on comparative climatology, was also published in 1787. Much of his work published in the 'Transactions' of the Royal Irish Academy, of which he was the second president in 1799, was on meteorology. It included synopses of the weather in Dublin from 1788 to 1808, which he compiled from daily records using instruments set up behind his house at 6 Cavendish Row, Dublin. His most important paper, 'On the variations of the atmosphere' ('Transactions of the Royal Irish Academy', 8, 1802, 269-507), showed an early understanding of air masses. 
Kirwan's most important work however was his 'Elements of Mineralogy', published in 1784 and revised in 1794-6. The revised edition was aided by his negotiated purchase, for the Royal Dublin Society, of the Leskean collections (about 7000 specimens assembled by N. G. Leske, professor of natural history at Leipzig). His 'Essay on the Analysis of Mineral Waters' (1799) is a good account of the qualitative and quantitative methods of analysis then available. He also wrote informatively on subjects related to Ireland's economy, notably on coal and coalmining. His writings on geology included 'Geological Essays' (1799) and various papers, and are largely a defence of the Mosaic account of the creation against James Hutton's theory of the earth, which Kirwan believed was atheistic and therefore subversive. Towards the end of his life Kirwan turned to philosophical writing, publishing a lengthy critique of Hume's philosophy in 'Transactions of the Royal Irish Academy' (vol. 8, 1801); a two-volume 'Logick' (1807), concerned particularly with practical applications in metaphysics and religion and with probability theory; and 'Metaphysical Essays' (1811), a staunch defence of Berkeley's immaterialism. 
In his later life Kirwan developed a morbid fear of catching a cold, and Lady Morgan (formerly the author Sydney Owenson) described how, one fine spring evening, she was received by Kirwan clad in a cloak, shawl, and slouch hat, sitting on a sofa completely surrounded by a large screen, while a huge fire blazed on the hearth. He died at his home on 1 June 1812, and was buried a week later in the yard of the old St George's Church in Dublin. His library was bequeathed to the Royal Irish Academy. An earlier collection of his books came to be housed in the Athenaeum Library in Salem, Massachusetts, after the ship carrying it from Galway to London was captured by a privateer, and eventually sold at Salem. 


@@@@@


doc= 15687


Kirwan, Stephen (d. 1601), Church of Ireland bishop of Clonfert, was born in Galway and came from a prominent Anglo-Norman family. He was typical of the transitional generation of native Irish clergy in Elizabeth's reign who accepted appointments within the established (though hardly protestant) church, but whose own religious convictions were ambiguous, and whose children were Roman Catholic. He was educated at Oxford 'c'.1566, and in Paris and Louvain, where, according to a hostile source, 'he both heard and said many a mass' (Cunningham, 19). During his studies he held the archdeaconry of Annaghdown and the rectory of Killmacryan (both Tuam). In 1572 he was nominated by the queen to the see of Kilmacduagh in the province of Tuam; letters patent for his consecration were issued on 13 April 1573. On 30 March 1582 he was nominated to Clonfert, and letters patent for his consecration were issued on 24 May. Active in local government in Connaught, he served as a justice and commissioner for the province, 1580-1601. 
The strongly protestant Sir Turlough O'Brien claimed 'c'.1591 that though at the time of his appointment to Clonfert, Kirwan 'professed and swore to reformed disposition', he was in fact a lukewarm evangelist, more interested in the 'glutted security of corporate ease' than preaching. Kirwan could, O'Brien thought, best be termed 'the English-Romish bishop O'Kirovan of Clonfert'. Kirwan's eldest son, according to O'Brien, had run away to Spain and become an 'Antichristian rebel, a Spanish subject', while his other two sons, who remained in Ireland, were 'papish recusants' (Cunningham, 19). Kirwan died before 4 November 1601, when the see was said to be vacant following his death; at the time of his death he also held the deanery of Clonfert. 


@@@@@


doc= 15688


Kirwan, Walter Blake (1754-1805), Church of Ireland dean of Killala, was born at Gortha, co. Galway, into a Roman Catholic family. He was the elder son of Patrick Fitz Thomas Kirwan of Galway and Mary, second daughter of Walter Blake of Carrowbrowne. He was educated at the English College at St Omer. At the age of seventeen he accompanied a relative to St Croix in the West Indies. Much affected by the climate and by the cruelty of that society he left after six years and went to the University of Louvain, where he took holy orders and was appointed professor of natural and moral philosophy. In 1778 he became chaplain to the Neapolitan ambassador at the British court, and the eloquence of the sermons which he preached in London in this capacity attracted marked attention. 
In 1787 Kirwan left the Roman Catholic church, and on 24 June preached his first sermon to a protestant congregation in St Peter's Church, Dublin. He continued to officiate at St Peter's, where he proved to be an immensely popular speaker, for several years. His services were eagerly sought for charity sermons, and churches where he preached were often overrun by crowds eager to attend. It was not uncommon for collections of up to $1200 to be taken on such occasions. In 1789 Kirwan was collated by the archbishop of Dublin to the prebend of Howth, co. Dublin; in the same year he was preferred to the living of St Nicholas Without in the city of Dublin. On 22 September 1798 Kirwan married Wilhelmina, the youngest daughter of Goddard Richards of Grange, co. Wexford; the couple had two daughters and two sons, one of whom, Antony la Touche Kirwan, later became dean of Limerick. 
In 1800 Kirwan was appointed dean of Killala. He died at his house, Mount Pleasant, near Dublin, on 27 October 1805. He was survived by his wife, who was granted a crown pension of $300 per annum for life, with reversion to her daughters. A volume of Kirwan's sermons was published posthumously in 1816, reaching a second edition later that year. 


@@@@@


doc= 15689


Kitchin, Anthony (1477-1563), bishop of Llandaff, was of unknown parentage and origins. He entered Westminster Abbey as a mature vocation in 1511 and celebrated his first mass in 1517, by when he was studying at Gloucester College, Oxford. He was admitted BTh in 1525 and the following year was appointed prior of students, a post that involved supervising Benedictine students outside as well as within the loose federation of 'staircases' which made up the Benedictine Gloucester College. In 1532 he became abbot of Eynsham, near Oxford, and in 1538, shortly before the dissolution of his abbey, he proceeded DTh. He does not appear to have been a very active abbot. In September 1535 the king's visitor, John Tregonwell, reported of Eynsham that 'The abbot is chaste in his living; looks well to the reparation of the house; but he is negligent in overseeing his brethren, which he excuses by his daily infirmity' ('LP Henry VIII', 9, no. 457). He took the line of least resistance in the political and theological controversies of the 1530s, subscribing the royal supremacy in 1534 and the articles of religion in 1536. About the beginning of 1537 John Perkins, an Oxford lawyer who seems to have become mentally disturbed, brought a series of vague accusations of treason against Kitchin and the abbot of Osney, but these were speedily dismissed. Kitchin surrendered his abbey on 4 December 1538, receiving a pension of $133 6's'. 8died and an appointment as royal chaplain-in-ordinary. In 1545 he replaced Robert Holgate as bishop of Llandaff: he was to be the first resident bishop the diocese had had for over a century. 
The diocese was not (as a later bishop, Francis Godwin, claimed) one of the wealthiest in the land; it was in fact the second poorest. Kitchin thus gave up his pension for a diocese whose total income was only a little larger: and he was virtually unique among bishops of Llandaff before the nineteenth century in that he held no other preferments. The accusations (notably by Godwin) that he ruined the diocese by incompetent management also need to be treated with scepticism. In spite of considerable pressure, in effect he alienated no land outright, though he was forced to make several long leases and grants in perpetuity, including one of the manor of Llandaff to the Matthews family in 1553. His lease of the episcopal palace and manor of Matharn to William Lewis of St Pierre is best interpreted as a collusive grant to keep the lands out of other hands. Even so, in the early 1590s he was criticized by Gervase Babington with rueful humour in the comment that he was now bishop only of 'Aff', for all the land had gone. 
A more serious criticism is Kitchin's compliance in accepting a series of radical religious changes. He was prepared to oppose government policy, notably in his opposition to clerical marriage in 1549, but he never pushed his arguments so far that he could be removed from office. In 1554, again, he took his own line when, on the reconciliation of the kingdom with Rome, he was the only bishop not to seek absolution from the sin of schism. If he did not consider himself a schismatic, he may also have felt that he had protected his diocese from sin. Clearly a most reluctant persecutor, he showed his compassion in his efforts to persuade Rawlins White, presented by John Foxe as no more than a Cardiff fisherman but probably the leader of a group of local heretics, to save his life by recanting, and persevered in them up to the moment when White went to the stake in March 1555. 
In 1559, along with the other Marian bishops, Kitchin voted in the Lords against the restoration of the royal supremacy and the 'Act of Uniformity'. Elizabeth succeeded in removing the other intransigents. Kitchin could not be removed, but he was eventually outnumbered. Characteristically, he backed down rather than fight and be defeated. His refusal to take the oath of supremacy nearly cost him his diocese in 1559, but he eventually accepted a curiously worded compromise. He was also allowed to refuse Elizabeth's mandate to consecrate Matthew Parker as archbishop of Canterbury, a refusal that has subsequently called into question the validity of all Anglican orders. J. C. Whitebrook's theory that Kitchin did in fact consecrate Parker in a private ceremony is almost certainly fantasy. 
The extent of Kitchin's success as a pastoral bishop, and the justification for his sacrifice of principle, is seen in the condition of his diocese at the time of his death. The survey of the clergy in the winter of 1560-61 showed many gaps in the parochial ministry, caused partly by the slump in clerical recruitment and the devastating effects of the influenza epidemics of the late 1550s and partly by absenteeism. By 1563, however, the situation had improved considerably. Few parishes were without incumbents, though there was still much pluralism; several absentees had been persuaded to return; and there had been a marked upturn in recruitment. 
Kitchin was now eighty-six. He had been blind for some years and was too ill to attend the parliament of 1562. He died at his palace at Matharn on 31 October 1563 and was buried in the parish church: no monument survives. Nor has his will survived, though there are references to it in other documents. An inventory of the contents of his palace lists property worth $109. It makes pathetic reading: some old clothes and furnishings (possibly bought when he left the religious life); a little silver and gilt plate; forty books (alas, no details); and a well-equipped kitchen, suggesting that he was fulfilling another pastoral obligation, that of hospitality. 


@@@@@


doc= 15690


Kitchiner, William (1778-1827), epicure and writer, was baptized at St Clement Danes, Westminster, in May 1778, the son of William Kitchiner (died 1794), and his wife, Mary, 'nee' Grave. Both parents were originally from Hertfordshire; Kitchiner senior had built up a prosperous business as a coal merchant, operating from a Thames-side wharf below Fountain Court, the Strand, and achieved local eminence as 'Justice Kitchner' (Diprose, 2.28). At his death he left his wife adequately provided for, and his estate (which included property along the Strand at Beaufort Buildings and Fountain Court) in trust for his son. 
In later life Kitchiner let it be understood that he had been schooled at Eton and held a medical degree from Glasgow; in fact he had not attended either establishment but by claiming a Scottish medical degree, which barred him from practice in England, he could style himself Dr Kitchiner MD, and as he possessed an extensive library of medical books, this title was not challenged. Being financially independent he was able to marry early. On 3 August 1799 he married Elizabeth Oram, also of St Clement Danes parish, but the couple soon parted, and a subsequent liaison with Elizabeth Gifford led to the birth of a son, William Brown Kitchiner, on 23 June 1804. He was acknowledged by his father, educated at Charterhouse (1818-22), then at St John's College, Cambridge (1824-6), which he left without a degree. In later years Kitchiner lived with Elizabeth Friend, to whom he left his house and a comfortable bequest. 
Kitchiner's inheritance permitted him to enjoy, and to write extensively on, those three arts which most pleased him: music, gastronomy, and optics, and these interests were also represented in his library. He composed an operetta entitled 'Love among the Roses, or, The Master Key', was author of 'Observations on Vocal Music' (1821), and a prolific writer of patriotic and sea songs. His interest in culinary matters was wide-ranging. His friend William Jerdan commented: 'His medical and gastronomical practices were wonderfully combined, insomuch that his guests could not tell whether what was set before them was a meal or a prescription' (Jerdan, 282-7). Around 1812 Kitchiner was living near the observatory at Camden Town, but he later settled at 43 Warren Street, Marylebone, Middlesex, where the weekly meetings of his 'committee of taste' were attended by the most eminent members of society. They arrived to be greeted by Kitchiner at the piano; their meal might have been prepared with the assistance of Henry Osborne, chef to Sir Joseph Banks; after a stimulating discussion, they were expected to depart promptly at eleven. The most famous of Kitchiner's numerous cookery books, 'The Cook's Oracle', first appeared in 1817 and went through many editions, even after his death. It was written in a down-to-earth style, and demonstrated Kitchiner's familiarity with the entire process, from shopping, through preparing and serving the dishes, to cleaning up. It was an acknowledged source of inspiration for Mrs Beeton, and was mined by the writers of other household guides. The related subject of digestion and medical treatment of a more or less purgative nature were subsumed in his 'Peptic Precepts' (1821), a subject itself included in his exhaustive 'The Traveller's Oracle' (1827), which covered all conceivable aspects of travel, although Kitchiner himself had never been abroad. 
In 1819 Kitchiner was elected a fellow of the Royal Society. A considerable portion of his income was spent on his optical interests. At his death he possessed eighty-nine telescopes -- of which several, by the best makers, had been bought at auction from the estates of deceased astronomers -- besides numerous opera glasses and several microscopes. Kitchiner frequented opticians' shops, discussing improvements to instruments. He devised about 1820 the 'pancratic eye-tube', which allowed continuous adjustment of focus on the common refracting telescope. His 'Practical Observations on Telescopes' (1815) went through several editions, and was later expanded into 'The Economy of the Eyes', in two volumes (1824). Kitchiner was often accused of plagiarism in his books, and it is true that not all his 'borrowings' were acknowledged. 
Kitchiner's end was unexpected and in some degree suspect. On 26 February 1827 he dined with his friend John Braham at 69 Baker Street, overstayed his own preferred hour of departure, and on reaching his house suffered a heart attack, from which he shortly died. He was buried at St Clement Danes on 6 March; his son erected a memorial to him in St Pancras New Church. Sothebys auctioned his library and scientific instruments in July 1827. It transpired that Kitchiner had intended to alter his will on the day following his death, because he had come to the conclusion that his son did not deserve to inherit. His timely demise meant that William Brown Kitchiner did inherit; he married in 1828 Georgiana Macdonell, daughter of Major Edgworth of London, and died impoverished at Ostend, Belgium, in 1861. 


@@@@@


doc= 15691


Kitchingman, John (1740?-1781), painter, was a pupil at Shipley's drawing academy and afterwards at the Royal Academy Schools, which he entered on 4 April 1769, gaining that year the academy's silver medal. His name is entered in the schools' register as Kitchenman. Of his parents, nothing is known. He married when young, on 20 March 1764 at St Martin-in-the-Fields, Westminster, London, Christian Gibson. They had a daughter, Jane (baptized in 1768 at St Paul's, Covent Garden), and a son, Charles (baptized in 1770 at St Paul's, Covent Garden). He was awarded several premiums by the Society of Arts; he exhibited miniatures with the Free Society from 1766 to 1768, and from 1770 was a constant contributor to the Royal Academy exhibitions, sending, besides portraits, figure subjects and sea pieces. An example of his work, dated 1766, is in the Victoria and Albert Museum, London. His 'Beggar and Dog', a subject from Henry Mackenzie's 'Man of Feeling', exhibited in 1775, was mezzotinted on a large scale by H. Kingsbury, and a set of four pictures representing the building, chase, unlading, and dissolution of a cutter, which appeared at the Royal Academy in the last year of his life, was well engraved by B. T. Pouncy; his portraits 'Mrs Elizabeth Carter', 'Mr Macklin as Shylock', and 'Mrs Yates as Alicia in Nicholas Rowe's 'Jane Shore'' were also engraved. Kitchingman was fond of boating, and in 1777 won the duke of Cumberland's cup in the annual sailing contest on the Thames. Kitchingman separated from his wife and fell into intemperate habits. He died 'immediately after suffering the amputation of his leg, the bone of which was, in consequence of a strain, so much disordered as to baffle the attempts of the most eminent of the faculty' ('GM') in King Street, Covent Garden, London, on 28 December 1781. According to an affidavit by one Humphrey Tomkinson (a jeweller) and Thomas Simmonds (a tailor) made during a successful lawsuit by Kitchingman's sister, Beata Moore, to obtain administration of her brother's estate, Christian Kitchingman was a 'person of bad character and for several years last past hath been of a very loose and unsettled turn of mind' (Prob 29/42). 


@@@@@


doc= 15692


Kite, Charles (bap. 1760?, d. 1811), surgeon, may have been the son of Samuel Kite baptized at Gravesend, Kent, on 1 October 1760. Kite was a member of the Company of Surgeons in London, and practised at Gravesend, Kent. Little else is known about his life. Besides contributing to the 'Memoirs of the London Medical Society' and other medical journals, he wrote: 'An Essay on the Recovery of the Apparently Dead' (1788), for which he was awarded the silver medal of the Humane Society, and 'Essays and observations, physiological and medical, on the submersion of animals, and on the resin of the aeoroides resinifera, or yellow resin of Botany Bay' (1795). He died in Gravesend in 1811. 


@@@@@


doc= 15693


Kite, John (d. 1537), archbishop of Armagh and bishop of Carlisle, was born in London to unknown parents. He was admitted a king's scholar at Eton College about 1476, and then went to King's College, Cambridge, also as a scholar, in 1480. His graduation is not recorded, but in 1494/5 he proceeded BCnL. For unspecified reasons he was excused lecturing in the following academic year. By then he had already started to acquire ecclesiastical benefices, starting in 1493, when he became a canon of Tamworth with the prebend of Wilmercote. He became rector of Wolferton, Norfolk, in 1496, and of Boscombe, Wiltshire, in 1499. Subsequent preferments included prebends in Chichester Cathedral (1507), Salisbury Cathedral (1510), and Crediton collegiate church (1513). A royal chaplain by 1509, in that capacity he took part in the funeral of Henry VII and the coronation of Henry VIII; by February 1510 he had become subdean of the Chapel Royal. In the latter capacity he took part in court revels. Although his presence seems to have been partly associated with the music provided by the chapel's children, there is evidence that he had a fine singing voice, which enabled him to appear as a performer in his own right; hence his being provided with 16 yards of blue damask in February 1511, 'for a garment of strange fashion, and a rolled cap like that of a Baron of the Exchequer' ('LP Henry VIII', vol. 2/2, p. 1496). 
Throughout his career Kite was friendly with Thomas Wolsey, to whom he owed his provision to the archbishopric of Armagh on 24 October 1513. The appointment seems to have been intended as a reward, but Kite regarded it as more of an 'honourable exile' (Ellis, 115), and returned to England at regular intervals. He was present when Wolsey received his cardinal's hat on 15 November 1515, and he also attended the baptism of Princess Mary on 21 February 1516. At the end of February 1518 he was sent with John Bourchier, second Baron Bourchier, on an embassy to Charles I of Castile (later Emperor Charles V). Delays and diplomatic manoeuvring plagued their mission, as Kite's letters to Henry VIII and Wolsey amply record. Henry shared their frustration, and in a letter of 4 November 1518 he rebuked Kite, complaining that his reports were brief and contained little of importance, and suggesting that he had not discussed matters as fully with Charles as the king desired. Clearly troubled by Henry's loss of confidence in him, Kite responded by complaining of delays that were beyond his control, while allowing that his lack of diplomatic experience could have contributed to his difficulties. Subsequent letters were more detailed, and Kite reported on Charles's preparations against the Turks and on tensions between the Flemish and the Spaniards. By 8 January 1519 Kite had taken his leave of the Spanish king and set off for England. No doubt his experience abroad lay behind his being included among those who attended Henry VIII in 1520, both at the Field of Cloth of Gold in June and at his meeting with Charles at Gravelines in July. 
Kite was never comfortable with his position as archbishop of Armagh. He may have savoured his status as primate of Ireland, but he quite obviously did not like either the country or its inhabitants, as he showed in plaintive letters to Wolsey. No sooner had he arrived than he was writing of being 'far from your heaven, from the sight of our most gracious King and Queen... from the wealth of all the joys of England' ('LP Henry VIII', vol. 1/1, no. 2907), and described with horror his coming to Drogheda, where his ship was attacked by two Breton pirates, who were driven off only with difficulty. He urged the king to come to Ireland to restore order, and in his early letters to Wolsey anticipated some kind of royal intervention, but as it became clear that Henry's priorities lay elsewhere, so Kite himself lost interest in Irish affairs. In 1515 he formed part of a mission which reported to the council at Greenwich and complained of Ireland's parlous state. Its complaints were dismissed, and thereafter Kite spent little if any time in Ireland. 
Kite secured a formal release from involvement with Ireland on 12 July 1521 when he was translated to the see of Carlisle, at a cost of 1790 ducats in papal fees. The temporalities were restored on 12 November. To preserve his status he was also made archbishop of Thebes 'in partibus infidelium', while perhaps because Carlisle was a poor diocese he was by 1522 holding the rectory of St Stephen Walbrook, London, 'in commendam'. Wolsey sent him north to help maintain order on the borders and to assist Thomas, second Baron Dacre, the warden of the marches, as councillor and treasurer in conflicts with the Scots. His letters to Wolsey reveal an appalling situation, though he did not attribute it to Scottish raids. He reported in June 1523 that there was 'more theft, more extortion, by English thieves, than there is by all the Scots of Scotland' ('LP Henry VIII', vol. 3/2, no. 2328), and a year later complained that in travelling from Newcastle to Carlisle he would be forced to ride some 60 miles out of his way to avoid bandits. Other royal agents, notably the earl of Surrey, echoed his views. 
Kite was more energetic in the north than he ever was in Ireland. He continued the work of his predecessors in rebuilding his palace, Rose Castle, and in October 1523 begged Wolsey's mercy for the people of Newcastle, presumably under sentence of excommunication as they had been unable to receive the sacraments since before Easter. He seems to have been one of the bishops whose estate management involved the granting of longer leases, for his successor Robert Aldridge commented in 1537 that Kite had 'left nothing unlet for more years than he or his successor will probably see' ('LP Henry VIII', vol. 12/2, no. 848). Kite's epitaph (now lost) was apparently referring to his episcopate when it described him as 'Kepyng nobyl Houshold wyth grete Hospitality' (Cooper, 'Ath. Cantab.', 63). But he still longed to return to court. His letters to Wolsey, in one of which he apologized to the cardinal for detaining his own archdeacon (who was also Wolsey's secretary) in the north, and in another even claimed to have dreamed of the cardinal, help to explain why the sixth earl of Northumberland dubbed him 'the flatteryng Byshope of Carel' (Bouch, 187). He remained loyal to Wolsey, however, and after the latter's fall from power lent him 'dysshes to eate hys meate in And plate to drynke in and also lynnyn clothes to occupie' (Cavendish, 104). 
Kite was probably conservative in his religious views, as might have been expected of a friend of Viscount Lisle, but he supported the king in his pursuit of a divorce from Katherine of Aragon, and in 1534 subscribed the oath of supremacy. By the 1530s he seems to have been living mainly in London, where in 1536 he was recorded as playing cards with Sir William Kingston. He died there on 19 June 1537 and was buried in Stepney parish church three days later. 


@@@@@


doc= 15694


Kitto, John (1804-1854), writer and missionary, son of John Kitto, a Cornish stonemason, and Elizabeth Picken, was born at Plymouth on 4 December 1804. He was a sickly lad, caring for nothing but books. Between his eighth and eleventh years he was at four different Plymouth schools, and had no other schooling. In 1814 he was taken by his father to assist him at his trade. On 13 February 1817, while carrying slates up a high ladder, he fell 35 feet, as a result of which he became stone-deaf. Unable to work, he was left to spend his time as he pleased, and devoted himself to reading, selling scraps of old iron, and painting children's pictures and shop labels to make money to buy books. On 15 November 1819 he was sent to the workhouse, where he was set to learn shoemaking. In November 1821 he was apprenticed to a Plymouth shoemaker named Bowden, who treated him badly, and in May 1822 he was taken back into the workhouse. In July 1823 some gentlemen became interested in his case, made provision for his support, and got permission for him to read in the public library. In 1824 Anthony Norris Groves, an Exeter dentist and one of the early Plymouth Brethren, took him as a pupil, giving him board, lodging, and a small salary. Soon after he underwent a religious conversion and in July 1825 went, at the suggestion of Groves, to the Missionary College at Islington, to be trained for employment by the Church Missionary Society as a printer at one of their foreign presses. In June 1827 he was sent by the society to Malta, but his interest in writing seems to have prevented his giving his whole attention to his duties, and in January 1829 he returned to England. 
In June of that year Kitto became a member of a private mission party organized by Groves, and in company with him and others sailed for Persia; an interesting account of the journey appears in his journals. The party reached Baghdad in December, and Kitto, besides acting as tutor to Groves's children, opened an Armenian school. A terrible plague destroyed some 50,000 of the inhabitants of Baghdad in little more than a month, and carried off five out of thirteen inmates of Groves's house. A flood and a siege by Ali Pasha of Aleppo followed; the schools were broken up, and in September 1832 Kitto left Baghdad. On reaching England, after a journey of nine months, he obtained an introduction to the Society for the Diffusion of Useful Knowledge, and was engaged to write for the 'Penny Magazine', in which the 'Deaf traveller' and other papers of his appeared. He also at this time contributed to the 'Companion to the Almanack', the 'Companion to the Newspaper', the 'Printing Machine', and Charles Knight's 'Cyclopaedia'. On 21 September 1833 he married a Miss Fenwick; she and seven of their children survived him. 
At the suggestion of Charles Knight Kitto began in 1834 a series of narratives illustrative of the life of blind, deaf, and mute people, later collected as 'The Lost Senses' (1845); in 1835 he wrote a 'Biblical commentary', which resulted in 'The Pictorial Bible', originally published anonymously in monthly parts. It was completed in May 1838, and was well received (3 vols. octavo, and 4 vols. quarto, 1835-8). The notes were afterwards published separately under the title 'The Illustrated Commentary' (5 vols., 1840). He next agreed with Knight to write a 'Pictorial History of Palestine and the Holy Land, Including a Complete History of the Jews', which he completed after nearly three years of hard work (1840). 'The Christian Traveller' was then planned, a work intended to give some account of missionary activities; but Knight ran out of money and only three parts of it appeared (1841). These were the most notable of the many illustrated biblical works which made Kitto a prominent, but never financially successful, author. Following Knight's failure, Kitto suffered much hardship. He had to sell his house at Islington and move to Woking. He wrote for Messrs A. and C. Black, Edinburgh, who published his 'History of Palestine' (1843). He also began the 'Cyclopaedia of Biblical Literature', on which he was at work until 1845 (2 vols., 1845). In 1844, though a layman, he received the degree of DD from the University of Giessen, and in 1845 was made a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries. In 1848 he began the 'Journal of Sacred Literature', which he edited until 1853. Financial difficulties continued to press upon him. The 'Journal of Sacred Literature' did not pay the cost of printing, and he was obliged to leave Woking for a cheaper house at Camden Town. In 1849 he began the preparation of the 'Daily Bible Illustrations' for Messrs Oliphant of Edinburgh, to be published in quarterly parts. Volume 1 appeared in December of that year, and the concluding volume in January 1854. He was given a civil-list pension of $100 per annum in 1850 in recognition of his 'useful and meritorious literary works'. His health, never robust, began seriously to fail in 1851. In August 1854 he went to Germany to try the effect of mineral waters, but on 25 November 1854 died at Cannstadt, where he had settled. His remains were buried in the cemetery there, a tombstone being erected over them by Mr Oliphant, his publisher. 


@@@@@


doc= 15695


Klitz, Philip (1805-1854), composer, was born on 7 January 1805 at Lymington, Hampshire, the eldest of the six sons of George Philip Klitz (1777-1839), of Biebrich, Germany, a composer and drum-major in the Royal Flintshire militia, and his wife, Elizabeth Lane of Boldre (1775-1838). All six sons became musicians. 
Philip Klitz moved to Southampton about 1828, and in 1831 conducted Paganini's concert there. A brilliant pianist and violinist, he was also a popular lecturer and a successful proponent of the Hullah system of sight-singing. He became organist of St Lawrence and St Joseph's Church, Southampton, and from 1845 to his death was organist of All Saints' Church. On 20 June 1834 or 1835 he married Charlotte Lyte, half-sister of Henry F. Lyte, the hymn writer. They had one son, George, who also became a composer. 
Among Klitz's compositions were 'Songs of the mid-watch, the poetry by Captain Willes Johnson, the music composed for and dedicated to the British navy' (1838). These six songs were, by order of the Admiralty, reprinted in 'Songs of Charles Dibdin, arranged by T. Dibdin' (1850). Klitz was one of the first to write songs for the concerts of 'black-face minstrels': both 'Miss Ginger' and 'Dinah Dear' (1847) became very popular. He was an active freemason, and his 'Faith, Hope, and Charity' was performed at the Hampshire lodges. As well as his musical works, he also published 'Sketches of life, character, and scenery in the New Forest: a series of tales, rural, domestic, legendary, and humorous' (1850). He died at 24 Portland Place, Southampton, on 13 January 1854. 


@@@@@


doc= 15696


Klose, Francis Joseph (1784-1830), composer and piano teacher, was born in London, the son of a professor of music. His first teacher was his father, and he later studied the piano and composition with Franz Tomich, a pupil of Haydn. He was an excellent violinist, and was a member both of the orchestra of the King's Theatre and of the Concerts of Ancient Music. But he became so successful as a piano teacher that he gave up most of his public engagements and devoted himself almost entirely to teaching. He was also a prolific composer, and his sentimental ballads were especially popular. He set ballads by the leading poets of the day, notably Byron's 'Adieu! adieu! my native land', Lady Caroline Lamb's 'Can'st thou bid my heart forget', and 'The rose had been washed' by William Cowper. His other published works included a ballet, 'Les deguisemens amoureux', for the King's Theatre, sonatinas for the piano, a grand sonata for piano, violin, and flute, and 'Practical Hints for Acquiring Thoroughbass' (1822). His piano music was popular with teachers. Klose died in Beaumont Street, Marylebone, on 8 March 1830. 


@@@@@


doc= 15697


Knapp, John Leonard (1767-1845), botanist, was born on 9 May 1767 at Shenley, Buckinghamshire, the youngest son of the Revd Primatt Knapp, rector of Shenley, and Keturah, third daughter of Nathaniel French of Antigua. After attending school at Thame in Oxfordshire he went at an early age into the navy. He was present at an engagement with John Paul Jones (1747-1792) the pirate, and sailed under Captain Philip Carteret (died 1796), but ill health caused him to leave the navy while he was still young. He had joined the Herefordshire militia by September 1792 (when he became a lieutenant) and was present with that regiment during the riots at Bristol Bridge in September 1793. In 1795 he became a captain in the Northamptonshire militia, but resigned later that year. Until about 1805 he lived mainly at Powick, near Worcester. 
From an early age Knapp took an interest in natural history. Later, for a number of years he took long summer botanical excursions. On one of these he visited Scotland with George Don and collected several of the rarest species of British grasses. He published 'The Gramina Britannica' in 1804 using many of the specimens from his botanical tour of Scotland; it contained 119 coloured plates of grasses drawn by Knapp. Unfortunately a fire at the printing works of T. Bensley at Bolt Court destroyed all of the impressions except for a hundred copies that were with the binder. It was reprinted by Mr Strong of Bristol in 1842 with little alteration of the original text and no addition of species. 
In October 1804 at Walcot, Bath, Knapp married Lydia Frances (1772/3-1838), youngest daughter of Arthur Freeman, a plantation owner in Antigua. They had seven children, of whom three lived to survive Knapp. In 1805 he went to live at Llan-ffwyst, near Abergavenny, Monmouthshire, and from there during the spring of 1813 he made his last move, to Alveston near Bristol, Gloucestershire, where he owned some farmland. 
In 1818 Knapp published anonymously a poem, 'Arthur, or, The Pastor of the Village', also printed by Bensley. Between 1820 and 1830 he wrote a series of articles for the 'Time's Telescope' under the title of 'The naturalist's diary'. These formed the germ of his most successful work, also anonymous, 'The Journal of a Naturalist' (1829), which reached a fourth edition. The book is an account of the natural history, country life, and agriculture along the escarpment from Alveston to Thornbury in Gloucestershire and was inspired by Gilbert White's 'Natural History of Selborne' (1789). 
Knapp's last years were spent at Alveston where he was a churchwarden. His time was now spent almost entirely in the pursuit of natural history and the cultivation of his garden, even up to the day before his death, at his home, Old Alveston House, on 29 April 1845. He was buried six days later at the old St Helen's Church, Ridgeway, Alveston (now disused). Knapp was a fellow of the Linnean Society (from 1796) and a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries. He was elected an honorary member of the Bristol Philosophical and Literary Society in 1824. J. W. White described Knapp as 'a charming botanist and traveller through the inexhaustible regions of nature' (White, 85). The genus of grasses previously named 'Milbora' by Adanson was called 'Knappia' by Smith. 


@@@@@


doc= 15698


Knapp, William (1698-1768), composer, was born at Wareham, Dorset. A glover and property owner, he became one of the burgesses of Poole, and was parish clerk at St James's, Poole, for thirty-nine years. Knapp was apparently a 'difficult personality' ('New Grove'), and trained the choirs of several Dorset churches. He published two popular collections of church music, 'A Sett of New Psalm Tunes and Anthems' (1738; 8th edn, 1770) and 'New Church Melody' (1753; 5th edn, 1764). Both works contained music from earlier collections, as well as original compositions by Knapp. One of his psalm tunes, 'Wareham', appeared in both volumes: it continued in use throughout the twentieth century. Knapp's tunes and anthems were widely collected in Britain and the American colonies, and reveal his 'undoubted flair for effective melody' ('New Grove'). Knapp died in Poole and was buried there on 26 September 1768. 


@@@@@


doc= 15699


Charles Knapton (d. 1742) was a landscape painter and engraver whose work was closely associated with the Knapton publishing business. He copied portraits (see above) and old master drawings (particularly those of Guercino), assisting Arthur Pond in preparing 'Prints in Imitation of Drawings', published in 1735-6. With his wife, Elizabeth, whom he had married before 1728, he marketed a series of caricature heads etched by Pond and engravings of Italian landscapes chosen by Pond. After his death in the autumn of 1742 his wife became the mistress and business associate of Pond (died 1758), whom she survived. 


@@@@@


doc= 15700


Knapton, George (1698-1778), painter and art connoisseur, was born in London, the son or nephew of the bookseller and publisher James Knapton (died 1736). Between 1715 and 1722 he studied under Jonathan Richardson the elder, whose writings on art were published by James Knapton, and in 1720 he was a subscriber to the St Martin's Lane Academy in London. In 1723, with Arthur Pond, he became a founder member of the Roman Club. Two years later they went to Rome, where they engaged in the business of sending back to England plaster casts from the antique. Pond returned to England in 1727 but Knapton stayed seven years in Italy. In a letter to his brother Charles Knapton ['see below'] he described the new excavations at Herculaneum (and his account was later published by the Royal Society, in 1740), and he visited Venice before returning home in 1732. While in Italy he would have met many British travellers, among them Sir Francis Dashwood (second baronet) and Lord Middlesex (later second duke of Dorset) who became the principal movers of the Society of Dilettanti in London. At the first meeting of the society in 1736 Knapton was made its painter, thereby becoming the only dilettante not distinguished by rank or wealth. 
Italy had 'opend the eyes of his understanding' and 'finding he coud not make any extraordinary matter' of painting in oil (Vertue, 'Note books', 3.62, 109), Knapton, together with Pond and William Hoare, turned to pastel. They had doubtless been inspired in Venice by the pastels of Rosalba Carriera, whose influence is much apparent in Knapton's surviving pastels at Chatsworth, Derbyshire. By 1736 he had drawn the young Horace Walpole (work untraced). In 1741 Francis Cotes became his pupil and by the end of the decade he had received several commissions from Frederick, prince of Wales, for pastels of his children, sometimes emblematically portrayed according to the prince's 'directions & commands' (Millar, 1.189); three examples remain in the Royal Collection at Windsor and Buckingham Palace. Knapton may also have been involved, with his brother Charles, Pond, and Gravelot, in finding and copying older portraits to be engraved by Jacobus Houbraken in Amsterdam and published by Knapton's kinsmen, the brothers John and Paul Knapton, between 1743 and 1752 as illustrations for Thomas Birch's 'Lives and Characters of Eighty Illustrious Persons of Great Britain'. 
Knapton meanwhile had maintained his ambition to practise in oils. In 1741 the Society of Dilettanti decreed that members should each sit to him in fancy dress and by 1749 he had painted twenty-one competent but curiously irreverent half-lengths (Society of Dilettanti, London). In 1743 Vertue placed him 'in the first class' of painters (Vertue, 'Note books', 3.117) and the following year Walpole found him painting Lady Carteret (work untraced) 'with corn like the Goddess of Plenty, and a mild dove in her arms like Mrs Venus' (Walpole, 'Corr.', 18.467). Most of his surviving portraits in oil date between 1741 and 1751. They include 'The 3rd Earl of Burlington' (1743, Chatsworth, Derbyshire), 'John Spencer and his Son' (1745, Althorp, Northamptonshire), the attractive 'Lucy Ebberton' ('c'.1750, Dulwich Picture Gallery, London; engraved by J. McArdell), and the very large 'Family of Frederick, Prince of Wales' (1751, Marlborough House, London). In 1750 Vertue commented on Knapton's 'great improvement in oyl paintings' (Vertue, 'Note books', 3.154), mentioning with particular approval a large group (untraced) of the duke of Bedford and his family. Two full-size copies by Knapton after Van Dyck remain at Woburn Abbey, Bedfordshire. Further portraits are known only through engravings, the earliest dated plates being those of the Italian singers John Carestini (1735) and Lisabetta Du Parc (1737), and the last Sir George Vandeput (1750). 
By 1750 Knapton was also recognized as 'the most skillfull judge or Connoiesseur of Pictures' (Vertue, 'Note books', 3.154). In 1746 he had made an inventory of the pictures at Althorp for Lord Spencer and in 1750 the prince of Wales asked him, together with George Vertue, to inspect the pictures in the Royal Collection. In May 1765, on the death of Stephen Slaughter, Knapton succeeded as surveyor and keeper of the king's pictures. Connoisseurship had replaced painting; his last dated painting is from 1755 ('Dr Samuel Wathen and his Family', City of Birmingham Museum and Art Gallery) and he resigned as painter to the Dilettanti in 1763. 
Knapton died, apparently unmarried, in 1778; Walpole thought he was dying in January, but he lived on until December, when he was buried in Kensington. Throughout his life he had maintained a professional dignity, according to the ideals of his master Richardson, as both gentleman painter and connoisseur. His technical ability as an artist was not outstanding, but his success was always facilitated by social connection. In 1732 Vertue had suggested that his association with the Knapton publishing house brought him both 'acquaintance & employment' (Vertue, 'Note books', 3.62) and in 1736 membership of the Dilettanti considerably enlarged his circle. He was much favoured by Lord Spencer and the dukes of Bedford and Devonshire before finally attracting royal patronage. 
George Knapton's brother 


@@@@@


doc= 15701


Knapton, Philip (1788-1833), composer and music publisher, was born in York on 20 October 1788, the son of Samuel Knapton, a music publisher and instrument maker who took over Thomas Haxby's business in York about 1796. He received his musical education at Cambridge, under Charles Hague, but did not graduate from the university. After returning to York, he joined his father's business about 1820, and remained in the city until his death. He was active in local musical life, and served as one of the assistant conductors at the York festivals of 1823, 1825, and 1828. 
Knapton composed several overtures, piano concertos, and other orchestral works, and arranged a number of fantasias on popular airs for piano and harp. His piano arrangement of Lady Nairne's song 'Caller Herrin' and his music for the song 'There be none of Beauty's Daughter' ('c'.1818) enjoyed considerable popularity. He also produced a 'Collection of tunes for psalms and hymns, selected as a supplement to those now used... in York' (1810). The publishing business was taken over in 1829 by William Hardman and later by Henry Banks; it was still in existence as Banks & Son in the late twentieth century. Knapton died in York on 20 June 1833. 


@@@@@


doc= 15702


Knatchbull, Sir Edward, ninth baronet (1781-1849), politician, eldest son of Sir Edward Knatchbull of Mersham Hatch, Kent, eighth baronet, and Mary, daughter and coheir of William Western Hugessen of Provender in the same county, was born on 20 December 1781. He was educated at Winchester College 1794-9, matriculated from Christ Church, Oxford, in 1800, and enrolled at Lincoln's Inn in 1803. He was receiver-general for Kent 1814-19, resigning, following his father's death and his succession to the baronetcy on 21 September 1819, so as to occupy his father's seat as member for Kent. He held the seat from November 1819 until 1830, when he did not stand for re-election. He was a strong opponent of corn-law reform and of Catholic emancipation, on 12 February 1829 stinging Peel to ill temper in the Commons by his taunts of inconsistency on the Catholic question. He became a prominent figure among the ultra-tories. His amendment on distress in February 1830 was only defeated by whigs coming to the aid of Wellington's government. In November 1830 Knatchbull and Sir Richard Vyvyan engineered the downfall of Wellington's government by giving the ultra vote in support of Sir Henry Parnell's retrenchment motion. Like other ultras, Knatchbull favoured moderate political reform, especially if it stopped the rick burning caused by the Swing riots in Kent. But, unlike some of his ultra colleagues, he refused Lord Grey's offer of office when the whig government was formed. He subsequently promoted, without success, a resolution in favour of moderate reform if the 'Reform Bill' of 1831 was defeated on second reading (on which Knatchbull paired). 
In 1832 Knatchbull was elected for East Kent, representing it until 1845, when he retired. Much though he distrusted Peel, he was his paymaster-general, in the cabinet, in 1834 and again in 1841. His opposition in cabinet to the 1842 budget was unsuccessful and he had little enthusiasm for the political direction of Peel's government. The death of his favourite child, Fanny Elizabeth, in February 1845 confirmed a decision to retire adumbrated earlier; he resigned office on 15 February. 
Knatchbull's domestic life was no happier than his political. He married, on 25 August 1806, Annabella Christiana, daughter of Sir John Honywood, bt. She died on 4 April 1814 after bearing five sons and a daughter, Mary. He married, secondly, on 24 October 1820, Fanny Catherine, eldest daughter of Edward Knight of Godmersham Park, Kent. They had five sons and four daughters. Three of his sons from his first marriage died young, his daughter Mary eloped, and he disinherited his eldest son, Norton Joseph, because of the extravagant behaviour of his wife, Mary. He altered his will in favour of Edward Knatchbull ['see 'Hugessen, Edward, first Baron Brabourne], his eldest son from his second marriage, with the proviso that he take the name Hugessen on inheriting, which he did. 
Knatchbull was neither as ultra-protestant nor as protectionist as his record suggests. He had a knack of muddling into political crises and finding himself leader of a following he did not wholeheartedly represent. He died on 24 May 1849. 


@@@@@


doc= 15703


Knatchbull, Sir Norton, first baronet (1602-1685), politician and biblical scholar, was born on 26 December 1602, the eldest surviving son of Thomas Knatchbull (1572-1623) of Maidstone and his wife, Eleanor (1574-1638), daughter of John Astley, master of the revels. He was educated at Eton College from 1615 to 1618, matriculated at Cambridge as a fellow-commoner of St John's College on 20 March 1619, and graduated BA in 1620. In 1624, as his father and uncles had done, he entered the Middle Temple, London. On 22 October 1630 he married Dorothy, daughter of Thomas Westrowe, member of the Grocers' Company and alderman of London. They had thirteen children. His uncle Sir Norton Knatchbull of Mersham Hatch, Kent, sheriff of that county in 1608 and MP for Hythe in 1609, had founded the free school at Ashford. The younger Norton succeeded to the family estate on the death of his uncle in 1636. He confirmed the deed of endowment for the school of $30 per annum and subsequently added to the buildings. 
In 1639 Knatchbull was elected member of parliament for New Romney, Kent, and was knighted at Whitehall in London by Charles I. He was made a baronet on 4 August 1641. Although originally inclined towards the opposition to Charles I, he was summoned in November 1642 with twenty-seven others to appear before the House of Commons as a delinquent, and in the following year he was fined 1000 marks for neglecting his services to the house and the county committee. His considerable delay in taking the covenant reflected his distaste for the militant presbyterianism it represented. Knatchbull did not sit in the house after Pride's Purge, and occupied himself instead with his Hebrew studies. 
In 1659 Knatchbull published 'Animadversiones in libros novi testamenti'. The work demonstrates a considerable breadth of learning, reflecting the author's use of his large library. It is also intrepid in its arguments for considering historical circumstances and contemporary idiom, and for suggesting the existence of scribal errors in the transmission of the sacred text. A second edition with appendix was published in 1672 and a third, emended, at Oxford in 1677; a fourth edition, in English, appeared in 1692, entitled 'Annotations upon some Difficult Texts in All the Books of the New Testament' (Cambridge, 1693). The preface states that Knatchbull undertook the translation, probably shortly before his death. It is preceded by an 'Encomiastick upon the most Learned and Judicious Author', by Thomas Walker of Sidney Sussex College. The work was well received in England and abroad, was reprinted on the continent, and was held in high regard well into the eighteenth century. 
At the general election of 1660 Knatchbull's New Romney constituency honoured him by electing him together with his son on condition that they both took out their freedom. Knatchbull sat on only five committees in the Convention, and probably voted with the court. Re-elected in 1661, he participated more actively in the Cavalier Parliament, but he did not take part in formulating the Clarendon code or in later measures against its deviser. By now a widower, he married on 27 November 1662 Dorothy, daughter of Sir Robert Honeywood of Charing, Kent, widow of Sir Edward Steward of Barking, Essex, who survived him. They had no children. In 1669 Sir Thomas Osborne identified him as one of the members to be engaged by the duke of Buckingham. Owing to advancing years he probably did not attend any sessions after 1673. In December 1675 Sir Richard Wiseman listed him as a probable government supporter, recording his recent absence, and in 1677 Lord Shaftesbury marked him 'doubly vile', probably because his younger son was secretary to Lord Chancellor Finch (HoP, 'Commons, 1660-90', 692). 
In 1680 Pierre du Moulin the younger dedicated to Knatchbull his 'Short view of the chief points in controversy between the reformed churches and the church of Rome', a translation from an unprinted manuscript by his father, Pierre du Moulin the elder. Knatchbull had acquired the manuscript for his collection and handed it over for the purposes of publication. Du Moulin praised Knatchbull's combination of piety and learning well known to the world. 
Knatchbull died at Mersham Hatch on 3 February 1685 and was buried in the family vault under the chancel of Mersham church, where a Latin epitaph styled him 'Criticorum coryphaeus et oraculum', comparing his eloquence with that of Cicero and Chrysostom and his judgement with that of Varro and Jerome. In his will he left considerable sums to the poor around his estate, and the sum of $40 to his servant Francis. The estate passed to his eldest son, John. 


@@@@@


doc= 15704


Hugessen, Edward Hugessen Knatchbull-, first Baron Brabourne of Brabourne (1829-1893), politician, was the eldest son of Sir Edward Knatchbull, ninth baronet (1781-1849), of Mersham Hatch, Kent, where he was born on 29 April 1829. His mother, Fanny Catherine, daughter of Edward Knight of Godmersham Park, Kent, was a niece of Jane Austen. Knatchbull went to Eton College in 1844, and matriculated at Magdalen College, Oxford, on 9 July 1847. He graduated BA in 1851, and proceeded MA in 1854. His father died on 24 May 1849, having stated in his will his desire that his son should add to his surname the name Hugessen, after the testator's mother, Mary, daughter and coheir of William Western Hugessen of Provender, Kent. This was done by royal licence. 
At the general election of 1857 Knatchbull-Hugessen was elected for Sandwich as a Liberal, with Lord Clarence Paget for a colleague. His maiden speech in the House of Commons was made on 21 April 1858 in support of the abolition of church rates. When Palmerston on 30 June 1859 formed his second administration he included Knatchbull-Hugessen in it as a lord of the Treasury (that is, as a whip). This office he filled until 1866, when he became under-secretary for the Home Office. In Gladstone's first administration, formed on 9 December 1868, Knatchbull-Hugessen returned to the under-secretaryship for the Home Office. In 1871 he became under-secretary for the colonies. On 24 March 1873 he was sworn of the privy council. He left office when Gladstone resigned on 13 February 1874. He moved away from Liberalism, especially on church questions and the establishment of the Church of England. He was not included in Gladstone's second administration, which was formed on 28 April 1880, but on 24 March in that year he had been created Baron Brabourne of Brabourne. Shortly after becoming a peer he became a Conservative and joined the Carlton Club. In 1882 he was a founder member of the Liberty and Property Defence League. He was chairman of the East Kent quarter sessions and deputy chairman of the South-Eastern Railway. 
Brabourne was twice married, first, on 19 October 1852, to Anna Maria Elizabeth (died May 1889), younger daughter of the Revd Marcus Richard Southwell, vicar of St Stephen's, Hertfordshire, and his wife, Cecilia Jane; this marriage produced two sons and two daughters. His second marriage was on 3 June 1890, at Maxwelton Chapel, Glencairn, to Ethel Mary (died 1929), third daughter of Colonel George Gustavus Walker of Crawfordton, Dumfriesshire, and his wife, Anne Murray, 'nee' Lennock, the marriage producing one son, Adrian ('b'. 1891), and a daughter, Alicia, who was born after Brabourne's death in 1893. 
Before and after his elevation to the peerage Brabourne was an energetic author, chiefly known for numerous stories for children. He was also a book collector. An auction of part of his library, which 'abounded in topographical works, scarcely any English county being unrepresented', was held in May 1891, and the sum realized was over $2000; a further auction of his collection was held in June 1893, following his death. After the death of his mother on 24 December 1882, in her ninetieth year, Brabourne became possessor of ninety-four letters written by his great-aunt, Jane Austen, to her elder sister, Cassandra. At the close of 1884 he published these letters in two volumes, with introductory and critical remarks, which were mainly notable for their diffuse irrelevance. 
Brabourne wrote original fairy stories, the first of his many volumes being 'Stories for my Children' (1869). Its opening tale, 'Puss Cat Mew', was later a favourite of J. R. R. Tolkien and may have provided some of the inspiration for characters in Tolkien's 'The Lord of the Rings'. Brabourne claimed Hans Christian Andersen as his model, but his stories, though sometimes attractive, lack Andersen's skill and are 'often long-winded, macabre, and sadistic' (Carpenter and Prichard, 298). Brabourne also published a lecture on Oliver Cromwell (1877) and 'Facts and Fictions in Irish History' (1886), attacking Gladstone. He died on 6 February 1893 at Smeeth Paddocks, and was buried at Smeeth, Kent, three days later. 


@@@@@


doc= 15705


Knell, William (d. 1587), actor, may have been the son of Henry Knell, an immigrant from Bremen whose will was proved on 17 September 1585, though there is nothing more than an uncommon name to link them. The details of Knell's early career as a player are not known, but he was prominent enough by 1583, or at the latest by 1585, to be selected by Edmund Tilney, under commission from Sir Francis Walsingham, as one in the new company of Queen's Men. The selection is significant because it was expected of Tilney that the Queen's Men would outshine all rival companies, then operating under the patronage of such Tudor grandees as the earls of Sussex, Leicester, and Warwick. In a group rich in clowns, Knell's specialism was probably in heroic parts: he is described as 'playing Henry the fift' in the book of 'Tarlton's Jests' ('Shakespeare Jest-Books', ed. W. C. Hazlitt, 1864, 2.218), presumably in 'The Famous Victories of Henry V', which is known to have been in the repertory of the Queen's Men. It is the only role to which Knell's name can be confidently attached. 
The Queen's Men, whether or not the members individually shared Walsingham's concerns, were expected to tour the provinces during the summer and early autumn with a broadly protestant and insistently patriotic repertory. Travelling conditions were rough and the schedule often gruelling. In such circumstances, friendships are tested. On the evening of 13 June 1587, for reasons unknown, Knell drew his sword and attacked his fellow actor John Towne. It was in self-defence, a coroner's inquest concluded, that Towne stuck his own sword through his assailant's neck. Knell was dead within half an hour. The skirmish took place in White Hound Close, Thame, near Oxford. Because the Queen's Men visited Stratford upon Avon during this same tour, speculative biographers have mentioned Shakespeare as a possible replacement for Knell, but there is no evidence to sustain the theory. 
Administration of Knell's estate was granted to his widow, Rebecca (died 1619), by the commissary court of London on 12 December 1587. In that ruling, Knell is referred to as 'of St Mary Aldermanbury', but his place of burial is unknown. On 10 March 1588 Rebecca married the actor John Heminges, famous as Shakespeare's colleague and editor; they had several children. She died in the late summer of 1619, and was buried at St Mary Aldermanbury on 2 September. Heminges's will makes no mention of children by her first husband. 


@@@@@


doc= 15706


Knell, Paul (d. 1666), Church of England clergyman, was the son of Barnabas Knell (died 1646), minister of Reculver in Kent from 1602, who was sequestered from the living by parliament in the year of his death. Paul Knell was admitted as sizar at Clare College, Cambridge, on 18 June 1632, graduating BA in 1636. Upon the outbreak of civil war he joined the royalist cause as chaplain to a regiment of cuirassiers, to whom he preached a sermon, 'The convoy of a Christian', in August 1643, during the siege of Gloucester. He later joined the king at Oxford, where he was incorporated DD at Oxford University on 21 January 1644 and where he preached 'A severe sentence against secure citizens' at St Mary's on 17 March 1644. 
After the end of the civil war in England, Knell lived a peripatetic and insecure life. He was cited for intrusion at the parish of St Dunstan's, Canterbury, in July 1647, and spent much of 1648 in London, where he was able to preach and publish. A sermon at Gray's Inn in April was published as 'Israel and England Paralelled', in which Knell defended both church and king, and attacked the 'silly schismaticall assembly' (Knell, 'Israel and England', 17). Another sermon, at St Peter Cornhill, was published as 'The Life-Guard of a Loyall Christian', in which he cast the king's opponents as the 'Devil's darlings' (Knell, 'Life-Guard', 2) and claimed that the institutions of neither church nor monarchy could be destroyed by the deaths of particular incumbents. His most famous sermon, however, was preached at St Peter Paul's Wharf in September 1648 and published as 'A Looking-Glasse for Levellers', in which Knell attacked the 'conspiracy of Levellers against our sovereign', and claimed that 'destruction is in their way, they are still opposing of treaties, the way of peace have they not known, like horse leaches, they never think they have blood enough' (Knell, 'Looking-Glasse', 13-14). Thereafter, Knell may have been forced into exile. He later claimed to have preached a sermon, 'The Assumption of the Messiah', before Charles II at The Hague in May 1649. However, he soon returned to England, and helped to raise money for royalist ministers in Essex in 1650. 
During the late 1650s Knell, like other Anglican divines, appears to have been able to minister unmolested in London. He settled in the parish of St Peter Paul's Wharf, where he had married one Anne Powell on 3 August 1648, and where he was styled 'minister' from 1657. In June 1660 he petitioned for a prebend at either Windsor or Worcester, claiming to have suffered greatly by plunder, sequestration, and imprisonment in the troubles, and to have been reduced to destitution. He republished some of his earlier works as 'Five Seasonable Sermons', perhaps in order to remind the new king of his service to the royal cause. Knell's request was not granted, but he was made vicar of Newchurch in Kent, in May 1662, and vicar of St Dunstan's, Canterbury, in 1664, although he continued to live in London with his second wife, Elizabeth, whom he married some time before July 1663. Knell was buried at St Dunstan's, Canterbury, on 24 August 1666. 


@@@@@


doc= 15707


Knell, Thomas, the elder (d. 1576/7), religious writer and Church of England clergyman, was most likely a native of Kent. Many of the details of his life are uncertain, and he has suffered from confusion with another Thomas Knell, probably his son. The elder of the two men first appears in the years around 1550 as the author of a broadsheet entitled 'An ABC to the Christen Congregacion, or, A Pathe Way to the Heavenly Habitacion' (ESTC 15029). Written in verse it has a perceptibly evangelical character, not least in its rejection of salvation by works and its emphasis on the primacy of scripture, while its many references to the plight of the poor suggest an affinity to the 'commonwealth' literature of Edward VI's reign. 
The elder Thomas Knell may have been identical with the man of that name who was minister at Ashford, Kent, in 1552, who may in turn have been the Thomas Knell, described as a 'quondam' minister, who was enrolled as a resident of Geneva on 14 October 1557 and was received into John Knox's congregation there in the following month. It is also possible, however, that he was the Thomas Knolle recorded in 1557 as subscribing the 'new discipline' at Frankfurt am Main, and that he there came to know Alexander Nowell, who later secured ecclesiastical preferment for the elder Thomas Knell. But no certain identification is possible. By contrast it is clear that in January 1560 the elder Thomas Knell was collated by Archbishop Matthew Parker to the rectory of Warehorne, near Romney Marsh, worth $19 per annum. He also appears to have served the neighbouring parish of Snave. 
A survey of the Canterbury diocesan clergy of 1562 shows that Thomas Knell, rector of Warehorne, was a married BA who was learned but who had been forbidden to preach. He was allegedly resident and hospitable at Warehorne, his only benefice. In September 1569, again described as a BA, he was dispensed to hold a second benefice within 30 miles of Warehorne, a dispensation doubtless necessitated by his collation, that same month and again at Parker's hands, to the vicarage of Lyminge, near Folkestone, valued at $10 18's'. 8died per annum. He was inducted there in December. Shortly afterwards, now resident at Lyminge, he was recorded as a licensed preacher. The presentation in March 1570 to the vicarage of Dartford of a Thomas Knell, who may also have been the incumbent of Warehorne and Lyminge, seems not to have taken effect. 
By 16 October 1570 Knell had resigned his vicarage of Lyminge. From this point it becomes increasingly difficult to distinguish him from his younger namesake, but it is certain that it was the older man who, on the petition of Alexander Nowell, dean of St Paul's, was presented by the queen to the rectory of St Nicholas Acon, London, on 2 March 1571, and was instituted four days later. The living was valued at $13 per annum. His daughter Zephora was baptized there in October. It was probably the same man who in May 1571 was instituted to the Middlesex vicarage of Hackney (valued at $20 per annum) on the presentation of the rector. Knell resigned St Nicholas Acon and Hackney by 30 March and in April 1573 respectively, and in May was presented by the queen to another London vicarage, that of St Bride, Fleet Street, valued at $16 per annum. This presentation, too, was made on the petition of Dean Nowell. But he does not seem to have severed all connections with Kent, since Barnaby Knell, the son of Thomas Knell, clerk, was baptized at Warehorne in October 1574. 
By 23 March 1574 Knell had resigned the vicarage of St Bride, probably as a result of his appointment, at an unknown date, as chaplain to Walter Devereux, earl of Essex. With royal support Essex had set out to conquer and colonize Antrim in summer 1573, and was later appointed governor of Ulster. Having returned to England in November 1575 he went back to Ireland in July 1576, and a month later began to display symptoms of either dysentery or typhoid. A contemporary account of his steady physical decline (perhaps by Thomas Churchyard) records that among the clergymen who ministered to Essex in Dublin Castle was Thomas Knell, described as both preacher and chaplain. Essex is reported as continually desiring his chaplain to say prayers, and when he hoped to extract a promise from his attendants that they would not seek to prolong his life, and so his torments, Knell and another clerical ministrant, John Brown, counselled patience, with Knell declaring, of the earl's death, that 'for you it ys expedient but not for us neither for the Church of God' (Folger Shakespeare Library, MS V.b.317, unfoliated). Essex finally died on 22 September 1576. 
There were rumours that Essex had been poisoned, the finger of suspicion being pointed at Robert Dudley, earl of Leicester, who had enjoyed a probably adulterous relationship with the dead man's wife (they married in 1578). To scotch these damaging allegations Sir Henry Sidney, the lord deputy of Ireland, required Knell to divulge all he knew. In a report which provides incidental evidence of his knowledge of Latin, Knell confirmed that he had been continually present throughout Essex's last illness, and that he had even administered 'a glister' to the sick man. After the earl had declared his own suspicions of poison he had been sent 'a peece of unicornes horne' which Knell 'rased' and then gave to him, making Essex vomit. Admitting that others of the household had fallen sick at the same time as their master, Knell described in vivid terms the unwholesome symptoms of the earl's malady and the distressing findings of the 'post mortem' examination (BL, Add. MS 32092, fol. 5'r'-5'v'). None of this could either confirm or disprove the charges of poisoning, but Sidney certainly felt that Knell had erred on the side of credulity. In February 1577, after the chaplain's account had been circulated, Sidney told Leicester that he hoped that his investigations had satisfied him and others 'touching the false bruit of the Earl of Essex's poisoning', and declared that he would have 'made Knell retract his foolish speech', had not 'God prevented me, he dying of the same disease as the Earl, which was most certainly a mere flux' ('De L'Isle and Dudley MSS', 2.51). No will has been found and it is not known exactly when Knell died or where he was buried, though it was probably in Dublin. A Margaret Knell, widow, who was buried at Warehorne on 3 May 1577, may have been his wife. 
Two books by the elder Thomas Knell were published in 1581. 'A Godlie and Necesserie Treatise, Touching the Use and Abuse of Praier' (ESTC 15033.3), is a work of straightforward divinity, notable only for its expression of support for bishops as 'publike persons' who receive 'their authoritie from their naturall prince' (sig. C2'v'). Internal evidence suggests that 'Certain True Marks wherby to Knowe a Papist' (ESTC 15031), a warning against militant Catholicism, was probably written in the late 1560s. Perhaps it was the younger Thomas Knell who secured the posthumous publication of the older man's writings. 


@@@@@


doc= 15708


Knell, Thomas, the younger (1543/4-c.1592), Church of England clergyman and pamphleteer, was presumably the son of Thomas Knell the elder (d. 1576/7). When ordained deacon on 24 June 1567 by Edmund Grindal, bishop of London, he was living at Great Stambridge, Essex, stated that he had been born in Canterbury, and gave his age as twenty-three. Grindal ordained him priest on 17 April 1568, merely as 'of London'. He was probably, therefore, the 'Mr' Thomas Knell who was paid $4 per quarter for serving (presumably as curate) in the London parish of St James Garlickhithe between Easter and Christmas 1568 and again for the quarter ending at Lady day 1570. Meanwhile he appears to have served as curate in St Giles Cripplegate during 1569. 
Failing to find higher preferment Knell seems to have plunged into the Elizabethan equivalent of tabloid journalism. In the will of an obscure London curate, Henry Holtbie, proved on 4 August 1568, he was bequeathed a copy of 'The palace of pleasure' on condition that he restore to Holtbie's wife all the other books that he had borrowed. In 1569 he published, in verse, 'An epitaph, or rather a short discourse made upon the life & death of D. [Edmund] Boner, Bisshop of London'. Probably in response to the northern rising of 1569-70 there followed a flurry of anti-Catholic verse tracts. These effusions were undoubtedly intended to win him promotion but in the event they were unsuccessful. 
It is not clear whether it was he or Thomas Knell the elder who on 21 March 1570 received letters patent for the vicarage of Dartford, Kent, from the lord keeper, Sir Nicholas Bacon. The presentation was made at the petition of Lord Mountjoy and at the commendation of James Pilkington, bishop of Durham, but no institution is subsequently recorded. Knell the younger was present on 8 August 1570 at the execution of John Felton, condemned for setting up in the churchyard of St Paul's Cathedral Pius V's bull excommunicating Elizabeth, and accordingly published 'A piththy note to papists all and some that joy in Feltons martirdome'. The anonymous title-page states that the tract, which enshrines a blow-by-blow account of the execution, was 'set forth by one that knew his life, and was with him at the hour of his death'. Only on the final page did he reveal himself as 'T. Knel Juni.' This was followed in early 1571 by 'A declaration of such tempestious, and outragious fluddes, as hath been in England', previously attributed to Knell senior, and 'An historicall discource of the life and death of doctor Story', a diatribe against Bonner's hated chancellor, John Story, executed for treason on 1 June 1571. 
Since the composition record for St Nicholas Acon, London (15 March 1571), clearly states that the new incumbent was Thomas Knell 'senior' (TNA: PRO, E 334/8, fol. 236'v'), both logic and chronology suggest that it was the elder Thomas who also subsequently held, but quickly relinquished, the vicarages of Hackney, Middlesex, and of St Bride, London, between early 1571 and early 1574. In that case nothing further is known of the younger man's activities until the latter months of 1573 when, in the wake of the 'Admonition to the parliament' (1572) many Londoners suspected of nonconformity, both men and women, were required to sign a form of subscription to the English prayer book. Since Knell was one of them -- his signature is preserved among the Petyt MSS as 'Thomas Knell Jnr' -- his nonconformity may have prompted him to retire from the capital. 
Thus the younger Thomas Knell may have been the 'Mr Knell clerke' who, along with his wife, was presented during Archbishop Parker's episcopal visitation of 1573 for not receiving communion in the parish of St Alphege, Canterbury, at Easter or since. Of two tracts published in 1581, 'Certain true marks wherby to knowe a papist' is signed only 'Thomas Knell' but 'A Godlie and Necesserie Treatise, Touching the Use and Abuse of Praier' is clearly by Thomas Knell the elder. It seems likely that the younger Knell died about 1592 since a probate record exists for one Thomas Knell, clerk, of the parish of Kenardington, Kent. 


@@@@@


doc= 15709


Knell, William Adolphus (1801-1875), marine painter, was born in Carisbrooke, Hampshire, in 1801, the son of William Knell and Jane Richardson. He lived in London and first exhibited at the Royal Academy of Arts in 1825 with 'The Royal Squadron at Spithead'. Initially adopting the popular Dutch seventeenth-century marine style, in mid-career he shifted to an English manner to maintain his share of the market. The results were lighter and less heavy-handed pictures marked by translucent seas and broader handling in the skies. He specialized in inshore scenes of England, France, and the Low Countries, but many of his major works depicted naval action. Eight drawings by Knell, reproduced in coloured aquatint by Newton Smith Fielding, illustrated the 'Epitome, Historical and Statistical, Descriptive of the Royal Naval Services of England' by E. Miles and Lieutenant L. Miles, published in 1841. 
Knell contributed twenty-nine pictures to the Royal Academy from 1825 to 1866, forty-four to the British Institution from 1825 until 1867, and twenty to the Society of British Artists. He entered 'The Destruction of Toulon by the British, 18 June 1793' and 'The Battle off Cape St. Vincent, 14 February 1797' to the Westminster Hall competition of 1847. The latter, described as 'another masterly naval battle, treated with a spirit of effect worthy of praise' ('Art Union', 272), was one of only four pictures purchased by the Westminster commissioners for the nation that year, for $200. He painted at Queen Victoria's 'special command' (Millar, 133) 'The Naval Review at Spithead, 11 August 1853' (1854; Royal Collection) for $150 and 'The Arrival of Prince Albert, 6 February 1840' (1840; Royal Collection), which was engraved by William Miller (1796-1882) for the 'Art Journal' (1 June 1857, p. 188) and the 'Royal Gallery of Art' (2.25). Other major works include 'Pilot Boats off Dover' (exh. RA, 1847; Victoria Art Gallery, Bath), and 'The Arrival of the Princess Alexandra at Gravesend, 1863' (Danish Royal Collection). 
Knell married Susannah Williams ('nee' Cross), a widow, on 22 August 1846, when he was described as a widower. Their eldest son, William Callcott Knell ('fl'. 1848-1879), produced more vigorous and heavily worked marine scenes than his father and another son, Adolphus Knell (1855-1880), similarly turned away from the Dutch marine manner to produce oils likened to Turner sketches. John Henry Knell, who exhibited four pictures at the Royal Academy in 1833 and 1834, was probably Knell's brother. Knell died at his London home, 329 Kentish Town Road, on 9 July 1875, and was buried in the Abney Park cemetery, Stoke Newington. 
A number of Knell's pictures are in public collections in Derby, Edinburgh, Hull, Newcastle, York, and the National Maritime Museum, Greenwich, which owns twelve oils. 


@@@@@


doc= 15710


Kneller, Sir Godfrey, baronet (1646-1723), history and portrait painter, was born Gottfried Kniller (which name he used, together with Kneller, until well into his thirties) at Lubeck, north Germany, on 8 August 1646, the third son of Zacharias Kniller (1611-1675) and Lucia Beuten (died in or after 1676). Zacharias's father owned an estate near Halle in Saxony and served Count Mansfelt as surveyor-general of mines and inspector of revenues. Zacharias attended the University of Leipzig, was an official at Queen Eleanor of Sweden's court, and settled in Lubeck as chief surveyor. 
Kneller was intended for the army and after a grounding in Latin went to the University of Leiden to study mathematics. But his inclination turned 'strongly to drawing figures after the historical manner' (Buckeridge, 393). He moved to Amsterdam where his father placed him 'under the care of Rembrandt', a fact also attested to by Marshall Smith (Smith, 23). J. C. Weyerman, a Dutch painter who became Kneller's assistant in 1709, said that he studied under Rembrandt and Ferdinand Bol (Weyerman, 3.68) as did the engraver and historian George Vertue (Vertue, 'Note books', 1.58, 2.119). Kneller's early work shows the influence of both artists, stylistically and in the emphasis on large-scale 'history' paintings, that is figure paintings with a didactic purpose, whose subjects were drawn from the 'Bible', or antiquity, including mythologies and allegories. From the time of Alberti, in the fifteenth century, 'istoria' (history) was regarded as 'the greatest work of the painter' (Alberti, 70), a theory which was still accepted in seventeenth-century Holland (Blankert and others, 18). 
Kneller's earliest dated painting is actually a portrait, the three-quarter-length 'Johann Philipp von Schonborn, Prince-Bishop of Wurzburg and Elector of Mainz' (1666; Kunsthistorischesmuseum, Vienna). Its high quality indicates that less mature works must have preceded it. A commission from this exalted sitter was doubtless due to the painter's nationality, aristocratic family connections, and his membership of the Rembrandt school. 
Kneller's first dated history painting is his 'Isaac Blessing Jacob' (1668; St Annenmuseum, Lubeck), whose composition recalls Rembrandt's 'Danae' (Hermitage Museum, St Petersburg), but the shadowed, profiled, hunched Jacob creates tension in this more compressed composition. Also of 1668 are the 'Old Student' and 'Young Student', allegories of the contemplative and active life, painted for the Lubeck Stadtbibliothek (now St Annenmuseum). (The latter, much inferior in quality, is by 
Until 1986 the Vienna, Lubeck, and London works were the only known paintings from Kneller's Amsterdam period. In that year, in a remarkable scholarly breakthrough, Sumowski identified nine more early works by Kneller, including a large 'Self-Portrait' ('c'.1670; priv. coll.) in which Kneller proclaims his allegiance to neo-stoicism, a popular philosophy in the period which attracted artists such as Poussin, Rubens, and Van Dyck. Kneller shows himself copying an engraving (probably of Andromeda, as a symbol of patience) below which is a skull. Behind are an archer 'ecorche', and a bust of Seneca against a column, symbolizing the Stoic virtue of fortitude. 
Kneller's composition appears to be inspired by the 'Duet', by the Antwerp painter Theodor Rombouts (1597-1637), perhaps via the engraving by Schelte a Bolswert. However, Kneller may have seen the original painting (now lost) in Antwerp, since we know that he visited that city 'when he was young' (Vertue, 'Note books', 5.26). His journey probably took place 'c'.1669, and influenced Kneller to adopt bolder, more dynamic forms, including plunging diagonals and dramatic foreshortening. 
The largest Kneller identified by Sumowski is the 8.5 by 6 feet 'Dismissal of Hagar' ('c'.1670; Alte Pinakothek, Munich) whose composition derives from a Rembrandt etching. But Kneller's figures are grander and more dynamic, with expansive, poignant gestures and poses. The picture, formerly at the Wurzburg Residenz, was probably commissioned by Prince-Bishop Schonborn. Another work attributed by Sumowski to Kneller is 'Joseph Interpreting the Dreams of the Butler and the Baker' (Staatliches Museum, Schwerin), for which Kneller's composition drawing survives, wrongly attributed to Bol (Kunsthalle, Hamburg). The model for the baker also appears in the 'Rest on the Flight' (actually 'St Joseph's Dream in the Stable at Bethlehem') Malerisamling, Nivaagaards), attributed by Sumowski to Cornelis Bisschop. That model is seen yet again in 'Scholar in an Interior' (ex Sothebys, New York, 4 June 1987, lot 37; priv. coll.) described in the catalogue as by a follower of Carel van der Pluym, which is closely related stylistically to the Lubeck 'Old Student'. Hence 'St Joseph's Dream' and 'Scholar in an Interior' should also be attributed to Kneller (Stewart, 'Wisdom', 44). All these paintings have a gravity characteristic of many of his best mature works. 
A remarkable recent early Kneller discovery by Wolff-Thomsen is the 'Sacrifice of Manoah', until 1945 in the St Katherinenkirche, Lubeck, and since then in the depot of the St Annenmuseum there, wrongly ascribed to an amateur. The 'Manoah' dates from the mid- to late 1660s and is almost as large as the 'Dismissal of Hagar' but the figures are less dynamic. Manoah's head derives from one by Bol in his 'Descent of Moses from Mount Sinai' (Town Hall, Amsterdam) and Manoah's wife is based on the same model as Sarah in Kneller's 1668 'Isaac Blessing Jacob'. A standing angel lights the sacrificial fire with his staff; normally he flies upwards from the fire. Kneller's inventive iconography derives from the story of Gideon and the Angel, which like Manoah's appears in the 'Book of Judges'. 
In 1672 Kneller went with his brother to Italy. He studied in Rome with Bernini and Carlo Maratta, and 'began to acquire fame in history-painting, having first studied architecture and anatomy; the latter aptly disposing him to relish the antique statues, and to improve by them' (Buckeridge, 394). He also 'Copyed very much after Raphael' (Smith, 23). In Venice he 'studyed Titians Works, especially his Portraits' and painted members of the Donado, Mocenigo, Garzoni, and Basadonna families (ibid.). His portrait of Cardinal Basadonna was engraved. The pastellist Rosalba Carriera later admired one of Kneller's portraits of a member of the Mocenigo family. Two oval bust paintings survive, one of the Nuremberg sculptor Georg Schweigger (1674; Herzog Anton Ulrich-Museum, Brunswick), and the other of the most prominent contemporary Venetian painter, Sebastiano Bombelli (1675; Museo Civico, Udine). 
Kneller's Titianesque 'Herr von Copet' (1675; Kurpfalzisches Museum, Heidelberg) was painted in Nuremberg, where Kneller impressed Joachim von Sandrart. The return of the Kneller brothers to Lubeck in 1675 was prompted by the illness of their father, who died in April of that year. The following year they erected a painted wooden monument to their father in the St Katherinenkirche. From nearby Hamburg, they went to England because of Kneller's 'longing to see Sir Anthony Van Dyck's Works, being most ambitious of imitating that great Master' (Smith, 24). 
In London Kneller lodged with the Hamburg merchant John Banckes, whose portrait he painted in 1676 (Tate collection). By April 1677 Kneller had moved to rooms in Durham Yard procured for him by the duke of Monmouth's secretary, James Vernon. Kneller's Marattesque 'James Vernon' is now in the National Portrait Gallery, London. His early portrait of Anne Scott, duchess of Monmouth, is known from its engraving in mezzotint. The painter obtained commissions from her Scottish relations, the Hamiltons and the Tweeddales, who continued to be staunch patrons throughout his career. 
In 1678 Kneller painted the armoured three-quarter-length 'Duke of Monmouth' (priv. coll.). He used a Titian pose, but stylistically the painting was influenced by the work of such French emigres as Henri Gascars. The next year Kneller painted a portrait of Charles II for Monmouth, competing with the king's principal painter, Sir Peter Lely. Kneller's portrait is known from Robert White's engraving after it of 1679. After painting the king Kneller's 'reputation daily increased so that most noblemen & Ladies would have their picture done by him' (Vertue, 'Note books', 1.28). 
After his brief flirtation with the French style, Kneller mainly allied himself to the quieter colour and more painterly handling of the Lely-Van Dyck tradition. He borrowed a Lely design for his 'Duchess of Hamilton' (1679; priv. coll.) and his full-lengths 'Henry Somerset, 1st Duke of Beaufort' (priv. coll.) and 'James Cecil, 3rd Earl of Salisbury' (priv. coll.) of about 1680-82 are variations of a pattern used by Lely for portraying sitters in garter robes. 
In 1682 Kneller (and probably his brother John) moved to the Piazza, Covent Garden, where Lely had lived until his death in 1680. In 1683 the Kneller brothers were granted letters of denization. John Kneller painted small-scale portraits 'about a foot square' (Yale Center for British Art, New Haven, Connecticut, Kingsweston MS, fol. 14), miniatures, copies of Godfrey Kneller's work, and 'several Pieces in still-life exceeding well' (Vertue, 'Note books', 2.146). A panel, 'Dead Partridge and Implements of the Chase', signed 'J. Z. Kneller' was at Christies on 4 July 1952 (lot 11). John Kneller was buried in St Paul's, Covent Garden, on 31 August 1702. 
Godfrey Kneller's 'Duke of York as Lord High Admiral' (1684; NPG) for the Scottish privy council, Edinburgh, is more assured than earlier full-lengths and employs a swagger design. As a type, the full-length 'Duchess of Portsmouth' (1684; priv. coll.) derives from Lely's 'Duchess of Norfolk' (1677; priv. coll.), itself indebted to Van Dyck, but Kneller's figure has more thrust and energy and is more solidly planted on the ground. She is portrayed as Bathsheba (from Dryden's 'Absolom and Achitophel'). 
In 1684 Kneller painted a splendid life-size equestrian portrait (rare in England since those painted by Van Dyck) of Mohammed Ohadu, the Moroccan ambassador (Chiswick House, London). Ohadu and his retinue rode in Hyde Park 'very short, & could stand upright in full speede, managing their spears with incredible agility' (Evelyn, 4.269). The swirling forms and diagonals capture that verve. The subject recalls Rembrandt's copies of Mughal miniature equestrian portraits, while the rich colour and the detailed metal trappings are reminiscent of Kneller's own Amsterdam history paintings. 
In late 1684 Charles II sent Kneller to paint Louis XIV in France, where he took the opportunity to make a large drawing of the antique 'Diane de Versailles' (British Museum). On his return, the painter produced his most memorable image of Charles himself (Walker Art Gallery, Liverpool). Also of 1685 is the full-length 'Philip, Lord Wharton' (priv. coll.), a challenging commission, since Wharton had sat to Van Dyck, and possessed the largest private collection of that artist's portraits. The formal peer's robes are softened by Wharton's amiable expression and lolling posture. Their cool scarlet contrasts with austere greys and browns. 
Kneller's portrait of Michael Alphonsus Shen Fu-Tsung (1687; Royal Collection) was painted for James II. The conical figure points to a crucifix in his left hand and looks to the light at the upper left. It is a picture of serene simplicity, whose numinous feeling is enhanced by the concave, apsidal space of the back wall. Kneller also worked for members of James's opposition such as the fifth earl (later first duke) of Bedford, for example the double full-length 'Ladies Catherine and Rachel Russell' (1686; priv. coll.). The orphaned children of the whig 'martyr' Lord William Russell are shown below an urn on which one putto frightens another with a mask (symbolizing death), while at the right is a dog (symbolizing faith). Behind is a fountain of dolphins supporting a shell basin (adapted from Bernini's piazza Barberini 'Triton Fountain') on which Cupid subdues a lion, the Christian-antique consolatory theme of 'omnia vincit amor' (love conquers all). 
Kneller created further sympathetic portraits of fellow artists, for example 'Antonio Verrio' (priv. coll.), and three of the medallist Abraham Simon. One of the latter is a remarkable reclining full-length (Agnes Etherington Art Centre, Queen's University, Kingston, Ontario) showing Simon in pilgrim dress looking towards heavenly light, but chained to a globe. Simon was a Cynic, despising material things, including personal hygiene. Perhaps common philosophy drew the Stoic and the Cynic together. It is to Kneller's credit that he could see beyond Simon's squalid appearance. Moreover he risked his reputation by association with one whose aggressively independent behaviour had alienated James II and members of the nobility. 
By the mid-1680s Kneller was the most important portrait painter in England. His wide experience and the range of his work, especially in full-lengths, was unparalleled since Van Dyck. In his 'Self-Portrait' (1685; NPG) he looks confidently over his shoulder, a pose derived from a 'Self-Portrait' by Van Dyck (priv. coll.). Kneller had 'a pleasant conversation finely entertaining when a Painting' (Vertue, 'Note books', 2.122). His ability to capture a likeness was also recognized by contemporaries, whose familiarity with his work was assisted by mezzotint engravings. Kneller took considerable interest in prints made after his work and formed a close relationship with John Smith, the greatest mezzotinter of his age. 
During the reign of William and Mary, Kneller's position as court and society painter was unrivalled. Antonio Verrio, successor to Sir Peter Lely as principal painter to the king, refused to work for the new regime. John Riley, who was made principal painter jointly with Kneller on 24 July 1689, died in 1691 leaving him in sole possession of the post. Kneller was knighted in 1692, given a sword as a special mark of favour, and made a gentleman of the privy chamber. Perhaps at the king's instance, Kneller received an honorary doctorate from the University of Oxford in 1695. Four years later William III gave him a large gold medal with the royal image and a gold chain, like those given to Van Dyck by Charles I. Honours also came from abroad. In 1700 Kneller was ennobled and made a knight of the Holy Roman empire by Emperor Leopold. 
In 1690 Kneller painted full-length state portraits of the new sovereigns (Royal Collection). They recall Van Dyck's portraits of Charles I and Henrietta Maria, thus emulating Kneller's great Flemish predecessor and alluding to William and Mary's common ancestors. Copies were distributed at home and abroad, more widely than any royal images until Allan Ramsay's portraits of George III and Queen Charlotte. 
Kneller's earliest large-scale work for William III was the equestrian 'Duke of Schomberg' ('c'.1689; apparently formerly at Hampton Court, now priv. coll.), a powerful reinterpretation of Van Dyck's 'Duc d'Arenberg'. In 1697 Kneller, having accompanied the king to Ryswick (Rijswijk), Holland, for the signing of a treaty, was sent to Brussels to paint an equestrian portrait (now lost) of Maximilian II Emanuel, elector of Bavaria. 
In 1697 William III commissioned his own allegorical equestrian portrait from Kneller. In an oil sketch (formerly Gatschina Palace), the king is depicted in battle; his stallion is engaged in a levade, a battle movement whereby the horse rears up in order to trample down the enemy; the composition is based on Bernini's 'Louis XIV'. Another oil sketch (Het Loo Palace, Apeldoorn) became the final model for the equestrian portrait of the king (1701) at Hampton Court Palace. Here the king is mounted on a horse which is seen pacing by the seashore, trampling only emblems of war, with Neptune behind at the left. The king is welcomed by Ceres and Flora at the right, while above Peace, Cupid, and Mercury look down. In the new composition William III is not just a victorious warrior, but a bringer of peace and prosperity. It is a joyful celebration of his deliverance of England from James II's despotism and foreign domination, and alludes to the imperial Roman 'adventus'. William is conceived as a modern Hercules, inaugurating a new golden age, affirming thereby his 'British Trojan' descent from Aeneas. 
In June 1689 Queen Mary told Goodwin Wharton that she would have sixteen of the most beautiful Dutch and English court ladies painted; he persuaded her 'for the credit of the nation' to select only English women (Wharton, 255-6). Kneller began with the duchess of Grafton in January 1690; by Michaelmas 1691 he had received $400 for eight full-length portraits. The Hampton Court Beauties were painted in emulation of those painted by Lely for Queen Mary's mother, Anne Hyde, duchess of York. Kneller's Beauties are much less sensual than those painted by Lely, but like his include Neoplatonic allusions. As part of the same rhetoric, the 'Prologue' to Purcell's 1689 'Dido and Aeneas' eulogized the king as Apollo and Queen Mary as Venus and 'the Sovereign Queen of Beauty' (Stewart, 'Sir Godfrey Kneller and the English Baroque Portrait', 44). Kneller personally commemorated Queen Mary's death in 1694 by a design, engraved by Smith, showing Cupid with a discarded broken bow and arrows by the queen's tomb, wistfully regarding the inscription 'Pastora is no more'. Both imagery and text derive in part from William Congreve's memorial poem to the queen. 
Kneller had a large private practice: an anonymous account of 1693 says that he received up to fourteen sitters in one day, but made some sit ten to twelve times (Ozias Humphry, memorandum book, 1777-95, vol. 2, fol. 39'v', BL, Add. MS 22950). His range is wide and includes the elegiac 'Arabella Hunt' (Gov. Art Coll.), inspired by Tobias Stimmer's engraving 'The Lutenist'; the 'Lady Lempster' (ex Christies, 22 November 1935, lot 45) crouching by a stream in a pose adapted from an antique 'Venus with a Shell', now in the Louvre, but then in the Villa Borghese; and the 'Lady Howard' (known through Smith's mezzotint), reclining by a stream in a pose inspired by the celebrated antique 'The Sleeping Ariadne' (Vatican, Rome). Both the latter portraits also follow the English 'melancholy' portrait tradition which had developed in Elizabethan and Jacobean times, and derived from the Renaissance interpretation of the theory of the humours, in which the melancholy humour indicated a retiring, contemplative nature. 
An outstanding male portrait is Kneller's 'Isaac Newton' (1689; priv. coll.), whose fervent pose recalls Bernini's 'Gabriele Fonseca'. His 'Grinling Gibbons' ('c'.1690; Hermitage, St Petersburg) is an allegory of prudence, showing the sculptor aggressively confronting Bernini's 'Proserpina' with the compasses of wisdom, like Aeneas with the golden bough in his descent to Hades. The posthumous 'Sir Thomas Wharton' (1694; priv. coll.), ancient in breastplate and buff jerkin, is 'hommage a' Van Dyck, a tough, earthy translation of Van Dyck's elegant full-length of the same sitter painted sixty years before. By contrast, his portraits of the five youthful sons of the duchess of Hamilton (priv. coll.) are all glamorous in black armour. 

'John Dryden' (1697; Trinity College, Cambridge) with its varied texture (including primed canvas left visible) and cool lilac and warm brown tones, shows the impact of Rubens's late work on Kneller at Brussels. This impact is also evident in his drawings and can be seen in the dashing handling of chalk in the life-size head study (Courtauld Inst.) -- a practice not seen in England since Holbein, which Kneller revived in the early 1680s -- for his 'Jean Baptiste Monnoyer' (lost). This 'Rubenisme' was part of a European trend away from 'Poussinisme'. 
To the standard portrait sizes -- bust, 30 by 25 inches; three-quarter length, 50 by 40 inches; and full-length, about 90 by 60 inches -- Kneller added the 'kit-cat' (36 x 28 inches) named after the famous whig dining club. The earliest are 'John Dryden' (1697) and the '6th Earl of Dorset' (only the latter being a Kit-Cat member). Both were first owned by the publisher and secretary of the club, Jacob Tonson, to whom some forty members presented their portraits by Kneller over the next quarter of a century ['see also 'Kit-Cat Club]. All now belong to the National Portrait Gallery, London. 
The kit-cat format allows the life-size depiction of the head and shoulders plus one or both hands. Kneller had portrayed this view of sitters in the 30 by 25 inches (bust) format, but under life-size, in, for example, 'John Smith' (1696; Tate collection). The kit-cat scale heightens the sense of realism. The format was used by Raphael in the 'Castiglione' (Musee du Louvre, Paris), which Rembrandt copied in 1640. Subsequently Rembrandt and members of his school occasionally used the format. 

'Peter the Great' (Royal Collection) was painted for King William in 1698. Quieter in pose, but rich in colour and handling of paint are 'Nathaniel, Lord Crewe' (1698) and 'Dr. John Wallis' (1701) (both Bodl. Oxf.), the former in peer's robes, the latter in academic dress. Wallis was a famous elderly mathematician. Kneller claimed that he had 'never done a better picture, nor one so good' as that of this 'great man' ('Letters... of Samuel Pepys', 310). The three-quarter-length 'Matthew Prior' (1700; Trinity College, Cambridge) with its dramatic lighting, thin, angular forms, and the bravura handling of paint creates a memorable image. The absence of a wig gives Prior a fortuitously modern look -- what the artist aimed at was the appearance of an ancient Roman. Another powerful example, of about 1696, is his head-and-shoulders portrait of Ishack Pereyra (Bevis Marks Synagogue, London). 
Following the death of William III, Kneller continued as principal painter to Queen Anne. After the victory of Ramillies (1706), he planned an allegorical equestrian portrait of the duke of Marlborough in a brilliant Rubensian oil sketch (NPG). Its design emulates the early Christian 'Barberini Ivory' (Musee du Louvre, Paris; then in Rome), a Roman emperor's gift to a consul, and was, perhaps, a royal commission. In 1708 he planned a large work, 'Queen Anne Presenting the Plans of Blenheim to Military Merit' (priv. coll.) for Blenheim Palace Library. The central figures and the eagle derive from those of the emperor Constantine and his architect in Rubens's tapestry 'The Building of Constantinople', appropriately, since Constantine (then thought to be half-British) had been acclaimed emperor in Britain. A further witty touch is that, adjacent to a sun-king standard trophy, Apollo, the sun god, proclaims Marlborough's fame. Kneller was 'much commended for his skill' in designing this oil sketch, a commission from Queen Anne (Vertue, 'Note books', 3.23). Because of Marlborough's dismissal from office in 1712 neither of these projects was completed. 
Another commission from Queen Anne was for a series of fourteen Admirals (NMM) painted in emulation of those done by Lely for her father, the duke of York. The series was divided between Kneller and Michael Dahl, a Swede who had been much patronized before her accession by the queen's husband, Prince George of Denmark. As principal painter Kneller may perhaps have regarded the division of the commission as a slight; but his admirals have a dash and martial spirit lacking in the Dahls. A serious challenger to Kneller's position was John Closterman who in 1702 defeated Kneller in a competition for the London Guildhall 'Queen Anne' (lost) and acquired important patrons such as the duke of Marlborough. Closterman's early death in May 1711 left Kneller supreme again. In 1712 Lady Wentworth called him unequivocally 'the best painter we have' (Cartwright, 279n.). 
Kneller's only surviving religious picture of this period is the 'Conversion of St. Paul' ('c'.1705-10; Agnes Etherington Art Centre, Queen's University, Kingston, Ontario), a modello whose purpose is unknown. Its sources lie in works by Rubens and Raphael. The unusually prominent javelin in the foreground refers to Saul, from whom Paul derived his Jewish name. King Saul had infamously flung a javelin at David (Christ's ancestor), a prefiguration of the later Saul's persecution of Christians. 
At this time Kneller painted several charming small-scale works (priv. coll.), complete in themselves, for Lady Elizabeth Southwell ('nee' Cromwell). Of these, 'St. Cecilia' (1703) may have been inspired by Congreve's 'Hymn to Harmony Written in Honour of St. Cecilia's Day', since a version was given to the poet. The unfinished 'Lady Elizabeth and her Family' of 'c'.1706 is perhaps an allegory on marriage or the education of a prince. The scale and intimacy of these works anticipates the vogue for the conversation piece of the 1730s. 
In 1712 Kneller painted a portrait of the duke of Marlborough for the duke of Chandos (priv. coll.), signing with the imperfect 'faciebat'. Kneller signed two other paintings 'faciebat': 'William III' (Royal Collection), 'Dr John Wallis' (Bodl. Oxf.), and one drawing, 'Cupids Struggling for the Palm' (the combat of earthly and celestial love) ('c'.1715-20; E. B. Crocker Art Gallery, Sacramento, California). In antiquity this was a 'provisional signature... the artist... having intended to improve' wherein Pliny saw 'a wealth of diffidence' (Pliny, 1.17). Kneller's diffidence about his ability to complete images of these three great figures and of the Neoplatonic doctrine of the triumph of celestial love says much about his choice of heroes, and his idealism. 
William III defended European liberty against what Kneller called France's 'Slavish Government' ('Letters... of Samuel Pepys', 204). The duke of Marlborough became Louis XIV's nemesis. Kneller had planned to be a soldier, and as an old man jocularly told John Gay: 'I should have been a general of an army; for when I was in 'Venice', there was a 'Girandole', and all the 'Place St. Mark' was in a smoke of gunpowder, and I did like the smell' (Richardson, 204). In his youth Kneller also studied mathematics which may explain his great admiration for Wallis. 
Despite his development of the kit-cat portrait, Kneller continued to use the 30 by 25 inches format for busts (head-and-shoulders views), often with brilliant results, for example the bewigged 'Newton' (1702; NPG); 'John Locke' (1704; Virginia Museum of Fine Arts, Richmond), time-ravaged, in his own hair; and 'Anthony Henley' (1705; priv. coll.) in a cap. Interestingly, Kneller had earlier painted fine portraits of all three sitters. 
About 1710 Kneller's style became more classical, as can be seen by comparing the kit-cats 'William Congreve' (1709), for which there is a fine head study in the Courtauld Institute, and 'Jacob Tonson' (1717). Congreve is tall, twisting, and lit by flickering light; the handling is painterly. The Tonson portrait is quiet and broader in proportion; although there are still painterly passages in the sleeve, the other forms are more solidly and carefully rendered. 
In 1703 Kneller moved to Great Queen Street, Lincoln's Inn Fields. (At his death he owned numbers 57 and 58, and also numbers 55 and 56, having purchased the latter from Thomas Stonor in March 1718.) In 1709 Kneller built a villa at Whitton, Middlesex, about 8 miles from London, where he lived in the summer 'visited & courted by all People of Honour & distinction' (Vertue, 'Note books', 2.121). The unusual design of Kneller's villa (whose staircase was decorated by Louis Laguerre and Kneller) was attributed first to Christopher Wren and then to William Talman. 
On 23 January 1704 Kneller married Susanna Grave (died 1729), widow, daughter of the Revd John Cawley, archdeacon of London and rector of Henley-on-Thames. The marriage was childless. Kneller had had a mistress, Mrs Voss, with whom he had a daughter, Catherine ('b'. 'c'.1685x90), whom he used as model for 'St Catherine' (known from Smith's mezzotint) and as 'St Agnes' (Yale U. CBA). Catherine married James Huckle about 1706-7, had a son, Godfrey (who later changed his name to Kneller and became the painter's heir), and died in February 1714. 
Of himself and possibly his son-in-law, Kneller painted a small-scale portrait (Marquette University Collection of Fine Arts, Milwaukee, Wisconsin), whose design recalls Van Dyck's 'Earl of Newport and Lord George Goring' (Petworth House, Sussex). Another small self-portrait of 'c'.1706-11, with the kit-cat collection, is a version of the three-quarter-length (Uffizi Gallery, Florence) that the artist presented to Grand Duke Cosimo III at his request. In these works and in his 'Self-Portrait' (1721; priv. coll.) Kneller's gestures are expansive, and his expression confident. In all Kneller wears a wig, and the medal, chain, and sword presented to him by William III. 
The 'Self-Portrait' of 1710 (priv. coll.) depicts Kneller at the age of sixty-four, then an advanced age. His father and his master Bol both died at this age, and Rembrandt a year younger. Kneller wears a cap and plain grey coat, into which he tucks his right hand. There are no accessories except for what appears be the tip of the painter's brush under his right arm. There is grave, stoic resignation in the pose and expression, but also vulnerability. 
In 1711 'an Accademy for Drawing and Painting was contrived and established in London' (Vertue, 'Note books', 1.2). At the first meeting 'Sir Godfrey Kneller was agreed unanimously to be the Governor' (ibid., 6.168-9); he was re-elected annually until 1718, when factions developed and after two years the academy collapsed. 
George I's accession in 1714 brought final honours for Kneller. The king retained him as principal painter and created him a baronet in 1715. This rank was not surpassed by any artist until Frederic Leighton received a peerage in 1896. In 1717 the seventy-one-year-old Kneller wrote that he was 'Living altogether heer [Whitton]... Except extraordinary occassions in his Majesties and the Royal family Servis, and Sume particular good frinds' (MSS L.1678.6.VI.1957, V&A). Of the king Kneller painted a fine profile bust for the coinage (Neuhaus bei Schliersee) and for the Guildhall, London, a full-length (destroyed in the Second World War) in state robes, crowned, holding the regalia, like van Somer's 'James I' (Royal Collection). This was a dynastic statement: George I's claim to the throne was through James I's daughter. 
Kneller remained creative throughout his last decade. He painted group portraits, the finest being the 'Duke of Chandos and Family' (1713; National Gallery of Canada, Ottawa), showing the duke, his recently deceased duchess, and their two boys in a design inspired by a famous relief (thought to be antique), 'The Image of Faith'. Some of the colour and handling are influenced by Antonio Pellegrini, a Venetian painter then a director of the London academy. 
Kneller painted splendid full-length female dismounted hunting portraits. The finest is the 'Countess of Mar' ('c'.1715; on loan to the Scottish National Portrait Gallery, Edinburgh), ravishing in colour and handling; the cool lilac and silver of the dress set off by pink ribbons; the featheriness of the trees foreshadowing those in late works by Gainsborough. His brilliant indoor female full-length 'Henrietta Howard, Countess of Suffolk' ('c'.1719; Blickling Hall, Norfolk; mis-attributed to Dahl, and Thomas Gibson) shows the sitter in a masquerade dress of warm pink and cool silver against a severe architectural setting. In the statuesque 'Beauties' tradition are 'Elizabeth, Lady Middleton' (1713; priv. coll.) and the 'Marchioness of Rockingham' (1720; Aston Hall, Birmingham City Art Gallery), both featuring cupid-dolphin fountains. The former also includes a fine grisaille relief of Pan overcome by cupids ('omnia vincit amor'). Perhaps the finest late male full-length is 'Thomas Pitt, 1st Earl of Londonderry' ('c'.1720; Chevening, Kent), austere in design (the architecture recalling the 'Countess of Suffolk') yet rich in colour. 
Of 1721 is Kneller's bust-length portrait of Alexander Pope (priv. coll.). The poet is ivy-crowned, in profile, looking upwards. The pose derives from a coin of Alexander the Great as Jupiter Ammon (reversed, like a succeeding monarch on coinage), the silhouette framed by a serpent biting its tail, the classical symbol of eternity. That this witty assemblage of numismatic motifs was the work of a seventy-five-year-old is not the least remarkable feature about it. 
Also of 1721 is Kneller's bold profile pen-and-ink drawing of the antiquary William Stukeley, wigless (NPG), perhaps a study for an engraving. His free sketch in the same medium of the mezzotinter John Smith (priv. coll.) shows the sitter informally, in a cap. Its squiggly calligraphy recalls the Rembrandt school in which Kneller had been trained. 
An outstanding three-quarter-length known as 'William Cheselden' (1722; RCS Eng.), probably represents Dr Richard Mead, who saved Kneller from a violent fever in May that year. Beside the sitter is Hygeia (Health), a child of Aesculapius (implying that Mead is another). The design emulates Rubens's 'Sir Theodore de Mayerne' (North Carolina Museum of Arts, Raleigh, North Carolina) then owned by Mead. Kneller entirely repainted Hygeia, probably to harmonize with the scale of the Aesculapius statue in the Rubens portrait, for which the Mead portrait may have been designed as a pendant. 
Kneller's equestrian portrait 'King Henry IV as Duke of Hereford at the Coventry Duel' (1723; priv. coll.) was painted for Earl Coningsby's Hampton Court, Herefordshire. Kneller reused the design and colour of the horse in his painting of William III in 1701 at Hampton Court, thus making Henry IV's sufferings under, and eventual triumph over, the despotic Richard II a type that prefigures the history of William III and James II. 
Kneller died on 26 October 1723 and was: 'laid in state at his [London] house... over his Coffin his Arms Crest Sur coat. gold spurrs &c. ecocheon & penants & he was carryd out of Town in a herse thursday November 7... many coaches 6 horses & men in Cloaks on horse back in a grand manner. (Vertue, 'Note books', 2.123)' He was buried in St Mary's Church, Twickenham, on 7 November. 
Kneller 'lost 20 thousand pounds in the South Sea [Company]. yet has [1722] clear 2 thousand a Year income' (Vertue, 'Note books', 3.15). In his will of 27 April 1723 Kneller left his wife a life interest in his estate, which was then to go to his godson, Godfrey Kneller Huckle, which led to chancery suits (1725-33). Along with Whitton and the London houses, Kneller owned another property, the famous tavern, Pontack's, in Abchurch Lane, and shares in mining machinery, Becker's Engine. Kneller left $300 and a design (British Museum) for his monument, which he wanted to be erected in Twickenham. But this would have involved moving the memorial to Pope's father, at which Pope demurred, although he did write Kneller's epitaph. The monument to Kneller, by Rysbrack, was set up in Westminster Abbey in 1730. 
Vertue characterized 'Ho[garth as] a man whose high conceit of himself & of all his operations, puts all the painters at defiance not excepting the late famous Sr. Godf. Kneller -- & Vandyke amongst them' (Vertue, 'Note books', 3.111). This puts Kneller in fine company, but seems to clash with Marshall Smith's comment in 1692 that Kneller was 'a gentleman of good 'Morals', True to his 'Friends', 'Affable' and free from... 'Affectation' or 'Pride'' (Smith, 23). Both assessments may be correct. To his friends and contemporaries Kneller may have been as Smith described him. For some of the younger generation, impatient with authority and what they saw as pomposity, Kneller became an object of derision. In 1760 Hogarth recalled that the London academy had been started: 'by some gentlemen painters of the first rank, who, in their forms imitated the Academy in France, but conducted their business with less fuss and solemnity; yet the little that there was of it soon became the object of ridicule... and [Kneller] and his adherents... found themselves comically represented marching in ridiculous procession round the walls of their room. (Pye, 20)' But it is unlikely that the caricaturists included George Vertue, a younger academy member, despite his belief in the Governor's 'high conceit'. In 1721 he extolled Kneller as 'This great & Admirable Genius', 'this great man', and 'the Morning Star for all other Portrait Painters in his Time' (Vertue, 'Note books', 2.119, 122, 121). 
Kneller's reputation remained high long after his death. In Henry Fielding's 'Tom Jones' the heroine, Sophia Western, is 'most like the picture of Lady Ranelagh', a Hampton Court Beauty (1749, bk 4, chap. 2). The painters Joseph Highmore, John Vanderbank, Allan Ramsay, and Joseph Wright of Derby paid homage by making copies of Kneller's works or reusing his designs. Gainsborough wrote enthusiastically of Kneller's 'pencil or touch' (Gainsborough, 63), and Reynolds, who owned a Kneller self-portrait, 'admired and studied' (Dallaway, 73) his 'Lord Crewe' (Bodl. Oxf.). Abroad, he had at least one German pupil, J. L. Hirschmann of Nuremberg. Dutch artists employed Kneller's designs through mezzotints and in Russia the Dane Virgilius Eriksen 'borrowed' the horse from the 'William III' at Hampton Court for the equestrian portraits of Catherine the Great he painted in 1762. American colonial painters also availed themselves of Kneller's patterns, like the Dutch, through mezzotints. 
Change came with Horace Walpole's enormously influential 'Anecdotes of Painting in England' (1762-80), reprinted by J. Dallaway with additional notes in 1826. Walpole crassly condemned Kneller's patron William III: 'This prince, like most in our annals, contributed nothing to the advancement of the arts. He was born in a country [Holland] where taste never flourished' (Walpole, 2.201). Walpole also castigated Kneller's 'master Rembrandt's unnatural chiaroscuro' (ibid., 2.205). 
Although Walpole admired Kneller's equestrian oil sketch of William III (then at Houghton Hall, Norfolk), and praised the Kit-Cat Club series and the 'Grinling Gibbons' (also then at Houghton), he thought the Hampton Court picture a 'tame and poor performance' (Walpole, 2.203). Walpole also wrote that Kneller's 'draperies are [usually] so carelessly finished, that they resemble no silk or stuff the world ever saw' (ibid., 2.204 n. 3). On this Dallaway enlarged: 'He, sometimes, in the haste of finishing, left part of the primed cloth uncovered. This fault... proceeded from haste and rapaciousness'. With the latter Dallaway expanded on Walpole's baseless charge that 'where [Kneller] offered one picture to fame, he sacrificed twenty to lucre [because] he met with customers of so little judgment' (ibid., 2.201-13). 
In their criticism of Kneller's technique Walpole and Dallaway reflected neoclassical prejudice against baroque 'visible' brushwork, in favour of smooth 'finished' surfaces. But in response to their writings, Kneller's reputation plummeted. In 1848 his monument at Westminster Abbey was moved from the nave to the south aisle, truncated, and the remaining portion was placed too high to be properly noticed. Whitton became the Royal School of Military Music and was entirely rebuilt, thus destroying its unusual design. 
Xenophobia in England increased prejudice against Kneller. In 1845 the engraver John Pye dismissed Kneller as 'a German' (Pye, 19). 'British art', as recorded in Pye's 'Patronage of British Art' (1845), only began with Hogarth, a view which is still encountered. By the early twentieth century Kneller's continental achievements were almost forgotten. The estimate of his level of intelligence also fell. 'The matter [of being a Rembrandt pupil] is not very important as regards Kneller's formation... the revelation of [Rembrandt's] deep communings with life was no doubt beyond the puzzled Godfrey' (Baker, 'Lely and the Stuart Portrait Painters', 76-7). In his 'In Good King Charles's Golden Days' (1939) Bernard Shaw wanted to include Hogarth but for chronological reasons had instead to use Kneller: 'Kneller had not Hogarth's brains; but I have had to endow him with them to provide Newton with a victorious antagonist' ('Bodley Head Bernard Shaw', 205). 
Ironically Kneller was admired by Hogarth, who told Archbishop Herring that 'some of our chief Dignitaries in the Church have had the best luck in their portraits. The most excellent heads painted by Van Dyck and Kneller were those of Laud and Tillotson' (Antal, 225). The design of the chauvinist portrait signed 'W. Hogarth Anglus' (Dulwich Picture Gallery, London) derives from Kneller's 'Sir Richard Steele' (1711), a Kit-Cat Club portrait the engravings of which Hogarth owned. Indeed Hogarth's directness owes much to works by Kneller such as 'Ishack Pereyra' and 'Jacob Tonson'. Kneller's 'Self-Portrait' (1710) was long attributed to Hogarth. 
The later twentieth century saw a reassessment of Kneller. Collins Baker, reversing the judgements of Walpole and Dallaway (and his own earlier opinion), lauded Kneller 'as a technician... not unworthy of... [the] company [of Hals, Rembrandt and Velazquez]... in England no predecessor [of Kneller's] had practised his particular use of open, fluent brushwork, interplaying broken colour' (Baker, 'Craftsmanship', 29). Sir Ellis Waterhouse and Sir Oliver Millar stressed the high quality of many of Kneller's English works and his unusual range in full-length and equestrian portraits. Sumowski brilliantly recovered some of Kneller's Amsterdam works. 
In Amsterdam Kneller was a history painter of distinction. In England he painted a few (fine) histories, and created a remarkable portrait gallery including virtually everyone of importance from the time of Charles II to George I. He developed the Van Dyck-Lely tradition along simpler, more direct lines, especially after the experience of seeing works by Rubens in Brussels in 1697. Kneller ran a studio, which produced much routine work, as had Lely, Van Dyck, Rubens, and Titian. But Kneller's own works are always soundly drawn and painted -- at their best they are inspired. His grasp of the character and mind of his sitters, and his ability to express them in design and colour, is often brilliant. With a Newton, a Locke, a Dryden, a Prior, or a Pope he almost always rose to the occasion and produced a masterpiece. His intense, virtually religious, dedication to his art is attested to by Pope in a letter to Jonathan Richardson (13 January 1731): 'Sir Godfrey Kneller call'd imploying the pencil [paint-brush], the prayer of the painter, and affirm'd it to be his proper way of serving God, by the talent he gave him' (Wimsatt, 139). Kneller's strong sense of duty to his profession is shown by his acceptance of the governorship of the London academy at the age of sixty-five, and remaining in that office, a thankless task, for seven years. 
Nevertheless, Kneller's teaching at the London academy and the legacy of his works had a powerful impact on succeeding generations. Thanks to renewed interest in the seventeenth century, Kneller's technical qualities as a painter and designer are now once more appreciated. But the intellectual side of his art, including his invention, imaginative use of allegory, and wit, are still inadequately recognized. Nor is sufficient account taken of Kneller's influence on later English painters, including Hogarth, Gainsborough, and Reynolds. Because of his industry and longevity Kneller has long been known as Britain's most prolific portraitist. He should also be acknowledged as one of her greatest and most important. 


@@@@@


doc= 15711


John Zacharias Kneller (1642-1702), Kneller's elder brother, who was born in Lubeck on 15 December 1642.) Kneller's next dated painting, 'Elijah and the Angel' (1672; Tate collection), is a bold, dramatic work. 


@@@@@


doc= 15712


Knevet, Ralph (bap. 1602, d. 1672), poet and Church of England clergyman, was baptized at St Margaret's, Hardwick, Norfolk, on 19 February 1602, the seventh child and second son of 'Raphe Nevett and Alis', relatives of the great Norfolk family of Knyvett. Admitted pensioner at Peterhouse, Cambridge, on 3 September 1616, Knevet seems not to have resided after December 1618. He was probably tutor in the Oxnead household of his patron William Paston in Norfolk (Paston's maternal grandfather was Sir Thomas Knyvett of Ashwell Thorpe). When Paston's wife, Lady Katherine Bute, died after childbirth on 30 December 1636, Knevet wrote 'Funerall Elegies' (1637) as well as an inscription for the monument by Nicholas Stone, the celebrated master mason. In 1638 Knevet and Nicholas Stone jun. accompanied Paston on a tour to Florence and to Rome, where they then waited for Paston's return from Egypt in March 1639. The cautious Paston may have designed the journey 'to avoid employment' and involvement during an unstable period; he was readily discharged from sequestration on 3 June 1644. 
Knevet's first published work is ''Stratiotikon', or, A Discourse of Militarie Discipline' (1628), which is prefaced by thirty-seven dedicatory poems addressed in hierarchic order to Norfolk gentry active in militia organization or public affairs. It partly resembles instructional treatises like Roger Ascham's 'Toxophilus' (1545), Barnaby Riche's 'Alarme to England' (1578), and Sir Henry Knyvett's 'The Defence of the Realme', a manuscript presented to Queen Elizabeth in 1596. But ''Stratiotikon'' also belongs with the verse georgic, fashionable in the 1620s. Knevet expresses forthrightly (if in allegorical guise) his concern about the papacy's secular power, and advances Spartan arguments for military training to promote discipline and preparedness. He concludes with a dark threnody on two Norfolk military men who had died on the Ile de Re expedition (1627). 
On 3 May 1631 a masque by Knevet, 'Rhodon and Iris', was presented at Norwich to the Society of Florists, for whom William Strode ('c'.1632-1635) and Matthew Stevenson (1645) were later to write. Again allegory licenses bold speech -- this time satire of hypocritical puritans, besides two local individuals, an ambitious lawyer, and a military coxcomb. It provoked protests, which in turn elicited a published version (entered 12 November 1631 and printed in both Norwich and London). Its verse is sometimes rough, as if prose has been set as verse. 
Knevet's 'Funerall Elegies' (1637), written within three months, argue for cessation of grief in the exalted vein of mid-century elegies. Some have compared it to Donne's panegyrics on Elizabeth Drury but Knevet's praise is less wildly excessive: Lady Katherine actually was 'patronesse Of all [his] hopes' ('Shorter Poems', 265). Otherwise Knevet's work remained in manuscript until the twentieth century. 'A Supplement of 'The Faery Queene' in Three Bookes', dated 1635, continues Spenser's poem through books VII-IX with a 'mise en scene' in Norfolk and continental Europe. The manuscript (CUL, MS Ee.3.53) is a fair copy in Knevet's hand, which he had prepared for publication; for some reason, however, he changed his mind and later purged it of almost all evidence of his authorship. 'A Supplement' shows Knevet's interest in contemporary affairs (Albanio figures James I; Callimachus, Gustavus Adolphus) but inevitably disappoints any reader expecting Spenser's larger reach. 

'A Gallery to the Temple' (BL, Add. MS 27447) contains Knevet's best poems. It remained in manuscript until careful editions by G. Pellegrini (R. Knevet, 'A Gallery to the Temple', Studi e Testi, 6, 1954) and A. M. Charles (1966). Probably written in the 1640s, it was subsequently inscribed for 'Sir Robert Paston's Lady' ('Shorter Poems', 277). Unlike such other homages to George Herbert as Christopher Harvey's, Knevet only occasionally imitates 'The Temple' closely. As his title, from Giambattista Marino's 'La galeria' (1619) suggests, Knevet means to present foreign spoils. Rejecting Italian superstition and English coldness ('The Extremes'), his devotional warmth, like Crashaw's, is capable of surprise ('Truth'; 'The Feast'). A preface expounds Knevet's critical opinions, which include admiration of the Italian poets Vittoria Colonna and Marino, and dislike of secular Italian academies. 
In 1652 Knevet was presented by William Paston to the living of St Michael's, Lyng, Norfolk, valued at $66 per annum. He officiated as preaching minister until 21 September 1662, when he was ordained by the moderate presbyterian bishop Edward Reynolds. Knevet kept the parish register in his own hand until 9 August 1671. On 22 January 1672 he made a will, leaving all to his wife, Anne, his executor; he died probably before 25 March, and certainly before 16 July, when the will was entered for probate. Knevet was buried in the chancel at St Michael's, Lyng. 


@@@@@


doc= 15713


Knewstub, John (1544-1624), Church of England clergyman, was born in Kirkby Stephen in Westmorland in 1544. Nothing is known of his youth until his attendance at St John's College, Cambridge, from which he graduated BA in 1564. In 1567 he was admitted to a fellowship at St John's, where he soon emerged as a member of the puritan faction in the university, being among those who petitioned against the wearing of clerical vestments. He was one of a group -- along with Ezekiel Culverwell, John Carter, and others -- that met with Lawrence Chaderton to expound and discuss the scriptures, and he developed lifelong friendships with John Still, Adam Winthrop, Henry Sandes, Roger Goad, and others. His 'Lectures... upon the Twentieth Chapter of Exodus', first published in 1577, went through four printings between then and 1584. Delivered while he was at Cambridge, they set forth the developing English Calvinist theology which expounded God's determination of those who were elect and thus in covenant with him. 
Shortly before that work appeared Knewstub had emerged as an important figure in the church when in 1576 he preached the Good Friday sermon at Paul's Cross against the Family of Love. Opposition to the Familists preoccupied him over the next five years. In 1580 he was engaged to investigate the influence of the Family of Love at the royal court and was then chosen to deliver letters from the privy council to five bishops ordering the investigation of the sect in their dioceses. He was himself appointed to the investigating commission in the diocese of Norwich. In 1581 he helped to prepare and promote a bill against the Familists which was introduced into the parliament that met in the early months of that year. His prominence in the attack upon these heterodox opinions helped to mask his own reservations concerning church practices, and the prominent connections that he made during this campaign were useful in protecting him from episcopal attacks on nonconformity in the 1580s. 
Meanwhile, in 1579 he was presented to the living of Cockfield, Suffolk, by Sir William Spring. In 1582 he hosted a gathering of mostly East Anglian clergy to discuss the observance of the 'Book of Common Prayer'. The following year a group of Suffolk ministers, including Knewstub and others who had attended the Cockfield meeting, appealed to the bishop of Norwich in protest against Archbishop Whitgift's three articles, which intended to enforce clerical conformity. The ministers took the occasion to express their concerns about such matters as the rite of baptism and burial practices. Along with other signatories Knewstub was suspended from his ministry for his nonconformity, but through the intervention of Lord Burghley and others this proved temporary. In 1585-6 Knewstub served as a chaplain to the earl of Leicester on the latter's expedition to the Netherlands, another reflection of his connections with prominent puritans at court. 
In Suffolk Knewstub had emerged as leader of the combination lecture that functioned at Bury St Edmunds, and in 1589 he became engaged in a dispute with Thomas Rogers, who had been excluded from the lecture after preaching a sermon perceived to be critical of Chaderton. Throughout the latter part of Elizabeth's reign Knewstub was one of the dominant figures in the puritan movement in the Stour valley borderland of Suffolk and Essex. He travelled throughout the region, preaching and visiting such clerical colleagues as Richard Rogers, Ezekiel Culverwell, and Stephen Egerton, as well as lay supporters of the movement. His advice was sought on ecclesiastical appointments. Along with John Still he was consulted by the townsmen of Bury St Edmunds over the choice of town preachers. In 1592 he joined with Chaderton, Roger Goad, and Still, among others, in recommending John Ward of Haverhill to be town preacher of Ipswich. Though he continued to be cited in visitations for refusal either to wear the surplice or to sign with the cross in baptism, no action was taken against him. He was also noted for his advocacy of fasts and strict sabbath observance. No record of Knewstub's subscription to Whitgift's three articles has been found, and it is likely that, in common with many other clergymen, he offered only a qualified conformity. 
In 1595 Knewstub was proposed by Goad and others as master of St John's after the death of William Whitaker, but he was not elected. In 1596 he was named as an overseer of the Boxford grammar school chartered by the queen. Fellow overseers included Adam Winthrop, Thomas Lovell, Henry Sandes, and members of the Waldegrave and Gurdon families. 
In 1603 Knewstub was chosen to be one of the puritan spokesmen at the following year's Hampton Court conference. When the sought-for reforms were denied he pleaded with the king for tolerance of those in Suffolk who desired to avoid use of the surplice and signing with the cross in baptism, but his plea was rejected. Correspondence between his friends William Bedell and Samuel Ward indicates that at this time Knewstub was concerned with the possible consequences of continuing nonconformity and was seeking a curate who would conduct services while wearing a surplice. This stratagem failed, and in 1606 he was presented for not using the sign of the cross in baptism and for not wearing the surplice. In 1611 he was again cited for not wearing the surplice. Yet he escaped deprivation. 
Knewstub continued to play a prominent role in efforts to foster the piety of the godly in the Stour valley, and he preached strongly on the need to exercise Christian love to all members of the community. In 1605 he preached the funeral sermon for Robert Welche of Little Waldingfield and with his fellow clergymen carried the coffin to the graveyard. He joined Richard Rogers of Wethersfield, Essex, in acting as spiritual physician to an Essex youth. In September 1613, along with John Winthrop Groton, Henry Sandes (the lecturer of Boxford), and others, he formed a covenanted spiritual association whose members were pledged to remember each other in their prayers every Friday and to meet annually to renew their communion. In 1618 he preached the funeral sermon for Richard Rogers. 
Knewstub died at Cockfield and was buried there on 31 May 1624. In his will (drawn up on the 20th) he left gifts to Henry Sandes of Boxford, Ezekiel Culverwell, Samuel Ward of Ipswich, John Wilson of Sudbury, and others. He left $20 to buy a house or land whose revenue should be yearly distributed to the poor of Cockfield; if that annual income was not disposed of as directed, the money could be claimed by St John's College to supplement the two exhibitions which Knewstub had founded in 1620 to enable both a native of Kirkby Stephen and a youth of Cockfield to study there. Knewstub was not married, but left money to three nephews and several other relatives. The supervisors of his will were headed by his 'worshipfull good friend' John Winthrop of Groton, the son of Knewstub's ally Adam Winthrop and himself the future governor of the Massachusetts Bay Colony. 
Knewstub often preached what might be called a social gospel, urging his listeners to exercise charity towards their neighbours, and contemporary testimony indicates that he practised what he preached. Richard Rogers in his diary referred to his friend Knewstub as 'in prayer unwearyed', and a man of 'rare humility, joined with great knowledge and wisdom' who was noted for 'his bearing of wrongs' and 'bountiful liberality with mercifulness' (Knappen, 95-6). In 'The Real Christian' Giles Firmin records an episode that bears this out. Rogers and Knewstub were travelling together when they encountered a noted reprobate. Rogers moved to pass on, but Knewstub conversed with the man courteously and then reproved Rogers, saying that his friend's indifference 'is not the way to win wicked men to a liking of the Gospel and the way of God, but rather to beat them off' (Firmin, 67-8). 


@@@@@


doc= 15714


Knibb, William (1803-1845), missionary and abolitionist, was born in Kettering, Northamptonshire, on 7 September 1803; one of twins, he was the fifth of eight children of Thomas Knibb, a tailor who subsequently became bankrupt, and Mary, 'nee' Dexter. William attended the Kettering Free School, and at the age of twelve joined his brother Thomas as an apprentice in a firm of printers which had moved to Bristol. Their employer was the son of the Baptist minister in Kettering, who was also secretary of the Baptist Missionary Society. Through this connection, William and Thomas Knibb both became Baptists. 
In 1822 Thomas Knibb began work as a teacher in a Baptist school in Kingston, Jamaica. William, who also saw himself as a missionary, taught in a Sunday school for poor children and preached in a district in Bristol known as the Beggar's Opera or Beggars' Uproars. When Thomas Knibb died after only fifteen months in Jamaica, William volunteered to take his place and was accepted. He spent three months training as a teacher at the Borough Road school of the British and Foreign School Society; there, his teachers described him as a strapping young man, bounding with energy; they also saw him as impulsive but hoped that his personality would be balanced by the calming influence of his new wife, Mary Watkins, whom he married about October 1824, a month before sailing to Jamaica on 5 November. 
The situation for nonconformist missionaries in Jamaica in the 1820s was very difficult. When Knibb arrived in the colony in 1825, the dissenting missionaries were barely tolerated. The planters distrusted the missionaries' involvement with the slaves, and this situation was made worse by the British government's decision to ameliorate slavery, beginning in 1823. At first Knibb taught at a school in Kingston and, as was to be the case so often in the future, was instrumental in the construction of a new building for the school (he never seemed to hesitate in undertaking heavy expenditures for building and buying land and was frequently personally encumbered as a result). He also preached at a chapel in Port Royal, near Kingston, before starting a new mission in 1829 in Savanna la Mar, in south-western Jamaica. Although he was to remain at this mission station only briefly before moving to Falmouth on Jamaica's north coast a year later, it was in Savanna la Mar that he ran into his first serious difficulties with the planters. 
While Knibb was in Falmouth during the Easter period in 1830, some of his church members used his house in Savanna la Mar for prayer meetings. During one of these meetings, a group of people headed by a free coloured carpenter interrupted the prayers and reported them to the magistrates. The complaint was that slaves and free coloureds were preaching and teaching without permission, which was a violation of the slave code. Their leader, Sam Swiney, the slave deacon of the Baptist church, was found guilty and sentenced to two weeks' hard labour and twenty lashes. On the day of the punishment, Knibb accompanied Swiney at the flogging, and, as he was taken away to begin hard labour, Knibb shouted, 'Sam, whatever you want, send to me and you shall have it' (Wright, 46). The case generated considerable publicity and eventually reached the Colonial Office, where the judgment against Swiney was declared illegal. 
Tension in Jamaica rose dramatically in 1831, when the British government sought to have the Jamaican colonists pass an order in council further ameliorating the condition of the slaves. A massive slave rebellion broke out in western Jamaica just after Christmas 1831, and in scenes of confusion and disarray Knibb, along with several other missionaries, was arrested and threatened with death. The white people blamed the missionaries, and especially the Baptists, for the slave rebellion and destroyed most of the Baptist and Methodist chapels in the western part of the island. Although Knibb was indicted, the case was thrown out of court. The missionaries then dispatched Knibb to England to defend themselves against the slanders of the planters. 
On landing in England and on hearing that the 'Reform Bill' had been passed, Knibb was reputed to have said, 'Thank God. Now I'll have slavery down. I will never rest, day or night, till I see it destroyed, root and branch' (Wright, 112). He spoke at a large meeting of the representatives of the dissenting bodies at Exeter Hall in London, and was a witness before select committees of both houses of parliament. In his views on slavery Knibb was considerably ahead of the committee of the Baptist Missionary Society. When the secretary of the committee, John Dyer, urged Knibb to be prudent and to pursue a temperate policy, Knibb refused to remain silent and threatened to resign from the society. Knibb subsequently toured all over Britain speaking against slavery to much acclaim. In August 1833 parliament passed the bill to abolish slavery; it became effective a year later, on 1 August 1834. When Knibb returned to Jamaica that October, slavery had ended. 
The period after the formal abolition of slavery was to see significant growth in the Baptist church in Jamaica. In the ten years after 1831 membership in the church grew from 11,000 to 30,000, and the number of ministers grew from sixteen to twenty-seven. Knibb had an important role in this increase; within a year of his return to Jamaica he received 400 new members into his church at Falmouth. By 1837 he had established three new country stations, each with a chapel and school. Knibb's own family grew as well; he and his wife had four sons and five daughters. Four of the children died in infancy and the only boy to survive, William, died in 1837 at the age of twelve. There were suggestions that Knibb lived well; his congregation built him and his family a substantial house in Kettering, near Falmouth, worth $1000. But Knibb's comfortable lifestyle did not affect his concern for black people in Jamaica. 
Knibb opposed the apprenticeship system, the period between the abolition of slavery and full freedom. But full freedom in 1838 brought a new dimension to Knibb's work: he actively sought to negotiate fair wages for the ex-slaves. He published a weekly newspaper for the freedmen, the 'Baptist Herald and Friend of Africa', and he was also involved in buying land for the freedmen and establishing free villages for them. He frequently proclaimed his identity with black people and attended the Anti-Slavery Convention in England in 1840, speaking again on behalf of the freedmen. He returned to England in 1842 and 1845, to raise money for the mission in Jamaica and to highlight the plight of the former slaves. Knibb not only sought to protect the freedmen from exploitation by the planters; he also hoped to influence the elections to the Jamaican house of assembly and return candidates committed to disestablishment. Although Knibb founded the Anti-State Church Convention for this purpose, the governor, Lord Elgin, managed to outmanoeuvre Knibb and called an election in 1844 before the new voters, most of whom were freedmen, were eligible to take part in it. 
Late in 1845 Knibb was stricken with yellow fever, and he died at Kettering on 15 November. Nearly 8000 people joined the funeral procession in Falmouth, where he was buried. The funeral orations did not omit to point out some of Knibb's flaws: among them his egotism and love of power. But they also highlighted his enormous contribution to ending slavery and his commitment to freedom for the mass of Jamaicans. 


@@@@@


doc= 15715


Knight, Charles Parsons (b. 1742/3, d. in or after 1826), stipple engraver, emerged as an artistic personality in the 1780s, at which time he was working for the engraver-publisher William Dickinson. Nothing is known about his upbringing or training, but he may have come late to printmaking. His marriage to Catherine brought them two children: a daughter, Martha, born on 14 December 1770, who also became an engraver, and a son, Charles, who entered the Royal Academy Schools in March 1788 shortly before his seventeenth birthday, and may have been the C. Knight who exhibited four miniatures at the Royal Academy between 1793 and 1816. 
In 1781 Knight was living in Berwick Street, Westminster, but he had moved west to Queen's Row, Brompton, by 1785 when he published on his own account two drawings by John Raphael Smith. As a book illustrator Knight produced rather indifferent prints for Edward and Sylvester Harding's 'Shakespeare Illustrated' (1793) and the 'Memoirs of Count Grammont' (1794), and he stippled a large number of small portraits for books and magazines as well as for separate publication. But ultimately he gained a good reputation for his numerous larger prints after contemporary artists. In the mid-1780s his name began to appear on dotted prints published by William Dickinson, notably on a series of plates after Bunbury, and between 1784 and Dickinson's bankruptcy in 1793 Knight worked chiefly but by no means exclusively for Dickinson. It is plausible that he may have been largely responsible for similar prints that appeared in the early 1780s under Dickinson's name. He is said to have been the engraver of 'Of such is the Kingdom of God' (1784), the first of three prints forming a triptych after Matthew William Peters. Similarly, the fine full-length portrait of Elizabeth Farren, later countess of Derby, published under Bartolozzi's name in 1792, is said to have been largely engraved by Knight. Knight's work included a large number of separately published stipples of literary and genre scenes by such artists as Thomas Stothard, Henry Singleton, and Francis Wheatley. Among the relatively few prints that he published himself were 'Scarcity in India' and 'British Plenty' (1794) after Singleton. He was one of the original governors of the short-lived Society of Engravers, founded in 1803. By 1826 he was living in Hammersmith, Middlesex, where at eighty-three he published a portrait of the Revd Thomas Stephen Attwood, minister of Hammersmith. The date of his death is unknown, but it probably occurred soon afterwards. 


@@@@@


doc= 15716


Knight, Charles (1791-1873), publisher and writer, was born on 15 March 1791 in Windsor, the son of Charles Knight (died 1824), bookseller and stationer, and his wife, Mary (died 1792), daughter of John Binfield, a farmer in Iver, Buckinghamshire. 
Knight's childhood and early adulthood were spent in Windsor, a conservative provincial town whose meagre amusements he experienced to the full: he read unrestrictedly in the bookshop; he rambled in the Great Park and he visited the castle's state apartments and paintings; he was moved by the beauty and the solemnity of the service in St George's Chapel (although, after his confirmation, he told his father that his religious scepticism was such that he would become either a Quaker or a Unitarian); he attended the tiny Theatre Royal, to which he had free admission from the age of eight. 
Knight went to a day school in Windsor in the late 1790s, where his education was 'altogether rotework' (Knight, 1.23). In 1803, however, he was sent to Dr Nicholas's school in Ealing, a more stimulating environment where he learned to read for 'solid improvement' (ibid., 1.54). However, in 1805 he left the school to become his father's apprentice, and spent the next three years learning the print trade. Clearly disappointed at the abrupt termination of his formal education, he gave himself up to 'desultory reading to the neglect of all systematic acquirement' (ibid., 1.69); this thorough grounding in contemporary popular literature later stood him in good stead as a publisher. Deciding to make literature his profession, he embarked on a course of more serious reading, mainly history and law, and in 1810 founded an unsuccessful reading club for young men in Windsor. He also began to write poetry, essays, and plays and in 1813 published a play, 'Arminius'. 
Knight's interest in books extended beyond their educative uses: by the age of seventeen, he was a confirmed bibliophile, and a buyer and seller of second-hand books and a collector of rare books. A client gave him an imperfect first folio edition of Shakespeare, which he made complete by printing the missing pages from a facsimile edition. At the completion of his apprenticeship in 1812, however, his interests were directed away from the more staid side of his father's business to the expanding press industry. Staying for some weeks with the newspaper editor George Lane, he sampled the London journalistic world, sitting in the Commons gallery with reporters. On his return to Windsor, on 1 August 1812 he became the joint proprietor with his father and the sole editor (until 1827) of the 'Windsor and Eton Express', the borough's first newspaper. The cost of stamp tax and paper duty and the difficulties of the subscription system made the initial outlay great and the price of the paper was consequently high. However, it throve and in the first weeks of its establishment, the paper had the exciting news of the July battle of Salamanca to report. 
As a journalist, Knight was resolved to be 'the temperate advocate of everything that thinking men will support -- Toleration, Education of the Poor, Diffusion of Religious Knowledge, Public Economy' (Knight, 1.124). Accordingly he supported Catholic emancipation, advocated low taxation, and favoured only moderate protectionism and limited parliamentary reform. His social conscience had first been awakened in his adolescence, when the heavy taxation, high prices, miserable housing, and poor sanitary conditions endured by the poor of Windsor had made him 'a sort of Communist' (ibid., 1.75). During the next decade, his social concerns deepened: in the post-war period of economic distress and political protest, he became convinced that enclosure and mechanical innovations were depriving people of their livelihoods. 
This Cobbett-like humour was tempered by some practical experience of local government. In 1818 Knight was appointed as an overseer of the poor. Appalled by the wasteful expenditure of the committee and the number of fraudulent claimants, he attempted to reform the administration of poor relief, calling for visitations of the out-poor in their homes to ensure a fairer and more economical system. Believing that the state should assist the less fortunate in so far as it was able, he also tried to promote vaccination and to provide employment on public works for able-bodied paupers. His social philosophy was also influenced by John Sumner Bird, then a fellow at Eton College and later archbishop of Canterbury: Bird's dovetailing of Christian theology with Malthusian social and economic views fitted with Knight's growing belief that the poor must be encouraged to better their own condition through prudential financial planning and, significantly, autodidacticism. Complex as he believed the causes of poverty to be, he recalled that he 'never had any doubt of the advantages of educating [the poor]' (Knight, 1.191). 
In December 1819 Knight wrote an article in the 'Express' denouncing cheap publications as irreligious and anti-government, and calling for the provision of more 'healthful' literature. He now attempted to publish an example of the latter: with Edward Hawke Locker as joint editor, Knight decided to publish a monthly serial entitled the 'Plain Englishman', of which the first number appeared in January 1820. Lasting nearly three years (until December 1822), the journal advocated moderate social reforms, avoiding contentious political issues such as the Queen Caroline affair. It was the first of a series of short-lived journals in which Knight was involved. In October 1820 he published the first number of 'The Etonian', which perished after only ten months; it was succeeded in 1823 by 'Knight's Quarterly Magazine', which survived until late 1824. The contributors for both publications were largely Etonians, including W. M. Praed, John Moultrie, and T. B. Macaulay, but the 'Quarterly' also brought Knight into contact with such London literati as Thomas De Quincey and Barry St Leger. With St Leger he published for two months in 1826 a 'smart weekly sheet' (Knight, 1.342), entitled the 'Brazen Head'. His connections to the metropolitan literary and journalistic world were also strengthened by his position as editor and part-proprietor (from 1820) of the London weekly, 'The Guardian', where he continued to promote tepidly progressive but largely non-partisan views. The paper necessitated constant visits to London, a relief to Knight who felt stifled in Windsor. On the advice of J. W. Croker, he decided to enter London publishing, and in 1822-3 he sold 'The Guardian' and took premises in Pall Mall East; he moved his family -- in late 1814 he had married Sarah (1791/2-1879), daughter of William Vinicombe, an architect, and they had, eventually, two sons and five daughters -- into a cottage in Brompton. 
Knight's career as a London publisher began rather shakily. One of his earliest and most promising publications, R. C. Dallas's 'Correspondence of Lord Byron', provoked a court case in 1824; the work appeared only in a paraphrased version under a different title. Then his grand scheme for publishing a 'national library' of cheap and informative abridgements of important works was stifled by the financial panic of 1825-6. In autumn 1826, a close friend, Matthew Davenport Hill, had introduced Knight to Lord Brougham, who was then establishing the Society for the Diffusion of Useful Knowledge (SDUK) and had expressed interest in the publisher's scheme. Negotiations were opened with John Murray, who offered to merge Knight's business with his firm and to publish the 'national library'. The collapse of this arrangement forced Knight to put his business in the hands of trustees in spring 1827. 
Knight now supported himself by literary hack work, writing for J. S. Buckingham's 'The Sphinx' and editing an annual, 'Friendship's Offering' (1828). From July 1827 he also acted as reader and superintendent for the publications of the SDUK, a far more promising employment. Under the aegis of the society, with Baldwin and Cradock as publishers, he produced in 1828 'The British Almanac'; 10,000 copies sold in a week, according to its proud progenitor, and 'A Companion to the Almanac' followed. Knight added to the society's 'Library of Useful Knowledge' a 'Library of Entertaining Knowledge' (1829-37), publishing the first volume in the series from his own regained premises in Pall Mall East. Until the dissolution of the society, he remained its principal publisher (and its creditor), forming important connections with such men as Henry Hallam, James Stuart Mill, Isaac Goldsmid, and James Allen. 
In 1828 Knight had undertaken a tour of the midlands industrial towns to organize local committees for the SDUK: it produced a revolution in his understanding of industrialization and capitalism which completed the transformation of his social and political philosophy from his teenage tory radicalism to the whiggish utilitarianism which characterized his mature outlook. In addition to meeting a range of literary and antiquarian figures, Knight visited factories and finally appreciated the role of machinery in the industrial revolution. He also became convinced of the necessity of low taxation and free trade to safeguard industry, and still more of the importance of harmonious relations between industrialists and workforce, whose interests he believed to be too interdependent to allow any separation. Knight was opposed to trade unions, as indeed to most organizations with entirely working-class leadership and membership, and viewed popular demonstrations with no sympathy (as his reaction to the Bristol riots of 1831 and, later, the Chartist meeting of 1848 displayed). These views, strongly reliant on the economics of Adam Smith, were expressed in 'The Results of Machinery' and 'The Rights of Industry' (both 1831). 
Knight's publications for the SDUK were astonishingly diverse. In addition to volumes in the 'Library of Entertaining Knowledge', he started the 'Working Man's Companion' (1830-32) and the 'Quarterly Journal of Education' (1831-5). The best-known and most significant of his publications, however, was the 'Penny Magazine' (1832-45), the first issue of which appeared on 31 March 1832, 'the most successful experiment in popular literature that England had seen' (Knight, 2.179). The joint idea of Matthew Davenport Hill and Knight, it was aimed primarily at a working-class readership and served up a wholesome diet of informative articles on art, literature, natural history, science, history, and biography (but not politics or religion), intended to encourage thrift, self-discipline, self-education, and other social and moral desiderata. Although undoubtedly read by the self-improving artisan, it probably enjoyed a much larger audience among the middle classes, particularly among adolescents with a thirst for knowledge or didactic parents. It was the first lavishly illustrated publication to be offered to the working classes at an affordable price, and according to Knight by the end of 1832 it was enjoying sales of nearly 200,000 in weekly numbers and monthly parts. Its sales easily outstripped rivals such as 'Chambers's Edinburgh Journal' and the 'Saturday Magazine'. 
Its lack of controversial material and its pragmatic attempt to explain an increasingly complex society to itself were probably important factors in the 'Penny Magazine''s appeal to a mass audience. But its success owed even more to Knight's copious use of illustrations, his wholesale mechanization and improvement of his printing equipment, and his well-developed system of distribution. Knight had early decided that illustrations were the key to attractive popular publications, and he aimed to capitalize on the development of the new reproductive medium of wood-engraving, which by the 1830s was overtaking the more expensive method of steel-engraving and even recently discovered lithography. Based in London, Knight had access to a growing ghetto of skilled designers and engravers, including William Harvey, Thomas Williams, John Orrin Smith, Ebenezer Landells, the Whympers, the Dalziel brothers, and Edmund Evans. However, the availability of engravers was not in itself sufficient. Experiencing difficulties in the production of cheap images for 'The Menageries', Knight worked with the printer and inventor Edward Cowper to adapt his printing machinery to produce more illustrations by stereotype castings and steam printing. Casts of Knight's best cuts were later sent all over the world for insertion in popular publications. The mechanization of his plant was combined with the use of a nationwide network of wholesalers and retailers, which he had built up during his first four years with the SDUK. 
The 'Penny Magazine' was joined, in January 1833, by the 'Penny Cyclopedia', at a penny for a weekly sheet. This immense project tested Knight's commitment to the cause of popular education: costs soon forced the price up to 4died, and sales flagged. Over the eleven years of its publication, Knight suffered chronic financial loss, with the profits of his other more successful enterprises being entirely swallowed up. Nevertheless, he saw the project through, employing a distinguished band of contributors including Southwood Smith, Andrew Ure, and Charles Eastlake, and ensuring a fully contemporary ethos by covering new inventions such as photography and including the biographies of living statesmen. The 'Cyclopedia' was a highly influential work in its day, and represented a remarkable achievement for the hard-pressed Knight. 
Other publications by Knight -- some published under the auspices of the SDUK, some independently -- included the 'Gallery of Portraits' (1832-4); 'The Pictorial Bible' (1836-8), with commentaries by John Kitto; 'The Thousand and One Nights' (1838-41) in a new translation by Edward Lane; 'The Pictorial History of England' (1837?-1844), by G. L. Craik and Charles Macfarlane; 'London' (1841-4); 'Old England' (1845-6); and 'The Land We Live in' (1847-50). He also published from 1844 'Knight's Weekly Volumes', which began with Knight's own biography of William Caxton. 
During the 1830s and 1840s Knight became a well-known and respected figure in London literary, publishing, and political circles. He moved his business into the heart of the City, 22 Ludgate Street, in 1833; from 1833 he lived at Hampstead, moving in 1835 to Highgate. In 1837 he played a part in the establishment of the penny post. He became an early member of the Reform Club in 1834 (although his admission to the Garrick Club was delayed by rumours about his 1827 near bankruptcy). In the same year, he was appointed publisher to the poor-law commission (he was a hearty supporter of the new poor law, and became a close friend of Edwin Chadwick). In 1850 he was publisher to the General Board of Health and he himself wrote a pamphlet of advice during the cholera epidemic of 1853. Impressed by the Great Exhibition of 1851, Knight agreed to act as a juror at the Paris Universal Exhibition of 1855, writing the part of the report dealing with drawing, modelling, printing, and other related media. 
Despite his almost heroic industriousness, Knight was a sociable soul: although he had a quick temper, his contemporaries remembered him as a generous employer and a popular companion. According to one of his contributors, Charles Macfarlane, he put up Thomas De Quincey in his own house for three months while waiting for him to produce a sketch of Milton for the 'Gallery of Portraits'; he also let Leigh Hunt stay rent-free in his Brompton cottage for two years. One overworked contributor, Harriet Martineau, was invited to join his family for a month's holiday in St Leonards. His altruistic character may well explain Knight's lack of financial success as a publisher, as he was no mean statistician and clearly knew how to balance his books. He was, however, incurably kind, essentially idealistic, and -- according to Macfarlane -- 'about the worst man of business that has ever belonged to the 'Trade'' (Macfarlane, 96). 
In 1845 Knight met Douglas Jerrold, the playwright and 'Punch' contributor, with whom he visited Dublin and Killarney in 1849, to view the effects of the Irish potato famine; he also came to know such younger literary lights as W. M. Thackeray and Charles Dickens. He contributed to the first two volumes of Dickens's 'Household Words' and joined the novelist's Amateur Company of the Guild, which toured the provinces in 1850-51; the two men differed amicably on the issue of the working-class thirst for fiction, which Knight inevitably viewed as unimproving. In a letter to Knight of 17 March 1854 Dickens argued that: 'The English are, so far as I know, the hardest worked people on whom the sun shines. Be content if in their wretched intervals of leisure they read for amusement and do no worse. They are born to the oar and live and die at it. ('The Letters of Charles Dickens', 12 vols., 1965-2002, 7.294)' His position was vindicated by the collapse of the readership for the 'Penny Magazine', which was no doubt caused by the exclusion of fiction from its pages. 
Throughout his career, Knight had always been an author as well as editor and publisher. However, his first major project as an author took shape in 1837, when he resolved to produce a pictorial edition of Shakespeare's works. He started searching for 'authentic' visual materials and began a critical reading of the texts. His edition was based substantially -- indeed, too substantially -- on the first folio edition, although he made comparisons with other quartos and, in some cases, with originals in the British Museum. His background reading led to a deep interest in Shakespeare's life and the edition, published between 1838 and 1841 (he published six later editions of the works of Shakespeare), was prefaced with a one-volume biography. Knight succeeded in contextualizing Shakespeare's life as no biographer except Nathan Drake had done, and in dismissing a couple of the more absurd legends surrounding the playwright's early life. But he was prone to speculation -- even suggesting that Shakespeare had visited Italy and Scotland -- and all too dependent on J. P. Collier's forgeries, the traces of which were visible even in the last revised edition. 
Knight's retreat from publishing grew more pronounced in the late 1840s. In 1844 the last volume of the 'Penny Cyclopedia' appeared and in 1846 the SDUK itself was dissolved; from 1855 he withdrew from his publishing business, his own works appearing with Bradbury and Evans, and Murray (the firm of Charles Knight & Co. -- based from 1848 at 90 Fleet Street -- continued to publish long after his death). Knight's fascination with Shakespeare was but one aspect of his wider enthusiasm for English history and culture; it was this field of scholarship which he now explored more fully. In the 1840s -- in addition to writing the first sixteen chapters of 'A History of the Thirty Years' Peace' (1849-50) -- he had contributed as author as well as editor to such works as 'Old England' and 'The Land we Live in', early illustrated examples of the tourist and heritage literature which is now a staple of British publishing, These heavily illustrated but essentially lightweight works were succeeded by a more serious historical enterprise, Knight's 'Popular History of England' (1855-62) -- 'perhaps the most arduous work of his life, and in some respects the most successful' (Clowes, 84). Knight aimed to write a social and cultural history of the English people but, in an era which was only just beginning to see the professionalization of history as a discipline, he lacked the appropriate critical training and apparatus to achieve this ambition. The 'History' was instead an essentially constitutional history, a whiggish narrative of national progress, based on protestantism, economic prosperity, and harmonious co-operation between different social classes. Separate chapters covered the social, economic, and cultural history of the country -- a compartmentalization which Knight had objected to in 'The Pictorial History' and had hoped to avoid -- but the 'History' was a largely conventional interpretation of English history within the context of later Victorian historiography, a partial forerunner of J. R. Green's infinitely more popular 'History of the English People'. Knight's illustrations, judiciously selected and recycled from his historical publications of the 1840s, enjoy a higher profile, still appearing occasionally in history textbooks and popular historical works. 
A veteran campaigner against paper tax and excessive stamp duties (fearful of cheap radical political journals, he held that some duty should be charged), Knight was the author from the 1830s onwards of a variety of pamphlets, including 'The Struggles of a Book Against Excessive Taxation' (1850). He also took an interest in the history of publishing, producing 'The Old Printer and the Modern Press' (1854) and 'Shadows of Old Booksellers' (1865). 
The elderly Knight looked like a benign patriarch, with an 'ample brow, long white locks, and slightly bowed figure' ('The Athenaeum', 343). In 1864-5 he published his rather long-winded autobiography, 'Passages of a Working Life'. With 'The Old Printer and the Modern Press', it provides a unique insight into the world of nineteenth-century popular publishing; unlike many other publishers, Knight analysed supply and demand in detail, giving print runs and sales figures for some of his publications. Four other works followed the autobiography in 1867-8, but by this time Knight was losing his eyesight. He spent his later years at various addresses in London, Surrey, and Ventnor on the Isle of Wight, before moving to Addlestone in Surrey, where he died at his home at Grove End on 9 March 1873. He was buried in the old burial-ground, Bachelor's Acre, Windsor, on 14 March. 
Knight was, in the words of his 'Athenaeum' obituarist, 'a highly useful man' ('The Athenaeum', 343). With the Chambers brothers and John Cassell, he stands as a key figure in the development of the popular press and literature. Neither a great writer, nor a commercially successful publisher, nor an outstanding journalist, he is nevertheless significant in all these areas. He at once recorded and participated in the most remarkable events of the nineteenth-century newspaper and publishing worlds: the development of the provincial press, the mechanization of the printing press, the introduction of cheap illustrations, the expansion of popular publications to include educational works, and the abolition of 'taxes on knowledge'. Publisher to the 'Schoolmaster Abroad', this popular educator -- as he saw himself -- influenced the minds of thousands of Victorian men, women, and children (some working-class but still more middle-class). Yet he still awaits a full-scale modern biography. 


@@@@@


doc= 15717


Knight, Edward (1774-1826), actor, commonly known as Little Knight and spoken of as a Yorkshireman, was born in Birmingham. While training as an artist and practising as a sign-painter, he was stirred to emulation by the performance of a provincial theatrical company. He appeared accordingly at Newcastle under Lyme, Staffordshire, as Hob in 'Hob in the Well', and was so complete a victim to stage fright that, despite the encouragement of a friendly audience, he ran off the stage and quitted the town. A year later at Raither in north Wales, with a salary of 5's'. per week, he was fortunate enough to get through the same part in safety. While playing Frank Oatland in Thomas Morton's 'A Cure for the Heartache' he was seen and engaged by Nunns, the manager of the Stafford theatre. He stayed in Stafford for some years, increasing in reputation by playing such parts as Arno, Sylvester Daggerwood, and Lingo. About 1801 he married Sarah Clews ('c'.1781-1806), the daughter of a local wine merchant. 
Tate Wilkinson, to whom Knight introduced himself, engaged the actor for the York circuit about 1803. He began as Frank Oatland, played in 'The Jew and the Doctor', and was Davy in 'Bon Ton', in all of which roles he was favourably received. After a time he was gratified by the present from Wilkinson of a chest containing all the appliances of an actor's wardrobe, with the compliment: 'I have been long looking for some one who knew how to value them; you are the very man.' While at Leeds in 1806 Knight's wife died at the early age of twenty-four, only five years after their marriage. Left with a young family, he married in 1807 Susan Smith (1788-1859), who had succeeded her sister, Sarah Bartley, as leading lady of the York company in 1805, and, though an actress of no great power, was a remarkable favourite. 
Engaged by Wroughton, on the report of Bannister, for Drury Lane for three years, at a salary rising from $7 to $9, Knight arrived with his new wife and children in London to find the theatre burnt down. However, the company moved to the Lyceum, where Knight made his first London appearance on 14 October 1809, as Timothy Quaint in 'The Soldier's Daughter' and Robin Roughhead in 'Fortune's Frolic'. The favourable impression he made in these characters, and as Label in 'The Prize', was reinforced by his creation of Jerry Blossom in Pocock's 'Hit or Miss' (February 1810), Scrub in Farquhar's 'The Beaux' Stratagem', and Zekiel Homespun in Colman's 'The Heir-at-Law'. He was also the original Diego in 'The Kiss', an adaptation of Fletcher's 'The Spanish Curate'. With the company he went to the new theatre in Drury Lane, where he remained until his death. Simple in 'The Merry Wives of Windsor' (23 October 1812) is the first part in which he can be traced at this house. The Clown in 'Twelfth Night' and Little John in 'Robin Hood' were given during his first season. Knight played many parts, chiefly domestics, rustics, farm labourers, and similar roles, and was the representative of scores of characters in minor pieces by Thomas Dibdin, Isaac Pocock, James Kenney, and other writers. Francis in 'Henry IV', Sim in 'Wild Oats', Stephen Harrowby in 'The Poor Gentleman', David in 'The Rivals', Silky in 'The Road to Ruin', Peter in 'Romeo and Juliet', Isaac in 'The Duenna', Nym in 'Henry V', and Crabtree represent the range of his abilities. 
During the season of 1825-6 Knight retired from the stage in consequence of illness. He died on 21 February 1826 at his house in Great Queen Street, Lincoln's Inn Fields, and was buried on 27 February in a vault in St Pancras New Church. His son from his first marriage, John Prescott Knight, became a renowned portrait painter. 
Knight was a shy, careful, benevolent, and retiring man, who shrank from social intimacies, and was wholly domestic in habits. His figure was small and pliable, his height being 5 feet 2 inches, his hair and eyes were dark, and his voice was shrill but not unmusical. He sang well and made up well, and in various lines of pert servants was unequalled. He was the author of a musical farce in two acts entitled 'The Sailor and Soldier, or, Fashionable Amusement', which was produced for his benefit in Hull in 1805. It is without merit. 


@@@@@


doc= 15718


Knight, (Ellis) Cornelia (1757-1837), author and courtier, was the only child of Sir Joseph Knight (died 1775), rear-admiral of the white, and his second wife, Phillipina Deane (1726-1799). From the age of five she was educated for three days a week as a day pupil at the boarding-school kept by four Swiss sisters, the Misses Thomassets, in London. On the other three days of the week she was instructed in French, Latin, the elements of Greek, mathematics, geography, and history by a visiting master, M. Petitpierre, who had formerly been pastor at Neufchatel; she was taught to dance by Mr Novere, a highly fashionable dancing-master. Her mother was a great friend of Frances Reynolds, the sister of Sir Joshua Reynolds, and Knight thus came to know Dr Johnson and his circle. When her mother failed to obtain a widow's pension after the death of Joseph Knight in 1775, mother and daughter were forced to move abroad in order to economize. 
Initially intending to remain abroad for three years, Cornelia and Lady Knight travelled first to Paris and Toulouse, and then on to Rome, where they settled for eight years and mingled with the best society. Lady Knight was proud of her achievement in maintaining their social connections and propriety despite their frugal style of life and wrote in March 1793: 'I am sure few persons in the world have preserved independence upon so small a pittance, or are more clear of pecuniary obligations' (Ingamells, 581). During the late 1780s and early 1790s they toured northern Italy and France, and briefly visited Naples before returning again to Rome, where they remained from 1791 to 1798. Cornelia had acquired a reputation for her learning -- in May 1790 her mother wrote that she was busy learning Swedish, her tenth language -- and devoted much of her time to drawing and writing; she had amassed some 1800 drawings, 'some with the pen, but mostly coloured ones, the former from imagination, the latter from nature' (ibid., 582-3), and in 1790 she published her first work, 'Dinarbas: a Tale'. 'Dinarbas' was a continuation of Samuel Johnson's moral adventure 'Rasselas', and is interesting principally as a record of Knight's views on education and conduct. She drew on her classical education for her next work, 'Flaminius: a View of the Military, Social, and Political Life of the Romans' (1792); she announced in the preface that 'To bring history to life, is the chief intention of this publication' (p. vii). They spent the last year of Lady Knight's life in Naples and, during the Jacobin revolution there, in Palermo, in the company of Sir William and Emma Hamilton and Lord Nelson. Cornelia obtained the title of Nelson's poet laureate through her verses celebrating his victories, and dedicated her ode 'The Battle of the Nile' to Sir William Hamilton 'as a tribute of gratitude from a daughter of the waves for the distinguished attentions confer'd on the British Navy' by him and his wife. On her mother's death, on 20 July 1799, she complied with the latter's wishes and placed herself under the protection of Lady Hamilton. 
On her return to England in November 1800 with the now notorious 'menage a trois' of the Hamiltons and Nelson, Knight was advised by her friends that she was damaging her reputation by remaining in their company. She immediately left and severed her connections with her erstwhile patrons, much to their disgust. Emma gave vent to her feelings by writing in a copy of Moliere she had been given by Knight: 'Altho she is clever and learned She is dirty illbred ungrateful bad mannered false and deceitful But my Heart takes a noble vengeance I forgive her' (Constantine, 254). Little is known of Knight in the years before she was appointed companion to Queen Charlotte in 1805, and thereafter her autobiography again falls silent until 1813, when she became companion to the queen's granddaughter Princess Charlotte. She incurred the queen's lasting enmity for abandoning her service, but she was desperate to escape the dull and monotonous court life at Windsor. Her new employment certainly proved a complete contrast, as she found herself entangled in the intrigues, quarrels, misunderstandings, and recriminations that were the daily staple of Charlotte's court, and she fell out disastrously with the princess's closest confidante, Mercer Elphinstone. The princess's refusal in July 1814 to marry her father's intended match for her, the prince of Orange, caused the prince regent to dismiss all her attendants, including Knight. Knight afterwards wrote revealingly about her influence on the young princess: 'either I ought to have remained with the queen, or I ought to have carried things with a higher hand to be really useful while I was with Princess Charlotte... I had the romantic desire that Princess Charlotte should think for herself, and think wisely. Was that to be expected from a girl of seventeen, and from one who had never had proper care taken of her since early childhood? ('Autobiography', 213)' In spring 1817 Knight returned abroad. She thereafter spent most of her life on the continent, where her connection with the British court admitted her to the highest social circles and enabled her to collect the anecdotes that appear in her autobiography. In 1833 she published 'Sir Guy de Lusignan', a romance from the time of the crusades. Although she frequently revisited Britain, she died in Paris on 17 December 1837. An edited version of her autobiography, with selections from her diaries, was published in two volumes by Sir John William Kaye in 1861, with the help of James Hutton, and ran to three editions. Its popular success was dented by a stinging review in the 'Quarterly Review', possibly influenced by her old enemy Mercer Elphinstone, who was still alive. The reviewer criticized Knight for constantly 'imputing, often by such quiet insinuation as is not readily detected, low or crooked motives to almost every person concerned in the Princess Charlotte's affairs', and went on to comment: 'It is therefore one of those books of scandal of which it is impossible not to regret the publication; such as so but cause unnecessary annoyance, if not to the living, to those who cherish the memories of their dead, while they add absolutely nothing to our knowledge of any fraction of history worth knowing. ('QR', 140, Jan 1862)' It is precisely because of her frank account of the chaos and unhappiness of Princess Charlotte's court that Knight's autobiography is valued today. 


@@@@@


doc= 15719


Knight, Gowin (bap. 1713, d. 1772), physician and inventor of geomagnetic instruments, was baptized at Corringham, Lincolnshire, on 10 September 1713, the son of the local vicar Robert Knight and his wife, Elizabeth. In 1724 the family moved to Leeds, where Knight was educated at the grammar school. In 1731 and 1735 he won scholarships to Magdalen Hall and then to Magdalen College; he studied natural philosophy and medicine at Oxford until 1741. Soon afterwards he went to London, where he spent the rest of his life. In 1750 he moved from Lincoln's Inn Fields to Crane Court, Fleet Street; from 1756 he lived at the British Museum. 
By 1744 Knight was practising as a physician in London, and had embarked on the research that won him world renown for his magnets and compasses. He developed techniques for magnetizing steel bars by a repetitive process of stroking them with other magnets to build up their strength. Cheaper and more reliable than natural lodestone, these artificial magnets vitally affected subsequent experimental investigations into magnetic phenomena, popular and educational performances, and navigational practices. Knight also transformed traditional maritime compasses into precise instruments. He thus contributed to the introduction of natural philosophical techniques into navigation, and helped consolidate the increasingly influential role of the Royal Society on mercantile voyages of imperial exploration. 
Between 1744 and 1750 Knight gave several spectacular demonstrations of his magnetic bars and compasses at the society, and was rapidly acclaimed as an international expert. He published several papers in the 'Philosophical Transactions', which he later edited into a discreet advertising brochure (1758). Made a fellow in 1745, he was awarded the prestigious Copley medal in 1747 for -- as the president expressed it -- helping the British people 'to increase and promote greatly our foreign trade and commerce, whereby we are provided at home with the fruits, the conveniences, the curiosities and the riches of the most distant climates' (M. Folkes, presidential address, Royal Society journal book, 19.366). Largely because of the commercial significance of navigation, Knight gained social prestige as well as financial reward by promoting his bars, compasses, and other inventions. He exemplified contemporary upwardly mobile entrepreneurs who carved out new types of career in a commercializing society. 
Adopting discreet, gentlemanly techniques of self-advertisement, and protecting his methods by secrecy, Knight sold his magnetic inventions privately and also through the instrument dealers George Adams and Jean Magellan. He targeted the quality end of the market for instruments of natural philosophy, warding off cheaper imitations by a signed certificate. He sold three sizes of expensive steel magnetic bars, ranging in price from 21/2 guineas a pair to 10 guineas for a pair 15 inches long. He also invented portable cases for storing his bars to prevent the loss of their strength, exceptionally powerful magnets made from iron and linseed oil, and a variation compass for natural philosophers to measure the patterns of terrestrial magnetism. He constructed an impressive wheeled device made from two magazines, each comprising 240 magnetic bars, for magnetizing steel bars more easily than with the laborious stroking procedure. Displayed to eminent visitors at the British Museum, this machine was subsequently used by Michael Faraday. Knight also patented a mechanical window blind and invented a naval sounding device. 
After examining a compass damaged during a freak storm, Knight emphasized the benefits a philosophical approach could bring to navigational problems. Following extensive experimentation, he introduced two greatly modified maritime instruments: a steering compass for indicating a ship's course and an azimuth compass, designed in collaboration with John Smeaton, for measuring the angle of variation (the angle at a particular place between geographical north and the direction in which a compass needle is pointing). Knight mounted his compasses in durable non-magnetic brass instead of the usual casings made from perishable wood and iron nails, and he made slender rectangular needles from hard, permanently magnetized steel, which would not rust. His other numerous innovations designed to increase accuracy included revolutionizing the needle's suspension and incorporating a finely divided brass scale. His high-quality instruments were expensive, but could yield far more precise measurements than older models. However, they were more suitable for a philosopher's private study than the rolling deck of an ocean-going ship: bad weather curtailed his own trials at sea. 
Knight negotiated lucrative contracts to supply the Royal Navy with magnets and compasses. Benefiting from contacts made through the Royal Society, he convinced naval experts of the value of his inventions, and the board of longitude awarded him $300 in 1752. Later that year, after a perfunctory testing programme, the Admiralty board ordered all ships being fitted for foreign service to be supplied with one of Knight's compasses. Navigators agreed that Knight's bars were greatly superior to natural lodestone for remagnetizing compass needles. They were initially enthusiastic about his compasses: fitting out the 'Endeavour', James Cook wrote to the Admiralty, 'Doctor Knight hath got an Azimuth Compass of an Improv'd con[s]truction which may prove to be of more general use than the old ones' ('The Journals of Captain James Cook', ed. J. C. Beaglehole, 1955, 1.clxix). But experienced mariners increasingly accused Knight of designing an instrument that performed badly at sea, particularly in stormy weather. Knight constantly implemented modifications, and, in the face of increasing competition from rival compass makers, became the first to seek protection by patenting a revised model of his azimuth compass in 1766. Despite continued criticism from seafarers, Knight's compasses remained official issue for all the ships in the Royal Navy until well into the nineteenth century. 
In 1748 Knight produced a theoretical treatise on natural philosophy, republished by John Nourse six years later, entitled 'Two Simple Active Principles, Attraction and Repulsion'. Using Newton's suggestions in the 'Opticks', Knight sought to explain all natural phenomena -- light, heat, and gravity as well as magnetism -- by aethers made up of elementary attractive and repulsive particles. Knight claimed that these particles cluster round one another to build up larger corpuscles of varying size and net force, which combine to produce fluids and solids of different characteristics. For this Newtonian text he also drew on his own experiments and on continental research into metallurgy and mining. Knight's densely written book was little referred to by his contemporaries, though some Victorian scientists revived interest in his ideas. Benjamin Franklin judged Knight 'the greatest Master of Practical Magnetics that has appear'd in any Age' ('The Papers of Benjamin Franklin', ed. L. W. Labaree, 1963, 6.103), but never quite found the 'Leisure to peruse his Writings with the Attention necessary to become Master of his Doctrine' (ibid., 1961, 4.256). 
Knight was elected a member of the Royal Society council in 1751. He achieved an increasingly influential position in the society, though he was defeated by seventy-six votes to ninety-one when he competed with Thomas Birch for the post of secretary. For a few years, Knight was active at the Society for the Encouragement of Arts, Manufactures, and Commerce. In 1756 he successfully applied for the post of principal librarian at the newly founded British Museum, which was largely controlled by fellows of the Royal Society. Knight remained at the museum until his death, sixteen years later. For $200 a year, he acted as live-in caretaker, responsible for displaying the exhibits and supervising public access. He played a key role in the adoption of the Linnaean system of classification, and participated in international correspondence networks to enlarge the collections. 
Knight became publicly recognized in polite society as a man of importance. Participating in elite circles, he contributed to John Fothergill's reforming medical club and journal, and invested with him in a financially disastrous Cornish mining venture. Also close to Birch, Benjamin Wilson, Henry Baker, and John Pringle, Knight dined with influential statesmen and aristocrats, and was discussed by the king. Wilson, a schoolfriend from Leeds, portrayed him in an etching and an oil painting. Knight was increasingly reputed to be reclusive and ill-tempered, antagonizing visitors, staff, and trustees at the museum, where he very probably lived alone. Critics -- including Samuel Johnson and Edmund Stone -- deplored his marketing strategies and his secretiveness, and he became involved in a bitter priority dispute with John Canton. Knight persistently refused to divulge his magnetizing techniques, although partial accounts were published after his death. He died in his rooms in the museum on 8 June 1772, and was buried in London at either St George's, Bloomsbury, or the parochial cemetery near the Foundling Hospital. 


@@@@@


doc= 15720


Knight, Henrietta, Lady Luxborough (1699-1756), poet and letter writer, was born at Lydiard Park, Wiltshire, on 15 July 1699, the only daughter of Henry, first Viscount St John (1652-1742), and his second wife, Angelica Magdalene Pellisary ('c'.1666-1736), a French widow. Henrietta's half-brother was Henry St John, first Viscount Bolingbroke (1678-1751), with whom she remained in contact even in her most difficult years. She spent her early life at the St Johns' house at Battersea after Bolingbroke's attainder and flight to France in 1715. Scandal touched her name for the first time in 1719, but on 10 June 1727 she married Robert Knight (1702-1772), later Baron Luxborough. They travelled regularly to France, where Robert Knight senior had fled at the collapse of the South Sea Company from which, as cashier, he made a huge illegal fortune. 
Immediately after her marriage Henrietta was suspected of having an affair with her London physician, Dr Charles Peters (1695-1746). She and Robert Knight had two children, Henry ('b'. 1728) and Henrietta ('b'. 1729). She was accused by her husband of having also become pregnant by a young cleric, John Dalton (bap. 1709, d. 1763), tutor in the household of her friend Frances Seymour, countess of Hertford. She appears to have given birth late in 1736. In that year Knight arranged a separation order from his wife, having found her love letters to Dalton. She was obliged to live on $500 a year at Barrells, Ullenhall, a Knight estate in a remote part of Warwickshire, never to see her children, or to visit London and Bath. A remarkable monument in a local parish church, set up by Knight, commemorated Henry and Henrietta as her only offspring with her husband. His bitterness towards his wife never diminished. 
Isolated in Warwickshire, Henrietta relied on correspondents to keep in touch with contemporary affairs. Her attempts to be reconciled with Knight failed and, for some time, she was ostracized by the best local society. However, she became friendly with the poet William Shenstone (1714-1763) of The Leasowes, Worcestershire, and with others, including Richard Jago (1715-1781) and William Somervile (1675-1742). They formed the 'Warwickshire coterie'; she was known in their literary circle as Asteria. Much of her correspondence with Shenstone (1742-55) discussed garden design, literature, decor, and architecture, and they exchanged several visits. At Barrells she created a 'ferme ornee', with many rare plants, exotic birds, and fowl. She was slowly accepted into midland society as visitors came to view the gardens at Barrells. She continued to correspond regularly with Bolingbroke until his death. Her married daughter was also involved in a scandal, eloping and being divorced in 1753. 
Lady Luxborough's portraits show her to be a strikingly beautiful woman, although an unfashionable brunette, and Walpole's description of her as 'lusty' and high-coloured, with a 'great black bush of hair' is both accurate and spiteful (Walpole, 'Corr.', 32.243-4). Some of her poems, given to the publisher Robert Dodsley by Shenstone, were published in the 1775 edition of Dodsley's 'Collection of Poems by Several Hands', and much of her correspondence with Shenstone was published in 1775 and with the duchess of Somerset in 1778. In the last years of her life when she was ill, she finally visited Bath in 1752, and was also attended by Dr John Wall (1708-1766) of Worcester. From about 1750 she was in severe financial difficulties, and her friendship with Shenstone appears to have cooled shortly before her death at Barrells on 26 March 1756. She was buried at St Peter's, Wootton Wawen, Warwickshire. 


@@@@@


doc= 15721


Knight, Henry Gally (1786-1846), architectural writer and antiquary, was born on 2 December 1786, the only son of Henry Gally Knight (died 1808) of Langold Hall, Yorkshire, barrister, and his wife, Selina, daughter of William Fitzherbert of Tissington, Derbyshire. His grandfather John Gally (who assumed the additional name of Knight) was MP for Aldborough and Boroughbridge, and a son of Henry Gally DD, the classical scholar. The diplomatist Alleyne Fitzherbert, Baron St Helens, was his uncle; the novelist Frances Jacson was his aunt.Knight was educated at Eton College, and entered Trinity Hall, Cambridge, in 1805; he was in residence there until succeeding to the family estates on his father's death in 1808, when he left Cambridge without taking a degree. In 1809 he travelled to Spain, where he purchased works by Spanish painters. During 1810-11 he travelled in Greece, Egypt, and Palestine with Frederick Sylvester North Douglas and John Nicholas Fazakerley. He was a founder member of Grillion's Club in 1812. Between 1816 and 1830 he published a number of poems, including 'Ilderim, a Syrian Tale' (1816), which often drew inspiration from his earlier travels. His poetry received mixed reviews from Byron. 
In 1814, through a family connection with the fourth duke of Newcastle, Knight was returned as MP for Aldborough, but resigned the seat in the following year when he supported Catholic emancipation, against the wishes of his patron. He joined Brooks's Club in 1816 and associated with the group of whigs who followed the second Earl Fitzwilliam, opposing the repressive measures taken by the government against popular protest. Out of parliament, he remained active in public affairs in Nottinghamshire. He married, on 13 July 1825, Henrietta (died 1848), widow of her first cousin John Hardolf Eyre and daughter of Anthony Hardolph Eyre of Grove Park, Nottinghamshire. They had no children. In 1828 he wrote a pamphlet on the 'Foreign and Domestic View of the Catholic Question'. He returned to parliament in 1831 as MP for Malton, a seat owned by Fitzwilliam, and supported parliamentary reform, but did not stand at the general election in 1832. In 1835, by then a Conservative, he was elected for North Nottinghamshire, which he represented until his death. As an MP he was regarded by his contemporaries as a fluent but infrequent speaker. 
In May 1831 Knight, accompanied by the architect Richard Hussey, had travelled to France to study the buildings and libraries of Normandy. After his return to England he published 'An Architectural Tour in Normandy' (1836), which was translated into French by M. A. Campion and published in Caen in 1838. This work had a significant influence upon the French antiquarian Arcisse de Caumont, and in recognition of his work Knight was made a foreign member of the Societe Francaise. In August 1836 he travelled to Messina with the architect George Moore, a pupil of Edward Blore. Knight produced two books relating to this expedition: 'The Normans in Sicily' (1838; French translation by M. A. Campion, 1839; German translation, ed. C. R. Lepsius, 1841) and 'Saracenic and Norman Remains to Illustrate the 'Normans in Sicily'' (1840). In 1842-4 he published the two-volume 'The Ecclesiastical Architecture of Italy from... Constantine to the 15th Century', with eighty-one litho-chromatic plates, some by Owen Jones. Although Knight's work was that of an amateur antiquarian and lacked acute stylistic analysis, his books did influence some early Victorian architects. 'The Ecclesiastical Architecture of Italy' in particular provided accurate, visual documentation relating to Italian medieval architecture. Of great interest were the details of the various characteristic forms of polychromy. 
In 1841 Knight was a member of the select committee on the fine arts, which initiated the historical fresco paintings in the houses of parliament. He was also deputy lieutenant of Nottinghamshire. He died in Lower Grosvenor Street, London, where he lived, on 9 February 1846, and was buried in Firbeck church, Yorkshire, on 17 February. His will directed that his Langold estate should be sold for the benefit of some friends. His other estates at Firbeck, Kirton, and Warsop were left to his widow during her lifetime. After her death the Firbeck estate and mansion were to go to the ecclesiastical commissioners for charitable uses. Some manuscripts relating to Knight's tour in 1810-11 remained in the hands of his family. 


@@@@@


doc= 15722


Knight, James (c.1640-1719x24), colonial administrator and merchant, seems to have been born about 1640 (since he was apparently nearly eighty in 1719), possibly in Bisham, Berkshire, described later as his home in his will; his parents are unknown. A lifelong connection to the Hudson's Bay Company began on 16 May 1676 when he was employed as a carpenter. He appears to have spent the next five years building or rebuilding factories at Rupert, Moose, and Albany rivers in James Bay. Passed over in the appointment of deputy governor in Hudson Bay he returned in 1681 to England, where he reported to the company and advised on preparations for a voyage the following year. A 'faithfull and true Serveant' and 'able and dexterous in their business', on 11 May 1682 he was made deputy governor at Hudson Bay and chief factor at Albany on a yearly salary of $100 (Kenney, 25). With his brother, Richard, Knight sailed to Hudson Bay and remained there until 1685 when he returned to England. In December that year he faced, and denied, accusations, made by Governor Henry Sergeant, of private trading. The case concluded in November 1687 with the company unsatisfied with Knight's defence. 
Knight does not reappear in company records until five years later when he is described as 'of London, merchant', suggesting his occupation and residence in the intervening period. In March 1692 the company offered him the command of an expedition to protect York Fort and recover the bottom of the bay from the French. Royal letters patent issued on 15 June 1692 made him governor and commander-in-chief of all forts, factories, and territories in Hudson Bay. That month he sailed with the most powerful expedition the company had yet sent, comprising four ships and 213 men. The following summer the forces attacked and took Albany Fort, which became the only fort in English hands from October 1694 until August 1696, when the English retook York Fort. By this time Knight and his wife, Elizabeth, had a son, Gilpin. By the treaty of Ryswick (20 September 1697) Albany was to be returned to the French and York Fort, recently retaken by the French, to the English. In June 1698 the company employed Knight to oversee the exchange; however, it never took place. He travelled to Hudson Bay and for the following two years was governor of Albany on an annual salary of $400, double the amount he had been receiving since April 1693. 
By November 1700 Knight had returned to London, where he obtained $400 of company stock; added to the $200 of stock he had acquired in 1692, this made him eligible to sit on the committee of the general court. He was elected the following week, and every subsequent year until November 1713. In 1710 he travelled to the Netherlands 'to Soliciter the Company's affaires at the treaty of Peace' (Kenney, 47). The articles of the treaty of Utrecht (11 April 1713) provided that the French should return Hudson Bay territories to Britain and pay the company for damages. On 11 September 1714 Knight received the formal French surrender at York Fort, and subsequently became governor there. 
To further trade Knight set out to improve relations between Crees and Athapascans, and to establish a post on the Churchill River (the latter is recorded in his published journal). He received a number of reports, particularly from a slave woman, Thanadelthur, of a yellow metal, and on his return to England in 1718 he approached the company with plans for an expedition to discover the mines. In June 1719 the expedition departed, instructed to search for a north-west passage. Knight never returned and evidence collected by explorers in the following years suggested that both expedition ships had been wrecked. Almost fifty years later Samuel Hearne confirmed these reports; his interviews with Inuit suggested that some of Knight's party survived two winters on the Marble Island. In the late twentieth century the Marble Island site was excavated and divers investigated the wrecks; although inconclusive, the evidence suggests that perhaps not all of Knight's party died of starvation or scurvy on Marble Island. Knight's will was probated on 23 September 1724. Given that apparently he was almost eighty in 1719 he had probably died soon after arriving on the island (Robson, appx 1, 37). 


@@@@@


doc= 15723


James Knight (bap. 1793, d. 1863), religious writer, was baptized on 25 April 1793 at Wintringham. He matriculated from Lincoln College, Oxford, in 1811, and was a scholar there from 1812 to 1815, graduating BA in 1814 and proceeding MA in 1817. He was appointed perpetual curate of St Paul's Church, Sheffield, in 1824, and resigned the living in 1860. He published various commentaries on Christianity, and edited his father's 'Sermons and Miscellaneous Works' (2 vols., 1828), which were published together with a memoir by his brother, the Revd William Knight. He died at Barton upon Humber, Lincolnshire, on 30 August 1863. 


@@@@@


doc= 15724


Knight, John (d. 1606?), mariner, was described by Captain James Hall of Hull as 'my Countrie-man'; beyond this, his origins remain obscure. In 1605 he sailed on a voyage of exploration to Greenland. The fleet was commanded by John Cunningham, a Scot employed by Christian IV of Denmark. Cunningham sailed in the admiral 'Trost' with James Hall as his pilot. The vice-admiral the 'Rode Love' was captained by a Danish nobleman Godske Lindenov, while Knight was steersman of the pinnace 'Katten' or 'Marekatten'. 
The ships left Copenhagen on 2 May 1605. The 'Trost' sighted the coast of Greenland in latitude 59 degree 50' on 30 May, but the fleet's attempts at exploration were hampered by ice and fog. The 'Rode Love' parted company on 11 June and returned to Copenhagen with skins and narwhal ivory. Meanwhile the 'Trost' and 'Katten' reached an area of coastline without ice, and bartered goods with the Inuit in the Itivdleq Fjord. Hall and Knight sailed away in the pinnace to explore and map the harbours between the latitudes of 66 degree 30' and 68 degree 35', surviving skirmishes with Inuit. The islands at latitude 66 degree 59' were named after Knight. On 11 July the two ships started home through the ice, and arrived in Copenhagen on 10 August. 
In 1606 Knight undertook a voyage on behalf of the English East India and Muscovy companies in search of the north-west passage. He commanded the 'Hopewell', a pinnace of 40 tons, which sailed from Gravesend on 18 April making for the Orkney Islands, where bad weather detained the ship until 12 May. The voyage was uneventful until 3 June, when the 'Hopewell' met with the ice floes that were to hamper her progress. In his journal Knight describes the daily battle with the ice, and how his men manoeuvred the 'Hopewell' through narrow gaps with spars, boat-hooks, and oars. Land was sighted on 13 June, but two days later the ship was nearly crushed, tossed by high winds and stormy seas against the ice. On 19 June the 'Hopewell' reached land at latitude 56 degree 48' on the coast of Labrador. Knight managed to steer into a cove where a storm on 24 June broke off the rudder, flooded the ship, and drove her aground. 
Knight's journal ends abruptly: 'Thursday the 26th beinge faire wether'. Another hand has added an explanation. On the morning of 26 June 1606 Knight rowed to an island and went ashore with three others, taking instruments for mapping and weapons to defend themselves if necessary. Two sailors left in the shallop waited until eleven o'clock at night but Knight and his men did not return. The remaining eight crew members attempted a search for their colleagues, but were thwarted by the ice. They patched up the 'Hopewell' sufficiently to sail to Newfoundland for repairs and arrived in Dartmouth on 24 September 1606. Evidence given by the crew at a high court of admiralty inquiry in November that year satisfied the sponsors of the voyage that the loss of Knight and his men was not the result of desertion or mutiny. 


@@@@@


doc= 15725


John Knight (1616?-1679) of Bristol, merchant, and his first wife, a Somerset woman whose maiden name was Parsons. The elder John Knight was the grandson of the effective founder of the family's position within the civic and mercantile worlds of Bristol, Francis Knight (died 1616), through Francis's second son, Edward. Another of Francis's grandsons, by his eldest son, was Sir John Knight (bap. 1613, d. 1683), often known as 'the elder', another prominent figure in Restoration Bristol whose political and business career intertwined with those of his cousin and nephew. 


@@@@@


doc= 15726


Knight, Sir John (bap. 1613, d. 1683), merchant and local politician, the third but second surviving son of George Knight (died 1659), a mercer, and his wife, Anne, the daughter of William Deyos, was baptized on 24 November 1613 in Bristol. He inherited his father's business in Temple Street, and became one of the most prosperous merchants in the city and a prominent high-church member of the common council. On 9 April 1640 he married Martha, the daughter of Thomas Cole, a merchant, of Bristol; they had three sons and eight daughters. 
Knight was knighted by Charles II on 5 September 1663, on the occasion of the king's visit to Bristol, and elected mayor in the same year. His tenure of office was a year of terror distinguished by his persecution of radical sectarians under the old recusancy laws and the 'Conventicles Act' (1664). A critic of republican ideas who feared radical risings, he had Baptists arrested, disrupted Quaker meetings, paid large sums to have their houses watched, and concerted measures with Guy Carleton, bishop of Bristol, for their punishment. Some 920 persons are said to have suffered for their religion during his mayoralty, and many moderate churchmen were scandalized by the mayor's rushing out of church on Sundays in pursuit of recalcitrant nonconformists. 
Knight's intolerance increased with the years, and in 1669 he denounced the other members of the common council, including his cousin and namesake John Knight, who was mayor of Bristol in the following year, as 'fanatics'. In 1680, being infirm, he desired the city to nominate another person to take care of their affairs in the common council, but though he no longer had any official status he still occasionally acted as an informer. His antipathy to Roman Catholics was as strong as that against nonconformists. In 1681 he was fined for assaulting the mayor of Bristol in the course of his duty, and for calling several members of the common council 'papists, popish dogs, jesuits, and popish devils'. In August 1680 he had acted as emissary from William Bedloe to Chief-Justice North before the latter's receiving Bedloe's dying deposition, and it is apropos of this that Roger North sums him up as 'the most perverse, clamorous old party man in the whole city or nation' (North, 253). 
Knight became a member of the Bristol Society of Merchant Venturers in 1639 and was master of the society in 1663-4. He represented Bristol during the parliaments of 1661, 1678, and 1679, and was highly indignant at not being re-elected in 1681. He sat on seven committees concerned with ecclesiastical legislation in the Cavalier Parliament and served in the two Exclusion Parliaments. He died in December 1683, and was buried at Temple Church, Bristol. The value of his estate is not mentioned in his will, but it does not seem to have been substantial. 


@@@@@


doc= 15727


Knight, Sir John (d. 1718), merchant and politician, was the elder son of 
John Knight, the son of Edward Knight and his wife, Martha Challoner, served as apprentice to his merchant father from 1634 to 1641. He based his fortune, however, on East Anglian fenland purchased during the 1640s. His first wife had died and he had remarried by 1651; his second wife was Mary Latch (died 1681). He returned to Bristol by the early 1650s, where he established a sugar refinery at the Great House, St Augustine's Back, which was supplied by his West Indian plantations. He was warden of the Merchant Venturers three times (1654-5, 1655-6, and 1661-2), and master once (1666-7). In 1664 he was appointed sheriff of Bristol. Unlike his son, he was sympathetic to dissenters and gave them a respite from harassment during his mayoralty of Bristol in 1670-71. His most important foe in this period was his cousin and former business partner, Sir John Knight the elder, with whom he fought numerous lawsuits. In 1675 he gave his fenland and West Indian properties to his younger son, Joseph, while his elder son, John, inherited the Bristol sugar business and lands at Congresbury, Somerset, after his father's death on 29 March 1679, though the will led to legal contests within the family. 
The younger John Knight spent several years representing his father's interests in the West Indies, apparently living in Montserrat. He had returned to Bristol by the early 1670s and married Anne Smith, daughter of Thomas Smith of Long Ashton, Somerset; they had one son and two daughters. In June 1674 he was elected to Bristol's common council, though for a while he refused to serve. In November 1675 he joined the Merchant Venturers of Bristol, but it was not until September 1679 that he accepted election to the city's common council. The younger Knight's father had died six months earlier, which henceforth makes it easier to discern which of that name was performing increasingly prominent functions for the Merchant Venturers and the city corporation. He now became a warden of the Merchant Venturers and in September 1681 was made one of the city's two sheriffs for the year following. 
The shrievalty provided Knight with his first major opportunity to exercise leadership, which he did by directing the persecution of protestant dissenters. He quickly came into regular contact with officers of the royal court and convinced them of his zeal for the king's interests. Knight was also one of those leading an attack on Sir Robert Atkyns, the city's recorder and a justice of common pleas recently dismissed for his opposition to the royal court. Knight's campaign to close conventicles and harass dissenters became so extreme that he soon spurred a vigorous opposition within the corporation, which became seriously divided. Despite the conflict in Bristol, Knight was presented to the king at Newmarket in March 1682, where he was knighted. In these years it thus becomes easy to confuse Knight with his uncle, Sir John Knight the elder. This senior Sir John, though also a prominent foe of conventicles, as evidenced by his actions as mayor in 1663-4, opposed his namesake until his death in late 1683. The junior Sir John was sometimes known as 'the younger' or 'of The Hill', after his place of residence in St Michael's parish. 
In December 1682 Knight and others wrote to the government recommending the dismissal of four aldermen who allegedly stirred trouble in the corporation. From this arose the suggestion that Bristol, like other corporations in this period, be served with an information in the nature of 'quo warranto' to compel them to surrender their charter, thus permitting the issue of a new charter to install Knight's 'loyal' partisans firmly in power. Knight managed the surrender process, keeping Secretary of State Sir Leoline Jenkins informed about shifting local political alignments. Although he expected a favourable outcome, Knight misjudged the situation and failed to convince a majority of the corporation to vote to surrender the charter in March 1683. By now many in the corporation, even his allies, had become suspicious of what a new charter might do to increase Knight's power. But legal process against the city moved forward until a charter surrender was at last obtained in early 1684. 
Knight now looked to Whitehall for greater preferment in return for his services, and put himself forward to be governor of the Leeward Islands. Some in England supported his nomination, but many islanders remembered Knight's 'rude behaviour and insolence' (Latimer, 423) while he lived there and petitioned against his appointment, effectively ending his ambitions. Surprisingly, Knight requested the king's permission to resign from Bristol's council in July 1684, only one month after he had gained the city's new charter. Throughout this period, despite his divisive political efforts, Knight was frequently called upon to use his influence to represent Bristol's mercantile interests at court. Hoping to build on this influence, Knight stood unsuccessfully at a parliamentary by-election in December 1685. 
By this time Knight's worries were shifting from protestant dissenters to Catholics, whose interests King James now promoted. In April 1686 Knight reported a Catholic meeting to the mayor and sheriffs, and they arrested a priest and others. News soon arrived at court of Knight's aggressive manner toward Catholics and other citizens in this and other incidents. By late May the 'violent tory in Bristol' (Luttrell, 1.379) had been arrested and brought before the privy council to explain his actions, for which he was now imprisoned. A writ of habeas corpus failed to gain his release, but when tried by a jury in Bristol in November, Knight was acquitted. 
Knight rejoined the common council upon the restoration of Bristol's pre-1684 corporation in October 1688. Elected to represent Bristol in the convention of 1689, Knight soon became known as one of those who disagreed that King James's departure had made the throne vacant and thus as one who opposed making William and Mary monarchs. Knight was returned to parliament in 1690; he was elected mayor of Bristol later that year. At Westminster Knight worked to protect Bristol's trading interests in Africa and elsewhere, but he earned greatest fame for his popular attack on foreigners in the debate on a 'Naturalization Bill'. His speech questioned the loyalty and integrity of the measure's supporters; he concluded by moving that 'let us first kick the bill out of the House, and then foreigners out of the kingdom' (Knight, 8). The Commons voted to condemn the speech in its published form and it was burnt by the hangman, though not before Knight had denied all knowledge of how it appeared in print. Knight was in contact with the exiled Jacobite court in these years. After the assassination plot of 1696 Knight was detained on suspicion of his Jacobitism, though he was released for lack of evidence. Knight did not stand for parliament in 1695; when he did so in 1698, he failed to regain his seat. 
In 1702 Knight resigned from Bristol's common council once again and later retired to the small estate at Congresbury that he had inherited from his father. He died in apparent poverty in February 1718. 


@@@@@


doc= 15728


Knight, Sir John (bap. 1747, d. 1831), naval officer and surveyor, was baptized on 21 February 1747 at Dundee, the fourth of five known children of Rear-Admiral John Knight ('c'.1710-1788) and his wife, Jean Hay. In 1758 Knight joined the frigate 'Tartar', commanded by his father, in the expedition against St Malo and Cherbourg under Lord Howe. After the peace of 1763 he served in the 'Romney', flagship of the commander of the North American station, under Lord Colville and his successor Sir Samuel Hood, and gained experience of nautical surveying assisting J. F. W. Des Barres. On 25 May 1770 Knight was commissioned as a lieutenant at Halifax, Nova Scotia, and joined the schooner 'Diligent'. On 15 July 1775 he was taken captive when the ship put into Machias Bay, Maine, and was sent to Northampton, Massachusetts, until his release in a prisoner exchange in November 1776. Having been tried and acquitted for the loss of the 'Diligent', he was appointed by Lord Howe to command the 'Haerlem', a former New York privateer sloop. In the 'Haerlem' he was active against the enemy's coasting trade and also engaged in hydrographic work for Des Barres's New England charts. He was next moved to Howe's flagship, the 'Eagle', and used his intimate knowledge of the coast to lead the fleet through narrow channels to cut off d'Estaing's squadron from Boston. Knight married Prudence Reynolds (died before 1799) in America on 17 February 1778 and the following autumn returned to England. 
In 1780 Knight joined the 'Barfleur', flagship of Sir Samuel Hood, and was her first lieutenant in the actions off Martinique on 29 April and Chesapeake Bay on 5 September 1781. He was posted captain with command of the 'Shrewsbury' on 21 September 1781, but in January 1782, at Hood's request, he returned to the 'Barfleur' as flag-captain, and commanded her in the action at St Kitts, the skirmish of 9 April, and the battle of the Saints on 12 April. He was personally responsible for the professional education of Prince William Henry, the future William IV and a midshipman in the 'Barfleur'. In 1787-8 Knight was again appointed flag-captain to Hood, first in the 'Barfleur' at Portsmouth, and then in 1793, when Hood became commander-in-chief in the Mediterranean, in the 'Victory'. On his return from the Mediterranean Knight was appointed to the 'Montagu' in the North Sea under Admiral Adam Duncan. 
When mutiny broke out in 1797 the 'Montagu' was one of the first and worst affected ships. She was taken by her crew to the Nore, where her surgeon was tarred and feathered, and rowed through the fleet. After the mutiny was quelled the 'Montagu' played a distinguished part in the battle of Camperdown on 11 October 1797. In 1798 Knight commanded a detached squadron on the coast of Ireland, and in 1799-1800 he was in command of the inshore squadron blockading Brest, where he made a chart of the area. On 1 October 1799, after Prudence's death, Knight married Love Pickman Oliver (1754-1839), a widow, and daughter of a New England loyalist and Massachusetts judge, Peter Frye. Knight was promoted rear-admiral on 1 January 1801 and in 1805 succeeded Sir Richard Bickerton at Gibraltar where he performed unspectacular work with great confidence. He became vice-admiral on 9 November 1805, admiral on 4 December 1813, and a KCB on 2 January 1815, but saw no further naval service. 
Knight's portrait shows a wiry, bright-eyed man. Sir William Hotham, who served with him, considered him clever, brave, professionally able, and 'remarkably quick and active' (Hotham, 1.53). He was a skilful surveyor and his published charts included several of Corsica, Brest, Portsmouth, Cork, and the North Sea. Hood evidently respected him but Hotham reported that he was not popular in naval circles. He had a poor reputation for maintaining discipline and undeserved doubt was cast on his courage at Camperdown. 
Knight and his first wife, Prudence, had eight children and, according to Hotham, he was thought to pay too much attention to domestic affairs and consider his ship 'more a house in which he was residing with his family than a ship of the British fleet!' (Hotham, 1.53). Knight died suddenly on 16 June 1831 at his house, Woodend, at Soberton, Hampshire; he was buried at Soberton on 28 June. 


@@@@@


doc= 15729


Knight, John Baverstock (1785-1859), land surveyor and painter, was born on 3 May 1785 at the rectory, Langton Long Blandford, Dorset, the third of eight children of James Forster Knight (1751-1808), captain, 3rd Dorset militia, and his wife, Sophia (1751/2-1820), daughter of Colonel John Kay. His parents lived at the Down House, Blandford St Mary, which Knight had inherited with Littleton and Langton manors. John was baptized at Langton rectory, home of his aunt (wife of the rector, Dr J. H. Ridout), on 28 May 1786. Knight was educated privately at home, then at Mr Longman's Commercial School at Child Okeford. He started his career as land surveyor and agent as assistant to his father, a reputed connoisseur of art who encouraged his son's talents in drawing, and lived at his parents' home, the Manor House, Anderson, Dorset. He married Elinor Bulkeley Evans ('fl'. 1809-1824), daughter of the Revd Humphrey Evans of Glanville Wootton, on 20 December 1809; they moved to West Lodge, Piddlehinton, Dorset, in 1812 and had eight children. 
Knight followed a strict daily regime, rising at 5 a.m., painting from 6 a.m. to 9 a.m., then embarking on business. He invented a surveying instrument to measure the exact extent of land from a relatively remote location; his expertise as a surveyor and in architectural design led to his arbitrating in property disputes. Knight was employed by many landowners including the duke of Bedford, and Eton and Winchester colleges. Most of his work was in Dorset, but in 1811 he surveyed in Devon for Christ Church, Oxford, and in 1812 he reported on estates in Antrim, Londonderry, and Tipperary. He was an inclosure commissioner in Hampshire and Dorset, and was engaged on tithe work in Dorset ('c'.1839-45) with his son Humphrey Evans Knight and other surveyors, including George Easton, John Martin, and, probably, Levi Luckham. 
Knight built a studio at Piddlehinton, decorating it with a mythological painting. He painted portraits in oils of many county families including Josiah Wedgwood of Eastbury Park, Lord Arundell of Wardour, the sixth duke of Bedford and, in 1820 and 1821, James John Farquharson of Langton and his family. His portraits were commended by Sir Thomas Lawrence; his copies of old masters were good enough to deceive experts. He was an honorary exhibitor at the Royal Academy in 1818 and 1819; Benjamin West and Henry Fuseli praised his skill. Knight was versatile and also produced watercolours, etchings, and miniatures. An album containing watercolours and pen and wash drawings of places on the duke of Bedford's estates, together with other works by Knight, is now in Dorset County Museum. His drawings, many of which are of Lake District scenes (such as 'Lodore, Derwentwater'; V&A), show the influence of J. R. Cozens, J. S. Cotman, and Thomas Girtin. Many are in monochrome or blue-grey; others use light colour, for example 'Axbridge Vale' (Tate collection). Hardie regards them as his best work, with skilful handling of receding planes and a strong feeling for composition. His etchings were mostly topographical and were published in the 'Gentleman's Magazine' from 1816 and in the second edition of J. Hutchins's 'History of Dorset' (1815). Knight was prolific: he painted throughout the British Isles and on the continent. Particularly large collections of his work are in the Victoria and Albert Museum, London, the Victoria Art Gallery, Bath, the Dorchester Museum, and Dorset County Record Office, with others in many regional museums. 
Knight was 'a magnificent specimen of the country squire' (MacColl, 171), tall, handsome, and stately. He owned land at Brockenhurst in Hampshire as well as in Piddlehinton. His interests in the countryside were wide-ranging and included horticulture; he was an excellent sportsman. He was well-loved, a churchwarden, and notable for his charities. He was a wit and wrote poetry. 
In 1856 he resigned his membership of the Royal Agricultural Society of England and his health began to fail. He died at his daughter's house at Broadway, Dorset, on 14 May 1859 and was buried there on 19 May. 


@@@@@


doc= 15730


Knight, John Prescott (1803-1881), portrait painter, was born on 9 March 1803 in Stafford, the second of the three sons of Edward Knight (1774-1826), the comedian affectionately known as Little Knight, and the actress Sarah Clews ('c'.1781-1806). The Knight family soon moved to London, where Edward and Sarah furthered their acting careers and John began school at a 'classical and commercial academy' (Knight). Knight then went to work as a junior clerk for a West India merchant in Mark Lane, London, a position ending with the firm's bankruptcy. After seeing copies Knight had made of images by Benjamin West contained in the family 'Bible', Knight's father recognized his son's talent and sent him to study drawing with Henry Sass for six months and colouring with George Clint for another six months. In August 1823 Knight was accepted as a painting student in the Royal Academy Schools. In an attempt to supplement his income, Knight utilized his family connections and occasionally acted on the London stage. Economic pressures worsened in 1826 with the death of his father, and Knight's career as a portrait painter began in earnest. 
About 280 oil paintings are attributed to Knight, of which four-fifths are portraits, including such notables as 'Sir Walter Scott' (1826; priv. coll.), the architect 'Sir Charles Barry' (1851; NPG), and 'Sir Charles Eastlake' (1857; priv. coll). Knight was also well known for large group portraits such as 'The Heroes of Waterloo' (1842; priv. coll.), depicting the duke of Wellington receiving dinner guests on the anniversary of the victory, and 'The Peninsular Heroes' (1848; priv. coll.). Knight also painted a number of religious subjects which reflected his dedication to the Catholic Apostolic church, of which he became a deacon in 1847. 
On 1 November 1831 Knight married Clarissa Isabella Hague (died 1869), who was herself an accomplished painter, of still-life and domestic scenes, and they had two sons and a daughter. While he was highly regarded as a portraitist, it was Knight's extraordinarily long and devoted service to the Royal Academy which brought him accolades from his colleagues. Elected an associate of the Royal Academy in 1836 and a full academician in 1844, he served as teacher and then professor of perspective from October 1839 until April 1860. In October 1847 Knight was elected secretary of the Royal Academy, a prestigious office with a yearly salary of $400, which he held until May 1873. He was made a chevalier of the Legion d'honneur in 1878. 
Knight died at his home, 24 Maida Hill West, London, on 26 March 1881, and was buried in Kensal Green cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 15731


Knight, Joseph Philip (1812-1887), songwriter, was born in Bradford-on-Avon, Wiltshire, on 26 July 1812, the youngest son of Francis Knight DD, vicar of Bradford-on-Avon. At the age of sixteen he studied harmony and thoroughbass with John Davis Corfe, organist of Bristol Cathedral, and began composing. He subsequently published in 1832 a set of six songs under the pseudonym Philip Mortimer. Among these were 'Old Times', later sung by Henry Phillips, and 'Go, Forget Me', which became popular both in England and in Germany. Under his own name, and in collaboration with Haynes Bayly, Knight went on to write numerous songs, the most notable of which were 'The Veteran' and 'She Wore a Wreath of Roses'. After these came, among others, a solo song, 'The Parting', and a duet, 'Let's Take this World as some Wide Scene', both with words by Thomas Moore. In 1839 Knight visited the USA, where he composed his most famous song, 'Rocked in the Cradle of the Deep', which was for a long time associated with John Braham. On his return to England in 1841 he produced 'Beautiful Venice', 'Say, What shall my Song be To-night?' and 'The Dream', with words by the Hon. Mrs Caroline Norton. Some years afterwards he was ordained by the bishop of Exeter, and was appointed to the charge of St Agnes in the Isles of Scilly, where he remained for some years. He then married and moved abroad, but finally returned to England, retired from the ministry, and resumed composition. Knight wrote in all about two hundred songs, duets, and trios, many of which enjoyed great popularity in their time. He was praised for his command of pure English melody. He was also an excellent organist, particularly skilled at improvisation. He died in Great Yarmouth, Norfolk, on 2 June 1887. 


