@@@@@


doc= 15732


Knight, Mary Ann (1776-1851), miniature painter, was born on 7 September 1776 in Birchin Lane, Cornhill, London, and was baptized on 28 October 1776 in the parish church of St Michael Cornhill, the daughter of John Knight, merchant, and his wife, Frances, 'nee' Woodcock. In order to provide financial assistance to her parents, who later became impoverished, Mary Ann began to receive commissions to paint miniature portraits in 1802, at the age of twenty-six, and continued to paint until 1836. She had been a pupil of the miniaturist Andrew Plimer, who had married her sister, (Joanna) Louisa in 1801, and later she was to spend much time in the Plimer household, and painted several portraits of her nieces and nephews. 
In 'Andrew and Nathaniel Plimer' (1903) George Williamson included an account of Mary Ann Knight together with a list of her works 'extracted from her own note-books', then in the possession of Plimer family descendants (Williamson, 73). He noted that 'She kept a very careful account of her earnings, and records that she made the sum of $5,171 9s. 8d. being an average of 150 guineas a year throughout the above period' (ibid., 74). At first she charged between 2 and 4 guineas a portrait; by the end of 1805 she received 9 guineas for a larger- and 7 guineas for a smaller-sized portrait. About 1815 her success at portrait painting is indicated by her fees of between 20 and 30 guineas. She was particularly in demand for portraits of children, her success with whom Williamson attributed to 'her own engaging charm, quiet soft voice, merry vivacious manner, and great kindliness of disposition' (ibid., 77). She told her young sitters many stories and 'was able to represent them as real children, and to capture in her rapid and sketchy portraits excellent likenesses' (ibid.). While not immune to the custom of painting children as angels or in classical costume her most successful portraits of children are naturally posed. Williamson noted that Miss Knight sometimes copied the style of Anthony Stewart, a noted painter of portraits of babies. The fee of $42 that she received for a group portrait of the children of Sir William Rush in 1814 was identical with that which she obtained in 1821 for a picture entitled 'Venus and Adonis'. When she ceased work in 1836 she recorded having painted a total of 696 portraits. Her own list appears to be incomplete, however. Of the thirty portraits she exhibited at the Royal Academy between 1803 and 1830 some do not appear on her own list; in 1805 she exhibited at the academy a portrait, 'Captain Norton Teyoninhakarlawen, a chief of the Mohawks, one of the Five Nations in Upper Canada'. One of her signed miniatures, now in the Victoria and Albert Museum, London, is also of interest for the lock of hair intricately plaited in a sheaf design enclosed on the reverse. 
Miss Knight lived at St John's Wood and at Wicken, Stony Stratford, the address of her parents. In 1813 her studio was in Old Bond Street, London. In old age she lived at Grove End Road, St John's Wood, London, where she died, unmarried, in 1851 at the age of seventy-five. 
Of her miniatures Williamson noted that 'The finest work I have seen by Mary Ann Knight is at Oxford in the University Galleries; it might at first glance be attributed to Andrew Plimer so much does it resemble his work' (Williamson, 76). The miniature, of a young girl ('c'.1810-1820; AM Oxf.), is well painted and has subsequently been attributed both to Miss Knight and to Andrew Plimer. While her miniatures are generally of 'a large size' and 'pale, even washy in colour' she occasionally used a rich colour scheme and was 'very partial to the use of a rich purple, resembling the bloom of a grape' (ibid., 77). Her miniatures of members of the Manners family are reproduced in Williamson (facing p. 76). 
Apart from her miniatures Williamson drew attention to Mary Ann Knight's 'rough sketches made in a wash of sepia... in which she coloured the faces with the very faintest wash of carmine' (Williamson, 78). One of these was of the dramatist and poet Joanna Baillie. While Miss Baillie would not allow the portrait to be engraved, as she did not want to see it 'all over the place' (ibid., 75), a copy was taken and either this or the original is now in the Scottish National Portrait Gallery, Edinburgh, together with another of the socialist and philanthropist Robert Owen (1771-1858). The original of the Baillie portrait was included in a large sketchbook, subsequently in the possession of Plimer family descendants, containing a variety of 'first sketches' in pencil and watercolour. These also included portraits of the writer Lucy Aikin (or Aitken); Lady Caroline Lamb and Anne Isabella, Lady Byron (both City of Nottingham Museums, Newstead Abbey collection); the artist's mother, Mrs Knight (ibid., facing p. 74); Andrew Plimer's daughters; and a self-portrait. A chalk and watercolour drawing of Prince Hoare by Miss Knight after a portrait by Sir Thomas Lawrence is in the British Museum. According to Williamson 'these portraits deserve much more attention' (ibid., 79). The whereabouts of many of these sketches remains unknown. 


@@@@@


doc= 15733


Knight, Richard Payne (1751-1824), art collector and writer, was born at Wormsley Grange, Herefordshire, on 11 February 1751, the eldest son of the four children of Thomas Knight (1697-1764), rector of Bewdley, and his wife, formerly his servant, Ursula Nash (1715-1798), of Bitterley, Shropshire. His two sisters, Barbara (1756-1775) and Ursula (1760-1777), died young but his brother, Thomas Andrew Knight (1759-1838), became a renowned horticulturist. Knight took his middle name from his grandmother, Elizabeth Payne, whose husband, the ironmaster Richard Knight (1659-1745) ['see under 'Knight family (per. c.1680-1897)] had made one of the first great fortunes of the industrial revolution. Knight inherited much of the family fortune on the death of his uncle Richard Knight in 1765. 
On account of his poor health Knight was educated at home until his father's death in 1764. Thereafter he was taught by a private tutor, Mr Blyth, at Coleshill, Warwickshire, who introduced him to Greek, at which he excelled. He did not go to university but instead went on the grand tour in 1772, when he came of age and gained control of his fortune. He travelled through France to Florence, Rome, and Naples. On his return to England in 1773 he began to design himself a new house on the estates he had inherited at Downton, Herefordshire. The house, which became known as Downton Castle, was built from 1774 to 1778 by Thomas Farnolls Pritchard; the interior was not completed for another few years. Built on an asymmetrical plan that owed much to the designs of John Vanbrugh, and with embattled parapets that echoed the medieval castles of the Welsh borders, the castle was entered through a large, square tower that housed a circular, domed dining-room based on the Pantheon. Knight's personal involvement with the project -- he was kept informed about the building works by his uncle and agent Samuel Nash while he was abroad -- allowed him to express his highly individual taste in architecture. The integration of landscape (the site overlooked the wooded valley of the River Teme) and buildings, which was inspired by the paintings of Claude Lorrain, enabled Knight to both conceptualize and realize his ideas on the picturesque. The building of Downton Castle, which preoccupied him throughout his life, was a landmark in English eighteenth-century architecture and set the fashion for castellated buildings, such as William Beckford's Fonthill and John Nash's East Cowes Castle, that typify the picturesque movement. 
While work at Downton was in progress Knight again travelled south, and in the late summer of 1776 was touring Switzerland with the landscape painter John Robert Cozens. After some months in Rome, Knight undertook an apparently planned expedition to Sicily in April 1777 with the fashionable German landscape painter Jakob Philipp Hackert and the English shipbuilder and amateur artist Charles Gore (1729-1807). Perhaps under the influence of Johann Joachim Winckelmann's ideas on the pre-eminence of Greek art, they aimed to explore the remains of Greek architecture in Italy, most probably with a view to publication. Sailing via the ruined Doric temples at Paestum and the island of Lipari, they visited Patti, Segesta, Selinus and Agrigento, Syracuse and Taormina, and climbed Mount Etna. While Hackert and Gore recorded the various stages of their journey in sketches Knight kept a diary in which he flaunted his knowledge of classical architecture and literature. He also commented on local customs and contemporary political issues, agitating against all forms of 'priestcraft', a favourite topic throughout his life. By July the party was back in Rome, where their sketches were worked up into finished watercolours by Cozens, and Knight reached Paris by the end of the year. The plan of publishing the illustrations seems to have been abandoned a few years later. 
Back in England Knight was returned as MP, first for Leominster, in September 1780, and then for Ludlow, in April 1784. He represented Ludlow until 1806 and aligned himself with the opposition whigs against Pitt's government. Sponsored by Charles James Fox, whom he greatly admired, he became a member of Brooks's Club in 1788 and opposed the administration's conduct of the war with France in the 1790s. Although he took part in Westminster affairs Knight pursued the interests developed on his visits to the continent more vigorously than his political duties. 
In 1781 Knight was elected a member of the Society of Dilettanti which in 1786 issued his first publication, 'An Account of the Remains of the Worship of Priapus'. This included the account communicated to the society in 1781 by Sir William Hamilton, British diplomatic representative in Naples, of the wax phallic votive offerings made at the Catholic festival at St Cosmo's shrine at Iserno, Abruzzo. In his discourse that ostensibly examined the survival of phallic worship in Christian ceremonies Knight suggested that sexual symbolism lay at the basis of all religions. He went so far as to identify Christ with Priapus and to declare that the Christian cross was a transformation of a phallic symbol. He wrote in the wake of similar contemporary investigations into the symbolical language of antiquity, in particular the 'Recherches sur l'origine, l'esprit, et les progres des arts de la Grece' (1785) by Hugues, Baron d'Hancarville, a former associate and collaborator of Hamilton's in Naples. In spite of the fact that Knight's 'Account' was published privately it became notorious and was condemned as scandalous, irreligious, and obscene by critics such as T. J. Mathias, William Mavor, and the editors of the 'British Critic', Robert Nares and William Beloe. 
Perhaps as an antidote to this early 'faux pas' Knight concentrated on fashioning the landscape surrounding his house at Downton in a new, picturesque mode. In pursuing this interest he published 'The Landscape: a Didactic Poem' in 1794. Ostentatiously quoting both Virgil and Lucretius as his literary models, Knight was dismissive of the pleasingly irregular gardens created by Capability Brown. Instead he advocated the rougher and more 'picturesque beauty' of natural landscapes as represented in the paintings of Claude Lorrain, whose works he avidly collected, or those of Dutch and Flemish artists, whom he championed. However, unlike his friend and neighbour Uvedale Price, whose 'Essay on the Picturesque' was published in the same year, Knight was not really interested in the practical issues of garden design. In shaping his natural surroundings he was concerned rather with their evocative effect on the spectator. He adopted the argument proposed by Archibald Alison in his 'Essay on the Nature and Principles of Taste' (1790) that aesthetic notions are created by the association of sensory impressions with the emotions and ideas in the mind of the spectator. As with his European Romantic contemporaries, landscape and its representation -- which had always occupied a lowly position in the academic hierarchy of artistic genres -- provided him with an opportunity to experiment with new ideas and associations. 
Knight used landscape as a metaphor to pursue the political and moral issues that preoccupied him: the superstition and bigotry of the Christian church, his claims to freedom of expression, and his opposition to any kind of political and personal oppression. He developed these ideas further in a second long, didactic poem, 'The Progress of Civil Society' (1796), an encyclopaedic investigation into the history of mankind, progressing from international to national, and personal interrelations between peoples and people. Like Winckelmann, Knight regarded fifth-century Greece as the culmination of civil society and he linked its success to the political and personal freedoms enjoyed by its citizens. In modern times he saw, with Montesquieu, religious superstition, repressive government, and personal bigotry as the cause of mankind's decline. 'Missing the mood of the moment' (Ballantyne, 112), Knight ended his poem with an enthusiastic endorsement of the French Revolution, which, despite his condemnation of the violence of the terror, understandably further antagonized his critics, who attacked him in conservative journals such as the 'British Critic' and 'The Anti-Jacobin'. Furthermore he was blackballed from the Literary Society in 1795. 
Knight's reputation as a national arbiter of taste was confirmed by his most successful publication, 'An Analytical Inquiry into the Principles of Taste' (1805), which appeared four years after Uvedale Price's 'Dialogue on the Distinct Characters of the Picturesque and the Beautiful'. Sceptical of the notion that taste could be governed by general rules, Knight -- as he had done in the second edition of 'The Landscape' (1795) -- rejected Price's attempt to define 'picturesque' as an aesthetic category between the 'beautiful' and 'sublime' categories that had been established by Edmund Burke. Instead Knight argued for a diversity of tastes, quoting from David Hume's 'Of the standard of taste': 'Beauty is no quality in things themselves: it exists merely in the mind, which contemplates them, and each mind perceives a different beauty' (R. Knight, 'An Analytical Inquiry into the Principles of Taste', 4th edn, 1808, 16). Guided by Archibald Alison's concept of an 'association of ideas', Knight examined human sensory perception, associations, and emotions, giving priority to the sense of sight. Sight, in response to colour and light, offered the spectator intellectual pleasures through the association of a variety of ideas. These ideas could be evoked either in the contemplation of natural scenery or in works of art, which appealed to the spectator through 'tints, happily broken and blended, and irregular masses of light and shadow harmoniously melted into each other' as well as through their associations with literature, philosophy, and the imagination. The 'correct' response to these stimuli, however, Knight argued, could be achieved only by the educated spectator -- in other words by connoisseurs who had the time, money, and energy to cultivate their tastes and educate their minds. Knight's associationism thus remained specialized and elitist, a notion suggested perhaps in the portrait by Thomas Lawrence (1794; Whitworth Art Gallery, Manchester), which shows Knight, the 'arrogant connoisseur', pointedly staring into space while knowingly leafing through a volume of drawings in his lap. 
Throughout the 1790s Knight devoted considerable time and attention to his Greek studies. Two publications resulted: 'An Analytical Essay on the Greek Alphabet' (1791) and 'Carmina Homerica Ilias et Odyssea' (1808; 1820), which contested that Homer was not the author of 'The Odyssey'. He formed an unrivalled collection of small bronzes (mostly bought from Sir William Hamilton in 1794), coins (principally acquired at the sale of Matthew Duane's collection in 1785), gems, and cameos, which were displayed in a purpose-built gallery in his London house, 3 Soho Square. Sketches of Italian scenes dominated his collection of drawings, which boasted over 150 sketches by Claude. A co-founder of the British Institution, which was established in 1805 to encourage British artists, he enthusiastically promoted the talents of the artist Richard Westall, from whom he commissioned paintings on classical and historical subjects. A selection of his antiquities, together with some of his friend and fellow member of the Society of Dilettanti Charles Townley, were superbly illustrated in 'Specimens of Ancient Sculpture' (2 vols., 1809-35), to which Knight provided the accompanying commentary and brief history of ancient art. In 'An Inquiry into the Symbolical Language of Ancient Art and Mythology' (1818), originally intended as an introduction to the delayed second volume of 'Specimens of Ancient Sculpture', he produced a series of comparative investigations into the sexual symbolism of the art of different religions. 
Having stood down from parliament in 1806 Knight made over Downton Castle to his brother, who was married and had a family, in 1808 and retired to a very modest house on the estate, Stonebrook Cottage. Just as he was gradually withdrawing from public engagements Knight sparked a new controversy, this time over the Elgin marbles. When Thomas Bruce, seventh earl of Elgin, brought to Britain the marble sculptures from the Parthenon, Knight declared, without having seen them, that Elgin had 'lost his labour', as they were 'not Greek... but Roman of the time of Hadrian' ('The Life of B. R. H[aydon]... from his Autobiography and Journals', ed. T. Taylor, 3 vols., 1853, 1.272). When the sculptures were exhibited in London they were the first major works of classical Greek sculpture to have been put on public display in western Europe. Dilettanti and connoisseurs such as Knight who had acquired their expertise on the grand tour to Rome and other Italian cities were familiar only with Roman and Hellenistic copies of original Greek works that were displayed in Italian galleries. They therefore failed fully to appreciate the aesthetic value of the Elgin marbles. Knight in particular thought that they were Hadrianic copies because they did not meet his expectations of Greek art, which he had always extolled as the epitome of human achievement. His lukewarm appreciation, which was shared by William Wilkins and Lord Aberdeen, was at odds with the ecstatic reaction of John Flaxman, Benjamin Robert Haydon, Thomas Lawrence, and Benjamin West to the marbles. In 1816 Knight was called to give evidence to the parliamentary select committee set up to determine their value and legal status; despite his reservations about the marbles' quality he advised that they should be purchased. 
Knight's spectacular error of judgement about the Elgin marbles and the subsequent controversy had a catastrophic effect on his reputation. He endured stinging criticism from John Wilson Croker in the 'Quarterly Review' and from Haydon, whose evidence had not been heard before the select committee, in an article, 'On the judgment of connoisseurs being preferred to that of professional men', published in both 'The Examiner' and 'The Champion'. In a passionate, almost deranged, personal attack, in which he extolled his own piety while labelling his opponent as a demonic fiend, Haydon correctly predicted that the marbles' fame would rise as Knight's sank into oblivion. Knight had already alienated the prince regent by criticizing his architectural taste in the 'Edinburgh Review' and by supporting the cause of the prince's estranged wife, and unsurprisingly he was not chosen as the new professor of ancient literature at the Royal Academy in 1818. The following year he attracted more controversy when, in his capacity as a magistrate, he ordered the cavalry to break up a demonstration by the colliers at his mines at Clee Hill, in Shropshire. 
Despite his damaged reputation Knight was elected vice-president of the Society of Antiquaries in 1819 (his friend and ally Lord Aberdeen was president). His final publication, 'Alfred', a poetic romance, appeared in 1823. He died in London, of an apoplectic stroke, on 23 April 1824 and was buried at Wormsley church, Herefordshire, on 11 May. A trustee of the British Museum since 1814, he bequeathed his collections to the museum so that they could be displayed alongside those of Townley and Clayton Mordaunt Cracherode. Estimated to be worth at least $30,000, his bequest included over 1144 drawings, over 5205 coins, and 800 bronzes. 


@@@@@


doc= 15734


Knight, Samuel (1677/8-1746), Church of England clergyman and antiquary, was born in London, the son of John Knight, a freeman of the Mercers' Company. William Cole claimed that Knight was brought up a dissenter. He was educated at St Paul's School and entered Trinity College, Cambridge, as a sizar on 10 April 1697, aged nineteen. He graduated BA during the year 1702-3, MA in 1706, and DD in 1717, and was later incorporated at Oxford in 1740. He was ordained priest by John Moore, bishop of Norwich, on 24 September 1704 and became chaplain to Edward Russell, earl of Orford, who in 1707 presented him to the rectory of Burrough Green, in Cambridgeshire, and the vicarage of Chippenham, in Suffolk. In 1714 John Moore, by then bishop of Ely, collated him to the seventh prebendal stall in Ely Cathedral, and in 1717 to the rectory of Bluntisham, in Huntingdonshire. On 22 August 1717 at St Mary in the Marsh, Norwich, Knight married Hannah ('bap'. 4 May 1681), daughter of Talbot Pepys of Impington, in Cambridgeshire. She died on 14 April 1719, after the birth of their son, Samuel, and was buried at Bluntisham. 
Knight was one of the 'revivers' of the Society of Antiquaries in 1717 and a member of the Spalding Gentlemen's Society, whose members included most distinguished antiquarian scholars of the day. He was a friend and correspondent of the majority of these, who included Edmund Gibson, Thomas Tanner, White Kennett, and William Cole. No doubt he had been influenced in this direction by Thomas Gale, master of St Paul's School, whose son Roger was one of Knight's correspondents, and by his patron Bishop Moore. He was encouraged in his antiquarian studies by Thomas Baker, fellow of St John's College, Cambridge. Knight was a collector of manuscripts and used his periods of residence at Ely to investigate the manuscripts there. He also worked on a historical account of the Ely Cathedral manuscripts, which, though apparently not completed, was used by James Bentham in his history of the cathedral. In 1724 Knight published a life of John Colet, dean of St Paul's and founder of St Paul's School. This had been begun by White Kennett, who gave it up when he began to plan the publication of all the important historical documents of Charles II's reign and handed over the materials to Knight for completion; Knight made little public acknowledgement of Kennett's major contribution to the work. He published a life of Erasmus in 1726, of which John Jortin, a subsequent biographer of Erasmus, commented: 'Dr Knight's work is indeed confused and not over elegant, but it contains many good materials' (Jortin, 617). Knight made collections of material for biographies of Archbishop John Peckham, bishops Robert Grosseteste, John Overall, Lancelot Andrewes, George Mountain, and Robert Sanderson, and of John Strype. He also annotated and completed Bishop Simon Patrick's autobiography, the manuscript of which he owned. 
Knight appears to have been an 'active and useful' residentiary canon at Ely (Nichols, 5.354). He was involved in a concerted attempt by the dean and chapter to make benefactions to the governors of Queen Anne's bounty, to attract further benefactions of $200 for livings in their gift, so that their endowments were increased by a total of $400 each. 
Knight continued to receive ecclesiastical preferment in the later part of his career. On 29 December 1730 he was appointed a chaplain to George II. In 1735 Thomas Sherlock, bishop of Salisbury, collated him to the archdeaconry of Berkshire. Knight was an active archdeacon and made regular diurnal visitations, unusual for a pluralist. When his turn came to preach at Salisbury Cathedral as archdeacon he used his visits to study the manuscripts in the chapter house. In 1742 Richard Reynolds, bishop of Lincoln, collated him to the prebendal stall of Leighton Ecclesia in Lincoln Cathedral. 
Knight died on 10 December 1746 and was buried beside his wife in the chancel of Bluntisham church, where the inscription on his monument was composed by his friend Dr Castle, dean of Hereford and master of Corpus Christi College, Cambridge. He left an 'ample fortune' ('GM') to his son, Samuel, fellow of Trinity, who was ordained priest in 1743 and whose father's interest was remembered when Bishop Sherlock awarded him the valuable sinecure rectory of Fulham in Middlesex. 


@@@@@


doc= 15735


Knight, Samuel (1759-1827), Church of England clergyman, was born in Halifax on 9 March 1759, the son of Titus Knight (died 1793), Independent minister at Halifax, and his second wife. Influenced by the countess of Huntingdon, Titus Knight became minister of a Methodist chapel in 1763, and regularly assisted George Whitefield at Tottenham Court Chapel and elsewhere. 
Samuel Knight attended Hipperholme grammar school and entered Magdalene College, Cambridge, as a sizar in 1779. He graduated BA as seventh wrangler in 1783 and was elected fellow, proceeding MA in 1786. In April 1783 he was appointed curate of Wintringham, Lincolnshire, and took pupils. On 13 July 1789 he married Frances Lawrence at Roxby-cum-Risby, Lincolnshire. They had at least two sons and three daughters. In 1794 he was presented to the vicarage of Humberstone, Lincolnshire, but continued to reside at Wintringham, where he received pupils into his house; he was also curate of Roxby. In 1798 he was the first to obtain the perpetual curacy of Holy Trinity, Halifax, and he moved there with his pupils. In December 1817 he was appointed vicar of Halifax. 
Knight was the author of the popular devotional work, 'Forms of Prayer' (1791), which passed through sixteen editions in his lifetime. He died in Halifax on 9 January 1827. 
The younger of Knight's two sons, 


@@@@@


doc= 15736


Knight, Thomas (d. 1820), actor and playwright, was born in Dorset of a family which was of some importance but not wealthy. He was intended for the bar, and received lessons in elocution from the actor Charles Macklin. A favourite with Macklin, he accompanied him to the theatre, and acquired in his visits tastes that led him to adopt the stage as a profession. At an unrecorded date he appeared at the Richmond theatre as Charles Surface, but failed conspicuously. He then joined Austin's company at Lancaster. Before leaving London he tried vainly to force upon Macklin payment for his services as a teacher. Tate Wilkinson saw Knight, it is said, in Edinburgh, and engaged him for the York circuit. His first appearance was made in York in 1782 as Lothario to the Calista of Dorothy Jordan. Wilkinson, who was greatly disappointed with him, advised him to quit the stage, but Knight struggled on, playing Charles Oakley, Spatterdash in John O'Keefe's 'The Young Quaker', and Carbine in 'The Fair American', and gradually grew in public favour. Wilkinson generously acknowledged the error of his former judgement, and during the five years in which Knight remained with the company he took the lead, and had only one quarrel with the management: finding his name as Twineall in 'Such Things Are' put third on the list, the customary place for the character, he refused to appear. On 27 October 1787 he played at the Bath theatre as the Copper Captain. Spatterdash, the Duke of Monmouth in 'Such Things Were', and the Marquis in 'The Midnight Hour' followed. 
In 1787 Knight married at Bath 
Knight's first appearance at Covent Garden took place on 25 September 1795, as Jacob in 'The Chapter of Accidents' (when his wife played Bridget) and Skirmish in 'The Deserter'. The most important of the huge number of parts he took at the theatre were Sim in 'Wild Oats', Hodge, Bob Acres, Slender in 'The Merry Wives of Windsor', Roderigo, Gratiano, Dick Dowlas, Sir Benjamin Backbite, Tony Lumpkin, Sergeant Kite in 'The Recruiting Officer', Sir Andrew Aguecheek, Touchstone, and Lucio in 'Measure for Measure'. His original parts included Young Testy in Holman's 'Abroad and at Home', Count Cassel in Elizabeth Inchbald's adaptation 'Lovers' Vows', Changeable in Thomas Dibdin's 'The Jew and the Doctor', Farmer Ashfield in Morton's 'Speed the Plough', and Corporal Foss in 'The Poor Gentleman'. After the couple had remained for three years at Covent Garden, they went together to Edinburgh, where she played on 2 July 1799 Aura in 'The Farm House', and he made what was called, probably in error, his first appearance in the city as Sir Harry Beagle in 'The Jealous Wife'. Margaret Knight afterwards performed at Newcastle and elsewhere before returning to Bath, where she died on 28 July 1804. 
With well-known artists such as J. G. Holman, H. Johnston, J. S. Munden, and Charles Incledon, Knight signed the significant 'Statement of the differences subsisting between the proprietors and performers of the Theatre-Royal, Covent Garden' (3rd edn, London, 1800). The lease of the Liverpool Theatre was taken by Knight in partnership with the actor W. T. Lewis, and the house opened on 6 June 1803 with 'No Song, No Supper' and Thomas Morton's 'Speed the Plough', together with an address by Thomas Dibdin, spoken by Knight. During this season Knight remained at Covent Garden, where his last performance took place for his benefit, on 15 May 1804, as Farmer Ashfield in 'Speed the Plough', and, for the first time, Lenitive in 'The Prize'. He also spoke an address. In 1802 he was living at 10 Tavistock Street, Covent Garden. While managing the Liverpool theatre he lived first at Norton Hall, Lichfield, and then at Woore, Shropshire. In 1817 a new lease was granted to Knight, Thomas Lewis, a son of his late partner, and Banks, with whom Knight became associated in the management of the Manchester theatre. Knight died, with 'appalling suddenness', at the Manor House, Woore, on 4 February 1820. 
Knight wrote many pieces himself. His 'Thelyphthora, or, The Blessings of Two Wives at Once', a farce, was acted at Hull in 1783, but neither printed nor apparently brought to London; 'Trudge and Wowski', a prelude, supposedly from 'Inkle and Yarico', was acted by Knight in Bristol in 1790, and 'Honest Thieves', a two-act abridgement of 'The Committee', by Sir Robert Howard, was produced at Covent Garden, with Knight as Abel, on 9 May 1797. On 14 November 1799 he appeared at Covent Garden as Robert Maythorn in his own 'The Turnpike Gate'. This farce was printed in 1799, was well received, went through five editions in two years, and was constantly performed. Charles Munden made a noteworthy success in it as Crack. The anonymous author of the 'Managers' note-book', which appeared in the 'New Monthly Magazine', attributes to Knight 'The Masked Friend', an anonymous and unprinted reduction to three acts of Holcroft's 'Duplicity', given at Covent Garden on 6 May 1796, with Knight as Squire Turnbull and his wife as Miss Turnbull. The same author attributes to him 'Hints for Painters', an unprinted farce, given on the same occasion, and 'What would the Man be at?' a one-act piece, unprinted, in which Knight played Charles, George, and Will Belford, three brothers. Knight also wrote an 'Ode on the Late Naval War and the Siege of Gibraltar' (1784) and some comic songs or recitations. 
Although he lived in good style, and consorted with men of science and letters, Knight accumulated considerable savings, which were augmented by a legacy from an uncle. His repertory was not unlike that of his namesake Edward Knight. He had a light and elegant figure, a melodious voice, and much sense and tact. As Watty Cockney in 'The Romp', a version of Isaac Bickerstaff's 'Love in the City', chosen for his second part, he did not create much effect, and his wife's Priscilla Tomboy was a failure, the result being that both were relegated for a time into obscurity. His great parts were Jacob Gawkey, Plethora in Thomas Morton's 'Secrets Worth Knowing', Count Cassel, and Farmer Ashfield, all very distinct characterizations. His Master Stephen in Ben Jonson's 'Every Man in his Humour', which he revived, also won much praise. During the latter part of his life he assumed the position of a country gentleman, and he left a reputation for great liberality. 


@@@@@


doc= 15737


Knight, Thomas Andrew (1759-1838), horticulturist and plant physiologist, was born on 12 August 1759 at Wormsley Grange, near Ludlow, Herefordshire, the younger son of Thomas Knight (1697-1764), non-resident rector of Ribbesford and Bewdley, Worcestershire, and Ursula Nash (1715-1798) of Bitterley, Shropshire. His father was very wealthy, having inherited a substantial income and land from the mining activities of Richard Knight (1659-1745), and neither Knight nor his elder brother, the antiquary Richard Payne Knight, had any need to take up a profession. 
Knight was educated at Ludlow School and briefly at a school in Chiswick, and matriculated at Balliol College, Oxford, on 13 February 1778. Although he half-heartedly intended to enter the church, he did not take his degree, having spent most of his time as a sportsman. From about 1780 he lived with his widowed mother at Maryknowle, until 1791 when he married Frances Felton, daughter of Humphrey Felton of Woodhall, near Shrewsbury, and moved to a family estate at Elton. There his acute but untrained scientific interests emerged and he began experimenting with new varieties of fruits and vegetables. He became a successful cattle-breeder and was recommended by his brother to Sir Joseph Banks as a suitable man to return information about Herefordshire to the board of agriculture. He met Banks in 1795 and, with his encouragement, began sending articles to the Royal Society. His first papers on grafting and on the diseases of fruit trees were well received and in 1805 he was elected FRS. In 1806 he received the Copley medal for his papers on plant physiology. These early papers set out his ideas about the movement of sap in plants and the effects of gravity, moisture, and sunlight on roots and leaves. To test his ideas he devised an ingenious revolving apparatus which eliminated the effect of gravity, and which was illustrated in Davy's 'Elements of Agricultural Chemistry' (1813). He believed the movements within plants to be solely mechanical. 
Knight discovered his real vocation in the Horticultural Society. He was not one of the founder members but was brought in by Banks to draft the formal prospectus in 1804 and retrospectively declared one of the twenty-eight original members. From 1811 to his death in 1838 he was president, skilfully orchestrating the society's expansion and consolidation, including the acquisition of gardens in Hammersmith and Chiswick, new offices, a library, the introduction of exhibitions, medals, annual fetes, and displays, the publication of the 'Transactions', the funding and direction of overseas collectors, and a training programme for up to thirty-six young gardeners in a 'National School for the Propagation of Horticultural Knowledge'. Public controversy over this lavish expenditure marred the end of his presidency and an anonymous pamphlet in 1829, probably by Charles Henry Bellenden Ker, which was loudly taken up by J. C. Loudon in the 'Gardeners' Magazine', forced an inquiry into the society's management. Knight felt his absence from London was partly to blame. Nevertheless, the society struck a medal in his honour in 1836. Knight's numerous papers in the Horticultural Society's 'Transactions' included studies on sap, buds, germination, bark, early varieties, forcing-houses, layering, manure, mildew, blight, and greenhouse design. 
In 1808 or 1809 Knight moved into Downton Castle, Herefordshire, a castellated house and 10,000 acre estate built and owned by his elder brother, Richard Payne Knight, who, tired of overseeing the property, had moved to a cottage in the grounds. Making the most of this opportunity, Knight threw himself into horticultural and agricultural experiments of the highest calibre, which brought him into contact with continental physiologists such as Dutrochet, who visited Downton in 1827. Sir Humphry Davy, who included some of Knight's results in various editions of his 'Elements of Agricultural Chemistry', also visited, and praised the Downton fishing in his 'Salmonia'. 
Knight was particularly alarmed by an apparent decline in traditional varieties of fruit, considering it a matter of urgency to breed new varieties as well as to conduct scientific experiments on grafting, hybridity, fecundity, and heredity. Most of these researches were published in the 'Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society', or the 'Transactions of the Royal Horticultural Society', and were later collected in 'A Selection from the Physiological and Horticultural Papers' (1841). Charles Darwin afterwards appreciated many of his observations. 
Knight grew and exhibited specialist fruit and vegetables himself, earning several Horticultural Society medals. A variety of garden pea carries his name and his general observations on peas earn him a minor place in the history of genetics for adumbrating some of Mendel's results. His researches included occasional studies into animal instincts and heredity. He investigated meat production in sheep, breeding from a Merino ram given to him by George III. This work provided the basis for several publications about tithes, in which he suggested tithe value should be calculated by meat rather than corn, since the former could be produced more efficiently than the latter. 
Knight was a whig of the old school, a lax Christian, and an engaging host. He was able to remember long sections of abstruse text and amused friends by reciting them perfectly, page after page. He had an only son, Thomas Andrew BA, who died in a family shooting accident in November 1827, and three daughters. On the death of his son the inheritance of the estates passed, not without family difficulties, from Richard Payne Knight to Thomas Knight's grandsons. The oldest daughter, Frances (1793-1882), shared in Knight's experiments and married Thomas Pendarves Stackhouse Acton of Acton Scott, Shropshire; the second married Sir William Rouse Boughton; and the third, Francis Walpole. Knight died on 11 May 1838 in the London house of his daughter Frances, who wrote a short memoir after his death. He was buried at Wormsley on 22 May. 


@@@@@


doc= 15738


Knight, William (1475/6-1547), diplomat and bishop of Bath and Wells, was admitted as a scholar to Winchester College in 1487, aged eleven, the son of a college tenant in London. Little is known of his family. In 1514 he referred to John Newington, mercer of London, as his kinsman, and in 1547 left a legacy to Margaret James of London, his cousin. He went up to New College, Oxford, where he was admitted scholar on 12 May 1491 and elected fellow on 12 June 1493. He vacated his fellowship in 1495. Anthony Wood claims he then entered royal service and rose to become secretary to both Henry VII and Henry VIII, but it is more likely that he went to Italy to study. He was in Ferrara studying law in 1501 and was BCL by 1504 and DCL by 28 October 1506, when he visited the English College, Rome, from London. He was incorporated as DCL at Oxford on 12 October 1531. His education overseas so influenced him that in 1516 he was described as a good Italian. 
Knight's recorded diplomatic career, which for much of its course was shaped by Henry VIII's anti-French policy, began in June 1512 when he sailed with the marquess of Dorset and an English army to Spain as an ambassador to Ferdinand II of Aragon. His reports back to Wolsey suggest that he was closely associated with him, so much so as to arouse suspicion of him in the army's council and to threaten his personal safety there. After the army's return to England in October 1512, Knight proceeded to Ferdinand's court in the following February to negotiate a new treaty. Ferdinand's determination to maintain his truce with the French resulted in Knight's recall on 29 June 1513. 
In February 1514 Knight was sent to the court of the regent of the Netherlands, Margaret of Savoy, to further Henry VIII's alliance with the emperor Maximilian against France and to finalize arrangements for the marriage between Charles, the emperor's heir, and Mary Tudor. The hostility of Charles's counsellors to the match and Maximilian's procrastination alerted Knight to the untrustworthiness of England's allies. In a forthright report sent on 2 May he advised Wolsey to make peace with the French, but during the summer was sent to negotiate with the Swiss to secure their aid against the French before this course was eventually taken. On 7 May 1515 he was appointed to negotiate with Charles about renewing the treaty of Windsor of 1506, and in July attended a conference at Bruges which decided that commercial grievances for the next five years should be adjudicated under the terms of the 'intercursus magnus' of 1495. On 2 October he was appointed to conclude a treaty with Charles, a task completed in March 1516. 
On 13 December 1516 Knight was appointed to convey the protest of the enemies of France who formed the Holy League to France and Venice, but on 30 December was sent to the Low Countries, instructed to draw the emperor and Charles, now king of Spain, away from French influence. In February 1517, while he was in Brussels, he became convinced of Habsburg duplicity and advised Wolsey to recall him. On 26 August 1517 he was made a commissioner to settle disputes in Calais between English and French merchants. In January 1518 he was sent as ambassador to the court of Margaret of Savoy and, apart from a visit to the ailing Emperor Maximilian (December 1518 to January 1519), remained there until returning to England in February 1519. He was appointed a commissioner to settle disputes between English merchants and the Hanse (10 June 1520) and attended the Field of Cloth of Gold on 24 June 1520. 
In October 1521 Knight was chosen ambassador to Charles V, though the emperor demurred on account of Knight's non-noble status, which he deemed a slight to his dignity. He was also designated ambassador to the Swiss in January 1522, and, after an audience with Charles V in Brussels on 9 February, he went on to Zurich (by 13 March), but was unable to induce the Swiss to recall their troops from French service in Milan. He returned to England in April 1522. 
After helping to draft a treaty with the imperial commissioners concerning the wool staple in Calais, 17 January 1523, Knight returned to the court of Margaret of Savoy in April. On 22 June in that year he was commissioned to negotiate a treaty with the duc de Bourbon against Francois I, with orders to leave Margaret on pretence of going to the Swiss and, in disguise, to meet Adrian de Croy, an imperial agent, at Bourg-en-Bresse. But by the time he neared Bourg on 13 July, de Croy had already completed negotiations with Bourbon's envoys. Knight returned to his post at Brussels, taking formal leave of Margaret on 3 May 1525. 
In 1526 Knight replaced Richard Pace as royal secretary, receiving the signet on 20 August. He began to complain of illness, and of age and failing eyesight. Even so, Henry decided to send him to the pope, probably to seek a dispensation for him to marry again without an annulment of his first marriage. When Wolsey, then in France, heard of the mission, he urged Henry that Cardinal Ghinucci was better qualified to serve his secret matter as he had more experience than Knight and better access to the pope. Knight, as instructed, met Wolsey, who was confident that he would be recalled, but Henry in further orders told him to leave for Rome immediately. Knight now had a new secret purpose: to obtain a dispensation for Henry to marry any woman, even one related in the first degree of affinity through either licit or illicit intercourse -- a clear reference to Anne Boleyn, who as a result of the king's earlier affair with her sister Mary was related to Henry in precisely this way. 
Unable to delay him, Wolsey instructed Knight to make for Venice. By 4 November he was at Foligno where he waited for a safe conduct to Rome. Once this was procured, he resumed his journey. Following the sack of Rome in May 1527, Clement VII fled to Orvieto, where Knight followed and had an audience with him. He received the dispensation he requested on 23 December, but without a clause stating Henry's current marriage was invalid. He also obtained a commission for Wolsey to hear the case against Queen Katherine, but not on the terms the cardinal had wanted. Knight then made for home. Arriving at Asti early in January 1528, he was instructed by Wolsey to persuade the pope to send a second legate to England, but, as Sir Gregory Casale was nearer Orvieto, Knight continued his journey north and arrived in Calais on 3 February. His letter to Henry of 21 April shows he was aware his mission to Rome had failed. By this time he was at the French court. 
On 27-8 November 1528 Knight was included in an embassy to Francois I and the pope about the king's Great Matter. Two envoys were sent on ahead while Knight, because of his age and infirmity, followed with further instructions. By late December he was still at Calais, recovering from a tempestuous crossing, but by 8 January 1529 had reached Paris, concerned that his tardiness would be interpreted as negligence. After an audience with Francois he proceeded to Lyons, arriving late in January, where he was met by Stephen Gardiner who continued to Rome while Knight returned to the French court. Once it became clear that Francois I and Charles V were intent on making peace, Knight was included in the English delegation to negotiate with both at Cambrai (30 June). Just before the conclusion of the treaty, on 5 August, Knight was replaced by Stephen Gardiner as the king's principal secretary. Perhaps this owed less to royal displeasure with Knight than to Henry's awareness of his need for a younger, more vigorous servant. In February 1532 Knight was a delegate appointed to negotiate the renewal of the 'intercursus magnus' with the emperor's commissioners. This was his last mission. 
Knight was one of the best rewarded clerical careerists of his age. A royal chaplain by March 1513 and a protonotary apostolic by February 1514, he was rector of Barton, Bedfordshire, 1504-11, of Sandhurst, Kent, 1508-15, of Stowting, Kent (vacated by 1513), of Chartham, Kent, 1514-15, and of All Hallows, Bread Street, London, 1515-37. He was dean of the hospital and college of the Newarke, Leicester, 1515-17, and prebendary of Farndon, Lincoln Cathedral, 1516-41, of Horton, Salisbury Cathedral, 1517-41, and of Chamberlainwood, St Paul's Cathedral, 1517-41. He was rector of Romaldkirk, Yorkshire, 1518-41, and also prebendary, Bangor Cathedral, 1520-41, archdeacon of Chester, 1522-41, and archdeacon of Huntingdon, 1523-41. In addition he was rector of Bangor Monachorum, Flintshire, 1527-41, prebendary of St Stephen's Chapel, Westminster, 1527-41, archdeacon of Richmond, 1529-41, and prebendary of Haselbere, Wells Cathedral, 1535-41. Finally Knight was elected bishop of Bath and Wells on 23 April 1541, received the royal assent on 19 May, and was consecrated ten days later. He was granted a coat of arms on 14 July 1514. 
Knight's slow promotion to the episcopate might be attributed to his religious conservatism. In the 1530s vacant sees often went to reformers. He paid Friar Forrest to pray for the soul of Dean Richard Wolman, and in his will made bequests to endow obits and a temporary chantry for ten years. But when religious reaction set in from 1539, his prospects became more hopeful. Henry VIII planned to include Knight's archdeaconries of Chester and Richmond in a new diocese of Chester; both were highly privileged jurisdictions and to have left them in existence would have rendered the bishop without effective jurisdictional influence in his diocese. Knight's surrender of the two archdeaconries and their appurtenances to the crown soon after his election to the bishopric of Bath and Wells smacks of a quid pro quo. 
Knight's career as an ecclesiastic was undistinguished. As archdeacon of Richmond he was in dispute with Archbishop Lee of York by 1533 over jurisdiction. As bishop of Bath and Wells he spent much of his time at his episcopal residence at Wiveliscombe, Somerset, and it was probably there that he died, on 29 September 1547. He made several grants of presentations to livings and favourable leases, but only alienated one episcopal manor to the crown, that of Wick, Gloucestershire, on 20 June 1545. 
In old age Knight was reputed to be wealthy. In July 1544 Henry VIII assessed him for a forced loan of $3000, $2000 more than the next most highly rated bishops. Knight offered 1000 marks as his 'free and poor gift'. Under pressure another 1000 marks was extracted from him as a loan. Despite his reputed wealth, the most lavish bequest in his will of 12 August 1547 (which disposed of over $500 in cash) was $100 for his own tomb. New College, Oxford, was left $40, and Winchester College $20, while smaller charitable legacies were made to the poor, prisoners, and for the repair of the highways. 
Knight played a significant part in the introduction of Renaissance design and architecture into England. His works at Horton Court, Gloucestershire, dated 1521, include a Renaissance-style fireplace and front doorway, and a detached loggia with four stucco roundels of figures from classical antiquity embedded in its back wall. The inscription on the former market cross at Wells, Somerset, asserted that it was built in 1542 at the expense of Knight and Dean Wolman. Within the nave of Wells Cathedral is a stone pulpit bearing Knight's arms, described as 'one of the earliest attempts in England at a serious understanding of the Renaissance' (Pevsner, 'Gloucestershire', 309). He is supposed to have been buried nearby. 


@@@@@


doc= 15739


Knight, William (d. 1615/16), clergyman and religious writer, was probably born at Arlington, Sussex. He was probably the man who matriculated from Christ's College, Cambridge, in November 1575, graduated BA in 1580, and was ordained as a priest in the diocese of Peterborough on 5 September 1583. In 1591 he was admitted as rector of Arlington. Knight became a radical puritan. On 30 April 1605 he was one of ten Sussex preachers deprived for persistent nonconformity by Anthony Watson, bishop of Chichester, and a William Smith was instituted to the vicarage. However, within five years Knight became reconciled to the Church of England. About 1596 he had begun a long work, which he issued in 1610 as 'A Concordance Axiomaticall, Containing a Survey of Theological Propositions'. In his prefatory remarks the author criticized himself and other ministers in the area for their earlier tendency 'to minister occasions of discontentment to others' and for 'taking pleasure in rash invectives or calumniations against things established by order among us', recommending that they earn 'contentment to ourselves, according to these rules to preach Jesus Christ... labouring to establish in the hearts of our people, the grounds of faith, and the blessed practise of obedience'. This work is signed from Arlington, Sussex, on 20 July 1610, but if Knight had gained readmission to a benefice locally the fact is not recorded. He may perhaps have held a curacy and lived in the house of his upbringing. Knight died, at Arlington, between signing his will on 20 October 1615 and the grant of probate on 30 March 1616. 
A second William Knight (died 1623), Church of England clergyman, from Derbyshire, may perhaps have been baptized at Egginton, in that county on 20 January 1563. He too attended Christ's College, Cambridge, matriculating as a pensioner in July 1579, graduating BA in 1583 and proceeding MA in 1586. He was admitted as a fellow of the college in 1583, was active on college business from 1586 at its properties in Nottinghamshire, and later in Leicestershire, and was appointed dean in 1588. Following his marriage to Agnes Hobson at Papworth Everard, Cambridgeshire, on 11 June 1595, Knight resigned his fellowship. On 19 April 1598, after the death of Thomas Willet, and on the presentation of Edward Francklin, clerk, he was instituted to the rectory of Barley, Hertfordshire. On 29 January 1599 he was succeeded there by Thomas's famous son Andrew Willet (1562-1621), who resigned his own rectory of Little Grandsen, Cambridgeshire, in favour of Knight. The two men had been contemporaries at Christ's, and Willet wrote of Knight that he was 'vir probens, prudens, doctus, mihique amicissimus' ('a man of honesty, prudence, learning, and a very good friend to me'; 'Harmony on I Samuel 1', foreword). The demesne lands of Little Gransden had been used to support the heads of Cambridge colleges, and Knight is reported to have been involved in negotiations with parishioners over these impositions. He died in 1573 and was buried at Little Gransden on 25 November. 
A third William Knight ('c'.1573-1617?), Church of England clergyman and translator, matriculated as a sizar from St John's College, Cambridge, in 1593, graduating BA in 1596. He proceeded MA in 1599 and was incorporated in that degree at Oxford on 12 July 1603. The following year Knight was presented to the rectory of Hinderclay in the diocese of Norwich but, it seems, he was actually instituted to another Suffolk rectory, Culford, on 7 August 1604. He was there in 1612, at which time the rights of presentation were held by Sir Nathaniel Bacon of Stiffkey. It is likely that this was the William Knight who had translated 'Mundus alter et idem sive terrar Australis' by Joseph Hall (1574-1656), later bishop of Exeter and then of Norwich, and who in 1609 confided to Hall his doubts as to his own fitness for the ministry. Hall replied that he was 'sorry to hear of your discontentment' but that 'the cause is from yourself', stressing that divinity was a hard but rewarding taskmaster, and adding that 'We scholars are aptest of all others to make ourselves miserable' (Hall, 3.115-16). Nothing more is certainly known of this man, but in April 1617 a clergyman of his name fell seriously ill and died a week later at Puriton near Bridgwater, Somerset. In a nuncupative will proved on 19 December 1617 he left all his property to his wife, Mabel. 


@@@@@


doc= 15740


Knight, William (1786-1844), natural philosopher, was born in Aberdeen on 17 September 1786, the son of William Knight, a bookseller in that city and his wife, Janet Hoyes. In 1793 he entered the Aberdeen grammar school, where he was a contemporary of Lord Byron (whose disposition he described in later life as most damnable). He entered the Marischal College in 1798, graduated MA there in 1802, and delivered several courses of lectures to the students in natural history and chemistry between 1810 and 1816. He also published, in 1813, his 'Outlines of Botany'. 
In 1816 Knight was elected to the professorship of natural philosophy in the Belfast Academical Institution. In 1817 he received from Marischal College the degree of LLD, and in the following year he published his chief work, 'Facts and Observations towards Forming a New Theory of the Earth', a series of papers on geological subjects. This was followed in 1820 by 'First Day in Heaven, a Fragment', a curious book, which Knight himself subsequently suppressed. On 17 September 1821 Knight married Jean, the eldest daughter of George Glennie, professor of moral philosophy at Marischal College. The couple later had two sons and four daughters. 
Knight returned to Aberdeen from Belfast in 1822 when he was appointed professor of natural philosophy at the Marischal College. His style of lecturing, according to Professor Masson, was characterized by much pungency, occasionally relieved by a 'sarcastic scurrility which no other lecturer ventured on, and which was far from pleasant' ('Macmillan's Magazine', 9.331). Though his teaching was varied and interesting, its effect was greatly marred by the shallowness of his mathematical knowledge. 
Knight died at Aberdeen on 3 December 1844. He left eight volumes of manuscript collections relating to Marischal College which went to the library of the University of Aberdeen (and formed the basis of the 'Fasti academiae Mariscallanae', edited by P. J. Anderson for the New Spalding Club). He also left relatives some autobiographical material which was said to contain racy criticisms of contemporaries. 


@@@@@


doc= 15741


Knight, William Henry (1823-1863), genre painter, was born on 26 September 1823 at Newbury, Berkshire, where his father, John Knight, was a schoolmaster; he was articled to a solicitor named Gray in that town, but after having two pictures accepted by the Society of British Artists in 1844 he decided to pursue an artistic career. In the following year he moved to London and took lodgings in the Kennington Road. He supported himself financially by drawing crayon portraits while studying at the British Museum and in the Royal Academy Schools. In 1846 he sent his first contribution to the academy exhibition, 'Boys Playing at Draughts', which was purchased by Alderman David Salomons. From that year he was a constant exhibitor at the academy, and he also sent many pictures to the British Institution. Among his works were 'A Christmas Party Preparing for Blind Man's Buff' (1850), 'Boys Snowballing' (1853), 'The Village School' (1857), 'The Lost Change' (1859), and 'An Unexpected Trump' (1861). These titles indicate the character of Knight's art, which was limited to scenes of everyday life, generally small-scale, and usually involved children. Knight died on 31 July 1863 at his home, 15 Godolphin Road, New Road, Hammersmith, leaving a widow, Jane Sarah, and six children. 


@@@@@


doc= 15742


Knightbridge, John (1619/20-1677), Church of England clergyman and founder of the Knightbridge professorship in moral theology at Cambridge, was the fourth son of John Knightbridge (died 1640), attorney of Chelmsford, Essex, and his wife, Mary, daughter of Charles Tucker of Lincoln's Inn. He matriculated from Wadham College, Oxford, on 8 December 1637, aged seventeen. His elder brother Richard ('b'. 1611/12) had matriculated from there in 1629. John was a scholar from 1639 to 1647, and graduated BA on 4 December 1641. On 3 May 1645 he migrated to Peterhouse, Cambridge, where five days later he was admitted to a fellowship in place of the ejected Christopher Bankes of Yorkshire. He became lecturer at St Nicholas, Newcastle, in 1657, and after resigning his fellowship in July 1659 he became rector of Spofforth, Yorkshire. He was also rector of Holy Trinity, Dorchester, from 1663 to 1670. In 1673 Knightbridge took the degree of DD, having graduated BD from Peterhouse in 1655. 
It is, however, for the bequests of his will rather than the scope of his learning that Knightbridge is most remembered; he died in the parish of St Paul, Covent Garden, London, in December 1677, having made provision for bequests to benefit both his colleges and his home town. He left $40 each to the common funds of Wadham and Peterhouse, and gave to the master and fellows of Peterhouse as feoffees in trust his fee-farm rent of the manor of Heslington near York, a house in the Minories, London, $7 a year from his land in Chelmsford called Little Vinters, and another house and land on condition that they paid $50 annually to a professor of moral theology or casuistical divinity. The first election to the chair, called the Knightbridge professorship, followed in 1683, the first holder of the post being Thomas Smoult of St John's College, who himself further endowed it with a bequest upon his death in 1707. Later Knightbridge professors included Edmund Law, later bishop of Carlisle, and Frederick Denison Maurice; Knightbridge himself was enrolled among the primary benefactors of the university at Cambridge's commemoration services. He also presented a library for the use of the clergy of Chelmsford and the neighbourhood. This was long housed in a chapel on the north side of Chelmsford parish church; since the church's elevation to cathedral status the Knightbridge library has been moved to the cathedral's south porch library. 


@@@@@


doc= 15743


Knightley, Sir Edmund (d. 1542), lawyer, was the third son of Sir Richard Knightley (died 1534) of Lincoln's Inn and Fawsley, Northamptonshire, and Jane, daughter and heir of Henry Skynnerton (or Skennard) of Alderton. He was admitted to the Middle Temple in 1505, and as a barrister served as reader of Strand Inn in 1519. As early as 1515 he was elected to parliament for Reading, and in 1529 was returned for Wilton, though he had no apparent connection with either Berkshire or Wiltshire. In 1520 he made an impressive match with Ursula de Vere (1488-1558), sister and coheir of the fourteenth earl of Oxford, the widow of George Windsor, and from 1522 until 1526 he held the lucrative post of attorney-general to the duchy of Lancaster. On becoming a bencher of the Middle Temple in 1523 he gave a reading on the 1484 'Statute of Uses' (1 Ric. III c. 1). He was added to the Northamptonshire commission of the peace in 1524, served on various 'ad hoc' commissions in that county, and was recorder of Coventry in the same period. 
Knightley was created serjeant-at-law in November 1531, and became a member of Serjeants' Inn, Fleet Street. The following year he became involved in a dispute with the crown over some property, and after making 'proclamations' slandering the king's title was in September 1532 committed to the Fleet by the 'lord chancellor' (presumably Lord Keeper Audley). His impetuous behaviour probably prevented his rise to office. In October 1537 Audley proposed him for a judgeship, praising his 'great wit and learning' but adding the somewhat qualified recommendation that: 'though he be wilful and full of fond inventions, yet it is to be thought if ever he will be an honest man that now he hath these great possessions and may have the estimation of a judge, he will leave all his own fancies and become a new man. ('LP Henry VIII', 12/2, no. 805)' Cromwell was not minded to attempt the experiment, and Knightley received no further professional advancement. In 1538 he inherited substantial entailed family properties on the death of his elder brother Sir Richard, and rebuilt the great hall at Fawsley. A window panel from Fawsley, with the arms of Knightley impaling Vere, is now in the Burrell collection at Glasgow. Knightley probably gave up practice at the bar about this time. Indeed, in 1539 he asked Cromwell to obtain for him a discharge from the degree of serjeant. Late in life he was knighted, an unusual distinction for a serjeant who was not a king's serjeant. He died on 12 September 1542 and was buried at Fawsley, where his monumental brass represents him in armour rather than in a serjeant's robes. He was survived by his wife, who died in 1558 and was buried at Letheringham, Suffolk; the couple had six daughters, who, it appears, all died in infancy. 


@@@@@


doc= 15744


Knightley, Sir Richard (1533-1615), politician and patron of puritans, was the eldest son of Sir Valentine Knightley of Fawsley, Northamptonshire, and his wife, Anne, the daughter of Edward Ferrers of Warwickshire. The family fortunes were based on sheep farming, for which the lands on their estates were enclosed, and on the death of his father in 1566 Sir Richard inherited an extensive property said to be worth $13,000 a year. By that date he had already moved into the circle of Robert Dudley, earl of Leicester, who knighted him at Kenilworth in 1565 during the royal progress there. Knightley's religious sympathies with the puritans were already apparent, and in 1567 he was among other associates of Leicester granted a patent as governors of the property of ministers of the gospel in Warwickshire, an initiative which created a fund to support preaching clergy. Knightley married first, in 1556, Mary (died 1573), the daughter of Sir Richard Fermor; they had three sons and three daughters. His second wife was Elizabeth (died 1603), daughter of Edward Seymour, duke of Somerset; they had seven sons and two daughters. 
Knightley's social position soon secured for him a central role in the government of his own county; he was a regular member of the bench, and was appointed sheriff in 1568, 1581, and 1589. He was deputy lieutenant of the county and heavily involved in militia and musters through into his eighties, disrupted briefly by removal from office following his support for those puritan ministers unwilling to subscribe to the canons of 1604. This was not the first occasion, however, on which his puritan sympathies had brought him into conflict with authority. In 1581 Knightley, in association with Leicester, endowed a lectureship at Towcester for Andrew King, one of the ministers deprived during the vestiarian controversy; King had been active in the town since at least 1574. But it was the radical preaching at nearby Southam five years earlier, in 1576, that had drawn the attention of the privy council. The exercise there was said to attract local justices, and it is certain that Knightley was involved, as some of those attending sermons at Southam were also accused of gadding to sermons at Fawsley. The suppression of the exercises marked a watershed in Elizabethan religious history, but Knightley continued to support puritan clergy in those parishes where he was patron, and to use his influence in the county to secure other livings for godly ministers. 
Knightley took these concerns with him when elected to parliament as member for Northampton in 1584, and when he served on committees dealing with church attendance and pluralism. In the parliament of 1586 he was on the committee which drew up the unsuccessful petition for reform of the ministry. Knightley shared the strong anti-papist views of his fellow puritans, being present at the execution of Anthony Babington in 1586 and the execution and funeral of Mary, queen of Scots the following year, though he remained sympathetic to his Catholic neighbours. By the late 1580s hopes for further reform of the church through parliament had receded and the puritans adopted an alternative strategy of local initiatives, whereby clergy were organized into classes, in order to bring about their aims. Northamptonshire became a noted centre of this movement, and many of Knightley's clerical appointees were involved. Another crisis ensued, with the clerical leadership being tried before Star Chamber in 1591. By then Knightley had himself been arraigned before that body because of his involvement in the publication of the Marprelate tracts. Knightley was actually in London during August 1588, attending to militia business relating to the Armada when the Marprelate press was removed from East Molesey to a building on his estate at Fawsley. He later claimed to have had no knowledge of the printing of 'The Epitome', which took place there over the following months, but several of his servants were implicated in both the printing and distribution of the books. By the end of the year Knightley had arranged for the removal of the Marprelate press to the Coventry house of his nephew, John Hales. While this was taking place Knightley's standing with the council remained high, and with the support of the lord chancellor, Sir Christopher Hatton, who was also lord lieutenant of Northamptonshire, he was elected as MP for the county in autumn 1588. In contrast to previous sessions Knightley played no part in the commissions dealing with religious affairs in this parliament, and after its dissolution he returned to his work as deputy lieutenant. The discovery of copies of the Marprelate tracts in the possession of Knightley's servant, who was carrying them to his master's brother-in-law, the earl of Hertford, resulted in Knightley's imprisonment in the Fleet in November 1589. He was tried before his friend Hatton who, with Archbishop Whitgift, interceded with the queen to procure his release from gaol on payment of a fine of $2000. 
By the end of 1591 Knightley had resumed his county responsibilities, sitting on several commissions. By that date the classis movement had been disbanded, and puritan activists subsequently adopted a less overtly political agenda. Along with several other local gentry Knightley continued to support puritan ministers in the area, and his status locally, reflected in his re-election as MP for the county in 1597, offered them protection. By this time the family estates had been diminished, due in part to the extravagance of his elder sons, Valentine and Edward, and this occasioned complicated settlements which were also designed to protect the interests of his second wife, Elizabeth, and her children. This marriage placed Knightley on the fringes of the succession question, and he was given custody of his nephew Viscount Beauchamp following the latter's involvement in the Essex conspiracy, but there was no truth in the rumour that he proclaimed his nephew king on the death of Elizabeth. The accession of James revived the religious debates, and in 1605 Knightley joined other county gentry in a petition supporting those puritan ministers who were being prosecuted for their failure to subscribe to the canons of 1604. With his old friend Sir Edward Montague, and another old campaigner, Sir Francis Hastings, Knightley was fined before Star Chamber and removed from the deputy lieutenancy and the commission of the peace; but he was soon restored to his local offices, maintaining an active presence until his death. His support for puritans also continued, and Fawsley became the home of John Dod, the celebrated preacher and catechist, at this time. Knightley died at Fawsley on 1 September 1615. 


@@@@@


doc= 15745


Knightley, Richard (1593-1639), politician, was born on 2 June 1593, the eldest surviving son of Edward Knightley, esquire (died 1598), of Preston Capes, Northamptonshire, and his wife, Mary Coles (1577-1611), daughter of Peter Coles, gentleman, of Preston Capes. He was admitted to Gray's Inn on 21 October 1612 and on 4 July 1614 married Bridget ('c'.1593-1639x55), daughter of Sir Thomas Lucy of Charlecote, Warwickshire. The marriage was childless and in the inquest following Knightley's death it was declared that his widow was a lunatic. Knightley sat as knight of the shire for Northamptonshire in the parliaments of 1621, 1624, 1625, and 1628-9. 
During the 1620s and 1630s Knightley was an influential figure in Northamptonshire, where he inherited the religious and political connections of his renowned grandfather Sir Richard Knightley of Fawsley. The family had been established in the county since the early fifteenth century when they acquired a large estate centred on the manor of Fawsley. Richard Knightley succeeded to this in 1618 when his uncle, Sir Valentine, died without leaving a male heir; and Fawsley Hall became his principal residence. His return to parliament at a by-election in November 1621 was a reflection of the family's status among the gentry in the western half of the shire, where they were second only to the Spencers of Althorp. Knightley became a justice of the peace about the same time and was made a deputy lieutenant in the mid-1620s. 
Knightley was an active figure in local government, notable particularly for the vigour with which he pursued Roman Catholics. This led to a 'cause celebre' in October 1625 when he was assaulted while leading a search for arms at the house of the Catholic Lord Vaux. Vaux seems to have been provoked by Knightley's insistence that, in accordance with the recent statute, his brother be fined for swearing; but Vaux was summoned before the council and imprisoned. Knightley's anti-popery and determination to punish swearing were symptoms of a Calvinist zeal which lay at the heart of his beliefs and many of his actions. His will referred to his conviction that he would 'be receaved into everlasting happiness as one of the elect of God' (will) and he was described by a contemporary as 'a great countenancer and protector of the puritans' (Cliffe, 182). He continued the family tradition of promoting a godly preaching ministry. His restoration of the impropriated livings of Fawsley and Preston Capes to the church earned praise in a 1641 survey of the state of the clergy; he was said to be the 'bosom friend' of John Preston, the distinguished court preacher and chaplain to Prince Charles, who retired to Fawsley to die in July 1628 (Morgan, 70); and he supported and protected individual ministers. The main beneficiary of this patronage was John Dod, the eminent puritan divine who had been hounded out of various livings for his failure to conform. Soon after 1625 Knightley procured a licence for him to preach at Fawsley, and he remained there until his death in 1645, shielded from the church authorities in the 1620s and 1630s by Knightley's influence and sustained by a series of trust funds. Knightley's lay friends were also drawn mainly from the ranks of fellow puritans. Among local gentry those he collaborated most closely with were puritans such as Sir Thomas Crewe and his son, John, Christopher Sherland, the recorder of Northampton, and, especially, his near neighbours Erasmus Dryden and his son, Sir John, who also protected Dod. The feoffees Knightley chose to administer Dod's trust were virtually a roll-call of godly allies outside the shire, including Lord Saye and Sele, John Hampden, John Pym, Sir Arthur Hesilrige, and Sir Nathaniel Rich. 
Knightley's standing in puritan circles, and his own commitment to the godly cause, ensured that from the mid-1620s he was drawn increasingly into national politics. During the 1624 parliament, when the duke of Buckingham was recruiting puritan allies to support his policy of war against Spain, he became a client of the royal favourite. By late April he was writing to him in familiar terms, lamenting the duke's absence from court and impressing on him the need for urgency in dealing with Spain and the impeachment of Lord Treasurer Cranfield. The relationship continued through 1625 until November, when it was disrupted by Knightley's being pricked as a sheriff to prevent him from sitting in parliament the following year. This was Charles's doing -- apparently because he disapproved of Knightley's role in the Vaux case -- but he assumed it was the work of Buckingham and loudly protested his 'continual and sole dependence' on him and 'the endeavours he had used in parliament' for his and the king's service (Anstruther, 448). Early in 1626 he appears to have become even more disillusioned with the royal favourite. Preston wrote to him soon after the York House conference in February warning that the duke had disappointed their earlier hopes that he would become a supporter of the godly cause. From this point onwards Knightley was a forceful opponent of court policy. 
This became apparent in January 1627 when Knightley led resistance to the forced loan in Northamptonshire. At a meeting with a delegation of privy councillors in Northampton he presented a protest by local gentry and freeholders declaring that they were willing to pay the levy only if it was approved by parliament. He was summoned to London where he refused to kneel before the council table -- 'lest... he should seem to acknowledge a fault' -- and was promptly imprisoned in the Fleet (Cust, 166). However, he remained defiant, continuing to co-ordinate opposition and agitate for the loan refusers to be heard in court which eventually resulted in the 'Five Knights' case'. He was released from confinement the following January and was again elected knight of the shire for the 1628 parliament. 
In spite of his reputation in Northamptonshire as 'a parliament man of much esteem' (Ball, 152), Knightley was never in the front rank of Commons orators; however, he was a diligent attender of committees and would speak out on the issues which concerned him. Foremost among these was religion. He was quick to support any measures to curb Catholics, urging that they be disarmed in February 1624 and warning of the dangers of not enforcing the recusancy statutes in June 1625. He was also very conscious of threats to Calvinist orthodoxy, protesting at the poisonous influence of Arminian sermons in June 1628. His most significant interventions on secular issues were in 1628. He was especially concerned about the dangers of billeting, repeatedly warning that the presence of Catholic Irish soldiers in Northamptonshire was a standing invitation to a papist uprising. He also delivered a fierce attack on Buckingham, whom he described as 'an enemy of all christendom', because of his willingness to grant letters of marque to Catholics and thereby undermine the loyalty of the navy (Johnson, 'Proceedings', 4.120). This last speech -- following closely on an attack on Buckingham's religion by his friend Sherland -- marked the final stage of Knightley's turning against his former patron. 
After the dissolution of parliament in 1629 Knightley's opportunities to intervene in national politics became limited, but he remained a central figure among opponents of Charles's regime. He was 'the most faithful friend and brother' to Sir John Eliot while the latter was incarcerated in the Tower in the early 1630s, supplying him with a stream of advice and support (Forster, 492). In addition he was a leading shareholder in the Providence Island Company, originally established to colonize the West Indies but at the same time providing a forum for covert meetings between leading opponents of royal policy. These were also taking place at Fawsley and at Lord Brooke's residence of Warwick Castle and out of them emerged, among other things, a co-ordinated resistance to the crown's prerogative taxation in which Knightley continued to play his part. According to the earl of Exeter, 'Precise Ric Knightley' was among those who refused to pay knighthood fines in 1630, giving as his reason the fact that he had been sheriff at the time of the king's coronation and could not leave the shire (U. Nott. L., Clifton MSS, 631). He was less openly opposed to ship money than Saye and Hampden, but he was still reported to the council for stirring up disputes over ratings in Northamptonshire. 
The impression which emerges from a study of Knightley's career is of a forceful and principled politician who commanded enormous respect among his contemporaries. His commitment to defending the Calvinist religion and the liberties of the subject was unswerving and, had he survived, he would surely have been an influential member of the parliamentarian leadership during the civil war. He died on 8 November 1639 and was buried at Fawsley on the 11th. His cousin Richard Knightley (1580-1650), son of Thomas Knightley of Burgh Hall, Staffordshire, succeeded him, and was in turn succeeded by his son Sir Richard Knightley (1609/10-1661). 


@@@@@


doc= 15746


Knightley, Sir Richard (1609/10-1661), politician, was the eldest son of Richard Knightley (1580-1650) of Fawsley, Northamptonshire, and Jane ('bap'. 1584, died 1657), daughter of Sir Edward Littleton. The great-nephew of Sir Richard Knightley (1533-1615), he matriculated from Lincoln College, Oxford, in 1628, aged eighteen. He graduated BA in 1631, proceeded MA in 1633, and entered Gray's Inn later that year. His family had connections with the Eliots of Port Eliot, one of the great parliamentarian affinities of the age. The association was strengthened further when, about 1637, Richard married Elizabeth (died 1643), daughter of John Hampden. They had a son, Richard, who died unmarried in 1665, and a daughter, Elizabeth, who died in infancy. After Elizabeth's death, on 22 July 1647 he married Anne (1615-1703), widow of Essex Devereux, son and heir of Walter Devereux, fifth Viscount Hereford, and daughter of Sir William Courten (c.1568-1636). They had a son, Essex, and two daughters, Elizabeth and Jane. 
Knightley was elected as MP for Northampton in the Short Parliament in April 1640. After its dissolution he invited Hampden, Pym, and other opposition leaders to Fawsley. He was returned for Northampton again in November to the Long Parliament. In 1643 he was one of John Pym's pallbearers. An extremely active parliamentarian throughout the 1640s he eventually reached the higher echelons of the wartime administration when he joined the Derby House committee in May 1648. In explanation of his middle group allegiance during the first war it has been said that Knightley was among those who were able to 'reconcile a desire for primitive episcopacy with support for resolute prosecution of the war' (Underdown, 64-5). However, his allegiance was ductile, and by the time of the 1647 crisis between parliament and the army he was often found making common cause with the political presbyterians, and he remained at Westminster during the apprentices' putsch. In December 1648 he appears to have strongly favoured concluding with the king on the terms agreed at Newport. Despite his middle group credentials he was imprisoned for a fortnight after Pride's Purge. 
After the execution of Charles I, Knightley kept out of politics until the fall of the Rump Parliament. In 1651 a licence to go abroad was granted to one Richard Knightley. In 1655 he was described as one of those local governors 'who do not persecute but are loving to Friends' ('DNB'). He came to accept the protectorate, and represented his native county in Richard Cromwell's parliament (declining a nomination to serve as speaker), remarking that 'A Commonwealth was never for the common weal' (Underdown, 345). When the Rump was restored in May 1659 Knightley joined with William Prynne and others in attempting unsuccessfully to enter the house. Subsequently he was prominent in securing the readmission of the secluded members in February 1660, and soon afterwards he was appointed to the council of state. Rejected at the Northamptonshire election to the Convention later that year on account of an ill-judged remark about the return of the Stuart king to England, Knightley was elected instead, on the Eliot interest, for St Germans, Cornwall. In the Convention, Knightley spoke on the problem of dealing with maimed soldiers, widows, and orphans and sat on committees for instructing messengers to the king and preparing for his reception. Lord Wharton counted Knightley as a friend, and after the restoration of Charles II, Knightley was certainly active in support of indemnity for Wharton's associate Richard Salway. He also opposed an attempt to exclude all those who sat in judgment on Charles I from the 'Act of Indemnity', and supported lenience in the treatment of those who had supported the interregnum regimes. He appears to have favoured some sort of church settlement which would comprehend non-Anglicans, to have found the Worcester House declaration acceptable, and to have been amenable to the case for modified episcopacy. It has been suggested that 'on religious questions he generally followed the Presbyterian line' (Helms and Watson, 2.700). 
Knightley was made a knight of the Bath in the king's 1661 coronation honours, but died shortly afterwards in London on 29 June. He was buried on 9 July at Fawsley. 


@@@@@


doc= 15747


Knighton, Henry (d. c.1396), chronicler and Augustinian canon, of the abbey of St Mary de Pratis, Leicester, most probably took his name from the abbey's own manor of Knighton, on the southern boundary of the borough of Leicester. The date of his birth and his parentage are unrecorded, and all that is known of his life comes from the content of his chronicle, which he wrote between 1379 and 1396, and some references from archival sources. He was apparently a member of the house in 1363, when he saw Edward III at Leicester; his residence is attested in the 1370s, and he was still active in 1389. He probably went blind in his later years, and he wrote nothing later than 1396. He bequeathed three books -- two devotional works and an encyclopaedia -- to the abbey library. He almost certainly died and was buried at St Mary de Pratis. 
Knighton's chronicle survives in two manuscripts in the Cottonian collection in the British Library. The earlier, BL, Cotton MS Tiberius C.vii, is clearly close to the author, though none of its scribes' hands (some six in all) can be confidently attributed to him. It is certainly this copy of the work that was catalogued in the abbey library 'c'.1490 by William Charite. The second manuscript, BL, Cotton MS Claudius E.iii, is wholly derivative, and was probably made in Leicester early in the fifteenth century. 
The chronicle is a history of England from the Norman conquest to the last decade of the fourteenth century, with some introductory passages on events before 1066, including the legend of Guy of Warwick. Knighton explains his purpose in the opening chapters, and identifies himself by spelling out his name (as Henricus Cnitthon) in their initial letters, after the style of his model, Ranulf Higden (died 1364). He planned a text in four books, but feared that he might not be able to complete it, a misgiving that probably refers both to his failing sight and to the unusual structure of the narrative. 
The chronicle ends inconsequentially in 1396, but there is a break in the narrative between 1372 and 1376 that has caused much confusion. It appears that Knighton set out to write an account of his own times, beginning soon after the death of Abbot Clowne of Leicester in 1378, and then resolved to expand it into a general history from 1066. To that end he conflated the seventh book of Higden's 'Polychronicon' and the early fourteenth-century chronicle of Walter of Guisborough, which took him as far as 1340. He then launched upon his own composition, from the beginning of the war in 1337. During the 1380s he was therefore engaged in two works, one a history of Richard II's reign as it unfolded, and the other substantially a history of the Hundred Years' War. In the event he was unable to connect the two, though he came very close to doing so: a matter of four years. 
J. R. Lumby, who edited the Claudius manuscript for the 'Rolls Series', was familiar with the 'Polychronicon', but failed to identify Guisborough, and attributed his oversight to deceit on Knighton's part. He also propounded a theory that Knighton, whom he regarded as a plagiarist and fraud, had written only the first half of the chronicle, and that the section from 1376 onwards was the work of an anonymous continuator. The error, attested by references to ''Cont.' 'Knighton'' in the works of T. F. Tout and others, was finally corrected by V. H. Galbraith in 1957. 
The chronicle does nevertheless fall into two parts. In his account of the opening phases of the French war Knighton is writing at some remove in time from his material, though he shows himself a resourceful editor and narrator. His great hero was Henry of Grosmont, first duke of Lancaster (died 1361), and though it is not clear that he knew Lancaster personally, he drew much of his material from the Lancastrian household at Leicester and elsewhere. The second part of the narrative is concerned with contemporary events, running from the onset of the great schism (1378) and the peasants' revolt in 1381 to the rise of Lollardy, and the parliamentary crisis of 1387-8. 
There again Knighton enjoyed particular sources of information. He speaks familiarly of John of Gaunt, duke of Lancaster, and his son Henry Bolingbroke, and he quotes the duke's officials when he reports the sack of the Savoy in 1381 and Gaunt's expedition to Spain in 1386-9. His account of the appellants' campaign against the king's friends in 1387-8, and the proceedings of the Merciless Parliament in 1388, reflects quite close connections with Bolingbroke. 
When he described the beginnings of Lollardy, Knighton found his privileged position embarrassing. His fellow canon Philip Repyndon (died 1424), who became abbot of Leicester in 1393, had been a distinguished follower of John Wyclif (died 1384) and an enthusiastic preacher of Lollard beliefs to the laity in Leicester and elsewhere. William Swinderby, a formidable popularist and radical, was allowed to live in the abbey at some time before 1382, probably under Repyndon's patronage. Repyndon gave Knighton a variety of Lollard papers, and was evidently better assured of his ultimate justification than Knighton himself could feel. 
For Knighton emerges from his work as staunchly orthodox and conservative. He sympathizes with the victims of incompetent and oppressive government, but not with rebellion as a remedy for their wrongs. He accepts Bolingbroke as a warrantor for the appellants' cause, but does not blame Richard for his favourites' failings, and treats the king as intelligent and imposing. Lollardy he condemns wholeheartedly, and does what he can, within the evidence that he deploys, to protect Repyndon from the consequences of past follies. 
Beyond those large themes, Knighton tells a zestful story, and shows an informed interest in economic affairs: in wages, prices, and the business of supply. His putative audience liked tales of battle and military enterprise, and so did he, but he knew that campaigns had to be paid for as well as enjoyed. How far his own experience of such matters extended it is impossible now to tell, but it seems likely that at the least he had some firsthand knowledge of administration, in his own house if no farther afield. 


@@@@@


doc= 15748


Knighton, Sir William, first baronet (1776-1836), courtier and physician, son of William Knighton, was born at Bere Ferrers, Devon. His family had an estate at Grenofen, Whitchurch, Devon, but his father was disinherited, and, dying very early, left his widow in poverty. Knighton, after a little schooling at Newton Bushell, Devon, was sent at an early age to study medicine under his uncle, Dr Bredall, a surgeon in Tavistock. He afterwards spent two years at Guy's Hospital, London, where he studied anatomy under Henry Cline and surgery under Sir Astley Cooper, in addition to attending lectures on midwifery and physic. At the age of twenty-one he returned to Devon and obtained an assistant surgeon's post at the Royal Naval Hospital in Plymouth. At the end of 1797 he settled in practice at Devonport. 
In 1800 Knighton married Dorothea, youngest daughter of Captain James Hawker RN, and in 1803 he moved to London. He began practice as an accoucheur, but shortly moved to Edinburgh after learning that his medical education was not yet sufficient to meet the requirements of the Royal College of Physicians. After three years' additional study, he once more returned to London, received a degree from the archbishop of Canterbury, and the degree of MD from the University of Aberdeen (21 April 1806). He was admitted a licentiate of the Royal College of Physicians on 25 June 1806 and began practice in Hanover Square, primarily as an accoucheur. By that time Knighton had already made the acquaintance of the Marquess Wellesley, whom he attended as domestic physician on his embassy to Spain in 1809. 
In 1810 Wellesley introduced his protege to the prince of Wales, with the result that he became one of the prince's physicians, and was shortly afterwards created a baronet (1812). The prince told Sir Walter Farquhar, in explanation of this appointment, that Knighton was the best-mannered doctor he had ever met. Knighton had been a close friend of Sir John McMahon, and when the latter neared death in 1817 he visited McMahon, as McMahon's executor but with the knowledge and approval of the prince, and took possession of papers compromising to the prince, to remove any possibility of their falling into the hands of the prince's enemies. Shortly afterwards the prince appointed Knighton to the auditorship of the duchy of Cornwall and of the duchy of Lancaster, and soon began more and more to consult him on matters of business. 'I was now beginning to be made his Confidential Friend in all those secret concerns which a life of pleasure and sensuality had exposed him to', Knighton later recalled in his diary (Lawrence MS 51256). By 1821 Knighton was regularly dining tete-a-tete with the regent, now George IV, and was discreetly and efficiently negotiating with the Rothschilds on behalf of the king and scattered members of the royal family. 
Knighton's firmness of character appeared in his management of George IV's inextricably confused affairs. In spite of the king's extravagance, Knighton gradually reduced his finances to order, caused the debts to be steadily liquidated, and asserted over the king's weak mind an authority which few of the ministers enjoyed. The king wrote to him as 'dearest friend', signed himself 'most affectionately yours', and gave him written authority to notify the royal tradesmen that no goods were to be supplied or work done on account of the privy purse except upon Knighton's written orders. 
In September 1822 Knighton gave up his lucrative medical practice to devote himself fully to the king's service, having been officially appointed keeper of the privy purse in succession to Sir Benjamin Bloomfield, who had fulfilled that office as well as that of private secretary. In securing the resignation of Bloomfield, the latter office had been abolished, and the Liverpool ministry, believing the position to be an unconstitutional one, was unwilling to revive it on Knighton's behalf, or to admit him to the privy council. Nevertheless, Knighton functioned as unofficial private secretary for the duration of the king's reign, a position which kept him in daily contact with the king's ministers. 
Knighton was frequently employed on confidential missions for the king both at home and abroad for a variety of purposes, carrying private messages to his majesty's ambassadors, looking after the well-being of the younger members of the Conyngham family, and securing the financial interests of the royal family. He was sent to Paris in 1823, and in 1824 made three journeys in rapid succession to Paris, Spain, and Sardinia. These sudden and toilsome journeys, which continued yearly and often several times a year until 1825 and 1826, probably contributed to bring on the severe illness which overtook him in 1827. He was highly esteemed by the royal family and by the ministry, having taken to heart the duke of Wellington's advice to beware how he interfered in politics; but he became the object of considerable ill will, owing to his undoubted influence with the king who rarely attended to business without Knighton's urging and assistance. The prejudice which then existed against medical men also left Knighton vulnerable to criticism. Liverpool refused to make Knighton a privy councillor because he had been 'accoucheur to all the ladies in London'. This refusal would remain a sore point with both Knighton and the king. 'It is really too bad to reflect that all this intriguing and ill-humour', Mrs Arbuthnot observed in 1823, 'is going on because Lord Liverpool refused to admit into the Privy Council a fellow who, fifteen years ago, carried phials and pill boxes about the town of Plymouth' ('Journal of Mrs Arbuthnot', 1.186; 2.256). Knighton's profession, as well as the Rothschild connection, provided the basis for an attack upon him in the House of Commons on 18 February 1828; but Peel denied the existence of an invisible power behind the throne. According to Greville, the attack appears to have been got up as a joke by Henry de Ros and himself; but to Knighton, who was then abroad and unable to defend himself, it was very painful. 
Knighton attended the king almost night and day during his last illness, was present even at political interviews in the royal closet, and appears to have been sincerely attached to the king. His vigilance prevented Lady Conyngham from profiting by the temporary disorder at Windsor during the king's illness to lay hands on any of the royal jewels, and after the king's death on 26 June 1830 Knighton was busily occupied for several months in winding up his affairs. He subsequently gave up his house in London and retired into the country, which suited his failing health better than town. He died, however, in Stratford Place, Oxford Street, London, on 11 October 1836 of an 'enlargement of the heart', and was buried at Kensal Green cemetery. 
Knighton had considerable taste, especially in painting, being a friend of Lawrence and a patron of Wilkie. He also possessed very great social tact, a sound business capacity, and honestly fulfilled the duties of a very delicate position. Although he long held a position where his court interest might have commanded almost any favour, he proved himself greedy neither of money nor honours, and kept aloof from all intrigue. He left a widow, one son, and one daughter. 


@@@@@


doc= 15749


Knill, Richard (1787-1857), missionary, fourth child of Richard Knill, carpenter (died 15 December 1826), and his wife, Mary Tucker (died 1826), was born at Braunton, near Barnstaple, Devon, on 14 April 1787. In 1804 he enlisted as a soldier, but was soon afterwards bought out by his friends. He became a student of the Western Academy at Axminster in 1812, and under the influence of a sermon by Dr Alexander Waugh volunteered for missionary work. He was accepted by the London Missionary Society, and embarked for Madras on 20 April 1816. There he took services in English, while studying the native languages. His health soon failed, and he was sent in September 1818 to Nagercoil in Travancore, from where, after suffering from cholera, he returned to England on 30 November 1819. A cold climate was recommended for his health, so he sailed on 18 October 1820 for St Petersburg, intending to go to Siberia as a missionary, but British and American missionaries persuaded him to remain in that city. His mission had some success and obtained the support of the tsar and the royal family. A Protestant Bible Society was formed for supplying the 'Bible' in their own tongues to Germans, Finns, Poles, Livonians, and other persons not belonging to the Greek church. A school was opened for the children of foreigners, and a mission to the sailors at Kronstadt established. On 9 January 1823 he married Sarah, daughter of James and Isabella Notman of St Petersburg, with whom he had five children. 
On his return to England in August 1833 to obtain funds for building a larger church in St Petersburg, Knill was so successful a fund-raiser for the London Missionary Society that he was asked to remain at home, and for eight years he travelled widely in the United Kingdom, pleading the claims of the foreign missions. Exhausted by these labours, he on 1 January 1842 settled down as Congregational minister at Wotton under Edge, Gloucestershire, where he remained until he moved to Chester in 1848. His last days were some of the best of his career, and his preaching in the Chester Theatre for twenty Sunday afternoons was most successful. Few men of his time had greater mastery over large groups of people. Knill published a number of works on religion and missions, including 'The Happy Death-Bed' (1833) and 'A Dialogue between a Romish Priest and R. Knill, Missionary' (1841). He died at 28 Queen Street, Chester, on 2 January 1857. 


@@@@@


doc= 15750


Knipe, Thomas (1638/9-1711), headmaster, was born in Middlesex, probably in Westminster, the son of Thomas Knipe, a clergyman, whose wife may have been called Anne. He was educated at Westminster School, admitted a scholar on Archbishop John Williams's foundation in 1652 and captain of the king's scholars in 1656. In 1657 he was elected to a scholarship at Christ Church, Oxford, but did not matriculate until 31 July 1658. He graduated BA on 22 February 1661 and proceeded MA on 1 December 1663. From 1661 Knipe was employed as usher at his old school. In 1663 he became second master there under Richard Busby, who is said to have appreciated Knipe's merits. Knipe married twice. His first wife was Anne, daughter of Devereux Wolseley, of Ravenstone, Staffordshire, and sister or sister-in-law of Thomas Sprat, dean of Westminster from 1683 and bishop of Rochester from 1684; she died on 24 August 1685. His second wife, whom he married in 1694 when she was aged thirty-five, was Alice Talbot (died 1723), a widow, of St Margaret's parish. Knipe's son Richard, Busby's godson, became high bailiff of Westminster in 1692, and Knipe himself became head master by patent dated 6 April 1695, the day of Busby's death. He proceeded BD and DD the following 3 July. Although scarcely so formidable as his predecessor, he was respected by his pupils, who included two future prime ministers (Henry Pelham and his brother Thomas Pelham-Holles, duke of Newcastle) and two who almost held that office (William Pulteney and John Carteret, Lord Granville). A letter from Knipe to Lord Herbert of Cherbury, whose son Henry was at Westminster, and 'stood in the yard, crying, and blubbering, and roaring' (Warner, 1.164), shows that he was a strict disciplinarian, but he lacked the dynamism for the major building work then necessary. 
Knipe's head mastership saw the revival of the Latin play after a lapse of some years. He also published Greek and Hebrew grammars for the use of Westminsters -- an edition of the Greek grammar of Apollodorus Atheniensis (1686) and 'Hebraicae grammatiicae rudimenta' (1708). He had some part in, and is indeed said to have been the author of, 'Grammatica Busbeiana auctior et emendatior' (1702). The 'Graecae linguae dialecti in usum scholae Westmonasteriensis' (1706) of Michel Maittaire had a commendatory preface by Knipe and he was himself the dedicatee of 'An Historical Account of the Heathen Gods and Heroes' (1710) by William King, an Old Westminster. 
On 13 October 1707 Knipe was presented to a canonry of Westminster, and installed on 17 October. He died at Hampstead on 5 or 6 August 1711, in his seventy-third year. He was buried beside his first wife and several of his children on 9 August in the north cloister of Westminster Abbey; a monument was put up to him in the south aisle by his widow, Alice, who received by his will a $100 annuity. This and other bequests -- $50 annuities to his grandsons Richard and Thomas Knipe and $1500 to his granddaughter Anne Knipe (for which his nephew Thomas Sprat was a trustee) -- reveal that he had accumulated a comfortable wealth. 


@@@@@


doc= 15751


Knipp, Elizabeth (d. 1680x82), actress and singer, performed with the King's Company in London shortly after the Restoration. Nothing is known of her before then. Her first name may have been either Elizabeth (as she appears on a lord chancellor's warrant of 1672) or Mary (as she is named in a poem by Sir Charles Sedley). Her husband was Christopher Knipp, and they are probably the Christopher Knipp and Elizabeth Carpenter who were married at Knightsbridge Chapel in 1659. Their possible children appear in the parish registers of St Paul's, Covent Garden, St Clement Danes, and St Giles-in-the-Fields: Ursula ('bap'. 26 Dec 1663), 'Samuell Son of Christopher Nepp' ('bur'. 16 July 1666), Catherine ('bur'. 20 July 1667), and Mary ('bap'. 7 June 1672). Mrs Knipp certainly lost an infant son at the time that Samuel was buried; she had a young daughter, 'mighty pretty and witty', alive in February 1667 (Pepys, 8.57). 
Mrs Knipp is known primarily through the diary of Samuel Pepys. His first reference to her is on 6 December 1665, when he sees 'Knipp, who is pretty enough, but the most excellent, mad-hum[ou]red thing; and sings the noblest that ever I heard in my life' (Pepys, 6.321). He often praises her singing: he writes on 2 January 1667 that he saw Fletcher and Massinger's 'The Custom of the Country', 'wherein Knipp does the Widow well; but of all the plays that ever I did see, the worst, having neither plot, language, nor anything in the earth that is acceptable. Only, Knipp sings a little song admirably' (ibid., 8.3). She often danced, sang, or both between acts of plays. 
Mrs Knipp's earliest role may have been Lusetta in Thomas Killigrew's 'Thomaso', in November 1664. In tragedy, Mrs Knipp played Alibech in Dryden's 'The Indian Emperor' (1665) and Felicia in his 'Tyrannic Love' (1669), and Aglave in Nathaniel Lee's 'Sophonisba' (1675); in comedy, she played Otrante in Richard Rhodes's 'Flora's Vagaries' (1667), and characters in three of Wycherley's comedies: Lady Fidget in 'The Country Wife' (1675), Lady Flippant in 'Love in a Wood' (1671), and Eliza in 'The Plain Dealer' (1676). She consistently appears in cast lists as secondary, supporting characters. 
Her singing and acting were avenues to a greater intimacy between Pepys and Knipp. On 2 January 1666, he writes of 'my dear Mrs. Knipp, with whom I sang; and in perfect pleasure I was to hear her sing, and especially her little Scotch song of 'Barbary Allen'' (Pepys, 7.1). Several days later she signs her letter to him as Bab Allen; he responds as Dapper Dicky. The second of January was also their first recorded physical encounter: 'so I got into the coach where Mrs. Knipp was, and got her upon my knee (the coach being full) and played with her breasts and sung' (ibid., 7.2). Their first sexual intercourse may have been in April 1668. That he much admired her beauty is evident from an entry dated 17 August 1667: 'I was pleased to see... her come out in her night-gowne, with no locks on, but her bare face and hair only tied up in a knot behind; which is the comeliest dress that ever I saw her in to her advantage' (Pepys, 8.388-9). He expresses disgust at the mean circumstances in which she lived and wrote that 'she lives a sad life with that ill-natured fellow her husband', who, he states, 'is a kind of Jocky', that is, a horse-trader (ibid., 7.5; 9.391). 
In October 1668, after jealousy and irritation, Mrs Pepys finally required Pepys to forgo seeing Mrs Knipp. Pepys promised, but then struggled with his vow and limited his visits to the King's Company theatre to avoid encountering the actress. After this, little is recorded about Mrs Knipp except for her stage performances. She was arrested for unidentified 'misdemeanors' in February 1668 and again in April 1668. Her last recorded performance was as Mrs Dorothy in D'Urfey's 'Trick for Trick' in March 1678. She probably joined the group of players who headed to Edinburgh in 1680. Pepys had recorded seeing Knipp with the actor Joseph Haines (d. 1701) in May 1668, and a 1682 manuscript poem in the British Library by Haines states that she had died giving birth to their daughter there: 'To Madam Gwin, a Rhymeing Supplication' states that Knipp is 'In Child birth from mee to Lizeum departed' (Cameron, 'Jo Haynes, 'Infamis'', 63). No other evidence exists to indicate that she returned to London or that her acting career continued after 1682. 


@@@@@


doc= 15752


Knolles, Richard (late 1540s-1610), historian and translator, was born some time in the late 1540s, probably at Cold Ashby, Northamptonshire, possibly the son of Francis Knolles (or Knowlis) of Cold Ashby. He entered Lincoln College, Oxford, where he graduated BA on 24 January 1565, probably in his late teens, and was elected to a fellowship. Remaining at Lincoln in an increasingly senior capacity, he proceeded MA on 4 July 1570, and from the evidence of his signature on college documents stayed there until at least August 1572. In 1576 he is recorded as returning to the college as a visitor. His post-Oxford career of more than thirty years was probably spent almost entirely as headmaster of the grammar school at Sandwich, Kent, founded by Sir Roger Manwood about 1563. In 1568 Manwood had established four scholarships at Lincoln College, two of which were reserved for pupils of his grammar school; he would have met Knolles during the administration of these scholarships. Documentary evidence shows that Knolles was still headmaster of the school in 1606, though he was then being pressed by the governors to retire on a pension due to a perceived lack of diligence in carrying out his teaching duties. 
After Sir Roger Manwood's death in 1592, his son Sir Peter became Knolles's patron in both a professional and a literary sense. Acquainted with many of the learned scholars of the period, and subsequently himself a member of the Society of Antiquaries, Sir Peter not only encouraged Knolles to write but was also in a position to obtain for him the loan of books, reports, and other source materials from Robert Cotton and others (BL, Cotton MS Julius C.III, fol. 225, records Knolles's acknowledgement to Cotton). Knolles produced three substantial pieces of work. He is best known for 'The Generall Historie of the Turkes', first published in 1603. Compiled from a range of Byzantine and western histories, travellers' reports and letters, together with material from Leunclavius's recent Latin translation of a late fifteenth-century Ottoman chronicle, Knolles's was the first major work on the subject to appear in English, and was quickly recognized as a masterpiece of narrative synthesis. There is no evidence that he had any original personal reason for choosing to write a history of the Ottomans; the suggestion came possibly from Sir Peter Manwood in the light of growing interest in the Ottoman state in London following the chartering in 1581 of the Turkey (subsequently Levant) Company and increased commercial and diplomatic relations with the empire. A second edition appeared in 1610, incorporating both a continuation of the history to 1609 (a total of 1296 folio pages) and, appended to the main narrative, Knolles's fifteen-page 'Discourse on the greatnesse of the Ottoman Turkes', analysing the strengths and weaknesses of the state. 
As a compilation Knolles's work is of a piece with the then popular genre of 'generall histories' of various countries. It is, however, distinguished by an elegant and compelling style and by Knolles's underlying presentation of Ottoman success as being in large part 'the just and secret judgement of the Almightie' in the face of 'the smal care the Christian princes... have had of the common state of the Christian commonweale'. He repeatedly draws attention to the need for Christian unity to combat the Turks successfully, contrasting European disunity with 'a rare unitie and agreement' among the Ottomans in both religious and political affairs (introduction, Knolles, 1631 edn, ii). Subsequent editions in 1621, 1631, and 1638 included continuations by other writers: for 1609-20 by the translator and compiler Edward Grimeston; for 1620-28 based on the dispatches of Sir Thomas Roe, English ambassador in Constantinople, and containing translations of Ottoman diplomatic correspondence. The sixth edition of 1687-1700 was brought out by Sir Paul Rycaut, and is particularly valuable for the account of Rycaut's own residency in Constantinople from 1661 to 1667 as secretary to the English ambassador. A two-volume abridgement was issued in 1701 by John Savage. Knolles's literary style was admired by such writers as Johnson, who praises it in no. 122 of 'The Rambler', and Byron, and the work's reputation as an engrossing account survived well into the nineteenth century. 
Knolles's second published work was his translation of Jean Bodin's 'La republique', which appeared in 1606 as 'The Six Bookes of a Commonweale', dedicated to Sir Peter Manwood. Working critically from both French and Latin originals, Knolles produced not simply a translation but 'a work of independent judgement' (McRae, A38-39) which both illuminated textual difficulties in Bodin's texts and also showed how the latter's work could be understood by a near-contemporary English reader. No doubt it was in aid of such understanding that Knolles chose to translate 'republique' as 'commonweale', a term with familiar associations in England. Bodin's absolutist treatise was influential in seventeenth-century England, especially among royalists; however, Knolles's translation of it was not reprinted after 1606, which suggests it had only a limited role in circulating the Frenchman's ideas. 
Knolles's third major undertaking was an unpublished translation from the Latin original of Camden's 'Britannia'. This survives in the Bodleian Library (MS Ashmole 849), but remains little known. Knolles died in Sandwich and was buried there in St Mary's Church on 2 July 1610. He is not known to have married. 


@@@@@


doc= 15753


Knollys, Thomas (d. 1546), college head, was probably from Halifax, Yorkshire. In 1495 he was ordained acolyte and admitted to Magdalen College as a bachelor fellow; by 1498/9 he had taken up a fellowship. In 1500/01 he was appointed as an Ingledew chaplain-fellow at Magdalen, taking his MA and becoming second bursar at the college the next year. On 30 June 1502 he was instituted as vicar of Wakefield, a living he retained until his death. Knollys was admitted BTh on 19 April 1515, and was awarded his DTh in June 1518. In January 1528, following Wolsey's legatine visitation which superseded the authority of the bishop of Winchester, Laurence Stubbes, the president of Magdalen, resigned. Thomas Knollys was nominated to the vacancy, probably by Wolsey. In the contest which followed on 6 February 1528 he was chosen in preference to John Higdon, a former president. Knollys was one of those who delivered the university's determination against the validity of the king's divorce in 1531. 
On 13 March 1535 the members of the college unanimously pledged their allegiance to the king as head of the established church. But it is clear that Knollys had reservations about the new dispensation, and he spent a large sum on adorning the high altar of the chapel. His staunchly traditional outlook on religious rites and ceremonies sat uncomfortably with government policy now evolving under the direction of Thomas Cromwell. In 1535 Cromwell tried to remove Knollys from the presidency, but his nominee, Thomas Marshall, was rejected by the Magdalen fellows. The following year, however, a more acceptable candidate was found in Owen Oglethorpe, whose candidature the fellows agreed to support in the event of the death of the incumbent president. Pressure, meanwhile, was put on Knollys; on 3 February 1536 he set his signature to a letter of resignation. The fellows proceeded to the installation of Oglethorpe, and Knollys retired to Yorkshire. On 7 May 1536 he was instituted as vicar of South Kirkby; he held the living until his death on 9 May 1546 in Wakefield. He was buried at Wakefield church. 


@@@@@


doc= 15754


Knollys, Charles, styled fourth earl of Banbury (bap. 1662, d. 1740), peerage claimant and duellist, was baptized at Boughton, Northamptonshire, on 3 June 1662, the eldest son of Nicholas Knollys (1631-1674) ['see under 'Knollys, William, first earl of Banbury], who claimed to be third earl of Banbury, and his second wife, Anne Sherard (died 1680). Nothing is known of his early years and education, but it can be safely assumed that he was drawn into his father's struggle for his title from an early age. Nicholas, whose father may have been William Knollys, the eighty-six-year-old first earl of Banbury, or his mother's lover and eventual second husband, Edward, fourth Baron Vaux, had since 1661 been excluded from the House of Lords, which firmly believed that he was illegitimate. 
In June 1685 Knollys petitioned the Lords for a writ of summons. As had happened in his father's case, an order of the house for a full hearing went unfulfilled, and his claim remained undetermined. It was still at issue when on 16 May 1689 he married, at the Nag's Head Coffee House, James Street, Covent Garden, Elizabeth ('bap'. 1663, died 1699), daughter of Michael Lister of Burwell, Lincolnshire, and his wife, Ann Burrell. She took the title countess of Banbury. At the same time Knollys seems to have been involved with an actress, Elizabeth Price, with whom he apparently travelled in France and Italy from November 1689 until the spring of 1692. Price, in a claim rejected by the court of arches in 1697, said she married Knollys at Verona in 1692. They were reputedly the parents of Sir Charles Knowles, first baronet (d. 1777), although a later unknown mistress may well have been Knowles's mother. 
The dispute over the Banbury title took on a new urgency in 1692. Abandoning his mistress, who then drifted to the Stuart court at St Germain, Knollys returned to London. His callous behaviour towards his wife probably was behind the duel he then fought with his brother-in-law, Captain Philip Lawson. Knollys killed Lawson, and on 7 December 1692 the Middlesex grand jury indicted him for murder -- as Charles Knollys, esquire. His life in the balance, Knollys petitioned the Lords for trial as a peer, a move which provoked the house to resolve that he had no right to the Banbury title -- a decision against which twenty peers entered a protest in the Lords' journal. The upper house remained, by a relatively small majority of about eight, unpersuaded by Knollys's claims. Judicial proceedings, however, gave his claim an important boost, and rescued him from his murder charge as well. Knollys successfully had his trial moved from the Middlesex sessions to the king's bench, and at his arraignment in Hilary term 1693 he argued that his indictment was invalid, since he had been charged as Charles Knollys and not earl of Banbury. In Trinity term 1694, after months of argument, the four judges of the king's bench, agreeing unanimously, threw out the indictment on the principle that 'pater est quem nuptiae demonstrant', presuming the legitimacy of children born in wedlock, and freed Knollys. 
Reinforced by the judges' unambiguous support for his claim to the earldom, Knollys continued to press ahead, petitioning again in 1698. The Lords, to whom William III referred the petition, reiterated their 1693 resolution and complained about the judges' presumption. His marriage, on 30 April 1702, at St Bride's, London, to Mary (died 1762), daughter of a London merchant, Thomas Woods, might have eased his financial plight, but was a sign of his declining social position. Yet Knollys saw a new chance for his claim in 1712, as Queen Anne's government desperately sought votes in the Lords for its policies. He petitioned the queen in March, but the privy council, to whom it was referred, had not reported by Anne's death in August 1714. Knollys made a final attempt, in 1727, at the accession of George II. He petitioned once again for a writ of summons, but the attorney-general, Sir Philip Yorke, in 1728 advised that the matter should be taken no further on the grounds that the Lords and king's bench could not agree on the case. From then until his death at Dunkirk on 26 August 1740, Knollys seems to have given up the unequal struggle. He was buried on 28 August. His only surviving son with his first wife, William Knollys (1694-1740), who became MP for Banbury in 1733, always styled himself Viscount Wallingford as the eldest son of the earl of Banbury, but died just under three months before his father, on 6 June 1740, and so was unable to renew the claim. His eldest son with his second wife, Charles Knollys (1703-1771), went into the church, and neither Charles nor his two sons, William Knollys (1726-1776) and Thomas Woods Knollys (1727-1793), laid formal claim to the title. 
The son of Thomas and his wife, Mary Porter (died 1798), 
In 1806 Knollys petitioned the crown for a writ of summons to the House of Lords as earl of Banbury. The report of the attorney-general, Sir Vicary Gibbs, on the case took two years to complete, and was ambiguous, declaring that no final decision about the earldom had been reached in the multitude of proceedings in the case since the 1660s, but suggesting that Nicholas Knollys's legitimacy was doubtful. The petition was referred to the committee of privileges of the House of Lords, who reported after a further five years' discussion that Knollys had not made out his claim. On 15 March 1813 the Lords resolved that Knollys was not entitled to the earldom. The decision was controversial, and sparked a formal protest by eleven peers led by the former lord chancellor, Lord Erskine. 
Defeated, Knollys abandoned the use of the title earl of Banbury, and returned to his military career. He had been promoted lieutenant-general in 1808, was lieutenant-governor of St John's, Newfoundland, from 1818 to 1827, was promoted general in 1819, and was governor of Limerick from 1826 until his death in Paris on 20 March 1834, from influenza. His descendants never formally claimed the earldom, although his son Sir William Thomas Knollys (1797-1883) asserted his right to the title in a letter to the 'Morning Post' in 1863 and in his will, and his grandson William Wallingford Knollys (1833-1904) did the same in a letter to 'The Times' in 1883. Another grandson was Francis Knollys, private secretary to Edward VII, who was to return the family to the Lords when he was created Baron Knollys in 1902 and Viscount Knollys in 1911. 


@@@@@


doc= 15755


Knollys, Sir Francis (1511/12-1596), politician, was the elder son of 
Robert Knollys's career exhibits an interesting parallel to those of the founders of the Russell and Cecil dynasties. The service of each began under the first Tudor, continuing under his son. Like the Russells and the Cecils, Knollys was able to acquire lands and gentry status. Knollys, of course, died while his son was a child but seems to have established himself so well in the royal favour that Henry VIII extended his patronage to the son. His children included, besides Francis, a son, Henry, and two daughters, Mary and Jane. The latter married Sir Richard Wingfield of Kimbolton Castle. The son Henry (died 1583) was in some favour with Edward VI and Elizabeth I. He went abroad with his brother Francis during Mary's reign. In 1562 he was sent on a diplomatic mission to Germany to observe the temper of German protestants, and in 1569 was temporarily employed in warding both Mary, queen of Scots, at Tutbury and the duke of Norfolk in the Tower. He was MP for Grampound in 1547, New Shoreham in 1563, Guildford in 1571, and Christchurch in 1572. His will, dated 27 July 1583, was proved on 2 September. 
Francis Knollys succeeded his father in 1524, although a contested claim to the inheritance was not settled until he secured an act of parliament in 1545. According to tradition he attended Magdalen College, Oxford, but there is no record of this. He sat in 1533 in the fifth session of the 1529 parliament, the result of a 1532 by-election. He must have found a patron, conceivably Cromwell. He almost certainly sat in the 1536 house and probably in 1539, but the constituency is not known in any of these cases. Before the next parliament he married, about 1540, Katherine ('c'.1523-1569) ['see 'Knollys, Katherine], the daughter of William Carey of Aldenham, Berkshire, and Mary, sister to Queen Anne Boleyn. Katherine's brother Henry, Lord Hunsdon, was later Knollys's colleague in the privy council. In 1545 he sat in parliament for Horsham as a nominee of his wife's kinsman the third duke of Norfolk. In 1547 he represented the newly enfranchised Cornish borough of Camelford, possibly as a protege of Protector Somerset. He may have sat in the spring parliament of 1553 but the records are too sparse to make this certain. 
Knollys's court career began with his appointment as a gentleman pensioner in that newly founded body in 1539; he served until 1544. He was master of the horse to Prince Edward by 1547. He also launched a military career, campaigning in the Flanders expedition of 1543 and with the king in northern France the following year. His service at Pinkie in 1547 earned him a knighthood. In Edward's reign he became constable of Wallingford Castle and steward of Ewelme. He was a JP for Oxfordshire from 1547 to 1554. 
Knollys was moving in advanced protestant circles by 1551, when he attended discussions on the eucharist in Cecil's house. The precise circumstances of his conversion to the new faith are unknown, but the experience was a profound one. It shaped every aspect of his public career to the end of his life. Of the men who became his fellows on the council only Bedford shared his depth of religious conviction. There is doubtful evidence that he went to Lausanne immediately after Mary's accession to arrange for the reception of English exiles. He was certainly in England in 1554, since he was named as JP for Oxfordshire in February of that year and sold land in Cambridge, but by 1555-6 he was a student at Basel. Later he and his family lived at Frankfurt, and it was from there that he returned to England at Elizabeth's accession, possibly even before the event. On 14 January 1559 the queen admitted him to the privy council and at the same time appointed him vice-chamberlain of the household. His wife became a lady of the bedchamber, a post she held until her death on 15 January 1569, aged thirty-nine; the queen was much attached to her, and paid for her funeral in Westminster Abbey. 
In the parliament which met in 1559 Knollys and Sir John Cooke were the two most prominent Marian exiles among its members. They had a key role to play: the bill designed to restore the Edwardian religious order was committed to their care. They piloted it successfully through the lower house only to see it emasculated in the upper. What role Knollys may have played in the post-Easter sitting is not known. Over the next four years he was employed in a variety of assignments. In 1560 he was dealing with the special Spanish ambassador, Glajon, sent to mediate between the English government and the Guise regency in Edinburgh, bringing the reassuring message that Spain would not intervene. In the same year Cecil considered him as a possible replacement for Throckmorton as ambassador in Paris, but he was ruled out as lacking adequate private means. 
In 1562 Knollys was appointed captain at Portsmouth and placed in charge of sending supplies to the English force at Newhaven (Le Havre). As the enterprise faltered in 1563 he was asked to report on strategies of withdrawal, a move which he was urging, and in June was ordered to cross to Newhaven, but the withdrawal pre-empted a visit to the plague-ridden port. About the same time he was sent on a tour of inspection of defences in the Channel Islands and the Isle of Wight. Then in 1566 he was sent to Ireland for a two-month stint to advise Sir Henry Sidney, the lord deputy, on the O'Neill problem in Ulster. It was while he was there that he heard of the death of the treasurer of the chamber. Quick to apply for the vacant post, citing the burden of a family of twelve children, he won the appointment. He had already in 1565 been named captain of the guard. In 1570, when he was promoted treasurer of the household, he apparently laid down the other offices. 
In 1568 a much more onerous responsibility fell on Knollys's shoulders, an assignment which, however, displayed the queen's confidence in her kinsman. On news of Mary Stuart's arrival in England in May 1568, Knollys was sent north to be her guardian. Accompanied by Lord Scrope, the warden of the west marches, he met the Scottish queen at Carlisle at the close of the month. Although impressed by her personality, he saw her from the first as a danger to the realm. In their initial encounter he responded to her invective against Moray by reminding her that there were occasions when the deposition of princes was justified -- 'inter alia' murder -- a reply which reduced her to tears. After further dealings with Mary, Knollys and Scrope urged that she either be allowed to return to Scotland unimpeded by Elizabeth, or remain in England at the pleasure of the queen. Knollys believed she would return home only when French help was available. He warned of the risks of her escape 'with devices of toys or towels at windows' (Wright, 1.276-80) and urged that she be moved further away from the border. In the following months he was forthright in arguing with Cecil that the queen must support Moray and if that meant exposing 'the spots in Mary's coat' (ibid., 1.280-81), the sooner the better. He complained bitterly of Elizabeth's hesitation in making a decision, which, he said, weakened her friends and strengthened her enemies. By July he had persuaded Mary to move to the more secure situation of Bolton, achieving this on his own initiative without royal authority. 
Mary remained in Knollys's custody until the end of 1568. In December Elizabeth sought to involve him in her tortuous dealings with Mary. He was to press on her a scheme by which she would abdicate and remain in England at the queen's pleasure. Moray would continue as regent and Prince James be brought to England for his education. In return the charges against her would be consigned to oblivion. All this was to be delivered as of his own devising. This was to be done before the arrival at Bolton of Mary's agent, the bishop of Ross, who was being purposely delayed in London. Knollys carried out his instructions but when Ross arrived he brought a very different proposal -- that Mary and James should reign jointly. Sir Francis scolded his mistress roundly for allowing Ross to suggest such an alternative. He went on to lecture the queen: 'Now as Your Majesty's judgement must needs be ruled by such affections and passions of your mind as happen to have dominion over you; so yet the resolutions digested by the deliberate consultations of your most faithful counsellor ought ever to be had in most account in their weighty affairs. (Haynes, 497-8)' He reiterated that she must disgrace Mary and support Moray. This was plain speaking. Within three weeks, in February 1569, Knollys had the pleasure of transferring his charge to the earl of Shrewsbury. 
Knollys had another role, a major and continuing one, in the first dozen years of the reign, as manager of crown business in the Commons, where he sat in no fewer than eleven sessions. In 1559 he represented Arundel, probably through the good offices of his fellow councillor the earl of Arundel. In the same year he succeeded the late Lord Williams of Thame as 'custos rotulorum' for Oxfordshire, and in 1564 he became high steward of the city of Oxford. From 1563 to 1593 without a break he represented the shire in parliament. His position enabled him to place his son Henry (died 1582) as his fellow knight of the shire in 1572, and William (died 1632) in 1584 and 1593. Edward (died 1575) and Francis (died 1648) served as burgesses for Oxford city between 1571 and 1589. Sir Francis Knollys's parliamentary patronage was large. In 1563 he most probably nominated the Taunton burgesses (he leased the castle and borough); in Oxfordshire he controlled the New Woodstock seat in 1571 and 1572, and at Banbury in 1563 his relative Francis Walsingham sat. From 1563 to 1586 one of the Knollys family always sat for Reading, where Leicester was patron. Indeed no fewer than six of his sons sat in the Elizabethan Commons, the largest family group in the house. 
The government's business manager and its voice in the house, Knollys sat on all committees dealing with matters of concern to the government and was responsible for nominating speakers, carrying bills to and from the Lords, reporting on conferences with the upper house, reporting on the work of major committees, and -- often a painful task -- conveying the queen's will to the Commons. It was his special business to shepherd government measures on their way through the house, ensuring their successful passage. He had also to keep close watch on private initiatives which might cross the government's intentions or arouse the royal displeasure. 
In 1559, sharing the leadership of the returned exiles with Sir Anthony Cooke, Knollys was a member of the committee which probably amended the government's 'Supremacy Bill'. He also served in a commission to enforce the 'Statute of Supremacy'. In 1563 he was the head of a committee which amended an anti-Catholic bill so as to make first refusal of the oath of supremacy subject to the penalty of 'praemunire' and the second to death -- this against the queen's will: in debate he declared 'this business must be settled sword in hand and not by words and that he would be foremost in the struggle' (HoP, 'Commons, 1558-1603', 2.410). In 1566 he played a prominent part in the exchange between the queen and parliament over her marriage. He delivered her message promising marriage, served on the conference with the Lords on the succession, was among the thirty MPs summoned to hear her further words on the subject, and then finally was the bearer of the royal command to cease debate on the issue. His committee appointments were numerous: five in 1563, six in 1566. Their subjects included the queen's revenues, coneys, informers, excess of apparel, drinking and swearing, and the garrison of Berwick. 
The restless 1571 parliament loaded Knollys with difficult tasks. The religious radicals, led in the house by Strickland, were pressing for reform of the 'Book of Common Prayer', a measure with which Knollys probably sympathized. Nevertheless, he did his duty in opposing the move, arguing that matters of ceremony as distinct from those of doctrine were solely for the queen's authority as supreme governor. He sought to sweeten the pill by suggesting that there were secret reasons why the queen did not want the move now. Then on the sequestration and imprisonment of Strickland, Knollys had to defend the royal action, asserting that the MP's offence lay not in his words uttered in the house but in his offering a bill against the queen's prerogative. Strickland, argued Knollys, erred in his zeal, but without malice to the royal dignity. Apart from this Knollys made a long speech on the subsidy and reported the subsequent committee. He spoke twice on the 'Treason Bill', and also on usury and vagabonds. He served on eleven other committees, chairing some of them; their subjects included coneys once again, along with recusant priests, church attendance, and other matters. 
In 1572 Knollys had to deal once more with the problem of the Scottish queen. He had previously, in October 1569, been sent on a sensitive commission to arrest the duke of Norfolk, who had retired to his home ground at Kenninghall and seemed for a moment about to resist. Knollys brought him successfully to the Tower. That event triggered off the northern uprising among the gentry whose loyalty Knollys had questioned in 1568. Now, in the aftermath, parliament met in an agitated mood. On 12 May 1572 a committee was appointed to confer with the Lords on the queen of Scots. After the report on the conference was heard, Knollys urged a further meeting. There followed a move to bring forward the succession question. It was Knollys's business to stifle this move. While declaring his own wish for a settlement of the succession, he warned that it would founder on royal opposition and urged prayer to God to change the queen's heart. When a proposal was made to petition the queen to execute Mary, Knollys argued it was best to approach the queen 'by way of opinion [rather] than request' (HoP, 'Commons, 1558-1603', 2.411). Given his views on the queen of Scots, it must have cost him something to take this line. When the queen rejected a bill of attainder, Knollys saw that the Commons were still unsatisfied and suggested a petition of both houses urging the queen to reconsider. The petition was duly drawn up and presented; the royal response was to forbid discussion of the Scottish queen's matter. 
The Commons now turned to the question of Norfolk, in the Tower under sentence of death; the house began to agitate for his execution. Knollys's own view was that were the duke his brother, he would have him dead, but he urged delay in pressing the queen. The house, persuaded by his argument, agreed to postpone action until the following Monday. Before the house sat that morning Norfolk went to the block. In the aftermath of that event the Commons was concerned with the case of Arthur Hall, a dependant of Norfolk's, who was brought before the bar. Knollys again spoke against punishing Hall for his opinions, urging moderation in dealing with a rash head and a fool. 
There was ample routine business which involved Knollys, but the largest piece was a bill giving clergy the right to vary the order of service by omissions or additions, with episcopal approval. Knollys heartily approved of the measure, declaring 'that diverse mischiefs grew by the straitness of the statute for uniformity of common prayer', for which the bill offered remedy (HoP, 'Commons, 1558-1603', 2.412). But he was aware that the preamble, critical of the 'Book of Common Prayer', would offend the queen. Accordingly he managed its removal from the bill as well as eliminating the more extreme changes proposed by the bill's backers. At this juncture Elizabeth asked to see the religious bills before the house. When she declared her dislike for this measure, Knollys defended it, showing her that even in the Chapel Royal the prescribed order of the prayer book was daily broken. The queen responded graciously and asserted that she would take all good protestants to her protection. The bill passed both houses but in spite of her fair words did not receive her assent. 
1572 was the last parliament when Knollys bore the burden of responsibility for managing the house. That task was now taken on by Sir Christopher Hatton and Sir Walter Mildmay. Knollys, now sixty, continued to play an active role in parliament. In the first session of 1576 he sat on the committee examining Peter Wentworth, bringing in the report which recommended Wentworth's committal to the Tower. Besides this committee he sat on nearly a dozen others. In the second session he was similarly burdened, and spoke against Paul Wentworth's motion for a public fast. In 1584 he was no less busy, again sitting on a round dozen committees, reporting a bill against seditious words and practices, and attending a conference with the Lords on that subject. He also spoke against the puritans' bold attack on the establishment in the book and bill motion. Not until 1586-7 did his activities begin to diminish, but he did sit on the inter-house conference on the fate of Mary Stuart and moved the subsidy bill to pay for the newly launched war in the Low Countries. Then in 1589 his duties again increased with the chairmanship of half a dozen committees, including that on the vexed question of purveyance. In 1593, at eighty-one, he still chaired at least two committees. 
Of Knollys's activities as privy councillor the record is sparse, but a surviving letter of January 1578 to Secretary Wilson is revealing. The queen, it seems, was unwilling to listen to Knollys's advice, so he poured his frustrated anguish into Wilson's ears. According to the letter, Knollys knows the queen is loath to hear him, 'and indeed my speech hath no grave worthie of her Majestie's ears... and therefore I am the more silent, altho when I may be heard... rather than my silence shold be gyltie of her danger, I do utter my unworthy speech unto her Majestie'. He knows the queen must be obeyed in all matters which do not touch the danger of her estate, but if she does 'not supress and subject her own will and her own affections unto sound advice of open cownsayle in matters touching the preventing of her danger, she will be utterly overthrown'. Who will give safe counsel if she will not listen? 'Nay, who will not shrinkingly... play the partes of Richard the Second's men than to enter into the odious office of crossing her Majestie's wylle?' Specifically she must act to prevent a Spanish conquest of the Low Countries, to check the drift of Scotland into French arms, and to halt papist activity. Turning to domestic matters, he bewails the suspension of Archbishop Grindal, which will raise the 'pride and practice' of papists. Thinking on all this leads him to wish for a private life; he is not cut out to be a courtier. He ends by praying Wilson to hide nothing of this letter from the queen (Wright, 2.74-6). 
In August of the same year Knollys rejoiced in the queen's change of mind in agreeing to aid the states general; had she acted sooner -- rejecting the advice of those who feared war with Spain -- the present crisis might have been avoided. It might be too late now. Fearful of a Spanish victory which might lead to a Franco-Spanish alliance against England, Knollys was equally concerned that French support for the rebels would give them dominance in the Netherlands. Two years later, during the prolonged episode of the Anjou match, Knollys wrote to Leicester outlining his objections. The earl was now his son-in-law; his daughter Lettice Dudley, widowed by the first earl of Essex, had married Leicester. In 1585 Knollys was a member of the council committee to negotiate the treaty of alliance with the Dutch along with Burghley, Leicester, Hatton, Walsingham, Admiral Howard, and his brother-in-law Hunsdon. Later in the year the same body of men (minus Leicester) was busy with instructions for the treasurer at war. 
Knollys had always been sympathetic to those who found the 1559 settlement but halfly reformed. He gave voice to these sentiments in his lamentations on Grindal's fate. He was alarmed, however, by the manifestations of the religious left. In 1581 he wrote to the chancellors of the two universities to condemn a recently published English translation of a work by Sebastian Castellio with its freewill doctrines. Knollys blamed the bishop of London, John Aylmer, for failing in his role as clerical censor in prohibiting publication. Such writing would discredit mainstream protestantism, giving a weapon to the papists, who, he feared, were gaining in strength and who were more dangerous than all the sects. In 1584 he would vote against the radical proposals embodied in the bill and the book. 
It was the accession of John Whitgift to the primacy and his ensuing programme of enforced clerical conformity that aroused Knollys to active intervention in the affairs of the church. The matter was one of practice rather than doctrine. The new archbishop had required of all clergy unqualified subscription to three articles accepting the royal governorship, the 'Thirty-Nine Articles', and the 'Book of Common Prayer'. Those refusing the required oath were suspended. When the parliament of 1584 met, members of the lower house initiated a petition to the queen which called for the restoration of the suspended clergy, a bar on proceedings against clergy who omitted any part of the prayer book, and the suspension of unqualified and unlearned clergy. Knollys headed the delegation which sought the Lords' participation in the petition. The upper house, after some hesitation, were persuaded to support the document. It was effectually denied by the queen. 
In May some of the councillors wrote to Whitgift in behalf of the suspended clergy. Knollys followed with a letter to the primate in June, urging Whitgift to 'open the mouths' of the zealous preacher non-signers by lifting their suspension. Their preaching was sorely needed in the campaign against the papists, whose words were all too persuasive to a people naturally given to superstition and idolatry. They could be withstood only by preaching. The cause was one not only of religion but of policy, the very maintenance of the queen's personal safety, threatened as it was by a still untamed papistry. Knollys also sent Whitgift a writing which argued the equality of all clerics and impugned episcopal authority as encroaching on the royal supremacy. Whitgift refused Knollys's request, and the latter turned to Burghley for support against a policy which silenced sound preaching while neglecting the popish menace. 
In 1589 Knollys returned to the fray. The archbishop had made a visitation of Peterborough diocese. Puritan sources sent a copy of the articles to Knollys, who wrote indignantly to Burghley demanding a public acknowledgement by the bishops that they had no superiority over their brethren except as they were given authority by the queen. He followed this by a denunciation of the covetous ambition of church governors who despised the humble doctrine of Christ's government, citing the 'Bible' as asserting the equality of all ministers. There followed a bombardment of letters to Burghley, denouncing the misuse of episcopal authority on biblical authority. Then, shifting ground, he argued the legal case. Henry VIII had granted the bishops the same authority as their predecessors, but Cranmer had secured a statute conferring legal powers. This, however, had been repealed in the present reign, hence the illegality of ecclesiastical courts. These activities had now won the queen's disapproval. In 1590 or 1591 she banned Knollys from her presence. This was not the first occasion of royal displeasure; some years earlier she had forbidden him to deal with the puritans. 
In 1591 Cartwright and Travers had been ordered to appear before Star Chamber. Knollys had not been notified, but soon found out that the chancellor had proposed to afforce the court with a DD and a DCL. Asked his opinion of this man, Knollys responded that since the queen would not allow him to speak his conscience he could answer only with her consent, but he reiterated his argument against episcopal authority and desired it to be debated publicly. He then appealed to Burghley, bemoaning the strait in which he found himself. It was deadly grief to him to offend the queen publicly, yet he would rather die than impugn her safety by a pleasing speech. He asked Burghley to show his letter to the queen so that she might give him leave to speak his conscience publicly -- or else, if this denied, to make him a private man. 
Knollys's position in these years had moved beyond objection to specific acts of the archbishop to an assault on the episcopal office as exercised by Whitgift. In his view the archbishop was asserting a divine right origin for his authority and hence independence of, if not superiority to, the crown. Knollys was insistent that bishops had no inherent superiority over other clergy, and that whatever powers they exercised derived solely from the queen. 
There seems to have been a reconciliation with the queen, since Knollys wrote in January 1592 of a conversation with her in which she declared she feared puritans more than papists, to which he retorted that the former could only act through parliament with her consent. He urged that they be given open and fair trial to defend themselves against charges of treason and sedition. The queen's attitude towards the puritans countered Knollys's repeated assertion that what was at stake was an argument not merely about ecclesiastical matters but about the queen's safety. He had developed an obsessive notion of the link between abuses of episcopal authority and the queen's security. Only through the preaching which Whitgift forbade could the deadly menace of papistry be crushed. 
Knollys continued indefatigable in the cause. In his last parliament, that of 1593, he again championed the puritans. Early in the session James Morice brought forward a bill which assailed ecclesiastical jurisdiction and specifically forbade the requirement to subscribe to the contentious articles set out by Whitgift. Knollys spoke out boldly in its favour: the bill was intended to reform abuses. If bishops were indeed acting illegally, they should suffer the penalties of 'praemunire'. In a letter to Burghley, Knollys set out what he saw as the larger issue. The clergy sought to have a separate clerical government, exempt from the actions of the temporal government. That was his final word on the subject. He continued in council attendance but in much diminished frequency. He died on 19 July 1596, and was buried at Rotherfield Greys, Oxfordshire. 
Knollys was consistent in his deep-rooted loyalty to evangelical protestantism, but in his public career bowed, sometimes reluctantly, to his royal mistress's differing views. He became an articulate champion of the evangelical party and a bold critic of the official ecclesiastical policy only in the last decade of his life. As he saw it, Whitgift's efforts to ensure conformity in worship and doctrine would stifle the preaching of the gospel, halt the progress of renewed reform, and lose the battle against a still unconquered papistry. The queen and the archbishop saw the puritans as a menace to the unity of the church just as dangerous as the papists. Those who would have sympathized with Knollys were fast disappearing. He was virtually the sole survivor of the heady Edwardian years, for him the first stage in what was to be a continuing work of reform. Such a conception was in stark contrast to the royal view, which saw the queen defending a completed and unified order under attack by irresponsible dissidents. Yet although Elizabeth silenced Knollys, he retained her confidence as a councillor. In 1593 she rewarded him with the Order of the Garter. 
Knollys had been granted the lordship and manor of Caversham with lands in Berkshire, Oxfordshire, and Reading by Edward VI. In 1563 and 1564 Elizabeth granted Sir Francis and 'our beloved kinswoman', his wife, lands in Buckinghamshire, Somerset (seven manors), Berkshire, and Oxfordshire. Knollys exchanged the Somerset lands for property near Reading. He acquired control of Kimbolton Castle, Huntingdonshire, as guardian (with Walter Mildmay) of the estates of his nephew and great-nephew the Wingfields, Charles and Edward. 
Knollys had at least seven sons and four daughters. The eldest son, Henry, predeceased his father, but after a considerable public career. An MP and esquire of the body, he married the daughter of the privy councillor Sir Ambrose Cave. William Knollys, the second son, succeeded to his father's offices and won promotion and an earldom. Of the others, all had parliamentary careers. Of the four daughters, Lettice married first Walter Devereux, first earl of Essex, to whom she bore Robert, the famous second earl. Second, she married Robert Dudley, earl of Leicester, and lastly Sir Christopher Blount. Cecilia, maid of honour to the queen, married Sir Thomas Leighton, captain of Guernsey; Anne married Thomas, Lord De La Warr; and Katherine married first Gerald Fitzgerald, Lord Offaly, and second Sir Philip Boteler. 


@@@@@


doc= 15756


Knollys, Hanserd (1598-1691), Particular Baptist minister and author, was born in Calkwell, near Louth in Lincolnshire, but grew up in Scartho, near Grimsby (also in Lincolnshire). His father, Richard Knollys, was vicar of two churches in Grimsby and Scartho. The first name of his mother is unknown but his maternal grandparents were Richard Hanserd and Christobel Sutcliffe. 
Hanserd Knollys was educated at home by a private tutor and later at Grimsby grammar school and St Catharine's College, Cambridge. The precise date of his matriculation (as a pensioner) is unclear with the sources being inconsistent on the point. Some authorities, including 'Alumni Cantabrigienses' itself, indicate 1629, but it was more probably in 1627. From his own brief account of his days at Cambridge it is plain that Knollys was already greatly concerned with spiritual matters, and it was at Cambridge that he came under the influence of puritans, whose works, he reports, he spent a good deal of time reading. Knollys later taught at Gainsborough grammar school, but after his ordination by the bishop of Peterborough as deacon on 29 June 1629 and then, the following day, his ordination as priest, he was given a small living at Humberstone (Lincolnshire). On 22 May 1632 he married Anne Cheney of Wyberton (died 1671), near Boston, Lincolnshire, 'a holy, discreet woman, and a help meet for me, in the ways of her household, and also in the way of holiness; who was my companion in all my sufferings, travels, and hardships that we endured for the gospel' (Knollys and Kiffin, 8-9). The marriage lasted almost forty years and produced seven sons and three daughters. 
Some time after his marriage, probably about 1636, Knollys came to the view that the wearing of a surplice, the use of the sign of the cross at baptism, and the admission of those known to be wicked to the eucharist were all improper, and resigned his living. Thinking well of Knollys the bishop of Lincoln, John Williams, was keen that he should not resign and offered him a better living. Knollys refused. However, with the full knowledge of the bishop he did continue to preach. The bishop's toleration is not altogether surprising: he was already well known for his toleration of puritans. Furthermore Knollys's particular objection to practices considered either non-biblical and / or high church, would have gained a sympathetic hearing from the fundamentally anti-Laudian Williams. Knollys's disagreement with established religion, however, deepened to the point where he came to the view, in his words, that 'my ordination received from the Bishop was not right, and though I had preached some years by virtue of that ordination, I had not received any seal from Christ of my ministry'. Knollys therefore renounced not only his living but his ordination itself and determined 'not to preach any more, until I had a clear call and commission from Christ' (Knollys and Kiffin, 9). Such a call came, it seems, after extended discussions with the puritan minister John Wheelwright, who convinced Knollys that he should seek righteousness by grace. It was at this point, Knollys later stated, that he 'began to preach the doctrine of free grace, according to the tenor of the new and everlasting covenant, for three or four years together, whereby very many sinners were converted, and many believers were established in the faith' (ibid., 16). 
In 1636 Knollys was arrested by order of the court of high commission and taken to the house of the man who served the warrant but, Knollys later wrote, 'God helped me to convince him, and he was so greatly terrified in his conscience that he set open the doors and let me go away' (Knollys and Kiffin, 16). Knollys then fled with his family to London where he spent some considerable time before boarding a ship for Boston, Massachusetts. In the 'Life' he describes a hard sea passage lasting fourteen weeks. During the passage, according to Governor Winthrop, one of Knollys's children died. 
Knollys's time in Boston was relatively short: he himself indicates that he was in America 'about four years' (Knollys and Kiffin, 17), though it may have been slightly less than this. According to White, Knollys may not have arrived in Boston before the summer of 1638, and he arrived back in London on 24 December 1641. His time in America was not particularly easy. He arrived without means of support and with very little money, living in a house that a friend had loaned him. He became unpopular in Boston itself on account of alleged antinomianism, an unwelcome reputation that did not diminish when, upon moving to Pascataquack (Piscataqua) where he gathered a church, he was charged with, and apparently admitted to, sexual misconduct. (It is worth noting that Wheelwright had also departed for Massachusetts in 1636 and he too quickly became involved in the antinomian controversy there. Though documentary evidence to support the conclusion is lacking, then, it may have been that Knollys's association with his old spiritual adviser continued during this time.) 
There were other troubles as well, including a significant dispute with another exile, Thomas Larkham, which resulted in charges of inciting a riot. Knollys got himself into further trouble for criticizing the Massachusetts magistrates and as a result was forced to leave the area and move to Long Island, though here too a protest was filed against him. Perhaps somewhat fortunately Knollys was at this time called home by his ageing father, a call which he answered, and thus ended what must have been a far less than happy sojourn. 
On returning to London in December 1641 Knollys once again faced financial hardship from which he was rescued, he later reported, by some Christian friends. One of these was Dr John Bastwick, a determined presbyterian, who like Knollys had previously found himself on the wrong side of the law. Despite this initial act of friendship, however, Knollys and Bastwick were later to engage in bitter doctrinal dispute on the question of church government. These Christian friends provided free lodgings and in addition some money. Preferring, Knollys wrote, to work for a living than to be maintained by such charity he returned to school teaching, at first by taking on some former pupils of a deceased schoolmaster who had lived nearby and then by becoming master of the free school in the parish of St Mary Axe. Times appear to have been happier and he reports considerable success in gathering 140 day scholars and sixteen boarders. Knollys left this employment, however, to become a preacher in the parliamentarian army. As uncompromising as ever, it seems, he felt constrained to leave the army too once he 'did perceive the commanders sought their own things more than the cause of God and his people, breaking their vows and solemn engagements' (Knollys and Kiffin, 20). Again he returned to London and again he was arrested for unlicensed preaching. However, though he was kept several days in gaol, he was released after giving an account of himself to the authorities. About this time he was preaching also in Suffolk, for which again he was arrested and was again, according to his own account, acquitted and indeed given permission by parliament upon the petition of the inhabitants of Ipswich to preach in the region without hindrance. However, following another disturbance, probably near Woodbridge, during which he was 'stoned out of the pulpit', his efforts became once more concentrated in London (ibid., 22). Tensions continued and further arrests followed. 
By 1644 it seems that Knollys became a member of Henry Jessey's congregation. Jessey was the minister of an Independent church in London, a church which has a strong claim to being the first Independent church in the capital, the founder of which was Henry Jacob. By the time Knollys joined the group this congregation had already suffered some internal dispute on the question of both the mode and timing of baptism (it was really the latter rather than the former that was the central issue in early Baptist controversies). This controversy quickly touched Knollys and his wife, who both refused to have their new-born son baptized. Jessey himself originally adopted a view in favour of infant baptism (by immersion); however, when the question was revisited, his views changed and he was subsequently himself baptized by Knollys in June 1645, laying himself open to the charge of Anabaptism. 
Knollys himself 'gathered' a church in 1645, one of the first Particular Baptist congregations anywhere (Knollys and Kiffin, 25). This met next door to St Helen, Bishopgate, where on 10 August 1645 he was heard to pray for the Leveller leader John Lilburne; he was evicted from the property and moved his activities to Finsbury Fields. From there the church moved to Coleman Street, George Yard, Whitechapel, and finally to Broken Wharf, Thames Street. Knollys maintained his association with this congregation for the rest of his life, though in his own words 'I was absent from the Church sometimes upon just occasions, and with their leave, or forced from them by violent persecution' (ibid., 23). Along with another former Church of England clergyman Benjamin Cox he subscribed to the second edition of the confession of faith issued by the London Baptists in 1646. Also in 1646 came 'An Appendix to a Confession of Faith', written by Cox, but probably expressing the views of the whole London Baptist group. 'The high Calvinist soteriology and a refusal to admit any to communion who had not been baptised as believers' are evident throughout that document (White, 9). 
Throughout this time Knollys continued teaching to provide the means of support for himself and his family, though he took on other posts too. Between 1645 and 1660 he held several offices including examiner at the customs and excise, a post he relinquished on 29 March 1653. He was clerk of the check until 23 May 1655. It was during this time that he studied with Christian Ravis from whom he learned Hebrew. Knollys also returned to Scartho, his home, where, on 12 October 1658 he was installed as vicar of St Giles, a post he held for some time without relinquishing his leadership of the London church. Knollys' ministry in Scartho is a surprising turn of events: he had, after all, resigned from the Church of England a dozen years earlier and was by this time quite clearly in the nonconformist camp. How Knollys himself accommodated two apparently divergent sets of views is unclear, and one can only assume that his father's term in the same church meant that, as a Knollys, he was accepted even if he was known to hold rather different views. (Cheney Knollys, Hanserd's son, was later to serve in the same parish.) Quite how unusual this arrangement was in the late 1640s is not entirely clear; however, we do know that some nineteen Particular Baptists were ejected from other livings during the period from 1660 to 1662. 
Thomas Venner's insurrection in January 1661 and the subsequent clampdown it brought once more led to Knollys's arrest. There is no hard evidence that Knollys was in substantial sympathy with the views of Venner or the Fifth Monarchists, but he was nevertheless judged guilty by association on at least two counts. Both have an element of plausibility: first, a number of Venner's followers had previously belonged to Knollys's congregation and some fourteen of them, though not Knollys himself, had signed the Fifth Monarchist manifesto, 'A Declaration of Several of the Churches of Christ'; and second, Knollys had visited the Fifth Monarchist visionary Anna Trapnell, though what the purpose of this visit was is unclear. There was hence certainly some smoke, if not an obvious fire, and Knollys was subsequently committed to Newgate prison where he remained for eighteen weeks. The 'Act of Pardon' which accompanied the restored king's coronation gave him his freedom. His continued association (loosely at least) with, and preaching at, All Hallows Church, a focal point of millenarian excitement in London, however, meant that he remained under suspicion, with the result that he fled first to the Netherlands and then to Germany where he remained, he reported, for 'two or three years' (Knollys and Kiffin, 25). During this time he had substantial property confiscated in London, despite, he claimed, winning a legal battle relating to this matter. After this time he returned to London via Rotterdam and once back in London resumed his teaching; by the time of his death he had built up a substantial school. 
On 19 May 1670 Knollys was again arrested during a meeting at George Yard and was sent to Bishopsgate compter, but was allowed to preach to the prisoners. He was soon set at liberty again. The last twenty years of his life are left uncharted in his autobiography. But it is plain they were hard for him physically, emotionally, and spiritually. He struggled against illness, the loss of family through sickness and death (his wife died on 30 April 1671), and his own doubts. In his preface to Knollys's 'Life', William Kiffin suggests that Knollys did write more, but that the latter part was lost. From other sources, however, it is plain that Knollys became a central figure in the first steps towards the consolidation and formal organization of the Baptist movement. For example, together with Kiffin, he was among the first London signatories who called for the assembly of churches held in London from 3 to 12 September 1689. It was here that the impetus towards the consolidation of the Baptist movement really took hold. He attended also the assemblies of 1690 and 1691. He died on 19 September 1691 and was buried in Bunhill Fields, London. 
As a key figure in the early growth of the Baptist movement, especially the Particular Baptists, Knollys's influence should not be underestimated. Even if, as now seems probable, he did not himself convert Jessey to the Baptist cause, he was at least a partner in the discussions and central to developments. His extended period as minister of an Independent congregation in London brought some stability, as did his drive towards final organization, while his undoubted learning was put to the task of providing some theological undergirding of positions that were emerging. 
Knollys was a prolific author. One of the more important of his works is his autobiography, published posthumously as 'The life and death of that old disciple of Jesus Christ and eminent minister of the gospel, Mr Hanserd Knollys who died in the ninety third year of his age; written in his own hand to the year 1672 and continued in general, in an epistle by Mr William Kiffin, to which is added his last legacy to the church' (1692). This work provides a firsthand account of the trials and strains, as well as the beliefs, of a seventeenth-century English dissenter and as such provides a window on the turbulent and somewhat unstable political and religious world which he inhabited. The same is true of his several polemical works such as his 'A Moderate Answer to Dr Bastwick's Book called 'Independency not God's Ordinance'' (1645), which outlines his views on the nature of the Christian congregation and places the same in the direct context of the seventeenth-century debate regarding episcopacy and church government in general. The following year, 1646, Knollys published 'The Shining of a Flaming-Fire in Zion', another polemical work, this time aimed at a book by 'Mr Saltmarsh'. Knollys's work disputes Saltmarsh's interpretation of a number of 'New Testament' texts relating to baptism and in the course of doing so again both outlines his own views on the issue and places them in the broader context in which they were formed. His writings on the book of 'Revelation' are particularly informative, for they indicate further (and in dramatic form) the extent to which polemics were an important part of the world that Knollys inhabited. This is seen especially in 'An Exposition of the Whole Book of the Revelation' (1689) and 'An Exposition of the Eleventh Chapter of Revelation' (1679) which illustrate clearly enough the widespread fears of Catholic plots. Unsurprisingly in both these works Knollys reflects the standard protestant view of his day, namely that the archvillain of 'Revelation' is the pope and that the book as a whole outlines the struggle between the true church and its enemies. He also published a number of grammars of the Greek, Latin, and Hebrew languages. 


@@@@@


doc= 15757


Nicholas Knollys, third earl of Banbury (1631-1674), nobleman, was born on 3 January 1631 at Harrowden, Vaux's Northamptonshire home. At fifteen he assumed the title as third earl of Banbury. He is referred to as Lord Banbury in a settlement made by Vaux in 1646, and it was as earl of Banbury that he petitioned Oliver Cromwell for permission to sell lands on 27 February 1655. By this time he was gaoled for debts amounting to $10,000. His first wife, Isabella (died 1655), daughter of Mountjoy Blount, first earl of Newport, and his wife, Anne, died shortly afterwards. On 4 October that year, at Stapleford, Leicestershire, he married Anne (died 1680), daughter of William Sherard, first Baron Sherard, and his wife, Abigail, thus improving, at least temporarily, his financial position. This was enhanced further, when his mother died on 17 April 1658, freeing up the dower estate. 


@@@@@


doc= 15758


Knolles, Sir Robert (d. 1407), soldier, was probably the son of Richard, who was of burgess or yeoman stock from Tushingham in the parish of Malpas, Cheshire. His mother is frequently named as Eva Calveley, sister of Sir Hugh Calveley, with whom Robert had a lifelong friendship. But no convincing proof of Eva's existence has ever been found, nor of a family relationship between Robert and Hugh, long professional brothers-in-arms, though their families were associated as early as 1354 when Sir John Wingfield granted Lea manor in Churton Heath, Cheshire, to Mabel Calveley and Henry Newton, chaplain, with remainders in tail to Hugh and David Calveley (both described as 'the elder'), and Robert, son of Richard Knolles. 
Knolles and Calveley first appear together in arms in documents relating to the siege of La Roche-Derrien in northern Brittany in 1346, when Knolles may have served as an archer under Calveley, probably his senior by a few years. But Knolles was already a knight when next glimpsed, in one of the most notable chivalric feats of the later middle ages, the battle of the Thirty (26 March 1351). This was fought between two teams representing the Anglo-Breton and Franco-Breton forces then disputing the succession to the Breton throne in a civil war that began after the death of Duke John (III) in 1341 without direct heirs. They agreed to joust 'a outrance', following a challenge by Jean de Beaumanoir, captain of Josselin, to the English captain of Ploermel, whom he accused of mercilessly exploiting the local population. Combatants were killed on both sides and the rest wounded in a bitter contest in which the Anglo-Bretons were vanquished and both Calveley and Knolles made prisoner. 
Released shortly afterwards, Knolles soon amassed a considerable personal landed fortune in south-eastern Brittany and neighbouring Mayenne, while acknowledging allegiance to Edward III and his ward, John de Montfort. In February 1352 Edward III confirmed his possession of Le Grand Fougeray, between Nantes and Rennes, which he had recently captured. He also held Chateaublanc (Ille-et-Vilaine) and La Gravelle (Mayenne) through the 1350s. When Gui de Nesle, marshal of France, brought troops in support of Charles de Blois, Montfort's rival, in the summer of 1352, Knolles fought alongside Sir Walter Bentley, Edward's lieutenant in the duchy. At Mauron (Morbihan) on 14 August 1352, a shattering defeat was inflicted on the French by using a combination of dismounted men-at-arms and archers that had already proved effective in the Breton war and at Crecy (1346). Evidence for the moveable wealth Knolles had already amassed from his career is provided by a schedule of plate and other goods, drawn up at Sutton Vautort, Devon, forfeit when Knolles fell temporarily out of favour in 1354, probably for disobeying Bentley's successor, Thomas Holland. In 1355 Edward III also revoked an earlier grant of the castle of Pestivien (Cotes-d'Armor). 
However, in June 1356 Knolles joined Henry, duke of Lancaster, with 300 men-at-arms and 500 archers drawn from Breton garrisons, contributing a third of Lancaster's force, in a 'chevauchee' through Normandy in support of Godefroy de Harcourt and Philippe de Navarre that reached as far as Verneuil, before returning to base at the abbey of Montebourg in the Cotentin. Skirmishing around Rouen and a siege of Domfront followed. But Lancaster failed to link up with Edward, prince of Wales, who had launched his own famous raid from Bordeaux that culminated in the battle of Poitiers, from which Knolles, unable to cross the Loire, was also absent, despite some reports to the contrary. 
Knolles's next campaign with Lancaster was an unsuccessful siege of Rennes (October 1356-June 1357). When this was lifted, he led an attack on Honfleur in Normandy with Sir James Pipe, where according to the chronicler Henry Knighton, with some 600 men, they defeated Robert de Clermont, marshal of France, with 800 men-at-arms and 5000 infantry, killing at least 500, while another surprise attack resulted in the slaughter of a further 1000 Frenchmen. Whatever the exact figures or circumstances (much embroidered by chroniclers, who also mention Knolles at a siege of Dinan), it is in these years that he gained his reputation as 'the most able and skilful man of arms in all the companies' ('Chroniques de J. Froissart', 5.366), cool, calculating, knowing when to retreat but striking with terrible effect. 
Knolles's reputation as 'a true demon of war' (Bridges, 178) was most spectacularly demonstrated in a great raid into the Orleannais and upper Loire region in autumn 1358 when he ostentatiously displayed a banner announcing: '
Qui Robert Canolle prendera, 

Cent mille moutons gagnera. 
('Chroniques de J. Froissart', 5.351)' He burnt the suburbs of Orleans, and, establishing himself at Chateauneuf-sur-Loire, ravaged the Auxerrois where numerous other English garrisons were living off the countryside, as they had been doing in Brittany and Normandy for years, and where the charred gables marking his progress became known as 'Knolles's mitres'. A first attack on Auxerre in January 1359 was repulsed, but on 10 March 1359 the town was delivered to him, despite the presence of a garrison under the renowned 'routier' Arnaud de Cervole (the Archpriest). Among Knolles's companions on this occasion was Sir Thomas Fogg; he was later joined by Ieuan Wyn, known as the Poursuivant d'Amour, a famous Welsh mercenary, and by Calveley. On 30 April the Auxerrois agreed to pay 40,000 moutons and hand over pearls worth a further 10,000 moutons (approximately $10,000 in total) to be rid of Knolles. 
Knolles now turned his attentions to the Auvergne, after apparently abandoning even more ambitious plans to attack the Comtat Venaissin, where Pope Innocent VI and his cardinals became highly alarmed at his progress when he was allegedly within twelve leagues of Avignon. Using Pont-du-Chateau as he had previously exploited Chateauneuf, Knolles raided widely in the Auvergne, taking Cusset, attacking St Pourcain, and even moving on Le Puy. On 25 June 1359 the townsmen of Millau in the Rouergue received letters warning them of his approach. But a counter-attack led by Thomas de la Marche, deputy of the dauphin, Charles, regent of France during the absence in prison of his father, Jean II, following his capture at Poitiers, forced a retreat after some captains accompanying Knolles went off independently. Burning Montbrison and sacking churches and abbeys around St Etienne, Knolles then began a staged withdrawal in which he was joined by Calveley, who had been fighting with other Anglo-Navarrese forces on the borders of Burgundy. Knolles passed through Limoges, and by the autumn was back in Brittany where he captured the future constable of France, Bertrand du Guesclin, who was establishing his own formidable credentials as a captain by similarly ruthless means. 
The treaty of Bretigny-Calais (May-October 1360) brought the first phase of the Hundred Years' War to a close and temporarily restricted opportunities for freebooters like Knolles. He was confirmed in possession of his French estates, visited England, obtained a pardon for any crimes committed abroad, sat in the court of chivalry, and regularized the payments he owed Edward III for his castles in France. But by October 1361 he was clearly tired of inactivity since he is reported fighting in Savoy, 'en route' for Italy with Sir John Hawkwood and Annechin de Bongarden, though little appears to be known about his actions there. By 1363 he was back in Brittany, serving at the relief of Becherel in June, and accompanying John de Montfort to Poitiers in November, when the prince of Wales tried to negotiate a peaceful end to the Breton civil war by bringing the two rivals together. When discussions finally broke down in February 1364, following another meeting at Poitiers attended by Knolles, preparations began for the inevitable military campaign that was to follow. In March 1364, Montfort conferred on him the lordships of Derval and Rouge (Loire-Atlantique), whose rightful owner had been a prisoner since the battle of Poitiers. As the Breton rivals manoeuvred for advantage in the summer, Knolles brought a force of 900 or 1000 men to Montfort's siege of Auray (Morbihan). He then fought, under the overall command of Sir John Chandos, in the vanguard of the Anglo-Breton army, which inflicted a crushing defeat on Charles de Blois as he attempted to lift the siege. Blois himself was killed on the field (29 September 1364) and Knolles took several prisoners, including the count of Auxerre. In April 1365, by the first treaty of Guerande, Charles V finally acknowledged John de Montfort as duke of Brittany. 
With his wife, Constance, to whom he was married by 1355, and who hailed from Yorkshire, though she had spent much of the previous decade in Brittany, whence she sometimes personally led small contingents of English troops, Knolles briefly settled down to enjoy his Breton estates and his prominent position at the ducal court. In 1365 he negotiated the return of La Gravelle, Segre, and Ingrande (Mayenne) to Amaury de Craon for 10,000 livres and arranged an exchange of Chateaublanc and Fougeray with John de Montfort for an annual rent of 2000 livres on the lordships of Conq (Concarneau) and Rosporden (Finistere), though he retained Derval and Rouge, which should have returned to their lord under the treaty of Guerande, despite his protests. Knolles was, however, forced to disgorge some profits from the raid of 1358-9, in his search for respectability and social acceptance, by repaying some of the 40,000 moutons Auxerre had agreed to pay, in exchange for a papal pardon. On 4 August 1366 the abbot of St Aubin d'Angers was ordered to return jewels, relics, and other goods which he had deposited at the abbey to St Germain d'Auxerre. 
Early in 1367 Edward, the Black Prince, summoned Knolles to join his expedition to Spain in support of Pedro the Cruel of Castile. After crossing the Pyrenees via Roncevalles, he reconnoitred around Navaretta in February and March with Sir William Felton. But he escaped the skirmish in which Felton was killed and fought on the left wing at Najera (3 April 1367), before returning to Brittany. At Candlemas 1368 he was at Dinan (Cotes-d'Armor) when, in a celebrated incident, John de Montfort's efforts to expunge a painting of his late rival, Blois, from the walls of the Dominican friary resulted in an apparently miraculous occurrence, as drops of blood seeped through whitewash used to obliterate the image. Witnesses later recalled that Knolles (who, according to the Chandos herald, was a man of few words), berated those collecting the liquid for their credulity: 'Countryfolk and villeins, do you believe he was a saint? By St George, you lie, you idiots! He was no saint!' (Plaine and Serent, 283). In March 1368 Knolles had a further protection to come to England with his wife and an entourage of sixty persons. From this period he began acquiring manors in Norfolk where he eventually retired. At the same time, he also cast envious eyes on an even more prestigious lordship, the 'vicomte' of Limoges, held by the widow of Charles de Blois, but at the time still under the Black Prince's dominion, which he attempted to purchase. 
At the end of 1368 Knolles was again campaigning in the Rouergue. After bringing reinforcements from Brittany in the spring of 1369, he waged war in the Cahorsin between May and July, besieging Domme and attacking Rocamadour and Villefranche, before joining the earls of Cambridge and Pembroke in Poitou. He was at the Black Prince's court at Angouleme in January 1370 and at the relief of Belleperche, before returning once more to Derval, from whence he was summoned to England by Edward III. 
Since the reopening of the war with France in 1369, the English had recorded no major successes. It was decided early in 1370 that a large expedition should be launched which for the first time was to be commanded by a captain below the rank of earl. It was for this task that Knolles was chosen. The original intention seems to have been to give him sole charge of a force to invade Normandy in June and link up with Charles II of Navarre, with whom negotiations were in train. But delays and growing criticism of the decision to appoint Knolles to such a high command forced a change of plan. This had disastrous consequences. On 13 June Knolles agreed terms with Sir Alan Buxhull, Sir Thomas Grandison, and Sir John Bourchier, who were now to share command with him, over the division of their expected profits. On 20 June Knolles sealed an indenture to serve with 2000 men-at-arms and 2000 archers for two years, with permission to fight anywhere in France outside Aquitaine. On 5 July he appeared before the king's council to agree these terms, as the other captains did in the next few days. Ships (under John, Lord Neville, and the admiral, Ralph Ferrers), troops, and supplies had been gathering for some weeks and by 22 July, Knolles, his men, and horses (some 8464 in total), were ready to set out from Calais, having crossed from Winchelsea and Rye. 
Spreading out into smaller bands and marching in roughly parallel lines, Knolles's troops pillaged their way through Picardy, Champagne, and the Ile-de-France into Normandy, the Chartrain, the Vendomois, and Maine in the next five months, inflicting much superficial damage but avoiding sieges of major strong points, for instance, bypassing Rheims and Paris, though Knolles tried on several occasions to offer battle. By the autumn disagreements among the commanders, all of whom felt socially superior to Knolles, and, in the case of Sir John Minsterworth (who called Knolles 'an old brigand'), even hints of treasonable communication with the enemy, together led to a complete breakdown in discipline and the disintegration of the army. Knolles himself eventually found refuge at his castle of Derval, some men later returning to England from western Breton ports, while another division, under Thomas Grandison, after hot pursuit, was finally defeated by du Guesclin at Pontvallain, 30 kilometres south of Le Mans, on 4 December 1370. For the first time, the French army had effectively employed the Fabian tactics that allowed Charles V in the next few years to regain most of the territory lost before 1360: it had shadowed the invading force, picked off stragglers, and avoided full-scale battle by withdrawing to well-defended towns whenever the English approached. 
In the recriminations that followed this disaster (for a time it was believed that Knolles had perished, and his attempt to assuage Edward III with a large sum of money was foiled when most of it was embezzled by William, Lord Latimer), Edward III seized Knolles's properties in England. For several years he was out of favour, serving the Black Prince in Gascony or guarding his interests in Brittany. However, worsening relations between John de Montfort and his nobility placed these in jeopardy and in May 1373 Charles V declared the lordships of Rouge and Derval forfeit after du Guesclin had overrun all the duchy except Brest Castle. Here Knolles was captain for Montfort, who had fled into exile in England. He was besieged in June; terms and hostages for the delivery of Brest to du Guesclin were agreed in July, but aid provided by the earl of Salisbury, cruising in the channel, allowed Knolles to renege. He also disavowed a similar agreement by his lieutenant, Hugh Browe, to deliver Derval to the French in the autumn though, unlike Brest, it did eventually fall in 1374. Knolles also gained more experience of naval warfare: Walsingham reports him attacking Spanish shipping off Sluys in 1374; a ship owned by him was lost off Purbeck while carrying his goods from Plymouth to London in 1371; and in autumn 1377 he was in the fleet sent to the relief of Brest under Thomas of Woodstock, earl of Buckingham. 
On land, Knolles campaigned in the Cotentin in June 1374 where the English still held St Sauveur-le-Vicomte, shortly before it was besieged by the admiral of France, Jean de Vienne, though it resisted for almost a year before falling. Knolles may also have fought around Niort (Deux-Sevres) in this period, finally receiving a full pardon for the expedition of 1370. He continued to consolidate his English estates, investing not only in rural properties in Norfolk, Kent, and Wiltshire, but establishing strong links with leading citizens of London, where he acquired extensive possessions, including the manor of St Pancras and houses and shops in Islington, Kentish Town, and the parishes of All Hallows Barking, and St Giles Cripplegate. 
During the Anglo-French truces of 1374-7 Knolles acted as a conservator, and was involved both as a defendant and as a commissioner in further court of chivalry cases. But as soon as the truces expired, he was to the fore in military affairs. He was appointed captain of Brest once more in January 1378, from where he attacked John de Montfort's domestic enemies. He continued in office for a short period after the duke agreed to deliver the castle officially into English keeping in April 1378, but was replaced in June 1378, only to raid Harfleur with Richard (III) Fitzalan, earl of Arundel, and then accompany John of Gaunt, duke of Lancaster, in his siege of St Malo in August. If not already one of Gaunt's retainers, Knolles subsequently received an annual fee from him as he had from the Black Prince. A domestic moment is revealed about 1 October 1378, when he dined congenially with John de Montfort at Cheshunt, Hertfordshire, one of the manors that Richard II had delivered in exchange for Brest. In February 1379 Knolles was appointed along with Sir John Cobham, Robert Bealknap, and others, including Sir Thomas Fogg and Sir John Devereux, with whom he had frequently campaigned in France, to guard the coasts of Kent. He went back to Brittany with Montfort in the summer, when the Breton nobility suddenly relented and asked the duke to return to his throne. After returning to England in 1380, he was retained as one of Buckingham's captains for another great 'chevauchee', with a retinue of 140 men-at-arms and 240 archers. They left Calais almost exactly ten years to the day after the expedition of 1370. 
Buckingham's army took an almost identical route to that of 1370 through northern-eastern France, before sweeping westwards around Paris, reaching Nantes in October. Here a siege was laid on behalf of John de Montfort against his most stubborn domestic opponent, Olivier, lord of Clisson, who had just succeeded du Guesclin as constable of France, following the latter's death in July 1380. The siege was long and ultimately unsuccessful, with winter weather causing much sickness among the besiegers. There was also growing tension between Montfort and his English allies, as he secretly negotiated terms with the French, finally ratified in the second treaty of Guerande in April 1381. To pacify Buckingham and his lieutenants, who reluctantly agreed to return to England, Montfort had to make substantial payments, though it is not clear what Knolles's share was. He was back in England, however, in time to take a characteristically robust part in suppressing the peasants' revolt. In order to disperse the mob, one chronicler reports that Knolles counselled Richard II to issue a proclamation on 13 June stating that Gaunt (who had been in Scotland on a diplomatic mission) was approaching London with a large force, while on 14 June Knolles was with the king at Mile End, when he met the rebels. On 15 June, after William Walworth killed Wat Tyler in Richard's presence at Smithfield, Knolles brought soldiers whom he had been gathering in the city to surround the leaderless rebels, a move that appears carefully co-ordinated with Walworth's actions, though Richard succeeded in persuading them to disperse without the need for Knolles to exercise force. This timely service earned Knolles the freedom of the city, a title he proudly boasted in his wills, as well as other rewards. There was one final campaign in 1383 with Bishop Despenser to Flanders, though he was appointed to later commissions for the defence of the realm, as in 1385 when he is reported gathering troops at Sandwich. Following his experience of pacifying London in 1381, he helped suppress a riot there in 1384, and at the time of the Merciless Parliament a faction, led by Nicholas Exton, wanted to appoint him captain of the city, but his fighting days were over. 
War had made Knolles a wealthy man. Much booty inevitably passed quickly through his hands as larders and cellars were looted, food and wine consumed, and material possessions generously shared with his own men or even, in the case of Auxerre, returned to their owners. But Knolles also proved astute not only in converting some gains into real estate but in lending specie and increasing his liquid assets. It is impossible to draw an exact balance sheet. Most payments to him concern military service, for which confusing pledges and assignments were made by the crown. Many of these could not be honoured. This led to much complex bargaining and rescheduling of debts. But from the early 1370s Knolles increasingly developed mercantile interests and lent money to private individuals as well as to the crown. In 1382, for example, Richard II acknowledged loans totalling $6888; and it may have been through his contacts in the city that a presumed relative, Thomas Knolles (died 1435), one of Robert's executors, was able to make a highly successful career as a grocer and citizen who was twice mayor of London. 
After 1381, with advancing years, Knolles's attentions turned more obviously to charitable and religious foundations. The traditional view (derived from Stow) that he helped establish an English hospital at Rome with Calveley and Hawkwood is now discounted, but he did receive a licence in 1389 to visit 'the Roman court for the quieting of his conscience' (Rymer, 'Foedera', 7.641). His two chief concerns were rebuilding the bridge over the Medway at Rochester, with its associated chapel, an enterprise taken in hand with John, third Lord Cobham by March 1388 and completed in the 1390s, and founding a college at Pontefract, the probable birthplace of his wife. In this he was following a fashion set by other old soldiers -- Sir Walter Mauny's patronage of the London Charterhouse, Sir Nicholas Cantilupe's establishment of Beauvale Priory, Nottinghamshire, or Calveley's own foundation of a collegiate church at Bunbury, Cheshire, under a will which Knolles executed -- and reflecting an ascetic piety shared with other members of Gaunt's retinue. In 1385 Richard II confirmed Knolles's plans for a chantry at Pontefract, staffed by a warden and six priests, with an almshouse for thirteen poor persons. After Constance's own death ('c'.1389), he paid a further fine of $240 for another royal confirmation, and bestowed on it a wealth of vestments and chapel furnishings (some possibly loot) as well as 1000 marks in cash under his second will (1404). The college was dissolved at the Reformation, but Knolles's Almshouses survived until 1881, when their endowments were reinvested with others to fund the still flourishing Pontefract Charities. At Rochester the new bridge served until 1856, before being replaced. But the chapel, dissolved in 1548, was saved. After restoration in the 1930s, it now provides a boardroom for the wardens of the Rochester Bridge Trust, with the arms of Cobham and Knolles displayed in its east window. 
Following his death on 15 August 1407 at Sculthorpe, his chief Norfolk manor, Knolles, a small but physically powerful man, was commemorated by Walsingham as 'a most invincible knight, whose arms the kingdom of France had felt against it for many years, the duchy of Brittany feared, and the lands of the Spaniards dreaded' ('St Albans Chronicle', 22). The most famous English professional soldier of the Hundred Years' War, he was described by the same author as 'a poor and humble valet [who rose to be] a great leader of soldiers, possessed of regal riches' ('Historia Anglicana', 1.286), yet he was buried with little pomp at the Whitefriars, London, alongside his wife. Knolles left a huge range of bequests to household servants and churches in London and elsewhere, including $5 to Malpas parish church. In earlier years Constance accompanied him with their 'boys' on his expeditions. None survived their parents; a son, who died young, was buried in the abbey of Prieres (Morbihan), about 1360. Since there were no direct heirs, the residue of his estate was settled on the college at Pontefract, while Knolles's fame was preserved by the display of his arms in several Norfolk churches (some of which, like Harpley and Sculthorpe, he rebuilt) and on other monuments that reflect family ties and friendships, like the tombs of Calveley at Bunbury and Thomas Knolles at North Mimms, Hertfordshire, or Bodiam Castle, Sussex, the home of Sir Edward Dallingridge, while a boss in the cloisters of Norwich Cathedral portrays Robert and Constance at prayer, flanking a representation of the Trinity. 


@@@@@


doc= 15759


Robert Knollys (d. 1520/21), courtier, and Lettice (died 1557/8), daughter of Sir Thomas Peniston of Hawridge, Buckinghamshire. Robert was fifth in descent from Sir Thomas Knollys (died 1435), lord mayor of London in 1399 and 1410, who directed the rebuilding of the Guildhall in 1400 and rebuilt St Antholin's Church in Watling Street. In 1488 Robert Knollys was one of Henry VII's henchmen, and late in that year was appointed to wait on Prince Arthur. He received a reward of $5 for each of the three years 1488 to 1490, and when Henry VII met Archduke Philip in 1500 he accompanied the English king as one of the ushers of the chamber. He continued in the same office under Henry VIII, and received an annuity of $20 on 15 November 1509, and a grant of Rookes Manor in Hampshire -- part of the confiscated property of Sir Richard Empson -- on 10 February 1511. On 9 July 1514 Robert and his wife were jointly granted the manor of Rotherfield Greys, near Henley-on-Thames, Oxfordshire, in survivorship, at an annual rent of a red rose at midsummer. Other royal gifts followed. Knollys made his will on 13 November 1520, and it was proved on 19 June 1521. He was buried in the London church of St Helen, Bishopsgate. His widow became the second wife of Sir Robert Lee of Burston, Buckinghamshire. He died in 1537, and she became the second wife of Sir Thomas Tresham of Rushton, Northamptonshire, prior (under Mary I) of the knights of St John of Jerusalem. Her will, dated 28 June 1557, was proved on 11 June 1558. 


@@@@@


doc= 15760


Knollys, William, first earl of Banbury (c.1545-1632), courtier, was the second son of Sir Francis Knollys (1511/12-1596), politician, and his wife, Katherine (1529/30-1569), daughter of William Carey of Aldenham, Hertfordshire, and his wife, Mary. His mother was Anne Boleyn's niece, and so Knollys was cousin to Elizabeth I, a relationship that did much to advance his career. His brothers included Henry ('c'.1542-1582), Edward ('c'.1546-1575), Robert ('c'.1547-1619), Richard ('c'.1548-1596), and Francis ('c'.1550-1648), who were all MPs. He had four sisters, including Lettice Dudley (1543-1634). He was particularly close to Lettice. The exact date and place of Knollys's birth is unknown. In his youth his parents took great care of his education: he was first tutored by Julins Palmer, who was burnt as a heretic in 1556, and then studied at Eton College (1560). Knollys attended Magdalen College, Oxford, probably as a commoner, in or before 1564 (where he was tutored by Laurence Humphrey), and then the Middle Temple in 1565. He was created MA on 27 September 1592. 
In 1569 Knollys commanded a company during the suppression of the northern uprising and in 1570 he became a gentleman pensioner. He served under his father guarding Mary, queen of Scots, at Bolton Castle, Yorkshire, in July and August 1568 and was in both the expeditions into Scotland in 1570 and at the siege of Edinburgh Castle in 1573. Knollys was elected MP for Stafford in 1571 and then, in 1572, for Tregony, Cornwall. Shortly afterwards (probably in 1573), he married Dorothy (1529/30-1605), fifth daughter and coheir of Edmund Braye, first Baron Braye, and his wife, Jane, and widow of Edmund Brydges, second Baron Chandos. The couple had no surviving children. In 1582 Knollys's position in the world changed dramatically after the death of his older brother, Henry. Now his father's heir, he assumed a more prominent political role. He joined Sir Francis Knollys as knight of the shire for Oxfordshire in 1584, and in November 1585 the queen sent him to Scotland as ambassador-extraordinary. In January 1586 he left for the Netherlands, where he served as a captain under his brother-in-law Robert Dudley, earl of Leicester, who knighted him. Knollys's association with Leicester went back to the earl's marriage to his sister in 1578; he was a trustee of her jointure in 1584. He supported his knighthood with the profits from his office as keeper of the Marshalsea prison (1586). Although Knollys did not stay on the continent long, he served briefly as governor of Ostend before he returned to England with Leicester, where his military experience and political prominence earned him command of the Oxfordshire and Gloucestershire regiment raised in the Armada crisis of 1588. 
Knollys was re-elected as knight of the shire for Oxfordshire in 1593, 1597, and 1601. He was the senior knight after his father's death in 1596. His succession to his father's position meant a significant increase in his power. Until 1596 his political role centred mostly on the House of Commons and local affairs -- he was an active JP and deputy lieutenant, particularly in Oxfordshire and Berkshire. On 30 August 1596, however, the queen appointed him comptroller of the household and a privy councilor, both positions that his father once occupied. She also named him lord lieutenant of Oxfordshire and Berkshire, an office he held for almost forty years. In 1599 Knollys returned to the Netherlands as an envoy to the states of Holland. 
Knollys was uncle to Robert Devereux, second earl of Essex (1565-1601), and sided with his nephew in the factional struggle between the favourite and Sir Robert Cecil. He escaped compromise during Essex's rebellion in 1601, however, and in fact testified for the prosecution during the earl's trial. His timely abandonment of Essex secured him the office of treasurer of the household in 1602, and on 13 May 1603 James I elevated him to the peerage as Baron Knollys of Greys. Still wary of Cecil, Knollys allied himself to the Howards through his second marriage. His first wife died on 31 October 1605 and on 23 December he married Elizabeth ('bap'. 1586, died 1658), the nineteen-year-old daughter of Thomas Howard, first earl of Suffolk (1561-1626), and his second wife, Katherine. Although over forty years separated the couple, Knollys could now hope for an heir and further political advancement. In the end he achieved both, though he discovered that neither blessing was unalloyed. The couple had two sons, including Nicholas ['see below'], and a daughter. The countess was a well-known Catholic and suspicion fell on both her husband and herself as a result. Over the next ten years Knollys's career flourished, though. In 1606 he became cofferer to Henry, prince of Wales, and in 1613 he entertained Queen Anne at Caversham as she made her way towards Bath, while in 1614 he was appointed a treasury commissioner and master of the court of wards. In the same year rumour falsely appointed him lord chamberlain of the household and in 1615 he followed his father as KG, being elected on 24 April and installed on 22 May. On 7 November 1616 the king promoted him Viscount Wallingford. His prominence at court made him a much sought after patron: he was high steward of Reading, Abingdon, Wallingford, Banbury, and Oxford. 
Lord Treasurer Suffolk's fall in 1618 brought his son-in-law down as well. In November John Chamberlain reported that Wallingford would be sacked as master of the court of wards for misadministration. After a brief struggle, he resigned -- with the king's consolation that his only fault was his poor choice of a wife. Wallingford was also on bad terms with the new favourite, George Villiers, first duke of Buckingham, who coveted his house in the Tiltyard. A reconciliation of sorts came in 1622, when the duke bought the house. 
Although he continued his attendance in the House of Lords and was an active lord lieutenant, Wallingford withdrew from the court after 1619. On 18 August 1626 Charles I promoted him first earl of Banbury, possibly as a reward for his effort to drum up loans for the crown in his lieutenancy. The king provoked the ire of the House of Lords by granting Banbury precedence over six other earls created since the coronation. Charles justified this unusual favour by noting Banbury's lack of an heir, and the house grudgingly accepted, stipulating that the title's precedence would revert to its normal position should there be a second earl. In fact the fears of the house were entirely justified, for on 10 April 1627 the countess of Banbury bore a son, Edward (1627-1645), at Rotherfield Greys, the family's Oxfordshire home. A father at last at eighty-two, it is not surprising that two years later Banbury excused himself from attendance at parliament as 'old and lame and fit for no use, but attends his majesty and his friends with his prayers' ('CSP dom.', '1629-31', 84). Banbury finally died, aged about eighty-seven, in Paternoster Row, London, on 25 May 1632. He was buried at Rotherfield Greys. 
The succession to Banbury's title generated controversy for over two hundred years, a dispute whose origins lay in the mysterious paternity of the countess of Banbury's two sons, Edward and his younger brother, Nicholas, born in 1631. The countess gave birth to a daughter who died as an infant years before Edward was born, but until 1627, when she was over forty, there were no other children. It was unusual, though by no means unprecedented for a woman of her age to give birth. What raised suspicions about Edward and Nicholas was that the countess was openly involved with Edward Vaux, fourth Baron Vaux (1588-1661) ['see under 'Vaux, Thomas, second Baron Vaux (1509-1556)]. Banbury's will, dated 19 May 1630, left almost all of his estate to his wife, but made no mention of Edward, then three years old. Moreover, the countess married Vaux only about five weeks after her husband's death. Edward, a minor at the earl's death, was called earl of Banbury on 9 February 1641 in a suit in the court of chancery, but he never sat in the Lords; about June, 1645, he was murdered in a dispute while travelling in France, aged eighteen. 


Banbury took his seat in the Lords during the Convention Parliament in 1660, where his attendance earned him a place on two committees -- but in July 1660 someone in the house challenged his legitimacy. Although the house ordered a hearing at the bar, it took no action. Banbury did not receive a summons to the Cavalier Parliament and in 1661 he petitioned Charles II for his writ. The king referred the petition to the Lords' committee of privileges, which in July 1661 resolved that Nicholas Knollys was the legitimate earl of Banbury. However, the full house refused to go along. While it is very probable that Nicholas's father was, in fact, Vaux, the Lords, in refusing to accept his legitimacy, was setting aside a long-honoured principle of the common law, which presumed that children born in wedlock were sired by their mother's husband. Banbury remained excluded from his seat, and in December 1661 a bill bastardizing him was read in the Lords, though it was never passed. The earl continued his efforts to regain his seat, petitioning the Lords and the king regularly. In August 1665 he disrupted the progress of James, duke of York, through Northamptonshire. After York declined an invitation to dine at Banbury's house, the earl stopped the royal carriage and 'laid hold of His Highness's leg and pulled so hard that he had almost drawn off his shoe' ('CSP dom.', '1664-5', 498). Unfortunately these histrionics failed to advance Banbury's case, and he never again sat in the Lords. He died on 14 March 1674 at Boughton, Northamptonshire, and was buried there, leaving the struggle to his son Charles Knollys, fourth earl of Banbury (bap. 1662, d. 1740), and his descendants. 


@@@@@


doc= 15761


William Knollys, styled eighth earl of Banbury (bap. 1763, d. 1834), army officer, was baptized at St Thomas's, Winchester, on 2 March 1763. He entered the army as an ensign in the 3rd foot guards in 1778, was promoted lieutenant in 1788, lieutenant-colonel in 1793, and colonel (brevet) in 1795. On 23 June 1795, at St Thomas's, Winchester, he married Charlotte Martha (died 1818), daughter of Ebenezer Blackwell, a London banker. He was promoted major-general in 1802. 


@@@@@


doc= 15762


Knollys, Sir William Thomas (1797-1883), army officer and courtier, born on 1 August 1797, was the eldest son of General William Knollys, styled eighth earl of Banbury ['see under 'Knollys, Charles, styled fourth earl of Banbury], and his wife, Charlotte Martha Blackwell. Until 1813 William held the courtesy title of Viscount Wallingford. Educated at Harrow School and the Royal Military College, Sandhurst, Knollys received his first commission in 1813, when little more than sixteen, in the 3rd, later Scots, Guards, and was almost immediately dispatched to the Peninsula. From there he crossed the Bidassoa into France with the victorious British army, and, after the passage of the Adour, was attached to the force that invested Bayonne. Knollys narrowly escaped capture during a French attack at Bayonne on 14 April 1814. 
On the signing of peace he returned to England, but directly after the battle of Waterloo he was sent to join the army of occupation in Paris. In 1821 he was appointed adjutant, and from this worked his way through successive grades to become lieutenant-colonel of his battalion in 1844, and then regimental colonel in 1850. His adjutant was Sir Frederick Stephenson, and under their joint efforts the regiment was held to be one of the best drilled, disciplined, and organized in the British army. On 29 September 1830 he married Elizabeth (died 1878), the illegitimate daughter of Sir John St Aubyn; they had five sons and three daughters. 
From 1850 Knollys instructed Prince Albert in the art of soldiering, and won his firm support. In 1854 he was promoted major-general and appointed governor of Guernsey, and in 1855 he went to Paris to study the French system of supplying troops when in action. At the same time the camp at Aldershot was created, with Knollys in command. The army at the time utterly lacked administrative cohesion. It therefore fell to Knollys's lot not only to form his Aldershot staff and to organize the troops into brigades and divisions, but to initiate the diverse departments of commissariat, transport, stores, and even the medical and chaplain's departments. He took it upon himself to instruct some of the first arrivals in camp in how to pitch tents, and by sharing a tent life with them taught them the elementary duties of soldiers in the field. On the death of General Bucknall Estcourt, chief of the staff in the Crimea, in June 1855, Knollys was selected to succeed him; but the appointment was cancelled, on the ground of his seniority, which would have entailed the supersession of many other Crimean generals. Notwithstanding his disappointment, he resumed his labours at Aldershot with undiminished energy. Aldershot was unpopular with the public, but Knollys received undiminished support from Prince Albert, who with the queen visited the camp frequently. Success exceeded expectation. General von Moltke was one of the foreign visitors to the camp, and, on the rare occasions when he broke his habitual silence, he evinced his surprise and approval at the progress made by British troops. When Knollys's command came to an end in 1860 he had established Aldershot on a basis of efficient organization. 
In 1861, at the instance of the prince consort, Knollys accepted the post of president of the council of military education. In 1862 he was selected by the queen as treasurer and comptroller of the household of the prince of Wales. For fifteen years he performed the responsible and laborious duties attached to this confidential position, frequently accompanying the prince, especially during the earlier period, in his travels abroad and in his visits to foreign courts. The position was no sinecure. Victoria regarded him as 'a species of Mentor... who would be responsible to Me to a great extent for what took place', and tried to hold him to account when the prince's actions displeased her, as they did when he visited Garibaldi at Stafford House in 1864. Knollys's reports to the queen convey his constant anxiety over the prince's gambling and morals, and over the intransigent dislike of the Prussians felt by Alexandra, which caused particular difficulties during a visit to Wiesbaden in 1867. He retired from office in 1877, and became gentleman usher of the black rod in the same year. 
The honorary distinctions of LLD and DCL were conferred on Knollys by the universities of Oxford and Cambridge (respectively) in 1863 and 1864. In 1867 he was created a KCB, and in 1871 he was made a member of the privy council. In 1872 he once more had a short interlude of military duty, when he was appointed umpire in chief in conjunction with Sir Hope Grant during the Salisbury manoeuvres. On 19 June 1883 Knollys was gazetted to the colonelcy of the Scots Guards, the regiment in which he had begun his career. He died four days later, on 23 June 1883 at his home, Black Rod's House, Westminster Palace, in his eighty-sixth year, and was carried to his grave in Highgate cemetery on 27 June by sergeants of his old regiment. His second son, Francis Knollys, later Viscount Knollys, inherited the family estates, to the exclusion of his elder brother. 


@@@@@


doc= 15763


Knott, Edward (1581-1656), Jesuit, was born Matthew Wilson at Catchburn, Morpeth, Northumberland, on 24 February 1581. His father was Edward Wilson but his mother's name is unknown; he described his parents as 'respectable' (Kenny, 122). His family in the main conformed to the established religion. He received some education in England and then through the offices of a Catholic friend was sent to the English College, Douai, arriving on 24 September 1599. Here he was accepted into the Roman Catholic church. On 20 August 1602 he left for the English College, Rome. He was duly ordained priest on 27 March 1606 and entered the Society of Jesus in October of that year. He completed the rigorous training of a Jesuit, taking the four vows finally on 30 September 1618, and played the while an active part in the work of the English College, Rome. 
Then in 1622 the decision was taken to send Knott north, to the English mission. There were to be three strands to his life now: he continued to work as an educationist; this role was combined with the position as one of the leading administrators of the English province; and he became a writer of religious tracts. Much of his time was spent in the Spanish Netherlands in the various educational institutions attached to the English province: as superior of the noviciate at Watten in 1622 and 1637-8; rector and then prefect of the house of studies at Liege in 1627-8 and 1646; and as spiritual prefect at the tertianship in Ghent, 1647-9. The provincial in London required a deputy over the channel to run the fairly considerable English establishment in the Spanish Netherlands. Much of Knott's career was passed in this capacity: a year after he arrived (1623) he was appointed vice-provincial in what would later become Belgium; in 1625-6 and 1632 he was designated substitute for the provincial there. He did, however, work in England, based largely in London, certainly in 1624, 1635-6, 1643-4, 1645-6, 1647, and in the early 1650s. He was captured when returning to England in April 1629 and was imprisoned in the Clink until January 1632, when he was released through the intercession of Marie de' Medici, and banished. 
Knott was well regarded by his superiors and colleagues, and there was little competition for the extremely difficult position of provincial. In November 1630 Richard Blount recommended that Knott succeed him in that post, but the general was reluctant, pointing out that he had worked almost entirely on the continent and was not well known in England; he was also in prison. As a result Knott was passed over in favour of Henry More. When More stood down Knott was eventually appointed, on 3 June 1639. But now a new difficulty faced him. From 1630 Knott had been active as a controversial religious writer; he was to write a total of eight titles, some of which went through more than one edition. Knott was a most effective pamphleteer, generally -- and for his age, unusually -- concise, writing one book, as he tells us, in one week. He engaged in two great debates: first as part of the internecine Catholic disputes between regulars and seculars over the appointment of a bishop to the English mission, which he opposed. Second, he played a part in a long-running controversy with the protestant Edward Chillingworth. His contribution to this debate was considered sufficiently offensive by Charles I for the king to let it be known that he did not wish Knott to take up his appointment as provincial in 1639. So Knott was ordered by the general to remain in the Netherlands. When, in June 1643, he finally came to England as provincial Knott began a tour of the priests under his command. His stay was again cut short, this time by the need to attend in November 1645 the general congregation called to Rome to elect a general in succession to Vitelleschi. Here he acquitted himself well, always adding, according to report, something new when it came to his turn to speak. By now Knott was certainly the most important English Jesuit; it was he who was given the task by the general of choosing which of two candidates should be the next provincial in 1646; he was nominated in 1649 by the outgoing provincial as his replacement, but not appointed. Finally, in March 1652 he was reappointed provincial. He died in office on 4 January 1656 in London, and was buried next day in the church of St Pancras. 


@@@@@


doc= 15764


Knowler, William (bap. 1699, d. 1773), Church of England clergyman, third son of Gilbert Knowler of Stroud House, Herne, in Kent, was born at Herne and baptized there on 9 May 1699. He was educated at school in Canterbury under Mr Smith and then at St John's College, Cambridge, whence he matriculated in 1717. He graduated BA in 1721, MA in 1724, and LLD in 1728. On leaving Cambridge, he was ordained priest on 9 June 1723 and became chaplain to Thomas Watson Wentworth, then Lord Malton, later marquess of Rockingham. Lord Malton had inherited the papers of his great-grandfather, Thomas Wentworth, earl of Strafford, and Knowler was given the task of publishing a selection from them. This appeared in 1739 under the title of 'The Earl of Strafford's Letters and Despatches'. In the dedication to Lord Malton, Knowler states that the papers were selected in order to vindicate Strafford's memory from 'the aspersions of acting upon arbitrary principles, and being a friend to the Roman catholics'. It is possible that Knowler obtained some help from William Oldys's 'Essay on Epistolary Writings with Respect to the Grand Collection of Thomas, Earl of Strafford' (1729), which was also dedicated to Lord Malton. Knowler was presented by his patron, first, in 1725, to the living of Irthlingborough, Northamptonshire, then, in 1736, to the vicarage of Hutton Buscel, Yorkshire, and afterwards, in 1740, to the living of Boddington, Northamptonshire. On 3 May 1749 he married Mary Dalton at Lincoln's Inn Chapel, Holborn. In 1766 he had prepared for the press a translation of Chrysostom's commentary on St Paul's epistle to the 'Galatians', which was never printed. He died in December 1773, and was buried at Boddington on 26 January 1774. He was survived by his wife and a son and four daughters. 


@@@@@


doc= 15765


Knowles, Sir Charles, first baronet (d. 1777), naval officer, was reputedly the son of Charles Knollys, styled fourth earl of Banbury (bap. 1662, d. 1740); the identity of his mother, the date of his birth, and details of his upbringing are all unknown. His abilities as an engineer suggest a sound education. He may have served as a volunteer on the 'Bedford' in 1708 and the 'Valeur' in 1711, but the muster book of the latter does not record his presence on the ship. In March 1718 he entered the 'Buckingham' with Captain Charles Strickland, whom he followed to the 'Lennox' in April, with the rating of captain's servant; he continued in the 'Lennox' until December 1720. For much of this time the 'Lennox' was in the Mediterranean under the orders of Sir George Byng, and from Knowles's own papers it appears that in the battle off Cape Passaro in August 1718 he was serving on the 'Barfleur', Byng's flagship. Between June 1721 and June 1726 he served in the frigate 'Lyme' under Lord Vere Beauclerk, rated first captain's servant and later steward and able seaman. Knowles passed his lieutenant's examination on 30 January 1729 and in the following year he was promoted lieutenant of the 'Trial'. In March 1731 he was moved to the 'Lion', flagship of Rear-Admiral Charles Stewart in the West Indies. 
On 24 November 1731 Knowles was promoted commander of the 'Southampton' (40 guns) serving as a hulk at Port Antonio, Jamaica. There Knowles served as an engineer in the development of the port for use by the Royal Navy. He returned to England in 1735 but it was not until February 1737 that he became captain of the 'Diamond'. In her he went out to the West Indies and in November 1739 joined Vice-Admiral Edward Vernon at Porto Bello where he was ordered to destroy the settlement's forts. In March 1740 Knowles was involved in the attack on the port of Chagres to the west-south-west of Port Bello. On its surrender he was appointed governor of the castle pending the destruction of the defences. In June he returned to England and on arrival was appointed to the 'Weymouth' (60 guns). In October the 'Weymouth' was one of the fleet under Rear-Admiral Sir Chaloner Ogle which escorted the expeditionary army under Major-General Lord Cathcart to the West Indies. Knowles took part in the unsuccessful expedition against Cartagena during March and April 1741, and acted throughout as Vernon's principal surveyor and engineer. He was active in examining the approaches to the several points of attack, cutting the boom across the Boca Chica, taking possession of the Castillo Grande, and destroying the captured works before the fleet left. A pamphlet entitled 'An Account of the Expedition to Carthagena' (1743), highly critical of the army's conduct in the campaign, is generally attributed to Knowles. 
After the failure at Cartagena, Knowles was moved into the 'Lichfield', and in the course of 1742 into the 'Suffolk' (70 guns). In her he commanded a squadron which was sent to act against the Spanish settlements on the Caracas coast. The Spaniards were prepared for his arrival and when the squadron attacked La Guayra on 18 February 1743 it was beaten off with very heavy losses. After refitting, it attacked Puerto Cabello on 15 and 24 April with no better fortune. On 28 April it was decided that the squadron was no longer able to engage the enemy, and Knowles returned to Jamaica where, between 1743 and 1745, he continued as second in command under Ogle. Towards the end of 1745 he returned to England, and after a short time in the Downs, as second in command under Vice-Admiral William Martin, he was, early in 1746, sent out as governor of Louisbourg, which had been captured from the French a few months before. There he remained for upwards of two years, but he disliked the place and was eager to return to the West Indies. In the large promotion of 15 July 1747 he was made rear-admiral of the white, and at the same time was appointed commander-in-chief at Jamaica. 
In February 1748, with his flag in the 'Cornwall', Knowles took the squadron to the south coast of Cuba. After capturing Port Louis, Hispaniola (St Domingue) on 8 March he arrived off Santiago in April and prepared for an attack. An attack was immediately attempted, but the failure of this assault resulted in a disagreement between Knowles and Captain Dent in the 'Plymouth', the former commander-in-chief, who led in. Dent was sent home to be tried on, and later cleared of, a charge of not having done his utmost. Meanwhile Knowles, having refitted the ships at Jamaica, took them for a cruise off Havana in hopes of intercepting the Spanish treasure fleet. This occurred on 1 October and heavy fighting ensued between the 'Cornwall', the 'Strafford' (Captain David Brodie), and the Spanish ships 'Africa' and 'Conquistador'. In writing of the engagement to Lord Anson, Knowles spoke of the 'bashfulness' of some of his captains. They in turn accused Knowles of delaying the attack, engaging in a straggling line, and providing a false report to the Admiralty. A court martial on Knowles was accordingly ordered, and sat at Deptford in December 1749. Captain Thomas Innes of the 'Warwick' acted as prosecutor, in the name of the captains. The court decided that Knowles was at fault in taking his fleet into action in such a straggling line, and also in not going on board another ship and leading the chase in person. He was sentenced to be reprimanded. The four captains were themselves then put on their trial: Holmes was honourably acquitted, Charles Powlett and Edmund Toll were reprimanded, and Thomas Innes suspended for three months. Many duels followed. Knowles received four challenges and exchanged shots with Holmes on 24 February. A meeting also took place between Innes and Edward Clarke, the principal witness against him, and Innes was mortally wounded. Several more duels were forbidden by the king, who ordered the challengers into custody. 
On 28 November 1749 Knowles was elected MP for Gatton in Surrey. His interest in this pocket borough of about twenty-two electors is not clear, but his objective was almost certainly to further his career, and in 1752 he gave it up on being appointed governor of Jamaica. He offended the residents by insisting on the supreme jurisdiction of the English parliament, and by moving the seat of government to Kingston, thus causing a depreciation of property in Spanish Town. A petition for his removal, signed by nineteen members of the assembly, was presented to the king, and charges of 'illegal, cruel, and arbitrary acts' were laid before the House of Commons. After examination by a committee of the whole house, the assembly's action was condemned as 'derogatory to the rights of the crown and people of Great Britain', and Knowles's conduct, by implication, fully justified. But Knowles had already returned to England and resigned the governorship in 1756. 
On 4 February 1755 Knowles had been promoted vice-admiral, and in 1757, with his flag in the 'Neptune', he was second in command under Sir Edward Hawke in the abortive expedition against Rochefort. Knowles was among those reproached for this failure and responded with a pamphlet, 'The Conduct of Admiral Knowles on the Late Expedition Set in a True Light' (1758). This met with scant favour, and a notice of it in the 'Critical Review' (1758, 5.438) was so extreme that the editor, Tobias Smollett, was tried for libel and sentenced to a $100 fine and three months' imprisonment. Nevertheless Knowles's share in the miscarriage offended the government. He was superseded in his command and, though he retained his flag in the 'Royal Anne', guardship at Portsmouth, he had no further active service in the English navy. 
On 3 December 1760 Knowles was promoted to the rank of admiral of the white. In October 1765 he was created a baronet, and on 5 November 1765 nominated rear-admiral of Great Britain. In October 1770 he accepted an appointment as chief of the surveying branch in the Russian navy and reluctantly resigned as rear-admiral. Knowles carried out surveys of the Baltic yards and ships and made a series of suggestions for administrative and technical improvements, based largely on the British model. He returned to England on the conclusion of peace between Russia and Turkey (1774) and in the following year he published a translation of M. de la Croix's 'Abstract on the Mechanism of the Motions of Floating Bodies'. In the preface he claimed to have verified the author's principles by a number of experiments, and to have found them effective in several line-of-battle ships and frigates that he built while in Russia. Knowles was married twice: first in 1740 to Mary Alleyne (died 1742); they had one son, Edward, who was killed in command of the 'Peregrine' (1762). In July 1750 he married Maria-Magdalena Theresa, daughter of the comte de Bouget; they had one daughter and a son, Charles Henry Knowles, also a naval officer. Knowles died at his home in Bulstrode Street, St Marylebone, Middlesex, on 9 December 1777, reportedly after having suffered a paralytic stroke brought on by bathing in the sea at Weymouth. He was buried next to his first wife in St Nicholas's Church, Guildford. 


@@@@@


doc= 15766


Knowles, Sir Charles Henry, second baronet (1754-1831), naval officer, was born in Kingston, Jamaica, on 24 August 1754, the son of Sir Charles Knowles, baronet (d. 1777), then governor of the island, and his second wife, Maria-Magdalena Theresa, daughter of the comte de Bouget. Educated at Eton College ('c'.1764-1766) and the University of Glasgow, Charles Henry entered the Royal Navy in 1768 as a captain's servant to the Hon. Samuel Barrington in the 'Venus'. He spent the next six and a half years serving in various ships until, on 1 January 1776, he was commissioned lieutenant. He served in the 'Boreas' from May 1776 and arrived in New York in August, where he spent the next five months in operations against the American rebels. Knowles returned to Britain briefly in January 1777 to be with his ailing father but returned to North America that summer, though he left for England again when his father died on 9 December, whereupon he became second baronet. 
Knowles returned to active service when he sailed for the Leeward Islands in the summer of 1778. He took part in an action in the Cul-de-Sac off St Lucia on 15 December, while in the 'Ceres'. This ship was shortly afterwards captured by a French squadron and Knowles was briefly held prisoner. He was soon exchanged, however, and was then court martialled with the captain and other officers and acquitted for the loss of the ship. In May 1779 he received his first independent command, as acting master and commander of the storeship 'Supply'. He fought in an action off Grenada on 6 July 1779, while in the 'Prince of Wales', when he was slightly wounded. At the end of October 1779 he returned to England. 
Knowles volunteered for service once more in December, and went with Admiral Sir George Rodney to Gibraltar. Rodney evidently thought highly of him, as Knowles was promoted to substantive commander of the 'Minorca' at the end of January 1780 and, just a week later, to post captain of the 'Porcupine'. While in the 'Porcupine', Knowles engaged in several actions with Spanish and French privateers as well as escorting several merchant vessels. He was taken ill in Minorca and briefly blockaded there by a French squadron, but in January 1781 he was enabled by their departure to head for Gibraltar where he remained until April 1782. On his return to England he was falsely accused of piracy and murder, but having successfully cleared his name he went back to Gibraltar, where he served as senior naval officer until April 1783. While there he captured and retained possession of the Spanish ship of the line 'San Miguel', and in her he returned to England. 
During the peace Knowles prepared several papers on naval matters and in 1788 embarked on a tour of France. When war started in February 1793 he was appointed to the 'Daedalus' which he took to North America. In January 1794 a French squadron arrived in American waters, but Knowles was able to evade capture by the French vessels. In the summer of 1794 he left for Britain and took command of the 'Edgar', a poorly manned and dilapidated ship of the line, in which he sailed for Norway and then to the Texel, where the 'Edgar' lost masts and had to be towed back to Britain. 
Knowles left for the Mediterranean in the 'Goliath' in March 1796, and took part in the battle of Cape St Vincent on 14 February 1797. Like many officers he came in for sharp criticism from Admiral Sir John Jervis. By contrast the journal of the seaman John Nicol reveals him as a very popular captain with the lower deck; he also received public thanks for his role in the battle. However, while Knowles was at dinner in Lagos Bay with some other officers his ship received orders and sailed without him. To compensate him for this affront the Admiralty appointed Knowles to command the first rate 'Britannia' (100 guns), but ill health apparently prevented him from accepting the post. 
Knowles saw no further active service, but he received steady promotion through the higher ranks of the navy, being made rear-admiral on 14 February 1799, vice admiral on 23 April 1804, and full admiral on 31 July 1810. An innovative thinker, Knowles may have made the earliest suggestion for naval aircraft when he put forward the proposal to use balloons flown from shipboard to observe Brest in 1803. On 10 September 1800 he married Charlotte (died 1867), daughter of Charles Johnstone. They had four children: one son, Francis Charles; and three daughters, Louisa Charlotte, Georgiana Henrietta, and Maria Louisa Theresa. Knowles continued to produce works on naval affairs, publishing his last edition of his 'Observations on Naval Tactics' in 1830. In recognition of his services, on the accession of George IV in 1820, he was made a supplementary knight grand cross in the Order of the Bath. He died on 28 November 1831. 


@@@@@


doc= 15767


Knowles, Gilbert (1667-1734), Roman Catholic priest and botanist, was born in Hampshire, professed at St Gregory's, Douai, France, and was ordained priest in 1700. He was sent to the Benedictine northern province in 1705, and stationed at Newburgh, Yorkshire, in 1710-19. In that year he was transferred to Wenby, where he remained until 1721. Probably during or soon after that time he composed his 'Materia medica botanica' (1723), dedicated to Dr Richard Mead, and consisting of 7355 Latin hexameters. Four hundred plants of the materia medica are described and their uses in medicine explained. Various episodes are interwoven with the subject for the sake of ornament. Knowles alludes to his verses as being written 'rudi Minerva' and he was evidently a close student of both Virgil's style and his matter. 
Knowles subsequently returned to Douai, where he died on 8 September 1734. 


@@@@@


doc= 15768


Knowles, Herbert (1798-1817), poet, was born at Gomersal, near Leeds, Yorkshire. His parentage is said to have been very humble, but it is also stated that he was the brother of J. C. Knowles, subsequently QC. He was early orphaned and was about to enter a merchant's office at Liverpool when his talents came to the notice of three benevolent clergymen, who raised $20 a year towards his education on the condition that his friends contributed another $30, and sent him to Richmond grammar school, Yorkshire. 
Lacking funds to obtain a sizarship at St John's College, Cambridge, Knowles wrote to Southey, sending him the poem entitled 'The Three Tabernacles', better known as 'Stanzas in Richmond Churchyard', which he had composed on 7 October 1816. Southey, with his usual generosity, promised $10 a year, and obtained a further $20 from Earl Spencer and Samuel Rogers. Knowles's letter to Southey, dated 28 December 1816, shows his modesty, candour, and good sense. He puts aside excessive expectations, but undertakes to 'strive that my passage through the university, if not splendid, shall be respectable'. His verses were printed in the 'Literary Gazette' for 1819 and 1824, and the 'Literary Souvenir' for 1825 (reprinted in the 'Saturday Magazine', vol. 16); and a correspondent of 'Notes and Queries' possessed several unpublished pieces. 
Knowles was elected a sizar on 31 January 1817, but was already fatally ill, and died on 17 February 1817 at Gomersal. His precocious talents and early death invite the inevitable comparison with Chatterton. 


@@@@@


doc= 15769


Knowles, James (1759-1840), schoolmaster and lexicographer, was probably born in Dublin, the youngest of three sons and one daughter of John Knowles of Dublin, and Frances, daughter of the Revd Dr Dennis Sheridan of Quilca; he also had a sister. His father, who worked as treasurer in Sheridan's theatre in Smock Alley, died at an early age, and his mother provided for her young family by opening a girls' school in Dublin which proved a financial success. His mother's brother, Thomas Sheridan, elocutionist and author of a renowned 'Pronouncing Dictionary', directed his education and intended him for the church. This plan was thwarted when Knowles fell in love on holiday in Cork with a singer, Jane Daunt (died 1800), daughter of Andrew Peace, physician. A great beauty, she was recently widowed and had an infant daughter. They married in 1780 and established a school in Cork in 1780, which soon prospered. Their first two children died in infancy but the birth of a son, James Sheridan Knowles (1784-1862), was followed by the birth of two daughters. The family's fortunes suffered when Knowles signed a petition for Catholic emancipation, and then went bail for a friend, the editor of a liberal paper, who had been prosecuted for libel by the government. His pupils, who were the sons of the local protestant gentry, deserted him, and in 1783 he and his family left Cork for London. He was helped by his first cousin Richard Brinsley Sheridan to continue his career as a schoolmaster, by setting up a private school in Sidcup. 
Following his wife's death in 1800 Knowles married Miss Maxwell, but this remarriage did not please his son, who abruptly left home one day. Relations seemed to improve when James Sheridan Knowles relinquished his appointment as headmaster of the English department in the newly founded Belfast Academical Institution in favour of his father. Knowles gave up his school in Sidcup, which then had forty boarders, and began teaching in the Institution in April 1814, with his son as his assistant. This arrangement proved disastrous, not least because father and son differed fundamentally on the correct method and style of reading and elocution. These differences were exacerbated by Knowles's attitude; according to one historian of the school 'he displayed a mixture of truculence, petulance, tactlessness, bravado and down-right viciousness which made it a general relief when he finally went' (Jamieson, 13). After two and a half years in the post he was asked in 1817 to resign for the sake of the school, which had suffered a decline in pupil numbers, but he refused to go quietly. He published a pamphlet that claimed he was the aggrieved party and obtained a testimonial from some of the leading citizens in Belfast, but after barricading himself in the schoolmaster's house for several days, he was forced to leave. He returned to London, where he appears to have carried on his profession as 'teacher of reading, elocution, grammar, and composition' (J. Knowles, 'Orthoepy and Elocution', 1829, title-page) for several years. In 1829 he seems to have joined his son in Glasgow, where he brought out a little book entitled 'Orthoepy and Elocution'. About this time, although he was now seventy and suffering from the stone, he began to compile a dictionary. His grandson recalled how he would rise at four in the morning and plod 'through his dismal labours with all the zest and enthusiasm of youth in the pursuit of some bright fancy' (Knowles, 122). It was published in London in 1835 as 'A Pronouncing and Explanatory Dictionary of the English Language' and was dedicated to William IV. A dispute with the printer over the number of copies embroiled him in a protracted lawsuit, which incurred costs of some $3000 that were borne by his long-suffering son. 
Knowles died at his son's house, Alfred Place, Bedford Square, London, on 6 February 1840, and was buried at Highgate cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 15770


Knowles, James Sheridan (1784-1862), playwright, was born at Cork on 12 May 1784, the son of James Knowles (1759-1840), lexicographer, and his first wife, Jane (died 1800), daughter of Andrew Peace, medical practitioner of Cork, and widow of a Mr Daunt. Richard Brinsley Sheridan, from whom he derived his second name, was his father's first cousin. At the age of six Knowles was placed in his father's school at Cork, but in 1793 moved with the family to London. There he made early efforts in verse, and at the age of twelve attempted a play, in which he acted with his juvenile companions, as well as the libretto of an opera on the story of the chevalier de Grillon. A few months later he wrote 'The Welch Harper', a ballad which was set to music and became popular. He was befriended by William Hazlitt, an acquaintance of the family, who helped him with advice and introduced him to Samuel Taylor Coleridge and Charles Lamb. 
Knowles's mother, from whom he received much encouragement, died in 1800; and on his father's second marriage soon afterwards, to a Miss Maxwell, Knowles, unable to agree with his stepmother, impulsively left home and lived for some time from hand to mouth, helped by his friends. During this period he served as an ensign in the Wiltshire militia, and afterwards (1805) in the Tower Hamlets militia, before studying medicine under Dr Willan, taking the degree of MD from the University of Aberdeen, and becoming resident vaccinator to the Jennerian Society. Meanwhile he was writing small tragedies and 'dabbling in private theatricals'. By 1808 he had abandoned medicine and taken to the provincial stage. He probably made his first appearance at Bath. Subsequently he played Hamlet with little success at the Crow Street Theatre, Dublin. In a company at Wexford he met, and on 25 October 1809 married, Maria Charteris (died 1841) of Edinburgh. They acted together in Cherry's company at Waterford, and there Knowles made the acquaintance of Edmund Kean, for whom he wrote 'Leo, or, The Gipsy' (1810), which was well received at the Waterford Theatre. In the same year he published 'Fugitive Pieces', a small volume of poems. After a season in Swansea, where his eldest son was born, Knowles acted in Belfast. There he wrote and performed in a highly charged drama called 'Brian Boroihme, or, The Maid of Erin' (1811), which proved very popular. 
But these efforts produced a very small income, and Knowles was driven to seek a living by teaching. He opened a school of his own in Belfast, and assembled for his pupils a series of extracts for declamation under the title of 'The Elocutionist', which ran through many editions. In 1813 he was invited to offer himself for the post of first headmaster in English subjects in the Belfast Academical Institution; but he declined this appointment in favour of his father, contenting himself with the position of assistant. Three years later the dismissal of his father made it necessary for the son to leave Belfast, and Knowles moved to Glasgow, where he established and ran a school for nearly twelve years. 
On 13 February 1815 Knowles's tragedy 'Caius Gracchus' had been greeted as a work of genius in Belfast. It demonstrated, at least, a sensitive response to Shakespeare's 'Coriolanus'. Edmund Kean saw in it the promise of meaty parts in contemporary tragedy, and suggested to Knowles a play on the subject of Virginius. Though at this period he was teaching thirteen hours a day, Knowles wrote the drama in three months; but by the time it was ready Kean had accepted another play on the same theme. Knowles, having waited in hope until 1820, produced 'Virginius' in Glasgow, where John Tait, a friend of William Charles Macready, saw it, and urged Macready to read it. This marked the beginning of a tumultuous relationship which would last over twenty years and see the production of seven of Knowles's plays. 'Virginius', performed at Covent Garden on 17 May 1820, with Macready in the title role, was the first. Excited reviewers wrote of a dramatic renaissance, recognizing in Knowles's mixture of Roman grandiloquence and English domesticity a new and distinctive voice. Among the congratulations which Knowles received was one in verse from Charles Lamb. Knowles then remodelled his 'Caius Gracchus', and Macready staged it at Covent Garden on 18 November 1823. A decorous adaptation of Massinger's 'The Fatal Dowry' followed, and then, at Macready's suggestion, 'William Tell', which opened at Drury Lane on 11 May 1825. Playwright and actor shared an interest in the portrayal of devoted fathers, and exploited it to their mutual advantage. In 'The Spirit of the Age' (1825), Hazlitt pronounced Knowles the finest writer of his time, and there was a chorus of agreement in the theatrical journals. But Knowles made little money by his dramatic successes. In 1823 and 1824 he added to his income by conducting the literary department of the 'Free Press', a Glasgow paper which advocated liberal and social reform. His school did not prosper, and he began lecturing on oratory and drama, earning the praises of John Wilson (Christopher North) in the 'Noctes Ambrosianae'. 
Knowles's first comedy, 'The Beggar's Daughter of Bethnal Green', was produced at Drury Lane on 22 November 1828. It was based on the well-known ballad, which had already inspired a play by Henry Chettle and John Day (written about 1600, and printed in London, 1659). Though expectation ran high, the play was damned at the first performance, according to Knowles's defenders because of the malicious actions of a claque from the temporarily closed Covent Garden. In a reworked version, it held the stage for a further fifty years. In 1830 Knowles left Glasgow with his wife and their son, and settled in Newhaven, near Edinburgh, and there, while working at a new comedy, he put the last touches to his 'Alfred the Great, or, The Patriot King'. This opened at Drury Lane on 28 April 1831 with Macready in the title role and owed its success to the audience's sentimental attachment to the legendary hero-king. It is among the weakest of Knowles's twenty published plays. 

'The Hunchback', a much better play, was initially accepted by the authorities at Drury Lane, but Macready asked for changes, and his hesitation over the revised text caused a breach between the two men. Knowles demanded the return of his manuscript, and took it to Charles Kemble at Covent Garden. It was produced there on 5 April 1832, with Knowles himself in the part of Master Walter. According to Westland Marston, this was Knowles's favourite among his plays, but even so friendly a critic as Marston could find little beyond fervour and sincerity to praise in Knowles's acting, 'which did not gain in charm by the addition of a strong Irish brogue' (Marston, 268). 'The Hunchback' was a great success, and enjoyed an almost uninterrupted run until the end of the season, but Knowles's acting did not meet with much approval. On taking 'The Hunchback' to Glasgow and Edinburgh, he was received with enthusiasm by his former friends and pupils. When his next important play, 'The Wife', was brought out at Covent Garden on 24 April 1833, Charles Lamb wrote both prologue and epilogue. In this, his prime, Knowles was widely recognized as the leading dramatist of the day. 
On 10 September 1837 'The Love Chase', Knowles's second comedy, and perhaps his best play, opened at the Haymarket. Like 'Old Maids' (1841), it is an adroitly plotted story of three contrasting courtships, witty enough to merit revival. Those of his friends who found Knowles's moral gravity excessive were quick to celebrate his comic skills. 
Knowles, despite much adverse criticism, continued to act until 1843, and by his own account was well paid for it. He acted as Macbeth at the Coburg, and in some of his own plays at Covent Garden, where Macready found him 'raw, energetic, harsh, but with mind and purpose' ('Diaries', 1.45). After Knowles's successful tour of America in 1834, Macready's attitude to him changed, not least because of Knowles's flagrant parading of his young protegee Emma Marian Maria Elphinstone, who had returned from America with him in 1835, and whom he married on 23 July 1842, the year after the death of his first wife. The relationship was further strained when Knowles was credited with 'The Bridal' (1837), an adaptation (and bowdlerization) of Beaumont and Fletcher's 'The Maid's Tragedy' (1610-11), which was more Macready's than Knowles's. Literary fame had probably turned Knowles's head. Few of the dozen plays he wrote between 1836 and his abandonment of the theatre in 1844 enhanced his reputation; nor did the publication of two quickly forgotten novels, 'Fortescue' (1846) and 'George Lovell' (1847). 
It is not difficult to detect signs of religious fervour in Knowles's writing, but his contemporaries were startled when, in 1844, he began a new career as a Baptist preacher. His intentions were evangelical, but his style remained histrionic, and he retained a fondness for the theatre. He was on the committee that engineered the purchase of Shakespeare's birthplace, and it was reported in 1848, when the purchase was completed, that the custodianship was offered to him. He never filled the office, but at his death the trustees of the birthplace recorded their belief that he had been in receipt of the dividends of $1500, invested in the names of Forster and Dickens, 'for the ostensible purpose of founding a custodianship of the birthplace', and enquiries were made into the investment and appropriation of the dividends (extract from trustees' minute book, 31 Dec 1862). 
Financial anxiety was a familiar demon to Knowles, who had made strenuous efforts to discharge his father's debts. Having rejected the offer of a civil-list pension of $100 in 1847, he accepted one of $200 in 1848. He now entered into religious controversy with the publication, in 1851, of 'The idol demolished by its own priest: an answer to Cardinal Newman's lectures on transubstantiation'. Himself a sufferer from rheumatism, he was also an active promoter of the water cure, and an admired itinerant preacher almost until his death. His native city of Cork honoured him at a banquet early in 1862, and on 30 November 1862 he died in Torquay. He was buried in the Glasgow necropolis. He was survived by his son, Richard Brinsley Knowles (1820-1882), who produced a privately printed 'Life of James Sheridan Knowles' in 1872. Two volumes of 'Lectures on Dramatic Literature' were published posthumously in 1873. 


@@@@@


doc= 15771


Knowles, John (c.1625-1677), antitrinitarian preacher and religious controversialist, was born at Gloucester, the eldest of the three children of Henry Knowles, a prosperous tradesman in that city, and his wife, Ann (died 1661/2), who appointed her 'Loveing Son John Knowles' (will, 8 April 1661, Glos. RO) sole executor in her will. 
Knowles's education is unknown but he was already preaching to Independent congregations as a teenager and he was clearly familiar with both the Greek text of the 'New Testament' and the Latin commentators. Suspected of being an antitrinitarian for his association with the teacher John Biddle, he was requested about 1646 by the parliamentary committee at Gloucester to state his theological views. He sent them a letter confessing that he had denied for a while 'the Godhead of the holy Ghost' but that afterwards he had been convinced that 'the holy ghost is God' (Eaton, 234). In 1646 Knowles found himself in controversy with the minister Giles Workman, who objected to Knowles's manuscript tract defending lay preaching, a document which Knowles then developed in his 'A Modest Plea for Private Mens Preaching' (1648). By 1648 he had moved from Gloucester to London where he lodged in Aldersgate Street with Edward Atkinson, an antitrinitarian. He then joined the parliamentary army, belonging to 'the Life-Guard of his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax' (Knowles, 'Modest Plea'). He succeeded the Independent Samuel Eaton as preacher to the army garrison at Chester in 1650. His preaching at Chester was 'the earliest recorded case of avowed antitrinitarianism in an English pulpit' (Wilbur, 198). During his stay there he secretly distributed Biddle's 'Confession of Faith'. Samuel Eaton was ill disposed towards his successor, no doubt because he had heard rumours of his 'unsoundnesse in the Doctrine of the Trinity' (Eaton, 5), and he sent a paper to Knowles's flock in defence of orthodoxy. Knowles replied with 'A Friendly Debate on a Weighty Subject' (1650), in which he expressed views which were Arian rather than Socinian, arguing that Christ was truly the son of God but was not himself 'that most high God, whose Being and Actings are originally of himself' (Greaves & Zaller, 'BDBR', 163). Eaton countered with 'The Mystery of God Incarnate' (1650) and 'A Vindication, or, Further Confirmation of some other Scriptures' (1651). 
By the end of 1650 Eaton succeeded in securing Knowles's removal, as is evident from Thomas Porter's pamphlet 'A Serious Exercitation', published on 26 December 1650 and directed against the 'late Preacher at Chester' John Knowles. Knowles came twice to the notice of the council of state for his erroneous opinions, witnesses being questioned about his views on 12 October 1650, when he was still in Chester, and on 19 November 1650, when he was back again in Gloucester. It is unclear whether any further action was taken but he then moved to the small country town of Pershore in Worcestershire, where he lived for some fifteen years as a professed minister. Here he devoted himself to studying, preaching, and collecting money in aid of the Polish exiles. From 5 June 1662 to 1 April 1665 he carried on an interesting correspondence with his Socinian friend Henry Hedworth, who vainly invited him to London to take charge of Biddle's congregation. 
On 9 April 1665 Knowles was arrested under suspicion of disaffection towards the government. He was imprisoned first at Worcester and then, at the end of May, committed to the Gatehouse, Westminster. Papers found in his house at Pershore were seized and made the basis of charges of heresy and sedition. On 23 June he petitioned Lord Arlington for a speedy trial. In July he wrote to the king and to the duke of Albemarle protesting his innocence and entreating release, as the plague was then raging in London. These appeals were left unheeded for on 2 February 1666 he petitioned again. Not long after this fourth petition he was released. 
Knowles remained in London and it seems that he accepted the invitation to become the leader of a group of Socinians. In 1668 he published his final works, this time on the moral theory of atonement, in opposition to the Calvinist Robert Ferguson, publishing two pamphlets, 'The Freeness of Gods Grace in the Forgiveness of Sins by Jesus' (1668) and 'An Answer to Mr. Ferguson's Book' (1668), in both of which he argued that the sacrifice on the cross had for ever reconciled man to God. In early 1676 he is said to have preached at a Socinian meeting-house in Coleman Street. He was buried at St Peter Cornhill, London, on 23 November 1677. His will, dated 1 May 1676, named his nephew John Knowles and Henry Hedworth as executors. He owned a significant number of 'Books of value', some of which apparently went to a library in Gloucester, and he left 'a Third of all he had, for the Relief of Men persecuted for Religion, and other Charities' (Nye, 16). 


@@@@@


doc= 15772


Knowles, John (c.1606-1685), nonconformist minister, was born in Lincolnshire. A brilliant scholar, he graduated BA from Magdalene College, Cambridge, in 1623 and in 1625 was elected fellow of St Catharine's College, where he proved a successful and popular tutor. In 1627 he proceeded MA and was ordained deacon (18 March) and priest (3 October) at Peterborough. On the advice of the master, Richard Sibbes, he joined in electing to a fellowship at St Catharine's Laud's nominee, John Ellis (1606-1681), an act of compliance which he afterwards bitterly regretted. In 1635 Colchester elected him to the corporation lectureship at St Botolph's. He preached with great fervour and exerted considerable public influence. He delivered the 1636 funeral sermon for his close friend, the great Essex puritan, John Rogers, lecturer of Dedham, and engineered the appointment of his successor, Matthew Newcomen. In 1637 his candidate for the mastership of Colchester grammar school, William Dugard, prevailed over Laud's, but 'the getting in of a schoolmaster proved the outing of a lecturer' ('Calamy rev.', 605). Knowles's opposition to ceremonies and adamant refusal to communicate at the altar in a mixed multitude led to the revocation of his licence and to his resignation in 1637. 
In 1639 Knowles embarked for New England, and in December that year he was called to be co-pastor with George Phillips at Watertown. He married about this time Elizabeth, daughter of Thomas Willis, the famous schoolmaster of Isleworth, Middlesex, and Lynn, Massachusetts, with whom he had two daughters. In 1642 Knowles joined the Harvard board of overseers and on 7 October was one of three ministers sent to Virginia in response to requests from puritan settlers there. Their nonconformity soon led to their silencing and expulsion by the new governor, Sir William Berkeley. Knowles returned in 1643 to Watertown, where he continued to minister, alone after Phillips's death in 1644, and with John Sherman from 1647. In 1650 he became a freeman and on 31 December was a signatory to a letter congratulating Cromwell on his suppression of the Irish uprising. 
In 1651 Knowles returned to England and was appointed lecturer in Bristol Cathedral. He was also rector of St Werburgh and pastor of Castle Green congregationalist church, Bristol. In 1654 he was an assistant to the Somerset commission, and in September 1658 was one of the representatives of the congregationalist churches at the Savoy Assembly in London. He was several times barracked by Quakers: on 6 October 1659 his door was assailed with a chopping knife. He claimed credit for eliciting the Dodderidge bequest for Harvard College from a former Bristol recorder. 
Deprived at the Restoration, Knowles went to London where he remained until his death. He was briefly lecturer at All Hallows-the-Great in 1661 and 1662 but was forced underground after the 1662 'Act of Uniformity'. In August 1664 he was reported to be holding $1000 for the benefit of 'godly men' and continued to solicit funds for Harvard. He was reported as holding conventicles at various places in London in 1664 and 1665, and courageously continued to minister during the great plague. By 27 October 1671, when he received the freedom of Bristol, he had married his second wife, Deborah, daughter of Thomas Barwicke. The next year an invitation to become president of Harvard coincided with the royal declaration of indulgence, and he declined. Though continuing correspondence, the next year he sold his remaining Massachusetts property. Instead, in the new tolerant atmosphere, he became a colleague of Thomas Kentish in ministering to a presbyterian group in St Katharine by the Tower, afterwards in Eastcheap (ultimately at the king's weighhouse). He had many narrow escapes after the cancelling of the 'Act of Indulgence' in 1673 and in 1676 was preaching at Booby Lane, Wapping. He died in London on 10 April 1685. By his will, dated from Shadwell, 10 May 1680, he left bequests to his son, Samuel, and daughters Anne (wife of Benjamin Eyre) and Martha (wife of Thomas Impey). 


@@@@@


doc= 15773


Knowles, John (1781-1841), naval surveyor and biographer, was born on 24 March 1781 at 14 Union Street, Deptford, London, the eldest of the three sons of John Knowles (died 1814), shipwright, and his wife, Mary Posgate, and was baptized on 19 April 1781 at St Paul's, Deptford. He was privately educated at Bexleyheath. On 30 March 1798 he was appointed as one of the four clerks to the surveyors in the Navy Office. By 1806 he had risen to chief clerk (salary $500, later $650, p.a.). He was superannuated with a pension of $498 in August 1832, thereafter becoming managing director of the Economic Life Assurance Society until 1835. 
Knowles was the author of 'An Inquiry into the Means Taken to Preserve the British Navy' (1821), in recognition of which he was elected, in July 1821, fellow of the Royal Society, and 'The Principles and Practice of Constructing Ships' (1822). Knowles is best-known, however, for his long friendship with Henry Fuseli and his biography of the painter. Knowles was introduced to Fuseli by their mutual friend John Bonnycastle in June 1805. Since the Navy Office was only a few steps from the Royal Academy across Somerset Place, Knowles and Fuseli saw each other almost daily for the next twenty years. The 'Life and Writings of Henry Fuseli' (3 vols., 1831) was an expanded version of Knowles's anonymous memoir in the 'Annual Biography and Obituary for the Year 1826' (232-70). Knowles's biography is notable for its factual accuracy; the accompanying volumes made accessible all of Fuseli's writings on art, including the 'Lectures on Painting' (comprising twelve lectures, separately published by Knowles in 1830), the 'Aphorisms on Art', and the unfinished 'History of Art in Italy'. Knowles was executor to both the painter and his widow, Sophia (died 1832). Knowles's collection of paintings included choice works by Giorgione, Titian, Rembrandt, Van Dyck, Gainsborough, and Reynolds, and fourteen paintings by Fuseli. 
Knowles died, unmarried, at Ashburton, Devon, on 21 July 1841, having moved from London in 1840 to live with his brother Samuel Posgate Knowles. He was buried in the Whitheare family tomb in Ashburton churchyard. His portrait was painted by S. P. Knowles, Samuel Drummond, and Charles Landseer, and a marble bust was executed by William Behnes (exh. RA, 1836). Photographs of these remain in a private collection. Knowles was one of the original members of the Athenaeum and a lithograph by 'W. D.' after Landseer's portrait was included in Thomas McLean's 'Athenaeum Portraits' (no. 25). 


@@@@@


doc= 15774


Knowles, Mary (1733-1807), poet, was born on 5 May 1733, the eldest daughter of Moses and Mary Morris of Rugeley, Staffordshire. Her talent for needlework was brought to the attention of Queen Charlotte, for whom she was commissioned to produce worsted portraits of George III and the young princess, Charlotte. Mary married Thomas Knowles (died 1784), physician and author of 'Tentamen medicum' (1772). The couple, who had one son, George, travelled abroad and were received at The Hague and at Versailles. A brilliant conversationalist, Mary Knowles was on intimate terms with Samuel Johnson and said of Johnson's reading that 'he tore the heart out of a book' (Boswell, 942). About 1776 she wrote 'Compendium of a Controversy on Water-Baptism', in which she engaged with a Revd Mr Rand of Coventry. 'A Poetic Correspondence', between herself and a Captain Morris, was printed in the 'British Friend' (April 1848); others of her verses appeared as small tracts without dates. James Boswell recorded her talents but declined to accept as authentic her account of a 'Dialogue between Dr Johnson and Mrs Knowles' (regarding the conversion to Quakerism of Jane Harry), which Mrs Knowles forwarded to Boswell while he was engaged on his biography of Johnson. After Anna Seward, who was present at the interview, confirmed the authenticity of the account, Mary Knowles published it in the 'Gentleman's Magazine' (June 1791) and it later appeared separately in 1799. Thomas Knowles died on 16 November 1784 at Lombard Street, London. Mary died, also in London, on 3 February 1807. 


@@@@@


doc= 15775


Knowles, Richard Brinsley (1820-1882), journalist, son of James Sheridan Knowles (1784-1862), dramatist and Baptist preacher, and Maria Charteris (died 1841), actress, was born at Glasgow on 17 January 1820. From 1838 to 1841 he was a clerk in the registrar-general's office, Somerset House, London. He was admitted as a student of the Middle Temple on 14 November 1839 and called to the bar on 26 May 1843. Having inherited his father's love of the theatre, on 19 November 1845 he produced at the Haymarket Theatre a comedy entitled 'The Maiden Aunt', which had a run of thirty nights. In 1845-6 he edited the humorous magazines 'Joe Miller the Younger' and 'Mephystopheles'. On 25 October 1845 he married Eliza Mary, youngest child of Peter and Elizabeth Crowley of Dublin, and sister of Nicholas Joseph Crowley (1819-1857), painter. 
In 1849 Knowles became a Roman Catholic and was appointed editor of the 'Catholic Standard', subsequently purchased by Henry Wilberforce and renamed the 'Weekly Register'. From 1853 to 1855 he edited the 'Illustrated London Magazine', a series of five volumes. He was a leading writer on 'The Standard' from 1857 to 1860, but the anti-Catholic prejudice of the proprietors led to his dismissal. John Sherren Brewer, who was then editing the paper, at once resigned in protest. Knowles was editor of the 'London Review', but in later years his chief engagement was on the 'Morning Post', until ill health forced his resignation. 
Turning to historical research, Knowles edited the 'Chronicles of John of Oxenedes' from a manuscript in the duke of Newcastle's collection; this was published in 1859 in the 'Rolls Series'. In 1871 he was appointed to the inspectorate of the Royal Commission on Historical Manuscripts, and catalogued many valuable collections, mainly belonging to Roman Catholic families. Among these were the papers of the marquess of Bute, the earl of Denbigh, the earl of Ashburnham, and Colonel John Towneley. His 'Life of James Sheridan Knowles', a limited edition privately printed in 1872, besides being a work of filial piety, vividly evokes the theatrical milieu of the early nineteenth century. Knowles died suddenly at his home, 29 North Bank, Regent's Park, London, on 28 January 1882, survived by his wife. His son Richard Brinsley Sheridan Knowles (1848- 'c'. 1930), educated at Ratcliffe College, became a civil servant and occasional contributor to literary reviews. His three-volume novel 'Glencoonoge' (1891) is an attractive Irish romance set in Bantry Bay. 


@@@@@


doc= 15776


Knowles, Thomas (1723-1802), religious writer, born at Ely, Cambridgeshire, was the son of John Knowles, a verger and master of the works of Ely Cathedral. He was educated at Ely grammar school and at Pembroke College, Cambridge, where he was admitted as a sizar on 6 July 1739; he graduated BA in 1744 and MA in 1747. He was elected a college fellow on 23 March 1749 and was ordained deacon at Ely in May 1746 and priest in Norwich in September 1748. He published 'The Existence and Attributes of God not Demonstrable A Priori' (1746) in response to Samuel Clarke and his followers, in particular to Phillips Glover's 'The Argument A Priori... Stated and Considered'. He subsequently published 'The Scripture Doctrine of the Existence and Attributes of God... in Twelve Sermons' (1748), the preface of which was written in response to David Hume. 
On 10 January 1748 Knowles became rector of Ickworth and of Chedburgh in Suffolk, the second of which he held until his death. He was also chaplain to the dowager Lady Hervey, of Ickworth. In 1752 he had a dispensation to hold the living of Teversham, Cambridgeshire, which he held until 1761. He was made DD by Archbishop Secker in 1753, apparently on the strength of his sermons in response to Bishop Robert Clayton's 'An Essay on Spirit'. From 1771 onwards he was also lecturer of St Mary's Church, Bury St Edmunds. On 10 October 1779 he was collated to a prebend at Ely, and in 1791 he became rector of Winston, Suffolk. 
Knowles also wrote on practical religion: his 'Preparatory Discourse on Confirmation' was hugely popular and went through ten editions by 1784, and in his final years he published anonymously a book of advice to young clergymen on entering the priesthood. He published two sermons on schools in 1772 and 1787, and works on the 'Tithe Bill' and 'Test Act'. His treatise 'Primitive Christianity' (1789) drew forth 'Observations' (1789) from Capel Lofft and 'Strictures' (1790) from James Edward Hamilton. 
Knowles died in Chedburgh on 6 October 1802, and was buried in his church there. He was married and one of his two daughters married Benjamin Underwood, rector of Great Barnet and of St Mary Abchurch, Abchurch Yard, London; the other, Eliza, married Sir Edmund Lacon, later baronet. 


@@@@@


doc= 15777


Knowlton, Thomas (1691-1781), gardener and botanist, was born at Chislehurst, Kent, and baptized there on 6 September 1691, the eldest of the five sons of William Knowlton and Ann Stokes. Little is known of his early life. In 1720 he was employed as a gardener by Sir Henry Penrice (1677-1752) at Offaly Palace, Hertfordshire. In the same year, on 27 June, he married Elizabeth Rice (died 1738). They had two children, Elizabeth and Charles, the latter of whom attended St John's College, Cambridge, and pursued a career in the church. After leaving Penrice's service Knowlton superintended the botanic garden of Dr James Sherard at Eltham in Kent. After a short time working for the duke of Chandos in Canons he entered the service of Richard Boyle, third earl of Burlington, at Londesborough, Yorkshire, and there he remained for the rest of his life. His freelance work at other estates in Yorkshire appears to have made him a wealthy man, and he invested his profits in property. 
Knowlton became known as a botanist of merit. He corresponded with E. M. Da Costa and other members of the Royal Society, and won the esteem of Sir Hans Sloane. He subscribed to Mark Catesby's 'History of Carolina' and actively encouraged others to do the same. To him is due the first discovery in England of the 'moor-ball', a species of fresh-water algae of the Conferva family, called by Linnaeus 'Aegagropila'. In order to find even a moderate number of these balls, he had to spend many hours wading in the lake at Walling Fen, in water from 2 to over 3 feet deep. 
Knowlton was also something of an antiquary. He discovered the exact site of the ancient city of Delgovicia, near Pocklington in Yorkshire, and communicated some observations on this and other subjects to the 'Philosophical Transactions' (44, 1748, 100-102, 124-7). Two large deer's horns which he discovered, one resembling the horn of an Irish elk, are figured in the same volume (plate 422). He was at first distinguished by his interest in and knowledge of indigenous plants. In 1726 he travelled to Guernsey to study the cultivation of the Guernsey lily. He became increasingly interested in exotic species, for which he first built a hot house at Londesborough in 1729. 
Knowlton died on 28 November 1781 at Londesborough. Toward the end of his life he was totally blind. He was buried in Londesborough churchyard. The genus 'Knowltonia' (Ranunculaceae), now subsumed into 'Anemone', was named after him by Richard Anthony Salisbury in 1796. A John Knowlton, gardener to Earl Fitzwilliam, whose will was proved in February 1782 (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/1087, sig. 85), was perhaps a brother of the botanist. 


@@@@@


doc= 15778


Knox, Alexander (1757-1831), theological writer, was born in Londonderry, in the north of Ireland, on 17 March 1757, the son of Alexander Knox (died 1770), a man of independent property and a leading member of the corporation of Londonderry, who was descended from the Scottish family to which the celebrated reformer John Knox belonged. His mother, whose name is unknown, died in 1792. Knox's lifelong poor health prevented him from passing through a regular course of school education, but his later writings and reputation for learning attest to his thorough grounding through extensive reading at an early age in the classics and divinity, as well as general literature. 
A seminal influence on Knox's early religious development and later life was his boyhood and youthful contact with the founder of Methodism, John Wesley, who had enlisted his parents into one of his societies in Londonderry in 1765, during the course of his tenth visit to Ireland. Wesley wrote twenty letters between 1776 and 1785 to the young Alexander Knox (addressed as 'My Dear Alleck') that were full of religious and practical advice. Knox was an intelligent but very delicate youth. From his earliest years he 'had been afflicted with attacks of epilepsy, attended by depression of spirits of the most painful character' ('Thirty Years' Correspondence', 2.24). Wesley convinced him of the providential nature of his afflictions as designed 'to balance the natural petulance of youth' (1 April 1777; ibid., 25). Knox was for a time a member of one of Wesley's societies, but a growing spiritual independence caused him to withdraw before the age of twenty. He remained an admirer of Wesley's original system, arguing that 'never, elsewhere, except in the Apostles themselves, and in the sacred books they have left, were the true foundation, and the sublime superstructure of Christianity, so effectually united' (to Joseph Butterworth, 25 Sept 1807; 'Remains', 1.74). Likewise, to his friend John Jebb, Knox insisted that in 'John Wesley's views of Christian Perfection, are combined, in substance, all the sublime morality of the Greek Fathers, the spirituality of the mystics, and the divine philosophy of our favourite platonists' (19 July 1804; 'Thirty Years' Correspondence', 1.143). Knox insisted, however, that it was to his mother rather than to John Wesley that he owed his early religious education and 'whatever I have gained of true peace' (to Mr Butterworth, 25 Sept 1807; 'Remains', 1.70). He found that the 'methods of Methodist piety were so much pointed to present effects, to the producing something new, that they seemed, when at all resorted to, to disturb my animal spirits too much'. A Sunday spent worshipping with the Methodists in Liverpool in 1802, on account of the dryness of Anglican pulpit discourse in the locality, convinced him 'that a quieter, more equable, more gradual course, was the one indicated for me to walk in' (ibid., 71). In the same letter he made clear that 'I never called Mr. Wesley, Rabbi' (ibid.). 
Knox's lifelong personal devotion to Wesley's memory, his abiding sense of Wesley's providential role in recalling the contemporary church to an emphasis on holiness of life, and the importance of emotion in religion, however, were only partially offset by his own later, independent thinking on the primitive church and a high-church emphasis on apostolic order and authority. To the end Knox defended Wesley against a variety of different critics. In 1802 he published a defence of Wesley against a Calvinistic clergyman, John Walker, fellow of Trinity College, Dublin, who had published 'Expostulatory Address to the Members of the Methodist Society in Ireland'. Knox's published remarks on this publication elicited a 'defence' from Walker. In 1822 he composed a defence of Wesley against Robert Southey's life of him as 'Remarks on the Life and Character of John Wesley'; Southey himself was so impressed with Knox's defence that he decided that any new edition of his own biography of Wesley should carry it as an appendix. Moreover Knox kept up his Methodist connections, befriending and becoming the patron of the young Adam Clarke, a Methodist preacher who became a notable Orientalist. He also attended the annual Methodist conference in Ireland as late as 1807. 
Knox became active in political life during the 1790s. He was a friend of moderate parliamentary reform at the beginning of that decade, and remained an advocate of Roman Catholic emancipation and of a moderate endowment of the Irish Catholic priesthood. However, alarmed by events in France and at the proceedings of the United Irishmen (with which he had some early connections) and by the unrest and subsequent rising of 1798, he moved in a more conservative political direction. In 1798 he was appointed private secretary to the chief secretary for Ireland, Robert Stewart, Lord Castlereagh. His political skills as an administrator in this post were underpinned by a profound historical understanding of the philosophical principles of government and the peculiar conditions of Ireland, and were reflected in his 'Essays on the political circumstances of Ireland during the administration of Lord Camden; with an appendix containing thoughts on the will of the people' (1799), which was written at intervals between 1795 and 1797 and originally intended as papers 'for insertion in newspapers, or for circulation in the form of handbills'. 
Knox's public career was cut short in August 1799, when, as he later recalled, 'I was obliged from nervous disposition to leave Ireland' (Baird Evans, 24). He had the highest respect for Lord Castlereagh, whom he praised as 'the honestest and perhaps the ablest statesman that has been in Ireland for a century' ('Remains', 4.31), and Castlereagh reciprocated his regard. As late as 1811 Castlereagh was pressing Knox, unsuccessfully, to write the history of the Union so as to confront 'the demons of the present day' (ibid., 539). Castlereagh had urged Knox not to resign, and later urged him to accept an offer to represent his native city, Londonderry, in the United Kingdom parliament. Knox was not dissuaded from his original intention and entirely abandoned public life. Some far-fetched reasons, relating to apparent blemishes in his private life, have been adduced for his decision. The literalness of Knox's own admissions in a fragmentary diary (only part of which survives: see 'Remains', 4.41-5, 55-61), wherein he upbraided himself for having involved himself in scenes of dissipation from early manhood until about 1797, has been questioned by G. T. Stokes. Knox has been the subject of gross, racy, and unreliable anecdotes from hostile sources, perhaps originating in disapproval of his changing political allegiances in the 1790s. For example, William Fitzpatrick, who sneeringly referred to Knox as having 'made himself useful as a scribe during the reign of terror', alleged that Knox underwent an act of bodily self-mutilation prompted by 'the madness and illegality of' an unrequited passion for the beautiful young wife of the chief secretary, Robert Peel (Fitzpatrick). This story is discredited by the fact that Peel only assumed the post in 1812 and was unmarried at the time when Knox is supposed to have fallen for his wife. 
Whatever the truth in respect of disorder in Knox's private life it can be safely assumed that it was his overriding theological interests and craving for solitude that lay at the root of his decision to retire. As his evangelical friend Hannah More noted, 'Having been a grand instrument in accomplishing the great work of the Union, he turned his back upon politics and politicians, and lives in a religious retirement' (H. More to W. Wilberforce, 24 Sept 1804, Bodl. Oxf., Wilberforce MS d. 15, fol. 71). Knox lived the last thirty years of his life in retirement, either at Bellevue, Delgany, outside Dublin, at the residence of the La Touche, a Huguenot banking family, or in his own bachelor quarters at 46 Dawson Street, Dublin. His life was one almost of a hermit, interrupted only by occasional visits to the country homes of friends. He was always plagued by a melancholy and at times neurotic temperament. None the less, in view of reports both of his brilliance as a conversationalist and of his being a gentleman of refined and exquisite taste, the image of an eccentric recluse and invalid requires modification. Moreover, it is significant that his health notably improved on his retirement and that after 1803 his epileptic fits disappeared and his state of nervousness diminished. 
It was during the long, later years of his retirement that Knox emerged as a profoundly original religious thinker, earning the sobriquet 'the sage of Bellevue', while his friend J. S. Harford called him 'the Plato of Bellevue'. One of the most formative personal contacts of his life after that of John Wesley was his close friendship with John Jebb, bishop of Limerick from 1823, whom he first met when Jebb was at Londonderry School. The names of Knox and Jebb became inextricably linked as representatives of a theological school. Knox used his close contacts with Charles Agar, archbishop of Dublin (1801-9), and Charles Brodrick, archbishop of Cashel (1801-22), to smooth the clerical career of the young Jebb. The two friends toured England together in the summer of 1809. 
Knox's theological position has been the subject of discussion, most notably by G. T. Stokes and Yngve Brilioth. Although he was influenced by the Methodist system and maintained close contacts with the so-called Claphamite evangelicals -- notably Hannah More and William Wilberforce -- Knox was a high-churchman of sorts but kept his distance from the 'high and dry' contemporary variant of high-churchmanship. Knox, like Jebb, was distinctly high-church in his teaching on the sacraments, insisting on the reality of the efficacy of sacramental grace in both baptism and the eucharist, as exemplified in his 'On the Doctrine Respecting Baptism Held by the Church of England' (1820) and in 'An Enquiry on Grounds of Scripture and Reason into the Use and Import of the Eucharistic Symbols' (1824). Knox defended the English Reformation on Catholic grounds, regarding it as a restoration of the early church as a court of appeal. He identified much more with the eucharistic doctrine of Nicholas Ridley than that of Thomas Cranmer. He took a high-church line in asserting that the catholicity of the Church of England was based on its unbroken episcopate and on the merits of the 'Book of Common Prayer'. For Knox the main strength of the Anglican liturgy lay in its apparent mediation of the piety of the early church. One of the abiding themes of his thought was gratitude for what he regarded as the providential escape of the Church of England from various attempts, whether from the direction of Geneva or Rome, to despoil her of her liturgical and apostolical inheritance. Those eighteenth-century establishment figures who went astray into Arianism or Socinianism or in the direction of dissent -- such as Samuel Clarke, Benjamin Hoadly, and Theophilus Lindsey -- did so, he argued, because they 'seem never to have been capable of feeling the peculiar excellencies of our liturgical forms' ('Remains', 1.98). His view of Anglican catholicity was also rooted, as he showed in a letter, 'On the fathers of the Christian church and on Catholic tradition' (ibid., 277-313), in his application of the celebrated dictum of St Vincent of Lerins -- 'quod ubique, quod semper, quod eadem' -- as the doctrinal standard of the Church of England. Newman's later idea of the 'via media' found expression in Knox's words to Jebb in a letter of 1813: 'What perverse influence the nickname of Protestant has had upon our Church... It will perhaps be at length discovered, that there is a 'medium' between the two extremes' ('Thirty Years' Correspondence', 2.122). 
Knox aligned himself with high-churchmanship and against evangelicalism in his understanding of the doctrine of justification. In opposition to Joseph Milner and other Anglican evangelical exponents he wrote 'Letter to Mr Parken on justification', in which, like Wesley, he criticized the 'forensic' doctrine of justification. In contrast Knox defined justification as the acquisition of a condition of inward or interior -- and not merely outward or formal -- righteousness, and identified baptism with justification. He sought to read this interpretation of justification as a moral change into the articles and homilies of the Church of England. At the same time Knox was sensitive to evangelical charges of formalism against high-churchmen. He reacted strongly against sterile forms of the establishmentarian high-churchmanship of his day. In a memorable passage in a letter to a friend he made clear his position: 'Now, I am a Churchman in grain -- not a Tory Churchman, for that is a disease in the Church, not its constitutional turn; nor yet a Whig Churchman, for they do not value enough the distinguishing features of our Establishment. But, if I may use the term, I am a primitive Churchman. ('Remains', 4.206-7)' 

This outlook brought Knox closer to Anglican evangelicals as well as to Methodists. In a letter of 1816, 'On the situation and prospects of the established church', Knox condemned the spirit in which 'the present champions for what they think high church orthodoxy, are combating their 'Evangelical' opponents', lamenting that in this quarter 'inward religion is little less than systematically exploded' (ibid., 1.58). Thus when during the so-called Blagdon controversy over Sunday schools, in 1802, Hannah More endured the obloquy of some high-churchmen Knox privately defended her as 'one of the most truly evangelical divines of this whole age' (Roberts, 3.161). Knox even went so far as to claim: 'Hannah More and I are substantially of the same school, that is, we both make it our object to pass through the form of Godliness to the power thereof' ('Remains', 4.174-5). More reciprocated Knox's compliments, regarding him as 'the most intellectual and spiritual man I ever knew' (H. More to W. Wilberforce, 24 Sept 1804; Bodl. Oxf., Wilberforce MS d. 15, fol. 75). Knox's closeness to More was also revealed by the close hand that he had in her publication 'Hints towards Forming the Character of a Young Princess' (1805). He was friendly towards, but kept a critical distance from, the leading high-church faction in the church, the so-called Hackney phalanx. He admired individuals in that group but disliked what he regarded as their rigidity and narrowness, even claiming in 1816 that the 'old high church race is died out' (A. Knox, 'On the situation and prospects of the established church', 1816, in 'Remains', 1.54). 
Knox and Jebb certainly parted company with most contemporary high-churchmen in their regard not only for evangelicalism and some puritan worthies such as Richard Baxter but also for the more religious strain in the latitudinarian tradition, as exemplified by Sir Matthew Hale, lord chief justice in Charles II's reign, and notably the whig historian Gilbert Burnet, bishop of Salisbury under William III. In his preface to Jebb's edition of 'Lives, Characters, and an Address to Posterity by Gilbert Burnet, Late Bishop of Sarum' (1833) Knox approved Hale's tenderness towards nonconformists on the ground that it proceeded from 'puritanic presuppositions' rather than 'latitudinarian indifference' (p. lii). Knox's high regard for Burnet and historic latitudinarianism puzzled his Anglican evangelical friends as well as stricter high-churchmen. Hannah More, bemused by a present that Knox left her to give to William Wilberforce -- Burnet's 'Lives', 'of which he is very fond' -- observed: 'His chief delight is in contemplation and inward religion; but he is not in all points in our way. He is of the Platonic Christian school, a disciple of Cudworth, Lucas, Whichcote, Scougal, Worthington, and Joseph Mede. In our disputes, however, I tell him that while Leighton and Baxter are his favourites, we shall not quarrel much. (H. More to W. Wilberforce, 24 Sept 1804, Bodl. Oxf., Wilberforce MS d. 15, fols. 70-71)' After Jeremy Taylor, Knox's favourite spiritual authors were Henry Scougal ('Life of God in the Soul of Man'), John Worthington ('On Resignation'), and Richard Lucas ('Inquiry after Happiness'). Knox's influence on the Claphamite circle of Anglican evangelicals was such, however, that Henry Thornton privately conceded to Hannah More that evangelicals like themselves had much to learn from the 'manliness and sublimity' exhibited in the religion of Knox and Jebb but 'which we lamentably want' (H. Thornton to H. More, 9 Sept 1809 CUL, Add. 1/L4, fols. 104-5). Some Irish evangelicals on the other hand were less tolerant of Knox's departure from accepted evangelical doctrinal norms than their English Claphamite counterparts. 
Knox's attitude to the Roman Catholic church and the question of reunion was also distinctive and the subject of controversy. Anglican evangelical friends, whom he strove to persuade into supporting Catholic emancipation, could be taken aback by his conversational championing of aspects of Roman Catholic teaching and by his eirenicism towards the Church of Rome. In a work defending the idea of Catholic emancipation Knox urged his protestant contemporaries to recognize the debt that the Church of England owed to the Roman Catholic church as 'having been the instrument of so much good to us' in terms of liturgical and devotional treasures (A. Knox, 'An Answer to the Rt Hon. P. Duigenan's Two Great Arguments Against the Full Enfranchisement of the Irish Roman Catholics', 1810, 41). Like Wesley, Knox was an avid reader of Roman Catholic devotional writers such as Thomas a Kempis, M. De Renty, and Francois de Sales, even complaining in a letter to Hannah More in December 1806 that protestantism was deficient in producing saints and saintliness. On the other hand Knox regarded his espousal of the Vincentian rule as the strongest barrier possible against the claims of the Roman Catholic church, which he regarded as being a 'mental yoke' enslaving the individual conscience. He responded respectfully and cordially, but in the negative, to the plan for reunion of the churches put forward by the Roman Catholic controversialist James Doyle, bishop of Kildare and Leighlin, in 1824. In a letter to Thomas Newenham, in which he recorded his conviction on the impossibility of any such union unless the Church of Rome parted 'with its essence', Knox none the less asserted in favour of the Roman Catholic church: 'I neither join in the charge of idolatry with which it is so customary to brand her; nor do I censure her tenets on many points which she has been condemned by Protestant controversialists. In many of these instances, I humbly think there is more truth on her side than on theirs. (A. Knox, 'Letters on the Re-Union of the Churches of England and Rome', [1824], 28-9)' 

Knox, who never married, died in Dublin on 17 January 1831. A major treatise on the epistles to the 'Romans' and 'Hebrews' on which he had laboured fitfully since 1817 remained uncompleted. Some of his evangelical friends, including the Revd Thomas Kelly, claimed that in his very last years and on his deathbed he abandoned what they regarded as the erroneous points in his theories, had a conversion experience, and embraced doctrinal evangelicalism. The claim, propagated in an article in the evangelical 'Christian Observer' in August 1836, was publicly rejected by others of Knox's friends, such as James Hornby, and by a reviewer in the high-church 'British Critic' in 1838, while Bishop Jebb's nephew John Jebb considered it based on 'the most profound ignorance of that venerable person's character' (J. Jebb to J. Hornby, 2 Oct 1836; TCD, MS 6398, letter 53). A monument to Knox was erected, at some time after his death, in St Ann's Church, Dublin, where he used to worship. A stained-glass window dedicated to his memory was erected in the same church in the early 1860s. 
Knox has been claimed as a religious prophet and as 'a Christian Socrates' whose influence was as disturbing to protestant divinity as 'a comet upon the orbit of our globe' ('Remains', 1). He has been compared to Samuel Taylor Coleridge as an original religious thinker and credited with anticipating Coleridge's famous distinction between the reason and the understanding. More controversially he has been viewed as a bridge between Wesley and Newman. There was enough in Knox's theological principles and teaching to give some credence to Stokes's contention that Knox, along with his friend Jebb, was a harbinger of the Oxford Movement. James Hornby, who edited the four volumes of Knox's 'Remains' (1834-7), was the first to make this claim, arguing that there was no catholic doctrine for which the authors of 'Tracts for the Times' were then contending that Knox had 'not been fighting over, and winning solid ground for, during the whole of the present century' (Hornby to Newman, 31 March 1840; 'The Letters and Diaries of J. H. Newman', ed. C. S. Dessau and others, 31 vols., 1973-7, 7.288). Certainly Knox's high doctrine of the Christian priesthood and apostolic succession, together with his advanced sacramental teaching, marks him out as a genuine precursor of the Tractarians. His view of justification as an 'imparted' rather than 'imputed' source of 'righteousness' also closely foreshadowed Newman's position in his 'Lectures on Justification' (1838). Building on the evidence of these similarities Stokes famously asserted that 'Wesley begat Knox, and Knox begat Jebb, and Jebb begat Rose and Pusey and Newman' (Stokes, 190). 
Stokes, however, overstated his case in making Knox the fount or origin of the Oxford Movement, and in his estimate of the extent of Wesley's influence transmitted by Knox on Newman (who in fact had a low opinion of Wesley). Newman conceded that Knox had played a part in the broader preparation of the ground that enabled the Oxford Movement to take root in the 1830s: 'Could we see the scheme of things as angels see it, I fancy we should find he has his place in the growth and restoration (so be it) of Church principles' (Newman to S. Rickards, 9 Feb 1835; J. H. Newman, 'Letters and diaries', 5.27). Stokes, however, overlooked Newman's and especially Keble's reservations about Knox's teaching. Newman, while conceding to Robert Wilberforce in June 1838 that he had 'read very little' of Knox, remarked that he 'seems to say dangerous things... I should be unwilling to think him more than an eclectic, though that is bad enough. Froude did not like him. I think his works on the Eucharist have done much good' (D. Newsome, 'The Parting of Friends', 2nd edn, 1993, 197). Taking his cue from Froude's criticisms, Newman later hardened his attitude against Knox, telling the editor of Knox's 'Remains' bluntly: 'I deliberately formed the opinion from the various works of his which I read, that he did not hold the Apostolical Succession in the sense in which Mr Froude held it; and that he entertained opinions less strict and definite than the Catholic Church teaches. (Newman to Hornby, 13 April 1840, J. H. Newman, 'Letters and diaries', 7.303)' E. B. Pusey's biographer H. P. Liddon drew attention to 'the slight use' that the Oxford school made of Knox's writings, explaining that: 'the Tractarians felt that they could not claim him as a whole; and they were certainly not indebted to him for anything which they knew of Catholic antiquity or Catholic truth. But they did occasionally use him as being a witness in dark times, to portions of the truth which they were reasserting; and in this sense he may be described as a precursor of the Oxford revival. (Liddon, 262)' Similarly Dean Church immediately challenged Stokes's argument as being built upon insufficient material. Church concluded: 'The Oxford men found their doctrines where Wesley in his younger days found them, and where Knox found them afterwards, but quite certainly they did not find them through Knox or Wesley' ('The Guardian', 7 Sept 1887). 
The mature Tractarian estimate of Knox can be compared to that of the young W. E. Gladstone before he had quite abandoned the traces of his own early evangelicalism. Gladstone's development from a youthful evangelicalism to a high-church position was influenced by his reading of Knox's religious writings, but initially his view of Knox was ambivalent. In a private memorandum composed on 24 May 1835 he praised the way in which Knox had 'in the first place vindicated, one may almost hope for ever, against the outrages of the scoffer and the saturnine contempt of formalism, the great and essential doctrine of an inward and vital religion'. However, as well as criticizing Knox's 'denial of a forensic justification' Gladstone found Knox's religion to be too 'individualised', recognizing 'no brotherhood'. 'There are few temperaments,' he concluded, 'which could afford to adopt this isolated method of religion, without serious perhaps fatal detriment' (Gladstone papers, BL, Add. MS 44724). Despite Gladstone's misgivings Knox has proved a seminal religious thinker of the period. 


@@@@@


doc= 15779


Knox, Alexander Andrew (1818-1891), journalist and police magistrate, the second son of George Knox, a landowner in Jamaica, was born in London on 5 February 1818. He was educated at Blundell's School, Tiverton, and went with a scholarship to Trinity College, Cambridge (BA 1844, MA 1847). He was called to the bar as member of Lincoln's Inn in 1844. 
Knox began his journalistic career at the 'Morning Chronicle', but in 1846 he became a writer of leading articles on the staff of 'The Times'. He continued to write for that paper until 1860, when he accepted Sir George Cornewall Lewis's offer of the office of police magistrate at Worship Street. In 1862 he was transferred to the Marlborough Street court, and remained there until 1878, when a stroke forced him to retire. On three occasions he received the special thanks of the Home Office for his magisterial services. 
A noted conversationalist, Knox spent much of his life in the company of intellectuals. In 1842 he travelled in Italy with Shelley, his wife, Mary, and Robert Leslie Ellis, where they met Edward John Trelawny, a friend of Byron and Shelley. Knox was a frequent guest of Dr John Ayrton Paris, at whose house in London he met leading men of science, including Michael Faraday, Sir Benjamin Collins Brodie, and Charles Babbage. Among his other friends were Sir James Brooke, Admiral Sherard Osborn, Alexander William Kinglake, Sir Spencer St John, Thomas Mozley, and Marianne North. Knox published 'The New Playground, or, Wanderings in Algeria' (1881). Besides his work on 'The Times' he contributed articles to the 'Edinburgh Review', 'Blackwood's Edinburgh Magazine', and many other periodicals. 
In 1857 Knox married Susan Toten, daughter of James Armstrong, of the Bengal civil service. He died at his home, 125 Victoria Street, London, on 5 October 1891; he was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 15780


Knox, Andrew (d. 1633), bishop of Raphoe, was born in Renfrewshire, the second son of John Knox of Ranfurly in Kilbarchan parish. Educated at Glasgow University under the regime of Andrew Melville, he graduated MA in 1579, and after continuing his theological studies in the college was appointed minister of Lochwinnoch, Renfrewshire, in 1581, and then minister of nearby Paisley in 1585. He married his cousin Elizabeth, daughter of William Knox of Silvieland; the couple had two daughters and three sons, Thomas, James, and George. 
Knox came to James VI's notice in 1592 when he discovered on the isle of Cumbrae in the Firth of Clyde George Kerr, a Roman Catholic, bound for Spain with certain papers, the 'Spanish blanks', signed by the conservative northern earls. When Kerr was interrogated the earls were implicated in a proposed Spanish invasion of Scotland. The next year Knox was appointed by the general assembly of the kirk to visit the presbyteries of Ayrshire and was assigned the task of persuading the master of Eglinton to accept Andrew Boyd as minister of Eaglesham, Renfrewshire. In 1597 Knox was made a commissioner to seek out Jesuits, seminary priests, and others suspected of plotting with the king of Spain. He subsequently received parliamentary commendation for his efforts and a pardon for his part in the accidental drowning, in the course of these duties, of Hew Barclay of Ladyland. In 1598 he was selected as one of the assembly's representatives to discuss with James VI a scheme of endowment for the ministry; from 1600 he was active in securing recruits to fill vacancies in the ministry; and in 1602 he was charged by the assembly with visiting the churches of Argyll. However, he seems to have been combative and quick-tempered. Disputes with neighbours went as far as the law courts, where on one occasion Knox struck his opponent, George Stewart, a Paisley burgess. On 4 October 1604 the presbytery is said to have suspended him and required him to do public penance in his church. 
None the less, memory of Knox's earlier service to the crown seems to have prevailed, and it played some part in his promotion by the king in February 1605 to the bishopric of the Isles. In this capacity Knox proved a tireless servant of royal policy in the Hebrides. Amid much pomp he was one of the bishops who rode 'betwixt the erles and the lords, two and two, clothed in silke and velvet, with their foote mantles' (Calderwood, 6.943) to the parliament of 1606, which approved the royal supremacy, exacted an oath of allegiance, and affirmed the restitution of the estate of bishops. Knox visited his diocese that year with his authority thus enhanced and further proclaimed in a new seal which depicted a bishop in an open boat, holding a book in his left hand and gesturing over the side with his right. In January 1607 Knox was appointed constant moderator of the presbytery of the Isles. In the meantime he attempted to retain his charge in Paisley, but he eventually resigned and was relieved of it on 12 November 1607. 
In spring 1608 Knox was appointed to a new royal commission to the Isles, headed by Andrew Stewart, third Lord Ochiltree. As part of a government programme aimed at curbing clan power, demilitarizing highland and island society, and obtaining rents allegedly due to the crown, it was to negotiate with the chiefs of Islay and Mull. By the autumn Ochiltree had assembled a military expedition. On arrival in the Hebrides he captured several chiefs (by tricking them into coming on board ship to hear a sermon by the bishop) and took the castles of Dunyvaig and Duart. Knox, who reported to the king that the chiefs, now carried off to prison in the lowlands, had 'ane servill feir of the executioun of your majesteis justle conceawit wrath aganis tham' (Goodare, 36), favoured an amicable settlement. In spring 1609 he went to court to confer with the king, and by June had persuaded him to change from a policy of dispossession of defiant chiefs to one of conciliation. Fortified with a new commission from the crown, Knox returned to the isles. Ignoring key instructions to conduct a survey of royal property, he called Hebridean chiefs to a court on Iona, in which nine of them agreed to regulations subsequently known as the statutes of Iona. This attempt to 'civilize' men sometimes regarded in other parts of Scotland as barbarians aimed to advance the reformed church within their territories and promote law, order, and acceptance of acts of the Scottish parliament. It also reflected government policies of discouraging Gaelic culture. Ministers' salaries, sabbath observance, and church repairs were negotiated, along with the education, in English and in the lowlands, of the eldest sons of leading islanders. At the same time limitations were placed on chiefs' military retinues and on clan hospitality. 
Knox soon returned to Edinburgh, and on 28 September appeared at the privy council. There has been some debate about the impact and importance of the statutes, but they clearly represented a significant manifestation of the Scottish government's stance and a benchmark for future action. Knox's action in 'reducing... the ignorant and wicked people of our Isles to the acknowledgement of God and obedience of the King's Majesty' (Canny, 198) was itself acknowledged by the council, and it seems to have been his experience in the Hebrides which led the king to reward him on 6-7 May 1610 with nomination to the bishopric of Raphoe in Donegal, Ulster. Consecrated probably between 23 January and 24 February 1611, Knox held the two bishoprics conjointly for the next seven years. 
The king's brief to Knox in Raphoe was that 'by his pains and travails the ignorant multitude within that diocese may be reclaimed from their superstition and popish opinions' (Laing, 1.427-8). In a memorandum subsequently passed by James to the lord deputy of Ireland, Sir Arthur Chichester, Knox 'suggested that the episcopate should be given extraordinary powers to suppress catholicism, including the right to arrest catholic priests' (Moody and others, 3.209). On visiting his Irish diocese in 1611 he prepared a report on the state of religion there which led the king to instruct the archbishop of Armagh to summon a meeting of bishops in his province to reform abuses. At that date Chichester considered Knox to be a 'good bishop for that part of the kingdom, and zealously affected to reform the errors and abuses of the priests and people', who had 'done much more good in church government in the short time of his being among them than his predecessor all his time' ('CSP Ire.', '1611-14'). 
In August 1618 Knox resigned as bishop of the Isles and by the following year he was granted Irish letters of denization. He was succeeded by his eldest son, Thomas, who since his graduation from Glasgow University in 1608 and a period in London seeking preferment had served as a minister on Tiree and had assisted his father in administering his turbulent Scottish diocese. Temporarily taken hostage when the MacDonalds of Islay seized Dunyvaig Castle in 1614, Thomas had been rewarded by the crown with lands in Ulster; provided to the Isles on 24 February 1619, he served until some time between 1 November 1627 and 3 April 1628, and continued to apply his father's policies. The elder Knox died on 17 March 1633. 


@@@@@


doc= 15781


Knox, John (c.1514-1572), religious reformer, was born at Giffordgate in Haddington. His mother was a Sinclair, a name he occasionally adopted as an alias when in hiding, and his father was William Knox, whose family had a long and proud tradition of service to the earls of Bothwell. William, probably an elder brother, was the only other known member of his immediate family. John seems to have been educated in the local burgh school and, though not taking a degree, continued his studies at St Andrews University where he was taught by John Mair, the great scholastic thinker who had returned there in 1528. Pursuing a conventional career pattern, Knox entered the church, being ordained deacon and priest in the late 1530s by William Chisholm, bishop of Dunblane. Using his training in canon law, by 1540 he was practising as a notary in and around Haddington. 
In 1543 the fledgeling underground protestant movement within Scotland was given added impetus by Regent Arran's brief flirtation with evangelical reform. The authorized preaching tour of Lothian by Thomas Guilliame, a former Dominican prior of Inverness, provided Knox with his first introduction to protestant ideas. Nothing else is known about his conversion, though on his deathbed Knox asked to hear 'John' 17, where, as he recollected, 'I cast my first ancre' ('Works', 6.643). The major formative influence upon the future reformer was George Wishart, whose rousing sermons in 1544-5 had a revitalizing effect upon supporters of reform. By this time Knox had become a tutor in East Lothian to Francis and George, sons of Hugh Douglas of Longniddry, and Alexander, the eldest son of John Cockburn of Ormiston. Under his supervision the three boys studied Latin grammar and literature, the 'Bible', and a catechism. Their fathers were members of the group of lairds supporting and protecting Wishart, and from about January 1546 Knox was one of the preacher's entourage, proudly carrying a two-handed sword during meetings. On the night of his arrest Wishart took the sword from Knox and ordered him back to his bairns, saying 'One is sufficient for one sacrifice' (ibid., 1.139). After his trial for heresy in St Andrews Wishart was executed there on 1 March 1546. 
Believing he was in danger as one of Wishart's known associates, Knox went into hiding, even considering flight to Germany. This proved unnecessary, and at Easter 1547 he and his pupils entered St Andrews Castle. It was held during a protracted and half-hearted siege by protestant sympathizers who had murdered Cardinal David Beaton, partly in revenge for Wishart's death. Knox quietly resumed teaching his charges, lecturing in the castle chapel on the passage in the gospel of 'John' that they had reached in their studies. This exposition was heard by two protestants, John Rough and Henry Balnaves, who tried to persuade Knox to become a preacher. He refused outright, protesting vehemently that he had not been called by God. Rough and Balnaves consulted Sir David Lindsay of The Mount, an advocate of religious reform who had been negotiating with the castle on behalf of the Scottish government. Rough then delivered a sermon explaining how a congregation could call its minister and concluding with a specific charge to Knox to accept such a call. Overcome, Knox burst into tears and ran off to his room. For several days he wrestled miserably with his conscience, before finally accepting his vocation. 
During the siege the St Andrews parish church of Holy Trinity had been treated to two series of sermons, one putting the protestant case by Rough, and the other defending Roman Catholicism by John Annand, the principal of St Leonard's College in the university. With Annand getting the better of the argument, Knox had been supplying Rough with notes to refute his opponent's points. When Annand asserted that only the church could judge heresy, Knox challenged him, adding he could prove the pope was Antichrist and that the Roman church was 'the synagog of Sathan' ('Works', 1.189). Although his opponent refused, the congregation enthusiastically accepted the offer, insisting Knox speak so that the non-literate could follow his reasons. This left Knox with no option but to preach for the first time the following Sunday. 
Knox's initial sermon, which the St Andrews wiseacres predicted would get him burnt for heresy, set the tone for the rest of his ministry. It was a hard-hitting attack striking at the roots of papal authority and brim full of fire and thunder. The chosen text, 'Daniel' 7: 24-5, spoke of the last beast, also identified with the Antichrist of the book of 'Revelation', signalling that even at this early stage Knox was interpreting the contemporary situation in apocalyptic terms. Most of the sermon argued that the papacy's doctrine and rules were contrary to the laws of God. With characteristic self-confidence, Knox concluded by challenging those present to refute him. The congregation included Mair, his former teacher, and John Winram, the subprior of St Andrews, as well as many other canons and friars. As part of his own reforming programme, Winram then staged a disputation in St Leonard's College upon issues raised by Knox's sermon. During this inconclusive debate, Knox faced the inept Franciscan John Arbuckle. Winram's burgh reformation continued with further sermons at Holy Trinity, university and priory men preaching in turn on Sundays and Knox during the week. In a radical departure, communion was administered in a reformed manner. The limited reformation within the ecclesiastical capital was brought to an abrupt halt by the arrival in July of a French fleet which recaptured St Andrews Castle. For the remainder of his life Knox retained a deep respect for Winram, even though the subprior remained within the Catholic church right up to 1559. 
After the castle's fall the captured nobles were imprisoned in French castles while Knox and the other commoners were sentenced to serve on the galleys. The nobles, turning to Knox as their spiritual adviser, consulted him about the morality of escaping. The French galleys passed the winter on the Loire before returning to Scotland in the summer of 1548 to fight against the English invasion. In his later 'History of the Reformation in Scotland' Knox gave few personal details of his nineteen-month captivity. He concentrated instead on incidents illustrating how the Scots upheld their protestant faith, including his own story of throwing overboard a picture of the Virgin Mary he had been ordered to kiss, though he first prudently checked he was not observed. While in Scottish waters Knox became so sick that he was not expected to survive. When asked if he recognized the Tay estuary he answered that he could make out the steeple of St Andrews parish church where he had delivered his first sermon and confidently predicted that he would preach there again before he died. 
Although in the galleys and sometimes in chains, Knox had sufficient freedom to receive and read the treatise on justification written by Henry Balnaves during his imprisonment in Rouen Castle. Having himself been much comforted by its message, he summarized its contents for the protestants in St Andrews. In this first surviving piece of writing Knox employed themes and language which were to become his trademark. He assured the brethren that when Satan appeared about to triumph, he would be defeated, and, though the battle would be fierce, Christ the captain would prevail. He culled a string of images and quotations from 'Isaiah' to emphasize the punishment awaiting those who condemn the law of God. Reflecting his enduring fascination with the 'Old Testament', Knox retained these references but omitted many of Balnaves's 'New Testament' ones. Throughout his life Knox viewed contemporary politics through the prism of the 'Old Testament' and paralleled his own experiences with those of the prophets, especially Isaiah and Jeremiah. His language and thought revolved around biblical concepts and his writings were saturated with 'Bible' phraseology and imagery. Supremely confident that he understood the overall sense and unity of the scriptures, he did not hesitate to run together disparate texts. For Knox the 'Bible' was essentially a message to be preached and, though careful and at times meticulous in his exposition, he was not a textual scholar. 
During this early period of his life Knox developed the virulent anti-Catholicism which became one of his hallmarks. He was strongly influenced by Wishart's Zwinglianism but had also readily adopted Balnaves's Lutheran emphasis on justification by faith alone. Knox's personal experience of a saving faith rooted in the scriptures underpinned his spirituality throughout his life. It also upheld his calling to be a preacher which, at first accepted with reluctance, dominated his subsequent career. 
Knox was released from the galleys in February 1549, probably owing to English intercession with the French. He travelled directly to England where he was awarded $5 by the privy council and sent to Berwick as a preacher. This garrison town played a critical role in the Anglo-Scottish wars then in progress. As a result of this 'rough wooing' the English borough served as a refuge for Anglophile Scots. Knox was thus reunited with some East Lothian friends and became part of the colony of 'assured' Scots tolerated by their English allies. His ministry improved the behaviour of the town's soldiers, removing the worst feuding and violence and helping to promote peace and quietness. During his two years at Berwick, Knox collected a core of committed protestants around him, and for them he composed one of the most gentle and pastoral of his writings dealing with the different aspects of prayer, 'A Confession and Declaration of Praiers', published in 1553. Drawing on his own experiences, including his sufferings in the galleys, he assured his readers that, even when all hope appeared gone, God answered their prayers and saved his people. 
With the support of the zealous within his congregation, Knox introduced more radical liturgical practices than those prescribed in the 1549 'Book of Common Prayer', with communicants receiving bread instead of the customary wafer and sitting rather than kneeling. Judging by a surviving fragment, Knox felt free to draw up his own order of service. He joined in a protestant campaign, led by Archbishop Thomas Cranmer, attacking the Roman Catholic mass. Whether to offer a platform for his views or to censure them and his liturgical nonconformity, Knox was summoned before the council of the north. At Newcastle on 4 April 1550 he faced his ecclesiastical superior, the conservative Cuthbert Tunstall, bishop of Durham, supported by a group of scholars. Although hinting he would rather debate, Knox presented a scholastic paper. The first syllogism stated: 'All wirshcipping, honoring or service inventit by the braine of man in the religion of God, without his own express commandment, is Idolatrie: The Masse is inventit be the braine of man, without any commandement of God: Thairfoir it is Idolatrie. ('Works', 3.34)' At the same time Knox penned a brief and simple summary of the Lord's supper, outlining the main points of belief. It denied the Roman Catholic doctrine of transubstantiation, stating that the communion elements were received spiritually, though not elaborating upon this eucharistic theology. The definition of how religion should be practised, contained in the syllogism, became the 'leitmotiv' of Knox's thought. Resting upon an 'Old Testament' viewpoint, especially the injunctions in 'Deuteronomy', it focused on the negative and exclusive. It asserted that any action not possessing a direct commandment from God was idolatry, and conversely that only those actions with a specific scriptural warrant were to be included within divine worship. By forcing everything into one or other category -- idolatry or true worship -- Knox left no room for grey or uncertain areas or for 'things indifferent' to be regulated by the church. The adherence to a rigid biblical model was treated as a universal and absolute rule applying everywhere and at all times. 
While at Berwick, Knox had met the family of Robert Bowes, the captain of nearby Norham Castle. Bowes's wife, Elizabeth, already a protestant, had sought the preacher's aid during recurring spiritual crises. Finding him helpful and comforting she became a close friend and encouraged his courtship of her fifth daughter, Marjory (died 1560). Although the rest of the family did not approve, Marjory became formally betrothed to Knox in 1553. In his dealings with his mother-in-law the preacher drew on a reservoir of patience not normally evident in his public life. With compassion and tenderness he guided Mrs Bowes's tentative steps along her doubt-ridden inner journey of faith. In his pastoral letters to her Knox felt able to express his own religious uncertainties and fears for the future, providing a vivid contrast to the brash and self-confident assertions of his polemical writings. In the spring of 1551 Knox moved to Newcastle where he met John Willock, a fellow preacher and a future leader of Scotland's Reformation. Although the peace treaties of 1550-51 had ended the Anglo-Scottish wars, many Scots within England had gravitated towards Newcastle, forming a nucleus of fellow countrymen around Knox. As at Berwick, Knox concentrated his attention on the committed core of his congregation. He occupied the pulpit of St Nicholas, the town's principal church, preaching in the presence of Newcastle's elite. In October 1551, on an inspection tour of the north, Knox had in his congregation the duke of Northumberland. The man who was governing England for young Edward VI was sufficiently impressed to extend his patronage to the preacher. By the end of 1551 Knox had moved to London to become a royal chaplain, receiving a salary of $40 per annum, with a roving preaching commission including sermons before the king and court. 
Preaching before Edward VI during the late summer of 1552 Knox attacked the practice of kneeling at communion as part of a radical campaign pushing for additional revisions to the draft 1552 'Book of Common Prayer'. As a result the privy council had its printing halted while the views of the royal chaplains were considered. Furious that changes could even be contemplated after parliament had approved, Archbishop Cranmer labelled Knox and his radical allies 'unquiet spirits' bent on upsetting good order. He singled out the proposition so dear to Knox, that what is not commanded in scripture is unlawful, stigmatizing it as a heretical Anabaptist error. Cranmer was prepared, however, to draft an additional rubric for the new liturgy, explaining that kneeling to receive communion did not imply adoration of the elements, as maintained by Roman Catholic doctrine. Printed on an inserted slip in black, rather than the normal red, it became known as the 'black rubric'. This represented a concession, but it was not the resounding liturgical victory traditionally attributed to Knox. 
While still complaining about kneeling, Knox and the other royal chaplains signed a statement, the forerunner of the forty-two articles, acknowledging that the 'Book of Common Prayer' agreed with scripture. News of his acceptance reached the north and provoked criticism from his former congregations. In a letter to Berwick, Knox explained he was not prepared to break the bonds of Christian charity nor the authorized, uniform order of the church over kneeling at communion, and he recommended conformity to the new prayer book. The long epistle was full of the troubles faced by the elect, warning them to hold fast to the gospel message and anathematizing any who taught otherwise. 
The kneeling controversy suggested to Northumberland that employing Knox in the south against the Anabaptists would make it easier to establish liturgical uniformity in the north. He also decided that, if the preacher were appointed bishop of Rochester, he could be used to propel his episcopal neighbour, the archbishop of Canterbury, in a more radical direction. Still angry over kneeling and possibly anxious to avoid becoming a cat's paw of Northumberland, Knox declined a bishopric in the Edwardian church. Much later he gave the reason for his refusal as foreknowledge of the problems Mary's accession would bring. In the short term Knox's behaviour infuriated his patron, who thought him ungrateful and impossible to please. The preacher had not assisted his cause by openly questioning the duke's religious sincerity. Despite such provocation Northumberland still tried to get 'poor Knox' settled, and in February 1553 Knox was offered one of the best livings in London -- All Hallows, Bread Street. Knox publicly refused the benefice before the privy council, in April, and launched a diatribe against the lack of discipline within the Edwardian church. In his last sermon before the king he pointedly preached about the danger of godly princes being surrounded by ungodly advisers, drawing specific 'Old Testament' parallels with certain courtiers. 
While based in London, Knox had been befriended by a group of merchants and their wives, such as Anne Locke and Mrs Hickman. As well as the more prosaic gifts of hospitality and financial support, they provided the firm backing of a small godly community within which Knox thrived. Throughout his ministry Knox was able to share his own spiritual heights and depths with the close female friends he made in the towns and cities where he worked. When apart, they became his regular and trusted correspondents to whom he readily disclosed his secret hopes and fears. By calling upon his pastoral expertise to unravel their doubts and difficulties, they brought him to a deeper understanding of his own faith and gave him the confidence to help others to overcome their spiritual tribulations. Knox's considerable pastoral gifts formed a counterpoint to his abrasive polemical style and help to explain the loyalty and affection he evoked among many of his parishioners. 
Despite his outspoken criticisms of the regime, Knox remained a royal chaplain and in June 1553 was sent to preach in Buckinghamshire and Kent. He was thus absent from the capital when Edward VI died, on 6 July. After the Roman Catholic Mary had triumphantly claimed the English throne, he chose not to return to London to join his fellow royal chaplains at Edward's funeral. Although Mary's regime strongly encouraged the departure of all the foreign protestants, Knox did not immediately leave the country. He returned to the north in the final months of 1553 but was too well known to stay there long. He went into exile at the start of the new year. 
In England during the opening months of Mary's reign, Knox wrote private letters as well as his 'Godly Letter' and 'Comfortable Epistles' to his former congregations; the latter were published in Dieppe once he had reached safety. In common with other clerical exiles Knox felt the need to counter the accusation that he had deserted his flock. His main task in these writings was to comfort those who remained and to explain the dramatic reversal of protestant fortunes when political power and control over the English church had been lost. This was a straightforward matter for Knox, who during all his ministry had stressed the apocalyptic struggle against Antichrist's forces and the imminent arrival of the plagues God sent to punish sin. Though underscoring the justice of divine punishment, unlike his fellow exiles Knox did not dwell on the positive aspects of suffering for the faith. With his deep reliance on the 'Old Testament' he placed the covenant model at the centre of his message, especially in the 'Godly Letter', which contained an extended comparison between England and Judah with himself in the role of Jeremiah. This emphasized twin points to his readers: the need to avoid idolatry -- participating in Roman Catholic worship -- and the call for repentance, which involved a national return to covenant obedience. It was not only religious apostasy which offended him. Particularly in the 'Faithful Admonition' (July 1554), Knox bemoaned the loss of English political independence through Mary Tudor's marriage to Philip of Spain. Characteristically, his grief expressed itself through a vitriolic denunciation of England's queen. Although he did not advocate direct resistance, he did pray for a second Jehu, to overthrow this English 'Jezebel'. 
Knox had become closely identified with his adoptive land and, as he confessed to his mother-in-law in his 'Exposition upon the Sixth Psalm' (1554), he was more deeply affected by England's plight than Scotland's troubles. During his English stay he had held his first continuous ministerial charges, thereby developing his confidence as a pastor and familiarizing himself with preaching every week. Among the committed protestants in Berwick, Newcastle, and the south, many of them women, he had discovered the spiritual support on which he relied so heavily. This experience encouraged his perception of the church as a godly minority surrounded by the actively hostile and the half-committed. The fear that hypocrisy would corrupt the faith and compromise the gospel message was greatly increased by his association with high politics in 1552-3. In common with most of the religious radicals, by the end of Edward's reign Knox had become deeply disillusioned. He thought the pace of religious change had been too slow and that protestantism had become tainted by its association with Northumberland's regime. 
This pessimistic interpretation of events during Edward's and Mary's reigns became locked deep in Knox's mind. He believed he had witnessed in his own times a repetition of the troubled history of 'Old Testament' Israel. Through its official acceptance of protestantism the English kingdom had entered God's covenant, but like the Israelites had refused full obedience to divine commands. Therefore, God had punished England by replacing its godly prince with an idolatrous female tyrant. Although the circumstances were different, after Scotland's Reformation Knox continued to be haunted by the fear that this pattern would repeat itself. 
Knox's four-year exile from Marian England crystallized his ideas and he developed much of the radicalism traditionally regarded as the chief characteristic of his thinking. With more leisure to write, he composed the bulk of his polemical writings during this period. In the atypical and hothouse atmosphere of the exile congregations he refined and put into practice his liturgical and ecclesiological ideas. Through his new contacts, the perspectives gained from his visits to other protestant communities in France, Germany, and Switzerland, and his discussions with their leading reformers, he experienced the diversity of international protestantism. For the remainder of his life he remained in contact with his European friends and acquaintances and valued his membership of this broad religious brotherhood. 
At the start of 1554 Knox travelled via Dieppe to Switzerland to visit Heinrich Bullinger in Zurich and John Calvin in Geneva, seeking advice on the English situation. The questions he put to them provide an indication of the direction in which his ideas were already moving. They touched upon the political authority of a minor (Edward VI) and a woman (Queen Mary), as well as the thorny problem of obedience when idolatry was being enforced (the re-Catholicization of England). In view of the extreme sensitivity of these subjects, the reformers gave Knox equivocal answers. Having visited Dieppe in April, to collect news and to publish the tracts written while on the run in Marian England, he returned to Geneva the following August, hoping to settle in Calvin's reformed city. 
At this point the English exile community in Frankfurt asked Knox to become one of their ministers. The magistrates there had provided a church, and it was hoped that as many exiles as possible would join the congregation. After pressure from Calvin, Knox accepted the Frankfurt invitation in November 1554. Once there he became embroiled in the debates about the liturgy to be followed by the English exile church. The congregation reached a provisional settlement in February 1555, but the following month its arrangements were disrupted by the arrival of a large contingent from Strasbourg. The next Sunday, Knox, upset by the flouting of the agreement, preached an inflammatory sermon criticizing the 'Book of Common Prayer'. In his attack upon the failings of the Edwardian church he censured named individuals, some of whom were present. The congregation polarized. In what Knox was convinced was a conspiracy against him, the opposing faction laid information before the Frankfurt magistrates concerning his writings. The unflattering comparison of Charles V to Nero ensured that the city council, anxious to keep the emperor's good will, requested Knox to leave. After an emotional sermon and a tearful farewell to about fifty diehard supporters, Knox left on 26 March 1555 for Geneva. 
Knox's personal affairs next occupied his attention. He planned to return secretly to Northumberland to marry and bring his bride and mother-in-law back to Switzerland. Having sailed to the Scottish east coast in the autumn of 1555, he travelled to Berwick to meet Marjory and Mrs Bowes and the wedding was probably celebrated in the spring of 1556. Although the sweet-natured Marjory remains a shadowy figure, especially by comparison with her mother, her affection and unstinting support were crucial to Knox during their married life and he was devastated when she died in December 1560. Marjory's own learning enabled her to shoulder most of her husband's secretarial tasks, in addition to her own domestic duties. The couple had two sons, Nathaniel and Eleazer, who after their mother's death were brought up in England by her kin and eventually sent to St John's College, Cambridge, where both became fellows. 
In 1555-6 Knox's original plans were altered by his reception in Scotland. During the autumn, winter, and spring he preached to the underground churches, moving around Edinburgh and the Lothians, north to Angus, and west to Ayrshire and Renfrewshire. Members of the Scottish nobility protected him from persecution by the ecclesiastical authorities. When faced with heresy proceedings, Knox was able to appear in Edinburgh on 15 May 1556 surrounded by so many supporters that the process was quietly dropped. He was caught off guard by the rapid progress the Scottish reform movement had made since 1549. He found a network of well-organized 'privy kirks' with a growing body of sympathizers who viewed his arrival as an opportunity to acquire experienced clerical leadership. Knox found himself giving advice about acceptable religious behaviour for Christians 'under the cross'. His sermon on 'Matthew' 4, letters to his 'sisters' in Edinburgh, and his 'Answers to Some Questions Concerning Baptism' reflected these pastoral concerns. Knox told his hearers not to attend mass, which he uncompromisingly labelled idolatry. By attempting to persuade the regent, Mary of Guise, to adopt a policy of reform, his 1556 'Letter' expressed the movement's political aspirations. The report of her cool and insulting reception of the 'Letter' probably encouraged Knox to leave Scotland. Even when the protestant fourth earl of Argyll, head of Clan Campbell, offered him complete protection, he could not be persuaded to remain. At this stage Knox was extremely reluctant to become the leader of the Scottish reform movement, and he sailed for France early in the summer of 1556. 
By September 1556 Knox had returned to Geneva, which he regarded as his exile home. Having finally triumphed over his opponents in 1555, Calvin had, in Knox's admiring testimonial, transformed the city into the 'maist perfyt schoole of Chryst... In other places I confesse Chryst to be trewlie preachit; but maneris and religioun so sinceirlie reformat, I have not yit sene in any uther place' ('Works', 4.240). The Scot treasured this visible lesson in the implementation of discipline which he tried to reproduce when he returned to his native land. While Knox had been away, the radical group from Frankfurt had obtained a church in Geneva and in November 1555 formally constituted themselves as a congregation, electing Christopher Goodman and Knox as their ministers. By the time he had returned to accept this call, the congregation had already published a full liturgy, 'The Forme of Prayers', and was becoming the largest and most important of the English exile communities. Although Knox's own contribution was slight, the exiles produced the Geneva 'Bible', a new translation later officially adopted in Scotland. This dynamic congregation also boasted an efficient ecclesiastical organization which maintained strict discipline. By preserving their internal harmony as well as their zealous commitment, they provided Knox with a working model of a perfect reformed congregation. Although subsequently he strove hard, Knox was unable to replicate this achievement within Scotland. In his rose-tinted memory the entire Genevan experience remained as a tantalizing ideal of complete and successful reformation. 
Knox's sojourn in Geneva was probably the happiest period in his life. In the midst of the English exiles Knox felt secure and valued and his domestic contentment was increased by the arrival in 1556 of Marjory, his wife, and the births of their two sons in 1557 and 1558. The deep friendships Knox made in the city sustained him for the rest of his life. He grew particularly close to Goodman, his ministerial partner, with whom he could share all his troubles and debate and formulate his political and theological ideas. Together they served a congregation of like-minded and deeply committed protestants, who responded to Knox's prophetic preaching and pastoral encouragement. In return the exiles furnished the intimate spiritual support that Knox craved, continually strengthening his sense of vocation while permitting him the freedom to travel. Leaving his charge in Goodman's capable hands, Knox could respond to what he understood as God's will whenever and wherever it called him. 
Having left Scotland in the summer of 1556 Knox was faced, as he had been two years before in the English context, with the charge of abandoning others to face persecution while himself going into a safe exile. From Dieppe in July 1556 he sent his 'Letter of Wholesome Counsel to the Brethren in Scotland' and maintained a steady correspondence with his Edinburgh 'sisters'. He reiterated his advice to stand firm and renounce the mass and gave practical guidance on conducting clandestine worship. The reform-minded nobles, anxious to sustain the political momentum achieved during Knox's visit, wrote to him in Geneva in March 1557 asking him to return. Loath to leave Geneva, Knox hesitated, torn between conflicting roles; eventually he left Switzerland in September, after Calvin had sharply reminded him of his duty to Scotland. In October, on his arrival in Dieppe, there was a letter from the Scottish lords asking him to wait. This provoked an angry reply from Knox, accusing the nobles of contaminating the religious cause with political opportunism. It was an unfair charge, reflecting Knox's ambivalence about his own role rather than the situation within Scotland. 
During winter 1557-8 Knox used his enforced leisure in Dieppe to write. He composed his most famous tract, 'The First Blast', while by translating into English and amplifying an 'Apology' addressed to the French king he also publicized the persecution faced by the Huguenots. Between January and March 1558, when he returned to Geneva, he travelled through France visiting the protestant towns of La Rochelle and Lyons. Once back in the Swiss city 'The First Blast' was printed anonymously, but Knox's name was placed on his later Scottish titles, 'The Letter to the Regent Augmented', 'The Appellation to the Scottish Nobility', and 'The Letter... to the Commonalty'. Together these 1558 tracts constitute Knox's major political writings. 

'The First Blast of the Trumpet Against the Monstrous Regiment of Women' is the best-known, and least understood, of Knox's writings. Instead of the stirring image of serried ranks of marching women, the title more prosaically refers to non-natural (monstrous) female rule (regiment). The thinking of the English exiles, especially those based in Geneva, had been radicalized in response to the burnings of protestants by the Marian regime which had begun in 1555. By 1558 a number of Knox's friends, most notably his partner Goodman, had written tracts advocating resistance to the queen, and 'The First Blast' was part of this campaign. Knox's main proposition was stated in the opening sentence of the main text: 'To promote a Woman to beare rule, superioritie, dominion, or empire, above any Realme, Nation or Citie, is repugnant to Nature; contumelie to God, a thing most contrarious to His reveled will and approved ordinance; and finallie, it is the subversion of good Order, of all equitie and justice. ('Works', 4.373)' In the sixteenth century the assertion that women should not wield political authority at any level was neither novel nor particularly controversial. Several aspects of Knox's book, however, caused a considerable stir when it was published and have maintained interest ever since. In characteristic manner Knox presented his case in stark black and white terms, permitting no middle ground, and establishing a single immutable law to provide a moral imperative for radical action. He declared it was the law of God and of nature that women must not rule. Most unusually, instead of relying exclusively on the 'Bible', Knox cited as wide a range of authorities as he could muster to support this claim. He could thus dismiss the normal loopholes permitting female rule based upon custom or specific law codes. For Knox this law of God was a springboard for action, for if a woman had by mistake or ignorance been permitted to rule, she should be deposed forthwith. 
The timing of 'The First Blast' added to the notoriety created by its style of argument and revolutionary conclusion. Its main target was Mary Tudor, the Roman Catholic queen of England, but on her death in November 1558 she was succeeded by her half-sister, Elizabeth, the great hope of English protestants. Scotland was also experiencing female rule with the regent, Mary of Guise, governing on behalf of her daughter, Mary, queen of Scots. The universalized nature of Knox's arguments ensured they were regarded as a direct attack upon each of these women. In one sense this was not what he had meant, as he later tried (unsuccessfully) to explain to both Elizabeth and Mary, queen of Scots. The predicament arose because of Knox's general tendency to get carried away by an idea in the heat of writing, without pausing to consider all its ramifications. As Calvin later noted, Knox's 'thoughtless arrogance' in 'The First Blast' had unfairly brought opprobrium upon Geneva (Robinson, 2.35). The Scot firmly believed his central ideas were revelations to be communicated: the prophet must deliver the message he had received from God. Although 'The First Blast' was conceived within this general framework, its non-religious arguments and sources of authority were distinctive. Knox's dependence upon syllogisms and scholastic proofs was a reaction to the worsening English situation. He broadened his arguments in a desperate attempt to convince Englishmen of all religious persuasions to depose their queen. By targeting Mary's gender, he chose an undeniable and unalterable characteristic of her reign. The result was a generalized attack on all female rule, presented as a logical argument. 
Even within the book, the preacher struggled to hold his prophetic thunder under control, and towards the end he poured forth his denunciation of Mary's idolatrous reign. In his mind the queen's 'monstrous' rule, which denied the constraints imposed by her gender, was inextricably linked to her religious policy of re-Catholicizing England and persecuting protestants. In the light of this link, Knox was puzzled by the book's adverse reception among fellow protestants, and he wrote sadly to Anne Locke that it 'hath blowne from me all my friends in England' ('Works', 6.14). He was equally surprised when Queen Elizabeth did not accept that he had written primarily against her half-sister. He was willing to recognize her royal authority on condition Elizabeth rested her claim upon divine providence which could override the general law forbidding female rule. In 1561 he offered a similar type of recognition to Mary, queen of Scots. While Knox saw no inconsistency between 'The First Blast' and these offers, others did. 
The centrality of his religious preoccupations and their impact on his political thinking were demonstrated in Knox's four propositions for his projected 'Second Blast', published in July 1558. They envisaged the 'election' of a ruler according to divine ordinance and allowed for the deposition and punishment of a tyrant. However, these broad principles were only applicable to kingdoms already in a covenant relationship with God. At the time of writing they applied to England, which had publicly embraced protestantism in Edward's reign even though it had committed apostasy under Mary; they did not extend to either Scotland or France, which in 1558 remained under Roman Catholic rule. 
Such a crucial distinction meant that Knox's advice in his 1558 tracts for his fellow Scots was different from that to Englishmen. Since his return to Geneva in 1556 his personal correspondence and Scottish publications had betrayed an underlying ambiguity. On the one hand he sought the recognition of protestantism by the authorities. On the other he was fearful that the religious cause would be contaminated by political motives. In 1556 he had hoped Mary of Guise could be persuaded to implement religious reform, but he was far less sanguine when he reissued his 'Letter to the Regent' with substantial critical additions in 1558. It accompanied 'The Appellation' and 'A Letter... to the Commonalty', addressed to the Scottish nobility and Commons respectively. In the first tract Knox produced his own version of a constitutionalist theory previously employed by the German Lutherans and later adopted by the Huguenots. He explained that, because the Scottish nobility were 'magistrates' in their own right, receiving their power directly from God, they owed a duty to uphold the laws of God and protect true religion. Specifically Knox urged the nobles to introduce protestant worship within Scotland, even if that entailed defying the crown. On the basis of the spiritual equality of all men and women, the preacher also appealed to the common people, who possessed no political authority of their own. He argued that, because the word of God was essential for salvation, the people were entitled to demand that the scriptures be preached to them. These were radical proposals which, if implemented, would have led to far-reaching consequences, but the Scottish tracts were not straightforward calls for revolution. 
Knox's attention remained fixed primarily upon the English situation. Just before Queen Mary's death in November 1558, the open letter addressed to his old congregations at Berwick and Newcastle indicated his deep awareness of the apocalyptic struggle being waged between the forces of Christ and Antichrist. He treated his former parishioners as soldiers in this great battle and collected a list of English martyrs, published a few months later. Having been so direct in 'The First Blast' about the need to depose Mary, within this pastoral context Knox was reluctant to urge outright resistance on his correspondents; he dwelt instead on the fearful consequences of God's further punishments, reminding Berwick of the fall of Calais, its sister fortress town. 
The situation was transformed by Elizabeth's accession on 17 November 1558. In the tract that Knox rushed out in January 1559, just before leaving Geneva, the Scotsman stressed how the English should welcome this great act of divine mercy. Like 'Old Testament' Israel, God had given the kingdom the opportunity to renew its covenant and rebuild Jerusalem. In response England must re-establish true religion, which meant introducing only those practices authorized in the scriptures and exercising discipline throughout church and kingdom. The compromises and half-hearted uncertainties which Knox believed had condemned the Edwardian Reformation must be left behind. 
Knox wrote his longest work in Geneva, during the summer, autumn, and winter of 1558. When he returned home the manuscript was left in the city and guided through the press in 1560 by his friend William Whittingham. Concerning the difficult theological doctrine of predestination, 'An Answer to a Great Nomber of Blasphemous Cavillations' was a refutation section by section of a piece by an anonymous English Anabaptist, probably Robert Cooche. The latter's tract, entitled 'The Confutation of the Errors of the Careless by Necessity', had attacked Calvin's explanation of the decrees of election and reprobation, asserting that the Swiss reformer depicted a cruel God ordaining the majority of mankind to condemnation, and a human existence devoid of choice or responsibility. Knox's rebuttal of it differs from his other writings in its length and its aim of elucidating a single doctrine. He retained his normal, destructive, polemical style, sharpened by a personal edge because, having been friends with his adversary, Knox now labelled him a blasphemer and liar. Employing an atypical device, he explicitly followed Calvin's doctrinal lead, employing long quotations from the reformer's writings on predestination. Disguised by his robust language, Knox's own discussion was sometimes tentative or, when dealing with the reprobation of the wicked, not entirely consistent. Although neither theologically original nor penetrating, the work was an impassioned defence of God's election to salvation of the invisible church. For Knox this represented the foundation of his own and every Christian's faith, humility, and obedience and the bedrock upon which he grounded his sermons. 
In Knox's mind predestination was associated with the cosmic battle between the two armies, the church of God and the synagogue of Satan. Although predestination was essentially a message of salvation and consolation, Knox was acutely aware that identifying the elect was not a simple matter. The reprobate might themselves display signs of faith and sanctification for a time, making it impossible in this world to distinguish them from the elect. Knox pressed home the point that the visible church was bound to contain many such hypocrites. Throughout his life this proposition provided a constant spur for him to be tireless in his admonitory preaching, and in his final years it came to dominate his thinking. In countering the charge that predestination removed the need to preach repentance and salvation, he explained the purpose of his sermons: 'for to those that have by publicke profession receaved Christ Jesus, be they elect, or be they reprobate, do appertein exhortations, threatening, the doctrine of repentance, consolation prophecying and revelation of things to come; but to those that yet remaine manifest enemies of the trueth, apperteine onlie the common calling to embrace the trueth, with the threatning of destruction if they continue unfaithfull. ('Works', 5.270)' Whatever the eternal consequences for the listeners, the warnings must be given: this conviction lay at the heart of Knox's own vocation as a preacher. The vehemence of his attack on the Anabaptist flowed from the serious threat he was seen to pose to the fundamentals of the faith Knox preached. Once the Scot had identified such an enemy he was not prepared to compromise, discuss, or debate, only to denounce. 
In response to the persecution in Marian England, especially the burnings, Knox developed a ruthlessness and an increasingly radical edge to his thinking. In his writings he demonstrated his mastery of polemical invective, creating rolling denunciations filled with hyperbole and biblical imagery. Having identified the failings of the Edwardian church, which had brought such divine punishment upon the country, he concluded that compromise had been disastrous and a complete and rapid reformation was the only viable policy. In his future dealings with both British kingdoms he was driven by the fear that the Edwardian mistakes would be repeated. He therefore demanded total and complete adherence to what he deemed to be the ordinances of God for his people. He also became obsessed by the threat from those secret enemies who undermined the church, the hypocrites. By the time he left the continent, Knox had become more convinced than ever of the need to apply one fundamental principle: 'In religioun thair is na middis: either it is the religioun of God, and that in everie thing that is done it must have the assurance of his awn Word, and than is his Majestie trewlie honourit, or els it is the religioun of the Divill. ('Works', 4.232)' 

Having been refused permission to enter or travel through England because of 'The First Blast', Knox sailed to Leith, where he docked on 2 May 1559. He plunged straight into the middle of a Scottish crisis. To secure radical ecclesiastical reform, the protestant nobles had placed increasing pressure on the queen regent and Roman Catholic hierarchy. The ending of the 1559 provincial church council removed any hope of an accommodation, leaving a deep religious divide. Tension mounted when the regent outlawed the leading protestant preachers. At this point Knox travelled to Perth, and in St John's Church preached a provocative sermon, 'vehement against idolatrie' ('Works', 1.321), which provoked an iconoclastic riot. It signalled the beginning of the armed confrontation between the regent and the protestant lords of the congregation. Knox was immediately drawn into the centre of the rebellion, spreading the iconoclasm to the north Fife ports, and the climax came in a sermon on 11 June in St Andrews. Knox made his most decisive contribution as a preacher who could inspire fiery and militant zeal, but he also acted as the congregation's secretary, helping to compose their manifestos and handling their correspondence. In the quest for English support he maintained a low profile so as not to arouse Queen Elizabeth's displeasure. 
In the autumn of 1559 Knox became minister at St Andrews, a leading protestant centre. He accompanied the troops as a chaplain, and after their dispiriting retreat from Edinburgh his rousing sermon at Stirling on 5 November helped to rally the army. During this struggle Knox composed a narrative to justify the protestant cause which became the basis for his 'History of the Reformation in Scotland', not published until 1587. In his tale he painted the queen mother as the arch-enemy supported by the Roman Catholic clergy, who were described as agents of Antichrist. The regent's death on 11 June 1560, which opened the way for the peace secured by the treaty of Edinburgh on 6 July, provoked some of the most unpleasant of Knox's asides, revealing the fear and hatred he felt for opponents, and above all for Mary of Guise. 
The summer of 1560 was a time of great triumph for Knox, when his dream of Scotland openly embracing protestantism was realized. In August the Reformation Parliament accepted the Scottish confession of faith and abolished papal jurisdiction and the celebration of the sacraments according to Roman Catholic rites. The protestant leaders were intensely busy as they strove to create a new church for the whole realm. Although extremely important as a figurehead, Knox was none the less a member of a team which together produced the key documents and the organizational framework for the new kirk. The first 'Book of Discipline' and probably the confession of faith were the work of a committee of six men, all called John: Willock, Spottiswood, Winram, Row, Erskine of Dun, as well as Knox. Scotland's kirk adopted the Geneva 'Bible' and that exile congregation's liturgy became the 'Book of Common Order'. These founding texts of Scottish protestantism were closely associated with Knox and vigorously championed by him. However, they reflect a variety of sources and influences and cannot be treated as exclusively his work. Even when credited with sole authorship, Knox drew upon existing church practice for 'Orders of Fasting' (1566) and 'Excommunication' (1569). 
During that momentous summer in 1560 Knox became minister at St Giles's in Edinburgh. He enjoyed being at the heart of political affairs as the leading preacher in the nation's capital. It was a conspicuous and, for such an outspoken man, potentially perilous position and he was twice forced to withdraw from the city. Nevertheless, at the centre of an efficient national and international information network, he exploited to the full his watching brief to keep the church informed of developments between meetings of the general assembly. His general letter of 8 October 1563, telling all protestants to gather in Edinburgh to support those arrested for disrupting the mass at Holyrood, led to his being accused before the privy council of treasonably assembling the queen's subjects. He was acquitted after a spirited defence and later received the assembly's endorsement, though not all protestants agreed with his firm and independent line. Knox could rally contingents of zealous supporters, but his brand of militant protestantism alienated as many as it attracted in his own congregation and the burgh at large. This left him nostalgic for his fellow Genevan exiles, and in 1566 made him reluctant to leave the godly warmth of his Ayrshire sympathizers when he withdrew from Edinburgh. In his ecclesiology it also encouraged the emphasis on the faithful remnant constantly suffering persecution, and downplayed the all-encompassing national church. 
Edinburgh town council demonstrated its appreciation by providing Knox with a well-furnished manse. He moved, shortly before his death, into the comfortable and spacious Netherbow property, now John Knox House. With his exceptionally generous stipend, worth $566 6's'. 8died, and with even some of his servants' wages being supplied from royal tax revenues, he was one of the best-paid clergymen in the land. From 1562 John Craig worked as his assistant and the burgh's second minister. His appointment made it easier for Knox to act as a general assembly commissioner to undertake visitations, such as his three-month inspection in 1562 of churches in the south-west. In the running of the national kirk Knox was employed in such specific roles as drafting articles, letters, and liturgical documents, and though he carried out some visitations he never became a superintendent. He was asked to open or close the assembly with prayers or a sermon but never served as moderator, which required the diplomatic skills of chairmanship which he manifestly lacked. Knox's strength did not lie in routine administration, as his colleagues well understood. By shouldering these burdens themselves they freed him to pursue his calling 'to instruct the ignorant, comfort the sorrowfull, confirme the weake, rebuke the proud, by tong and livelye voyce' ('Works', 6.229). In his role as a prophet of wrath and judgment Knox became increasingly detached from the work of consolidation and the local implementation of reform which preoccupied the kirk in its first decade of existence. 
In between his other duties Knox continued to write polemical tracts, directing his fire at the Scottish Roman Catholics. While on his 1562 visitation he held a public disputation on the mass at Maybole with Quentin Kennedy, abbot of Crossraguel, and the debate was subsequently published. Knox was also persuaded in 1568, though the result was not published until 1572, to refute a tract which James Tyrie, a Scottish Jesuit, had written to his elder brother, David Tyrie of Drumkilbo, to persuade him to return to the Roman Catholic church. It sparked a controversy about the nature of the true church which continued to rage after Knox's death. A more combative opponent, and one whom Knox declined to answer in writing, was Ninian Winzet, the Roman Catholic master of the grammar school at Linlithgow. Winzet had enjoyed pointing out the inconsistencies between the reformed kirk's theology and its practice and had criticized all its leaders. As part of his attack upon Knox, Winzet had ridiculed the highly Anglicized Scots which the reformer employed in his writings and his speech. It scored a polemical point at the time but has perhaps been taken too seriously by subsequent generations. Although he had acquired a slight English accent during his travels, Knox had no intention of abandoning his native tongue. The pragmatic adoption by the kirk of an English liturgy, the 'Book of Common Order', and of the Geneva 'Bible', a translation into English, had a far greater effect upon language within Scotland than either Knox's writings or his oratory. 
The return to Scotland from France of Mary, queen of Scots, on 19 August 1561, transformed the reformer's political position and his outlook. On her first night in her native country Knox led a delegation to Holyrood Palace to sing psalms as a pointed reminder of Scotland's religious allegiance. The preacher feared the presence of a Roman Catholic queen in the country and was implacably opposed to the concession granted by the protestant nobles that she could hear mass in private. He supported those who unsuccessfully stormed the Royal Chapel to disrupt the queen's mass on 24 August, the first Sunday. With his fondness for startling hyperbole, Knox had asserted, 'That one Messe... was more fearful to him then gif ten thousand armed enemyes war landed' ('Works', 2.276). As he let slip in a letter in October 1561 to his dear friend Anne Locke, he had even considered the extreme option of summoning the godly to arms. Such an unyielding approach brought conflict with his former allies, the protestant leaders of the congregation who were now the queen's closest advisers. With the focus firmly on the queen and the royal court, Knox found himself marginalized. This revived his deep-seated distrust of court politics as a mixture of sycophancy and the unprincipled pursuit of power, which had been formed in Edwardian England. Believing Scotland was engaged in a war against Antichrist, Knox was convinced that any compromise with Roman Catholicism would be disastrous because, as he warned in October 1561, 'by permission Satan groweth bold' (ibid., 6.131). 
Despite the myth so firmly embedded in the Knoxian legend of a titanic struggle between the Roman Catholic queen and the protestant preacher, Knox's direct contacts with Mary were limited. His own 'History' provides the main source for the four royal interviews, with their magnificent drama and memorable lines. Written in the bleak period of 1566, the narrative for 1561-4 was spiced throughout with his biting assessments of royal policy and motives. Drawing on his English experience, Knox assumed that all Roman Catholic queens were Jezebels intent upon introducing idolatry and persecuting God's prophets and people. There was the additional danger, in his eyes, of a royal marriage bringing a Roman Catholic prince to rule in Scotland, as Philip II had in Mary Tudor's England. The reformer always viewed Mary Stewart as an enemy and believed that Scotland could not be safe while a Roman Catholic ruled. When the queen failed to act in 'character', he explained away her friendly or conciliatory gestures as 'craft' or 'deceit'. 
The first interview took place at the start of September 1561, a few weeks after Mary's return. While defending his 'First Blast', Knox conceded that he accepted the queen's authority, though with his accustomed tactlessness he employed as an illustration St Paul living under the emperor Nero. When pressed by the queen on the wider issue of obedience, Knox endorsed the right of subjects to resist their rulers. The pair then sparred over the interpretation of the scriptures and how the true church could be recognized. Knox bluntly informed Mary that the Roman Catholic church was Antichristian and that the 'Bible' contained self-evident truth. Yet, despite their lack of agreement on any topic, at the end of the interview Knox wished Mary well, even suggesting she might become a second Deborah. Though there was again no meeting of minds, the subsequent two interviews in December 1562 and April 1563 also ended on civil terms. In summer 1563 Mary and Knox were able to work together amicably to delay marital breakdown between the earl and countess of Argyll. However, fearful that it was a trap to lure him into preaching less critical sermons, Knox refused Mary's request to become her personal spiritual adviser at court. 
The final interview in June 1563 was the most stormy, provoked by a sermon in which Knox had denounced a foreign, Roman Catholic marriage. Aware of the secret negotiations underway for a Spanish alliance, he explicitly cautioned the nobility that they banished Christ from the realm once they accepted an 'infidel' to rule the kingdom. When the queen demanded what Knox had to do with her marriage and what role he had in the kingdom, he produced the famous reply 'A subject borne within the same... Madam. And albeit I neather be Erle, Lord, nor Barroun within it, yitt hes God maid me... a profitable member within the same' ('Works', 2.388). Justifying his harshness he explained that his duty as a preacher was to forewarn of dangers in blunt terms. In response to Mary's angry tears he clumsily assured her that he did not enjoy seeing her weep, but could not avoid speaking God's truth. 
His sermons in St Giles's, which had lost none of their passion and charisma, enabled Knox to maintain a running commentary on political events during 1561-5. He constantly called for repentance for the public sins which he believed were disfiguring Scotland. These were headed by the idolatry of the queen's mass, which was polluting the entire realm, and any association with the Roman Catholic powers of Europe, especially Mary's uncles of Guise, who were fighting the French protestants. To Knox's stern eye, vice and hypocrisy sprang from the frivolity and flattery of the royal court and its politics. These constant attacks alienated many protestant nobles whose participation in Mary's government and unwillingness to follow his political direction were denounced by Knox as a lack of religious zeal. Writing his 'History' in 1566 with the certainty of hindsight, he accused the courtiers of betraying the gospel; they 'declyned from the puritie of Goddis word and began to follow the warld; and so againe to schaik handis with the Devill, and with idolatrie' ('Works', 2.265). The most dramatic breach came after a bitter argument with Lord James Stewart, earl of Moray, when the two close friends refused to speak to each other for eighteen months. Knox's harsh condemnation of the politicians stands in contrast to his more generous understanding of the motives and actions of his clerical colleagues. He did not openly criticize those, such as John Winram or John Row, who had remained within the Roman Catholic church until the Reformation crisis before transferring to leading positions within the protestant kirk. Similarly, John Erskine of Dun's friendly and conciliatory attitude towards the queen did not provoke a censorious blast. 
Although policy differences divided the protestant party at all levels, in his 'History' Knox presented this as a split between the kirk and the courtiers. At the general assembly of June 1564 the divide was revealed in a debate between Knox and the queen's secretary, William Maitland of Lethington, over Mary's mass. The argument broadened to the question of the legitimacy of resistance to political authority and provoked Knox's clearest and most radical statements on that subject. Within a covenanted nation, such as Scotland, he maintained that the common people possessed a right to resist based upon the universal religious obligation to punish idolatry or other breaches of divine law. Knox considered that upholding the ten commandments was a public and political duty, not solely a personal, moral goal. The kingdom's willingness to punish those who broke divine law was the litmus test of its commitment to the covenant. This 'suppressing of vice... [and] abolishing of all suche thingis as myght nureise impietie within the Realme' ('Works', 2.264) was the national dimension of the ecclesiastical discipline enforced by the kirk. Since the queen's return Knox had increasingly focused upon this aspect of the covenant relationship. He had become convinced that Scotland was failing this test and called with increasing stridency for a change of heart. Such a rejection of its covenant obligation would bring the terrible plagues of divine displeasure. With a frightening sense of 'deja vu' Knox identified within Scotland the same lack of discipline in church and kingdom which had caused the downfall of Edwardian England. 
In March 1564 Knox married his second wife, Margaret (1546/7- 'c'.1612), the seventeen-year-old daughter of Andrew Stewart, second Lord Ochiltree, a trusted friend and long-time supporter. With Knox aged fifty, the age gap was noted, though such discrepancies were common in second marriages. What excited greater interest, particularly from the queen, was his wife's distant royal connections because she was 'of the bludde and the name' ('Works', 6.533). The marriage was a happy one, with his 'yokefellow' acting as secretary and nurse and comforter when he was ill. They had three daughters, Martha, Margaret, and Elizabeth, all of whom survived into adulthood, and the younger two themselves married ministers of the kirk. 
Domestic happiness was unable to dispel Knox's growing sense of unease and powerlessness during Mary's personal reign. Having broken with many of the protestant nobles and deliberately rejected any close advisory role at the royal court, he concentrated upon his prophetic admonitions. From his earliest writings Knox had constructed a world of moral absolutes and imperatives which he had deduced from his interpretation of the scriptures. As he had explained to his friend John Foxe, 'to me it is yneugh to say that black is not whit, and man's tyrannye and foolishnes is not Goddes perfite ordinance' ('Works', 5.5). He now found himself trapped within these constraints. The arrival of a Roman Catholic queen in Scotland had triggered his warnings about another Jezebel. Mesmerized by the fear that Scotland was reneging on its covenant commitments, he relied on the lessons he believed he had learned from the 'Old Testament' prophets and the downfall of Edwardian England. They dictated that any compromise with Roman Catholicism was anathema and only total commitment to the moral discipline of the nation and unwavering zeal for the protestant cause would avert disaster. Mindful of his earlier shortcomings as one of the Edwardian preachers sent by God to be the salt of the earth, he was determined that this time he would redouble his warnings and in Scotland not hold 'backe the salt where manifest corrupcion dyd appere' (ibid., 3.270). 
Knox's prophecies appeared to be coming to pass in the crisis over Mary's marriage to Darnley. His belief that many of the protestant nobility had abandoned their religious commitment encouraged him to rely on spiritual remedies rather than political resistance. Although convinced that the marriage posed a threat to protestantism, Knox did not join Moray and Argyll in open rebellion against the queen. Instead he used the pulpit to warn about the dangers facing kirk and nation. Darnley was present in St Giles's on Sunday 19 August to hear Knox's sermon on 'Isaiah' 26: 13-21. Mary's new consort was offended by the pointed references to Ahab not restraining the idolatry of his wife Jezebel and to God punishing his people by allowing them to be ruled by children and women. Knox was summoned to court and forbidden to preach as long as the royal couple remained in Edinburgh. Although the burgh council protested, Knox's preaching was probably restricted. Contrary to his usual practice, he wrote down and later published the offending oration, providing his only entire sermon text to survive. It encapsulated all the major concerns of this stage of his career. 
Knox began by explaining that rulers had two tasks, to know God's will as revealed in his word and to implement his laws. With Scotland exhibiting the same disobedience as Israel had in 'Isaiah's' time, similar disasters would surely follow. The country faced many enemies: open opponents, like the 'infidel' Ottoman Turks and the 'idolatrous' Catholics, and the more dangerous hidden foes -- the hypocrites and those who had turned their backs on God and his laws. Knox warned that the 'day of temptation' was approaching fast. The godly would heed his warnings and demonstrate their obedience to God by humbling themselves, whereas the hypocrites would remain proud and scoff at God's prophets. The preacher reassured the faithful remnant that God would preserve them during persecution and, as the history of the church had demonstrated throughout the ages, in the long term they would triumph. It was a deeply pessimistic sermon reminiscent of Knox's sentiments a decade earlier during the burnings of the Marian martyrs, though the situations were not alike. Despite the militant language of fighting under the banner of Christ against the forces of Satan, this was not a call to arms. In a marked change from 1559-60 Knox now advocated the spiritual weapons of prayer and humility and a reliance upon faith and hope, rather than armed confrontation. 
During the autumn and winter of 1565 Knox left Edinburgh, and was probably travelling through the borders fulfilling the general assembly's commission to visit those areas without a superintendent. Having witnessed the queen's defeat of the rebellion known as the Chaseabout raid, and her espousal of policies favourable to Roman Catholicism, Knox was profoundly gloomy, assuming that Mary was implementing the Scottish section of a Roman Catholic conspiracy against European protestantism. In late 1565 rumours circulated that the French and Spanish monarchs had agreed at Bayonne to a crusade against the protestants. Mary, queen of Scots, was thought to be part of this league, backed by the pope and authorized by the Council of Trent. Knox even passed on details of a supposed Tridentine decree calling for the extermination of all protestants. 
The 'Order of a General Fast', commissioned by the general assembly in December 1565, reflected Knox's preoccupations during these difficult months. Before the liturgy of the fast, a long doctrinal introduction explained its purpose. Parallel to 'Old Testament' Israel, Scotland was a covenanted nation bound to uphold divine law against the threats of idolatry and social injustice. The fragility and vulnerability of the Reformation were emphasized and the dangers of lukewarm protestant commitment highlighted. A general public fast provided the ideal opportunity to demonstrate true repentance, thereby averting God's punishment of his people. The fast was a call for national repentance and the means by which the godly could demonstrate their obedience. It combined the two different concepts of the church, the comprehensive organization encompassing the covenanted nation with the persecuted faithful remnant. 
The general assembly also asked Knox to compose a pastoral letter exhorting all ministers to remain in their charges despite arrears in their pay. It emphasized that a minister's vocation could not be abandoned in the face of difficulty or privation. Ironically, shortly afterwards Knox departed from his Edinburgh charge. Whether or not he had prior knowledge of the conspiracy, the preacher approved of David Riccio's murder on 9 March 1566, which he categorized as the slaying of an idolater whose influence upon the queen had been malign. However, in Knox's prayer written three days after the murder the dominant emotion was despair, not joy, as he begged God to release him from the miseries of the world. When Mary returned to the capital on 17 March, intent upon punishing the assassins, Knox departed. In a deeply depressed mood he withdrew to his friends and close personal supporters in Ayrshire, where he quietly spent the following months revising and extending his 'History' to include the period 1561-4. 
Knox's spirits were lifted by the birth of a daughter and the comfort provided by his fervent adherents in the south-west. Relieved to be outside the political and religious mainstream, by the autumn of 1566 he had agreed to act as Ayr's minister, though those in Edinburgh wanted him to resume his charge. He also welcomed the suggestion by his close friend Goodman that they resume their partnership, this time in a mission within Ireland. Although nothing came of this proposal, in December 1566 Knox obtained leave from the general assembly to visit his sons, who were living with the Bowes family in co. Durham. During his English trip he may have visited London to see members of his old Genevan congregation and to deliver the general assembly's letter concerning the controversy over vestments. He encouraged Goodman to write a pamphlet against wearing vestments and was in close touch with other radical English protestants who sought his advice on whether to secede by rejecting the 'Book of Common Prayer'. Despite his trenchant criticisms of this liturgy, he counselled them to be patient and not separate themselves from the Church of England. Owing to his English travels Knox missed the upheavals of February-July 1567 -- Darnley's murder, Mary's marriage to Bothwell, the couple's defeat at Carberry, and the queen's imprisonment at Lochleven. For eighteen months he had withdrawn from public life into semi-retirement, his depression and quietism possibly linked to a bout of ill health. 
By the end of June 1567 Knox had returned to Edinburgh, immediately making known his views on Mary's fate. In a sermon on 19 July he went so far as to demand her execution as an adulteress and murderess, presenting this as a test case of covenant obedience to demonstrate that, within Scotland, breaking the ten commandments would be punished, irrespective of rank. To the preacher it was a final chance for the Scots to prove their loyalty to the covenant. He therefore dismissed Mary's abdication as a half-hearted compromise which would store up future trouble. Ten days later in his sermon at James VI's coronation he struck a more optimistic note, comparing the new reign to that of Joash, the young 'Old Testament' king. Moray became regent for the baby James and set about re-establishing the kirk on a firmer financial and constitutional footing, a cause dear to Knox's heart. To bolster these efforts, in December, Knox preached a rousing sermon at the opening of a parliament which re-enacted the 1560 Reformation legislation. Having buried his old quarrels with Moray, the preacher decided not to publish his 'History', which had documented them in bitter detail. Though advising the regent, Knox was reluctant to return to the heart of political affairs and seems instead to have contemplated retirement. In February 1568 he made the remarkable suggestion that he would like to serve again his former Genevan congregation, probably based in London, though it is difficult to imagine how he would have fitted into the Elizabethan church. During the next few years there was a marked deterioration in his health and he became increasingly melancholy, failing to write regularly to his friends and, when he did so, speaking of his imminent and longed-for death. 
During summer 1568 Knox finished the first draft of his tract against James Tyrie. The debate gave him an opportunity to mount a spirited defence of the Scottish kirk. It was his most positive description of the achievements of the Reformation, resting upon an affirmation of a visible church coterminous with the kingdom. Knox asserted that, by publicly rejecting the Roman Antichrist of the papacy and by adopting the laws of God, the Scottish realm had affirmed its covenant relationship. It had thereby entered the same league made by Christ with the apostles, establishing a true apostolic succession for the church, not the historical continuity claimed by the Roman Catholics. On the awkward charge of doctrinal diversity among protestant churches, Knox blithely stated that there was European agreement on the principles of the faith, and within Scotland no controversy at all because the preachers agreed over doctrine. In contrast to this triumphalist note, the appendix which Knox added in 1572 was introspective and gloomy. It reflected his sense of being part of a persecuted minority rather than a leader of a vibrant national church. Stung by accusations of impropriety, Knox also appended a letter of 20 July 1554 to Elizabeth Bowes demonstrating that his relationship with his mother-in-law was entirely pastoral. 
During a period of great upheaval in Scotland, Knox was unusually quiescent, taking no active part in the dramas which ended the queen's personal rule. Initially he seemed to have withdrawn to concentrate on writing, but after Mary's fall he returned somewhat reluctantly to Edinburgh. Although neither willing nor able to act once more as a revolutionary leader, he did resume an interest in political and ecclesiastical matters during Moray's regency. His declining health probably exacerbated a general feeling of disillusionment and a desire to finish his ministerial career. 
Moray's assassination by James Hamilton of Bothwellhaugh on 23 January 1570 was an immense blow to Knox, arousing in him a vehement and abiding hatred for all Hamiltons. Conscious of echoes of the godly Edward VI's early demise, he interpreted the regent's death as a mark of divine displeasure. God's people had once more failed to appreciate his gifts, which Knox listed: Scotland had first been delivered from French tyranny, then from Roman Catholic idolatry, and finally from the rule of 'that wretched Woman, the mother of all mischief' ('Works', 6.569). Moray, in whom Christ's image had shone, had rescued the realm from disaster only to be murdered by the devil and his wicked servants. At the funeral on 14 February, Knox preached on the text 'Blessed are they that die in the Lord', reducing the congregation of 3000 to tears with his eulogy for the 'good regent'. 
In the last two years of his own life Knox grew increasingly bitter and isolated, feeling encircled by enemies and with the work of reformation seemingly in tatters around him. In October 1570 he suffered a slight stroke which weakened both his voice and his body. He saved his strength for the weekly sermon in St Giles's, which became the chief outlet for his views upon current affairs. With Scotland embroiled in civil war between Queen Mary's supporters and those of King James, in his customary way Knox reduced the struggle to polar opposites. By treating it as a religious conflict, he turned the queen's party into Satan's agents and castigated its protestant members as backsliders from their faith. In December 1570 he launched a particularly vitriolic attack on his previous ally, William Kirkcaldy of Grange, who held Edinburgh Castle for Mary. When Grange complained of Knox's slander to the city's kirk session a feud began between the two men. Relying on the generalized right of a minister to admonish sinners, Knox continued to use the pulpit to fight his case. His Ayrshire friends joined the dispute by writing a threatening letter to Grange defending Knox as 'the first planter and chief waterer of the Kirk amonges us' ('Works', 6.585). Within the Edinburgh congregation support was less wholehearted for the minister's outspoken stance, which served instead to deepen the existing divide between the political factions. 
Rumours and propaganda leaflets circulated in the capital accusing Knox of undermining all political authority, of inconsistency in attacking female rule in 'The First Blast' but then approving Queen Elizabeth, and more generally of being too good a friend to England at Scotland's expense. The preacher defended himself vigorously and urged the general assembly, to which some specific accusations had been addressed, to vindicate him. But although it supported him, the assembly did not provide the ringing endorsement which Richard Bannatyne, Knox's secretary, demanded. When clerical friends privately suggested he moderate his criticisms, Knox remained unrepentant, declaring, 'The kirk may forbid me preiching, but to stop my toung being in the pulpit it may not' ('Works', 6.590). Such an impassioned defence of his prophetic vocation was an indication of how Knox's world had contracted to the arena of his sermons. 
Knox's continued denunciation of the queen's party, especially the hated Hamiltons, made Edinburgh unsafe when it occupied the burgh in May 1571. Persuaded that his presence posed a threat to his supporters, Knox left for St Andrews. Writing to his Edinburgh congregation he likened himself to the prophet Jeremiah, reminding them that continued persecution was one of the signs of election. Lodged within the priory, Knox found a more conducive atmosphere in St Andrews, especially when surrounded by the admiring students of St Leonard's College, who lionized him. His health had deteriorated to such an extent that walking unaided was difficult and he could not travel to the general assembly. Though requiring to be helped into the pulpit, as his sermons progressed he came alive, vigorously beating the pulpit and causing his hearers to quake with fear at his warnings. 
Knox's sermons expounded 'Daniel' and were packed with topical allusions, especially attacks upon the occupiers of Edinburgh Castle, William Maitland of Lethington, and the Hamiltons. They offended Robert Hamilton, minister of St Andrews, who challenged Knox's condemnations. In reply the St Leonard's students staged a play depicting the castle's fall, which Knox had foretold and had yet to happen. It became a focus for the existing rivalry between St Leonard's and St Salvator's colleges, leading to bitter feuding within the university. Knox, entangled in this dispute, wrote in August 1572 to the general assembly solemnly warning the kirk against the bondage of the universities. Now deeply suspicious of anyone who opposed him, he became embroiled in further rows with John Rutherford, principal of St Salvator's College, and with John Douglas, the newly appointed archbishop of St Andrews. By now, even in St Andrews, Knox felt opponents were fighting him at every turn. 
The news of the St Bartholomew's eve massacre of the Huguenots in August 1572 increased Knox's sense of being encircled by the enemies of true religion. His warm affection for, and continued contacts with, French protestants made it a particularly bitter blow which signalled worse disaster to come. With Edinburgh now safe, Knox accepted an invitation to return. Defending at all costs his calling to be a watchman, he made it a condition that his preaching should not be restricted. He continued his attacks upon those inside Edinburgh Castle, including a denunciation of William Maitland as an atheist. When he resumed preaching in St Giles's on 31 August his voice was so weak he was henceforth moved to the smaller Tolbooth section of the building. With grim determination he continued until his final sermon on 9 November 1572, delivered at the admission of James Lawson, his replacement. Afterwards he was too sick to leave his house, being afflicted with a violent cough which heralded the onset of bronchopneumonia. In his last fortnight he was visited by many of his supporters. Attended by his wife and friends, he died at 11 p.m. on 24 November. Two days later he was buried in the churchyard of St Giles's, at a funeral attended by many nobles, including the fourth earl of Morton. The newly appointed regent made his famous tribute, 'Here lyeth a man who in his life never feared the face of man; who hath beene often threatned with dagge and dagger, but yet hath ended his dayes in peace and honour' (Calderwood, 2.242). 
Knox had made his will six months earlier, leaving his wife and daughters as executors, and it was proved at the commissary court on 13 January 1573. In addition to the usual testament noting his debts and making his bequests, he penned a 'legacy', a justification of his life and vocation addressed to the faithful, the papists, and the unthankful world. It rehearsed the prominent themes of his final years: the persecution and threat of martyrdom which he and the faithful remnant of the kirk had suffered; and the failure to heed his admonitions of punishment to come, especially the destruction of Edinburgh Castle. Knox defended his vocation, asserting that by preaching the death of Christ he had striven to beat down the pride of the proud and encourage the faithful, without seeking financial reward or being tainted by corruption. Sensitive to the criticisms of partiality, he declared he had never gone beyond the scriptures in his references to contemporary events. Finally, he called for the faithful to be constant, even in the midst of troubles, and they would find that God protected them as he had Knox. 
Knox firmly believed that, like Ezekiel, he had been called to act as a watchman of the Lord forever crying warnings of the enemy's approach. In his declining years he had withdrawn into this watchtower mentality and identified as enemies all those who failed to share his views. Chronically ill and embittered, he clung to the idea of the church as a persecuted minority who, like the exiled Jews, would be vindicated in the end. While this biblical parallelism had fitted with his earlier experience of Marian exile and persecution, it seemed less appropriate for a period when the Scottish kirk was putting down its roots and the kingdom was ruled by protestant regents on behalf of a young protestant king. Knox's 'legacy' formed a sad and defensive conclusion to his life, assessing the present in negative terms and full of fear for the future. It displayed little appreciation of his own vital contribution to the mighty achievement of planting a protestant kirk in his native land. 
A proper likeness of Knox has always been difficult to construct. No contemporary portrait survives, though a verbal sketch was penned by his friend Sir Peter Young in 1579 indicating that Knox was short and stocky with broad shoulders. His dark blue eyes were set deep in their sockets under prominent eyebrows, and his narrow forehead was surrounded by black hair while a thick beard flecked with grey fell to his chest. Within his oval face, his long nose contrasted with a full mouth and large lips highlighted by his swarthy complexion. His normally grave countenance gave him an air of authority, but when angry his frown was deep and could be fearsome. By contrast the lineaments of Knox's personality have been less easy to draw. They have been dominated by his public role which has obscured the brief glimpses of the private individual also present in his writings. For Knox his calling as a preacher completely defined his life. His constant striving to live up to the responsibilities of his prophetic vocation allowed him no relaxation from his duty to act as the 'watchman of the Lord'. Once in the pulpit he believed he was no longer master of himself, but became instead the mouthpiece of the Holy Spirit. He was proud of this calling and jealously defended his right to preach, sure that he was defending God's honour and not his own. In a revealing aside he defined humility not as a lack of pride but as a consciousness of sin, and in that sense he knew himself to be a humble man. 
The stern preacher who thundered God's warnings with complete conviction frightened many of his hearers, causing some to tremble with fear. In tracts and sermons he confronted his audiences with a stark black and white world in which the choice between good and evil was plain with little excuse for following the wrong way. There was no distinction in Knox's mind between the doctrinal certainties found within his biblical texts and their direct 'application' to the contemporary situation. He viewed his political commentaries as a necessary and natural consequence of his vocation. Since his Edwardian days, Knox had feared the contaminating influence of court politics. He therefore elevated direct speaking into a distinct virtue, condemning the use of tact or diplomacy as obsequious flattery or shoddy political compromise. As with all successful myths, the image of Knox as the harsh, ranting cleric has its element of truth, though it does scant justice to the charismatic preacher whose sermons could be more rousing than 500 trumpets sounding together. 
Convinced he understood the 'sense' of scripture and that the meaning of the word was self-evident to all who sought it, Knox found it extremely difficult to accept alternative interpretations. On the few occasions he recognized the need to apologize he did so clumsily, which sometimes made matters worse. This general inflexibility was linked to an absolute confidence in identifying the 'enemies of the evangel'. His 'holy' hatred for such people allowed him to dismiss out of hand any good points they might possess. In the final years of his life, Knox's attitude towards opposition from any quarter verged on paranoia. With his failing health, he became bitter and pessimistic about the future of protestantism, viewing death as a release from the onerous burden of his public duty. 
Although certain of the righteousness of his cause, in private Knox could be assailed by doubt, lapsing into depression which would produce bouts of anger and frustration or withdrawal and relative passivity. During such periods he leaned even more heavily upon the support provided by his wives and an intimate circle of his spiritual sisters and brothers. In the glimpses afforded by his correspondence of these personal relationships a different Knox emerges. As a pastor he could be sympathetic, even tender, and extremely patient with the spiritual dilemmas facing his flock. In such contexts he was willing to moderate and adapt to the practical circumstances the moral imperatives that his pulpit rhetoric had declared were inflexible. Secure within the company of the godly, especially during his Geneva days, the gentler side of Knox flourished. This aspect of his personality helped to inspire the deep loyalty and affection so evident among his friends and supporters within his various congregations. 
Although his writings were infused by 'Old Testament' concepts and language, on his own admission Knox's spirituality began and ended with 'John' 17. He found in this, the chapter of the fourth gospel containing Christ's prayer for his disciples before his betrayal, both a personal assurance of salvation and a complete world view. Knox's general apocalyptical perspective and an understanding of his vocation rested on the sharp distinction between Christ and the world running through the first sections of the chapter. In the remainder of the chapter Christ's celebration of being one with his followers, through which they are brought into the unity of the Father and the Son, underpinned Knox's ecclesiology, his predestinarianism, and his own faith. These key themes of covenant and apocalypticism, predestination and ecclesiology which Knox found entwined in 'John' 17 provide the crucial link between the public and private aspects of his personality. 
Almost immediately after Knox's death his supporters and detractors began the dispute which has continued ever since concerning his legacy and character. In 1573 John Davidson, a fervent admirer, published two poems which eulogized those aspects of his life which Knox had emphasized during his final years. Described as a model of uprightness, he was portrayed as a servant of God who, hated and persecuted by the world, had not flinched from his duty to rebuke sinners and defy tyrants. Accounts of Knox's last illness by his secretary Richard Bannatyne, and by his successor James Lawson, were published to demonstrate his 'godly death', thus vindicating his memory against Roman Catholic attacks. 
The first publication in 1587 of Knox's 'History' took place in London, where Andrew Melville and other Scottish presbyterians were in exile, and included book 5, covering 1564-7, written by a continuator and giving greater prominence to Knox himself. The 'History' has usually been read as the first of the great presbyterian histories of the Church of Scotland, which has tended to abstract it from its place among Knox's other writings and dislocate it from its contemporary contexts. Knox's fine eye for the telling, and often humorous, detail and his enjoyment in coining a pithy or alliterative phrase give his 'History' great immediacy. Its lively narrative of a crucial episode in Scottish history has maintained interest in it both as a historical source and a literary work, ensuring a succession of editions down to the present. The impact of the 'History' has been immense, and it continues to provide indispensable evidence for the period, especially the revolutionary crisis of 1559-60. 
Knox has been accused of giving himself undue prominence in this work. Yet the 'History' is not an autobiography in disguise, for it conceals as much as it reveals about Knox's life; for example, it offers only a couple of sentences to cover his entire stay in England. It is instead a record of the Scottish struggle between the 'light of Christ's Evangel' and Satan's 'kingdom of darkness'. Knox was convinced that events in Scotland formed part of the cosmic battle between Christ and Antichrist. He fashioned his 'History' within this apocalyptic framework, deliberately choosing to fill it with biblical imagery and metaphors. Knox's sections of the 'History' (books 1-4) were revised in the dark days of 1566, which strongly coloured both his interpretation and his memory of the events he was recording. Nevertheless, within the framework imposed by its purpose and interpretation, the 'History' is a relatively reliable record, even though in many key instances, such as the famous interviews with Mary, queen of Scots, this is difficult to verify because there are no other full accounts. 
The initial association of Knox's 'History' with the Scottish presbyterian opposition was solidified in the 1620s and 1630s by David Calderwood, whose own 'History of the Kirk of Scotland' depended heavily on Knox's papers and publications. This was so successful that Knox's authorship of the 'History' was denied by Archbishop John Spottiswood in an attempt to retain Knox within the episcopal tradition as the acceptable Scottish reformer. These struggles produced the most enduring and influential of Knox's images, as the founding father of the Scottish Reformation and of presbyterianism. 
Having acquired iconic status, it was inevitable that Knox should be claimed at one time or other by virtually all Scottish protestants and deemed an anti-hero and arch-heretic by the Roman Catholics. Although dismissed as a fanatic by the rational Enlightenment, Knox remained in view because of his appearance in William Robertson's influential 'History of Scotland', first published in 1759. The fight over Knox's memory became particularly bitter during the ecclesiastical divisions of the nineteenth century, especially after the Disruption of 1843 when the Free Church battled to claim the reformer for themselves. The dramatic visual impact of David Wilkie's 1830s paintings of Knox preaching in St Andrews in 1559 and celebrating communion during 1555-6 reinforced the assumption that Knox had reintroduced apostolic purity to the kirk. Reflecting the revival of interest in Scottish history, the statues erected in Edinburgh's New College in 1896, and in Parliament Square in 1904 (now inside St Giles's), commemorate Knox as a preacher devoted to a rigorous biblicism. 
Knowledge of the reformer was raised to a new level by David Laing's publication of the comprehensive six volumes of Knox's 'Works' between 1846 and 1864. The corpus of material was completed in 1875 by Peter Lorimer's book 'John Knox and the Church of England', presenting the reformer as the founding father of puritanism and nonconformity. Strongly associated with the image of Knox the churchman, in its many guises, was that of the great anti-Catholic crusader, providing a model for a partisan protestant national identity within modern Scotland. Knox became an ideological patron for such anti-Catholic organizations as the Scottish Reformation Society, the Protestant Alliance, and the Orange order. Between 1909 and 1923 the Knox Club flourished, promoting Scottish Reformation history, and aiming to reduce Roman Catholic influence within Scotland and to defend the protestant succession to the throne. Among its publications were works by its vice-president, David Hay Fleming, for instance 'The Last Days of John Knox' (1913). 
Though he was firmly associated with Scotland, Knox's English and continental associations gave him an international reputation. He was included among the other major Reformation leaders in his friend Theodore Beza's 'Icones' and is commemorated by a statue in Geneva's Reformation Wall, erected in 1917. He is remembered most widely throughout the presbyterian world in countless churches and several educational institutions from the United States to Korea. From the Elizabethan period Knox was enthusiastically adopted by the puritan wing of the Church of England and later by the nonconformist and dissenting traditions. Ever since Richard Bancroft's sermon at St Paul's Cross in 1589, Knox's political views have been vilified by their episcopal opponents as revolutionary and subversive. 
A less controversial role for Knox to play was as patron of Scottish education, both at school and university levels. In the late nineteenth century his memory was employed to defend Scotland's system against 'Anglicizing' tendencies and justify comprehensive educational provision. This image was connected to the earlier characterization of Knox as a champion of democracy, emphasizing his revolutionary political thought and principled defiance of royal authority. Such an interpretation owed much to the ground-breaking and highly influential biography by Thomas McCrie first published in 1813. By using Knox's own letters and tracts, McCrie depicted him as the personification of the spirit of the Scottish Reformation. His book became an immediate best-seller, provoking an upsurge of interest in Knox to complement the massive enthusiasm for Scotland's past generated by Sir Walter Scott. In 1825 this was given visual expression in the erection of a statue of the reformer mounted on a high pillar in the Glasgow necropolis. The Chartists even celebrated him as a forerunner of their movement. The emphasis upon his heroic qualities was carried a stage further by Thomas Carlyle, who immortalized Knox as the 'one Scotchman to whom, of all others, his country and the world owe a debt' (Carlyle, 133). 
The most abiding popular picture of Knox places him in opposition to Mary, queen of Scots. As a deliberate foil to her romantic image, he has been employed by Mary's supporters and critics alike. The dramatic interviews between the pair became the best-known parts of his life, providing ideal material for large numbers of historical paintings, plays, and films. By treating Knox alongside Mary, greater emphasis was given to his relationships with, and attitude towards, women and upon his criticisms of court life. Over time these characteristics were transmuted within popular imagination into Knox the woman-hater and killjoy. In the late twentieth century this negative image was highlighted by Hugh MacDiarmaid's cultural circle as the main barrier to a positive Scottish national identity. More recently, the confidence brought by devolution and the growing interest in Scotland's history has permitted a more humorous acceptance of Knox the icon, though his name is still capable of stirring up controversy. 


@@@@@


doc= 15782


Knox, John (c.1555-1623), Church of Scotland minister, was the son of William Knox; it is unclear whether this William was the merchant of Prestonpans in Haddingtonshire who was the brother of the reformer John Knox, or this William's eldest son, also William, minister of Cockpen, Edinburghshire, from 1567 to 1592. After graduating MA at the University of St Andrews in 1575, Knox was admitted to the ministry at Lauder, Berwickshire, in April 1576. When he refused to baptize the illegitimate child of one David Douglas, the latter assaulted and wounded him, prompting him to complain to the privy council, which in June 1590 declared Douglas an outlaw when he failed to appear. 
Knox is first recorded as attending the general assembly of the Church of Scotland in October 1581; during his career he participated in at least twelve of these meetings. He left Lauder to become minister at Melrose, Roxburghshire, in 1584. Committed to presbyterian polity, he refused to subscribe the articles of religion issued by the king's secretary, John Maitland of Thirlstane, the following year. In October 1586 Knox was elected moderator of the synod of Merse and Teviotdale. On 6 March 1590 the privy council appointed him a commissioner for the preservation of protestantism and the examination of ministers in Roxburghshire, and two years later he was commissioned to send information about the activities of Roman Catholics and their supporters to the Edinburgh minister Walter Balcanquhall. In 1595 Knox persuaded the general assembly to permit William Knox the younger, who had succeeded his father at Cockpen three years earlier, to move to Selkirk, but William decided to stay where he was. 
Knox was active in support of the Presbyterian church at a time when it was making far-reaching claims for its own authority, even at the expense of the crown. When the general assembly established a commission in 1596 to reside at Edinburgh and monitor the actions of the excommunicated Roman Catholic earls of Huntly and Erroll and their supporters, Knox was one of the representatives for southern Scotland. However, the privy council ruled the commission illegal on 24 November 1596, and ordered its members to leave Edinburgh. Knox was one of the commissioners appointed by the general assembly in March 1598 to prepare a report on ecclesiastical representation in parliament. Two years later the assembly named him to a commission to establish ministers in towns devoid of them, and also to deal with actions by ministers that offended James VI. As a member of the assembly in 1601, he voted against the king's proposed transfer of ministers. The following year the assembly made Knox a visitor for the examination of ministers in Annandale and Nithsdale. It appointed him to a commission to advise James about the church's enemies, and included his name on a list of men that the king could present to empty benefices. Although Knox was unwilling to serve as the assembly's moderator, he accepted an appointment as moderator of Melrose presbytery in January 1607. The following year he was one of twenty ministers (ten per side) selected by the assembly to seek a compromise between advocates of presbyterian and episcopal polities. He also served as a commissioner to accompany the archbishop of Glasgow on a visitation of churches in Dumfriesshire. 
Knox participated in the Falkland Palace conference on 4 May 1609 that discussed differences of opinion on church government and discipline. He quarrelled with the archbishop of St Andrews over the king's five articles on worship at the general assembly in 1617. After the articles were approved by the general assembly at Perth the following year, despite the objections of Knox and others, he preached against them in a synod at Peebles, beseeching his listeners, 'with tears, to stand to the Libertie and Government of the Kirk Established before the erection of the late Bishops' (Calderwood, 717). Knox was married to Christian, 'nee' Paterson. He died, probably at Melrose, in 1623, his wife surviving him. 




@@@@@


doc= 15783


John Knox (d. in or after 1654), probably the son of the Melrose minister, graduated MA at St Andrews in 1613 or 1614. King James presented him to the living at Bowden, Roxburgh, on 22 November 1621. A member of the assembly in 1638, he served on the commission (the assembly's standing committee) in 1646 and 1648. He was married to Margaret, 'nee' Douglas, and was still minister at Bowden on 26 July 1654; it is not known when he died. Their sons, Henry, who attended Charles II in exile, and John, both became ministers, the latter at North Leith, until his ejection on 11 June 1662. 


@@@@@


doc= 15784


Knox, John (d. 1688), Church of Scotland minister and army chaplain, was the younger son of John Knox (d. in or after 1654) ['see under 'Knox, John (c.1555-1623)], minister of Bowden in Teviotdale, Roxburghshire, and his wife, Margaret Douglas. He was the grandson of John Knox (c.1555-1623), minister of Melrose, who was thought to have been the nephew of the great reformer; the family took conspicuous pride in this link. He was educated at the University of Edinburgh and graduated MA on 15 July 1641. Little is known of his activities during the following decade. It is possible that he remained in the Scottish capital, where his father enjoyed an influential position in the assembly of commissions, but it appears that he did not immediately seek a parish and that by 1650 he had instead become private chaplain to Archibald Douglas, earl of Ormond (1609-1655). 
As the army of the Commonwealth surged northwards in the summer of 1650, Knox sought refuge behind the walls of the Douglas stronghold of Tantallon Castle and became garrison chaplain. Since the English forces under Major-General Monck were insufficiently equipped to impose a stranglehold on the area, Knox was able to lead the countess of Ormond and her sister-in-law, Lady Alexander Douglas, to the safety of a waiting fishing vessel at North Berwick -- despite being marooned on a sandbank at low tide, deserted by his military escort, and assailed by Commonwealth soldiers. Forced to surrender in order to buy more time in which to effect the escape, Knox then charmed his captors over glasses of wine before seizing the horse of an English lieutenant and riding it back to the safety of the castle gates. Thereafter he continued to distinguish himself in the eyes of the royalist garrison by his gallantry and cunning, and was even able to capture a merchant vessel which had been running in supplies to the besieging army across the Firth of Forth. However, the arrival of heavy artillery in February 1651 profoundly changed the nature of the conflict and effectively sealed the fate of the garrison. After a twelve-day bombardment, the castle surrendered on 23 February 1651, though Knox received 'very good conditions' upon his own capitulation (Wodrow, 2.352). He was probably freed almost immediately. 
Knox then became chaplain to Sir John Brown's regiment of horse, in the royalist army raised by David Leslie. He was with the troops who blocked the passage of the Commonwealth army across the fords of the River Forth near Stirling in early July 1651. On 20 July he appears to have fought with the detachment which gave battle to Lambert's numerically superior English host at Inverkeithing, and taken part in the furious counter-charges made that day by Scottish lancers. Following the final flight of the royalists, however, he was arrested and taken to Edinburgh. From his prison cell he maintained a lively and useful correspondence with the exiled royalist court, where his elder brother Henry was a courtier and royalist agent. A letter from Charles II, dated 31 August 1653, promised that the king would use 'all the endeavours I can to free you' (Rogers, 72) and in return asked if Knox might find 'some way... to assist me with money, which would be a very seasonable obligation, and could never be forgotten by me' (Wodrow, 2.352-3). Knox was released from custody late that year, and having been only a probationer during his military service he was finally ordained and became minister for North Leith. He probably did raise money for the royalist cause at this point, and it is clear that he acted as a conduit for secret correspondence between the exiled king and his Scottish supporters. In the mid-1650s the billeting of English soldiers in his church forced him to preach from the citadel of North Leith until he was ejected by the military from his makeshift pulpit. On 23 June 1659 he married the eighteen-year-old Jean Dalgleish of Cramond. 
Despite his past loyalties, the Restoration did not bring Knox any improvement in his fortunes. He was firmly committed to the self-government of the kirk and bitterly resented the reintroduction of episcopacy. In defiance of the authorities, he led public worship at Newhaven and as a result was deprived of his parish by parliament on 11 June 1662 and by the privy council on 1 October. Although he was advised to journey to London to petition the king, Knox appears to have remained in Scotland, living near his former parish. He was one of those ministers who accepted the terms of the earl of Lauderdale's second indulgence of 1672 and was licensed to preach again in September of that year. He was given the parish of West Calder but soon fell out with his fellow incumbent, William Weir, who had refused both to appear before the privy council and to quit his manse in favour of Knox and his family. The row deepened and, having been summoned to Edinburgh on 5 September 1673 in order to affirm his own loyalty to the government and the episcopate, Knox appears to have used the occasion to push home his allegations of misconduct against his rival. Having heard that Weir had spoken against the king and had also 'by severall indirect and unhandsome wayes circumvein and abuse[d] the said Mr. John [Knox] and forced him to desert the said charge' of his parish, the privy council found against Weir. He was branded a rebel and dismissed from the parish, while Knox was confirmed as the sole incumbent and rewarded with the whole 'stipend of that Kirk for the year 1673' ('Reg. PCS', 4.98-9, 101). 
A regular income failed to materialize, however. Knox was widowed on 26 October 1673 and, with a young family to support, he felt impelled to petition the Scottish privy council in February 1675 and June 1677 for the payment of his arrears stretching over several years. Financial hardship may have driven him into hardening his attitude towards the hierarchy in both church and state. Charges of refusing to celebrate the king's birthday and of refusing to read out in church the order proclaiming a thanksgiving day for the deliverance of Charles II from the Rye House plot were brought against him in late November 1684 and he was once again brought before the privy council. Despite listing his services to the royal cause during the Commonwealth and protectorate periods, his refusal to sign a bond promising that he would never preach illegally again effectively condemned him in the eyes of the councillors and he was committed to the Tolbooth until such a time as he learned the proper 'cautione' ('Reg. PCS', 10.38). He was not, as has been sometimes suggested, sent to serve out part of his sentence on the infamous Bass Rock: from November 1684 to March 1685 he was closely confined in Edinburgh's Tolbooth gaol. By the spring of 1685 poor conditions there had undermined his health, and in March he was paroled for one month on a bond of 5,000 Scottish merks so that he might undertake 'a course of phisick' (ibid., 171). This parole was subsequently extended twice more in April and once in June, 'in regard of his continowd sicknes and infirmitie' and on account of his case being so 'singular and his loyaltie notourlie known' (ibid., 38). It was obvious that Knox represented no threat to the established order and he moved hurriedly to embrace the new offers of indulgence made in February and April 1687. Once his release was confirmed as being permanent, he returned to his old parish at North Leith, where he ministered to his congregation without interference or event until his death in March 1688. He was buried in Leith churchyard. 
Knox was survived by at least three of his four children. His son John later served as the garrison chaplain to Edinburgh Castle, and in 1691 one of his daughters, Jean, married John Tullidelph, the minister of Dunbarney. Though undistinguished in terms of his preaching style and theological reflections, John Knox managed to combine for most of his career a commitment to both the presbyterian Church of Scotland and the house of Stuart. His move into opposition later in his life reflected the increasing strains placed on the Restoration settlement by its chief beneficiaries in Edinburgh and Whitehall. 


@@@@@


doc= 15785


Knox, John (1720-1790), bookseller and economic improver, was born in Scotland; details of his parents are unknown. About Knox's early life before he moved to London to become a successful bookseller in the Strand, or his domestic circumstances, almost nothing is known. His London business was well established by the 1760s, and to his staples of selling and dealing in books he added some publishing, including in 1767 a seven-volume 'New Collection of Voyages and Travels', prepared (or so his preface alleged) not because he thought the work would be likely to sell, but 'because it was wanting' ('Monthly Review', 37, 1767, 57). Another venture with which he was closely associated was William Guthrie's popular 'New System of Commercial Geography', the first edition of which appeared in 1770. Although there is no internal corroboration -- the frontispiece merely states that it was 'Printed for J. Knox' -- he is said to have been the real compiler of this work (Watt, 'Bibl. Brit.', 1824, 1.453). In the section on Scotland there are certainly themes with which Knox was to be closely identified, such as the value of fishing to the north, a cause which in later life he made his own. Though resident in London, Knox retained the strongest connections with his native Scotland, especially, it seems, in the Clyde area at Old Kilpatrick in Dunbartonshire; the minister there, John Davidson, was one of the two executors of his will. Among the beneficiaries was a stepson, John Morrison, also resident there. Davidson and Knox may have shared similar politics, with both being seen as pro-American because of their opposition to the war with the American colonists. Knox's contribution to the cause is thought to have included a pamphlet, published in 1777, 'The American Crisis' (T. R. Adams, 'The American Controversy', 1980). 
There had been for many decades an established community of expatriate Scots in London: linen factors, bankers, and the like. But it was with the Highland Society of London, established in 1778, that Knox formed particularly strong links, channelling his time, abilities, and moneys into acquiring first-hand knowledge of conditions in northern Scotland. He made a series of tours from 1764 onwards to both the west and east coasts of Scotland, sixteen times in twenty-three years, a formidable undertaking in an era when travel in remote areas was still difficult. His journey in the autumn of 1786, published in the following year as 'A Tour through the Highlands of Scotland and the Hebride Isles', showed how the sea-crossings by open boat at that season of the year were especially hazardous. Nor was travel on foot much safer in the far north. As Knox wryly remarked, Sutherland with its bogs and precipices was a country where the traveller needed to climb like a goat and jump like a grasshopper. In 1784 appeared his 'View of the British Empire, More Especially Scotland', which argued -- understandably -- that transport links in the highlands had to be improved, and advocated the construction of what became the Crinan and Caledonian canals. 
Knox became known as an expert on the possibilities for fishing, and, to draw on his expertise, the Highland Society of London invited him in March 1786 to lecture on his schemes for some forty planned fishing settlements from Dornoch to Arran. Knox's ideas, which were quickly rushed into print under the title 'Observations on the Northern Fisheries', were much in vogue that year. There was a general context of anxiety about how to retain a productive population in the highlands, the region being seen not as a haven for rebels, as it once had been, but as an essential reservoir of seamen and soldiers. While linen had been tried, fishing appeared to offer much more potential. Parliament took an active interest, with Knox giving expert evidence to a House of Commons committee on the British fisheries. The committee's findings gave rise to legislation, including a premium per barrel of herring caught, as well as a tonnage bounty on fishing boats. A private joint-stock company, the British Fisheries Society, was formed to buy land in the north for lease to fishermen and curers. When the list opened at London in May 1786, Knox was among the first subscribers, and he was also active later that year in Scotland, helping to raise additional capital. He was commissioned by the society to make the tour mentioned above in October 1786, and recognition of its value came in the form of a gold medal for Knox, support for its publication, and the implementation of many of his recommendations, such as the choice of Ullapool and Tobermory as suitable places to locate fishing stations. 
But Knox's attention was not solely focused on fisheries. His travels in the north had made him aware of the growing enthusiasm for Scotland as a tourist destination, a market into which he intended to tap: 'Travelling through the Northern parts of our island, besides being conducive to health, has now become a fashionable amusement during the summer and harvest months' ('GM', 59.326). In November 1789 Knox announced a scheme for a complete set of Scottish scenic and architectural views. Some preliminary work had already taken place on his proposed book 'The Picturesque Scenery of Scotland', for which the artist Joseph Farrington, who was in Edinburgh during July 1788, had made the first sketch of a view of Edinburgh Castle. However, the project was abandoned following Knox's death, at Dalkeith, on 1 August 1790. 


@@@@@


doc= 15786


Knox, Robert (1641-1720), merchant and writer on Ceylon, was born on 8 February 1641 on Tower Hill, London, the second child of Robert Knox ('bap'. 1606, died 1661) and Abigail, 'nee' Bonnell (died 1655/6). The Knox family came from Nacton, Suffolk, and later moved to Wimbledon, Surrey, where Robert suffered 'no affliction and lived without want'. His father was a ship's captain operating profitably between England and the Levant. Robert's early education was under the deeply religious direction of his mother. He was then sent to the boarding-school at Barnes, Surrey, where he was taught by James Fleetwood, later bishop of Worcester. 
In 1655 Knox's father took delivery of a new ship, the 'Anne', and on 7 December 1655 sailed with his son for India: first to Fort St George, Madras, then to Bengal, before returning to London in July 1657. The voyage was successful and the elder Knox promptly began preparations for a second passage. In the meantime Oliver Cromwell had issued a charter granting the East India Company a new monopoly of trade to the East, which required Knox to put his vessel and crew in the company's service (13 November 1657). The 'Anne' sailed from England on 21 January 1658 to the Coromandel coast and Persia. During a voyage of limited commercial success she was dismasted in a storm at Masulipatam (19 November 1659). Captain Knox was instructed to take her to Kottiar Bay, Ceylon, to step a new mainmast and to engage in whatever trade was possible. 
At this time Ceylon was ruled by the king of Kandy, Rajasinha II, with whom the Dutch had a long-standing but increasingly tense alliance. The Dutch helped to rid Ceylon of the Portuguese in return for total control over the cinnamon trade. Under Rijklof van Goens the Dutch policy was to keep Rajasinha in debt, to promise food and housing to all inhabitants who would settle in areas under Dutch control, and to expand the Dutch frontiers inland at every opportunity. They had expelled the Portuguese from Colombo (1656), but had not honoured their promise to return the town to the king. Rajasinha was justifiably disenchanted with the activities of Europeans in his country. On his arrival Knox's father made the grave mistake of not sending a letter explaining his presence along with the customary present to the king to ensure his protection. Robert Knox states that this lapse in courtesy was the 'main reason of our Suprize', because Rajasinha, 'Who looking upon himself as a great Monarch, as he is indeed, requires to be treated with sutable State' (Knox, 'Historical Relation', pt 4, chap. 1). 
Between 4 and 10 April 1660 sixteen members of the 'Anne''s crew were taken captive by Rajasinha's troops. The Knoxes were separated from the other captives (16 September 1660) and put together in open detention in a village about 30 miles from Kandy. Both men suffered from malaria, and after a long illness the elder Knox died (9 February 1661). Robert Knox was moved around Ceylon, managing to establish himself as a farmer, moneylender, and pedlar. Eventually he and his close associate Stephen Rutland escaped to the safety of the Dutch fort at Aripu (18 October 1679), bringing to an end a captivity of over nineteen years. After generous treatment by the Dutch on Ceylon and at Batavia, Knox arrived at the English settlement at Bantam in Java (4 February 1680), from where he travelled to London (24 February 1680), arriving in September 1680. 
During the voyage to England, Knox wrote the manuscript of what became 'An Historical Relation of the Island Ceylon, in the East Indies'. His manuscript came to the attention of the directors of the East India Company, who recommended its publication. It was rearranged with the help of his cousin the ecclesiastical historian and biographer Revd John Strype and encouragement from Robert Hooke of the Royal Society. The book, published in 1681, was widely read, and translated into German, Dutch, and French during Knox's lifetime, and made him famous. The book influenced the work of contemporaries such as Daniel Defoe, who drew from Knox's experiences much of the context for, and the aspirations of, his hero in 'Robinson Crusoe' (1719). He also carefully summarized Knox's experiences in the novel 'Captain Singleton' (1720). The direct and idiomatic language used by Knox, his acute observation of details, the importance of practical self-sufficiency and strength of character, and his use of factual reality as the basis for fiction were influential in shaping the evolution of the 'English novel'. Likewise his close focus offered a detailed and objective study of Sinhalese topography, economic and social life (especially of the ordinary people), cultural characteristics, and conditions in the interior of the country, which has ensured that his book remains a fundamental source for the economic history and anthropology of mid-seventeenth-century Ceylon. 
On his return to England in 1680 Knox gained the patronage of Sir Josiah Child, chairman of the East India Company, and after he had successfully studied navigation he was employed as captain of the 'Tonqueen Merchant', for four voyages to the East over the next thirteen years. He experienced mixed fortunes and an increasing disillusionment with the East India Company's regulations covering the private trade of ships' officers. By 1694 he could no longer tolerate the company's removal of 'the Indulgence, as they call it, which is leave to bringe whome toyes and small things of little value free of mults' (Knox, 'Autobiography', fols. 46 and 62). He quarrelled with Child and the company, which dispensed with his services. 
On 3 May 1698, after four years during which he 'grew wary of a Idle and droneish life' (Knox, 'Autobiography', fol. 59), Knox took advantage of the ending of the East India Company's monopoly (1694) and invested in a private venture in the 'Mary', via Cadiz, bound for Surat, where he arrived on 1 February 1699. There was much dissension on board, and the voyage, under the direction of Thomas Lucas, was not a success. Knox returned to England in 1701, completing his seventh and final voyage to the East. Now, aged sixty, he decided he had enough of a competency to retire. He settled in London, where he spent most of his time writing further observations about Ceylon, accounts of his life, and letters to various people. On 12 April 1703 he engaged in a successful lawsuit to recover a small portion of land (in Biggery Meede, manor of Wimbledon) bought by his father on 24 April 1654, and resumed by the current lord of the manor on the grounds that the Knox family was extinct (ibid., fols. 71-5). 
Robert Knox died at St Peter-le-Poer, London, on 19 June 1720 and was buried in Wimbledon church, possibly beside his mother. In his will he left numerous personal belongings of value: books, manuscripts, silverware. As well there were specific bequests of money amounting to at least $1370. The remainder of the estate and the quarter-acre block in Wimbledon went to his executor, Edward Lascelles, son of Knox's sister Abigail. 


@@@@@


doc= 15787


Knox, Robert (1791-1862), anatomist and ethnologist, descended from a family of Kirkcudbright tenant farmers who claimed kinship with the ancient family of Ranfurly in Renfrewshire, which included the reformer John Knox, was the eighth child and fifth son of Robert Knox (died 1812), philosophical and mathematical master at Heriot's Hospital, Edinburgh, and member of the Jacobin-inspired Friends of the People. His mother was Mary Sherer or Schrerer (died 1838), daughter of a farmer of German ancestry. Knox was born on 4 September 1791 at Edinburgh. 
Knox was first educated at home by his father after suffering from smallpox which left him blind in one eye and severely disfigured. From 1805 he attended Edinburgh high school, where he was 'dux' and gold medallist. In November 1810 he began medical school at Edinburgh University, where he was twice president of the Royal Medical Society before his graduation. Having failed once in anatomy, partly owing to the incompetent teaching of Alexander Munro ('tertius'), he became a pupil at John Barclay's extramural school and gained a masterly knowledge of the subject. He graduated MD in 1814 with his impressive thesis, 'On the effects of stimulants and narcotics on the healthy body'. This was followed in January 1815 by an important paper, 'The diurnal variations of the pulse and other functions' ('Edinburgh Medical and Surgical Journal', 11.52-65, 164-7). He finished this phase of his education as a pupil of the surgeon John Abernethy at St Bartholomew's Hospital, London, and was able to apply Abernethy's theories after Waterloo, when he obtained a commission as assistant surgeon in the army in 1815 and was sent to Brussels. 
Knox returned to England in charge of a large party of invalids and was for a time attached to the Melsea Hospital in Hampshire. In April 1817 he was sent to the Cape of Good Hope with the 72nd highlanders to serve in the Cape Frontier War of 1819. It was here that he formulated many of the radical opinions he held throughout his life (such as an unpopular stance against colonial policy) and energetically embarked on ethnological, zoological, geographical, and medical researches which formed the basis of his study for the rest of his life. In 1820 he was involved in an altercation with a fellow officer for which he was officially censured and unofficially and publicly horsewhipped (Stephen, 1). The cause of the dispute remains obscure but it may have arisen from his anticolonialist opinions, for Knox was a steadfast if not proud and stubborn defender of his own beliefs. He returned to Britain, wishing to be with his family, on half pay, on Christmas day 1820. 
Knox remained in Edinburgh, contributing papers to the Wernerian Society on subjects suggested to him by his recent research. In the autumn of 1821 he began a year's study in Paris under Cuvier, Geoffroy St-Hilaire, De Blainville, and Larrey. He returned to Edinburgh at the end of 1822, and remained on army half pay until 1832. In 1824 he married Mary Russell (died 1841), whom his student and biographer Henry Lonsdale described as of inferior rank. Lonsdale suggested that he may have maintained an 'official' residence with his sister Mary taking on the social role as wife, and a private residence for his young family. To others this seems unlikely for a man known to be devoted to his family (Rae, 49). 
During the next few years Knox continued to contribute zoological and anatomical papers to the Wernerian Society and the Royal Society of Edinburgh. The most important of these was 'Observations on the comparative anatomy of the eye', in which the discoveries on the structure and physiology of the eye secured for Knox a niche in the annals of medical history. He embarked on a difficult relationship with the College of Surgeons of Edinburgh after persuading it to form a reputable museum of comparative anatomy and pathology. He was eventually appointed its conservator in 1825 after becoming a fellow of the college on 18 March, and superintended the purchase and transfer of the collection of Sir Charles Bell. He worked actively and enthusiastically in the museum until 1831. 
Meanwhile, on 2 March 1825, Knox signed articles of partnership with his old teacher John Barclay, taking on the bulk of the work. When Barclay died in 1826 he left the anatomical school entirely under Knox's control. Knox built up a formidable reputation as a teacher and lecturer and almost single-handedly raised the profile of the study of anatomy in Britain. His classes increased dramatically in size until his school could be said to be the largest of its kind in Britain, attracting barristers, the clergy, the aristocracy, artists, and men of letters. His students numbered 504 in 1828-9, when the demand was such that he lectured three times daily. 
Knox was probably one of the most skilled teachers Edinburgh had ever known and it is conjectured that without him British surgery might not have advanced in the way that it did (Rae, 125). Knox's approach to anatomy was refreshingly different from that of his predecessor and his university counterparts, inspiring in his students 'a desire to know the unknown; a love of the perfect; an aiming at the universal' (Knox, 22). Building on the comparative anatomy of Barclay but drawing on his knowledge of Cuvier and the French school, Knox invested anatomy with a new emphasis, infusing the mere mechanics of anatomy with a caustic wit and with a philosophy which elevated his subject to 'the hope of detecting the laws of organic life, the origin of living beings and the transcendental laws regulating the living world in time and space' (ibid., 141-2). As John D. Comrie has assessed, 'his forte was not in relation to surgery and medicine, but in bringing comparative anatomy to the explanation of human anatomy' (Comrie, 2.502). Knox's lectures were rehearsed with great care down to his physical appearance, which he embellished with fine clothes and jewellery. 
However, Knox's success as a teacher was to have a concomitant negative effect on the reputation of anatomical teaching. Demand had placed an added burden on the supply of suitable human subjects for dissection, legally confined to the bodies of executed murderers, and the entire practice of anatomy had become surreptitiously and illegally dependent on the work of the so-called 'resurrectionists' or grave-robbers. Knox was not alone in procuring subjects in this way, but through a combination of bad luck and bad judgement his name became inextricably linked with those of William Burke and William Hare ['see under 'Burke, William]. Knox started receiving subjects from Burke and Hare on 29 November 1827. Burke's confession testifies that this first body, the only one not murdered by Burke and Hare, was originally meant for Alexander Munro, professor of anatomy at the University of Edinburgh, but one of Knox's zealous students redirected the men to Knox's rooms at 10 Surgeon's Square with the promise of a larger fee (Ball, 83). By 2 November 1828, when they were charged, Burke and Hare, attracted by the high prices he was offering, had brought Knox twelve murdered bodies which were received and prepared by his assistants for dissection. 
Knox was not called as a witness in the trial and subsequently withdrew from the public eye. Privately, and naively, he was incredulous that he could be seriously linked with Burke and Hare. In a second confession published in the 'Edinburgh Courant' shortly before his execution in January 1829, Burke stated that Knox had received the bodies with no knowledge of the murders. Not convinced, the public and many of his colleagues charged Knox with guilt by association, while others accused him of being the advocate and instigator of the crimes. John Wilson in 'Blackwood' ('Noctes', March 1829) savagely attacked him for ignoring the 'thumb marks on the neck' of the bodies brought to him. Sir Walter Scott's censure remains the most memorable, referring to Knox as the 'learned carcass-butcher' (Currie, 43). Knox was vilified in popular ballads and caricatured in lithographic prints as Richard III looking for Tyrell. On 12 February 1829 the public took matters into their own hands by strangling, hanging, and destroying an effigy of Knox in front of his home in Newington. 
For months the atmosphere in Edinburgh was vengeful but Knox still made no attempt to defend himself. To investigate the charges against him a committee was formed which included John Robinson, secretary to the Royal Society of Edinburgh, and William Pultanay Alison, professor of medicine. This committee reported that they had 'seen no evidence that Dr Knox or his assistants knew that murder was committed in procuring any of the subjects brought to his rooms' and 'firmly believed' in his innocence. There were circumstances calculated to excite suspicion of murder (such as the freshness of the bodies), but because all the bodies had been smothered there was no visible proof (Knox and many of his contemporaries did not possess the knowledge required to ascertain ante- and post-mortem signs of violence). The committee merely rebuked Knox for acting incautiously in reception of subjects, and especially in allowing his assistants to receive them without investigating the source of the supply. 
In Burke's official confession he states that Knox was present on two occasions when murdered bodies were received, and that in one case he had been impressed by the freshness of the corpse but had made no further inquiries. In a pamphlet published by a former doorkeeper at Knox's school, David Paterson alleged that several of the bodies had been delivered with suspiciously bloodied eyes, ears, and mouths, and moreover that the head and feet were severed from the body of 'daft Jamie', a recognizable Edinburgh figure, when it became known that he was missing. On the 17 March 1829 Knox addressed a letter to the 'Caledonian Mercury' with the findings of this committee, publishing his only statement of vindication. He offered no statement of apology or regret but there is evidence from his personal catalogue that Knox ceased all research on human anatomy after 1828 (Ross and Taylor). However, the report did not alleviate the pressure of public opinion, as Knox's chief assistants T. W. Jones, William Fergusson, and Alexander Miller also took a share in his unpopularity. Sir Robert Christison, who had examined the body of the final murder victim, concluded that Knox had 'rather wilfully shut his eyes to incidents which ought to have excited the grave suspicions of a man of his intelligence' ('Life', 1.310). 
Current opinion remains divided as to the scale of Knox's guilt. He has a staunch and sympathetic defender in biographer Isobel Rae while social historian Ruth Richardson points to the more insalubrious nature of Knox's 'necrophiliac voyeurism' regarding the body of murder victim Mary Paterson, whom witnesses claim Knox kept preserved for three months so that her body could be admired and painted by students (Richardson, 101). Richardson takes Knox's failure to prosecute for libel those accusing him of complicity as 'tantamount to an admission of guilt' (ibid., 97). Anticipating the ensuing furore, Knox had drafted a letter to Robert Peel dated 3 November 1828 in which he outlined the 'obstacles which impede the progress of anatomy in Great Britain' (Rae, 62). The letter was never sent, but in it Knox hoped that the Burke and Hare scandal would force the government to publish their report on the laws governing dissection. In 1832 a new 'Anatomy Act' extended the supply of anatomical subjects to include the poor and the homeless. 
During this period Knox ignored the picketing at Surgeon's Square and continued to publish and lecture, winning the support at least of his students who presented him with a gold vase on 11 April 1829. In 1832 he moved to larger premises vacated by the College of Surgeons and in 1833 took William Fergusson and John Reid into partnership for the practical classes. But despite his students' loyalty he was gradually frozen out of official university life. The College of Surgeons' museum contrived to be rid of him and he finally resigned in 1831. In the 1830s Knox reneged on his earlier position of silence and entered into embittered wrangles with colleagues and critics such as John Stark, who accused him of plagiarism. 
Knox became a satirist and cynic, using the press and subsequent failed applications for university positions (chair of pathology in 1837, chair in physiology in 1841, and lecturer in anatomy at the Scottish Academy) to publicize his opinions concerning the administration of the study of medicine within the university and to attack colleagues including John Reid. His anti-Christian wit did nothing to endear him to the university authorities, and moreover he spoke of the chairs of the university as having 'fallen much below the income of a steady-going retail grocery or bakery' ('DNB'). In this latter respect he was correct: Edinburgh's medical teaching was falling behind London's in popularity and prestige. For this reason and compounded by the blows that Knox's reputation had suffered by 1834, the number of students attending his classes had fallen off. In 1836 John Reid left him and Fergusson virtually gave up his work as his assistant. Knox now relied almost wholly on his younger brother Frederick, with whom he had anatomized a whalebone whale in 1831-4. Knox's 'Edinburgh Dissector', brought out anonymously in 1837 to compete with Harrison's 'Dublin Dissector', was not a success. The nadir was reached in the early 1840s on the death of his wife from puerperal fever after the birth of their sixth child in 1841, and the death in 1842 of his son John, aged four. 
The arrival of Knox's partner and future biographer Henry Lonsdale in May 1840 seemed to signal a slight change in his professional fortunes. Knox replaced Alexander Lizars at the Argyle Square extramural medical school as lecturer in anatomy. But this good luck was short-lived. Knox recommenced his own lectures on anatomy and physiology but could not attract a class. He crossed swords with John Reid over the rights to a discovery concerning the placenta, claiming Reid's original discovery as his own (Lonsdale, 219-20, 257). This was perhaps the final humiliation. Knox placed his household in charge of his nephew and daughter Mary and left Edinburgh for London. From 1842 to 1846 he was very unsettled. He joined the small Portland Street school of medicine in Glasgow in November 1844 but returned fees to his students before the end of the month. Allowed no admittance into the ranks of London surgeons, he embarked on lecture tours, translated French anatomical textbooks, and wrote prodigiously for medical journals. 
According to Rae, Christison's comment that Knox was at this time a showman to a travelling party of Ojibwe Indians was probably wishful thinking on Christison's part (p. 132). This notion, however, was undoubtedly encouraged by Knox's 1846 popular lecture tour, entitled 'The races of men', which visited Newcastle upon Tyne, Manchester, and Liverpool, where his outspoken and lamentable views on Jews were the cause of much debate in local newspapers. After the Burke and Hare scandal this phase of Knox's career remains the most engrossing to historians. Building on his studies of black peoples in the Cape, and using anatomical method to study human history, Knox theorized, remarkably early in the history of European racist philosophy, that the human race was composed of a highly systematized group of distinct species based on a sliding scale of civilizational aptitude (Biddiss, 15-20). Within this scheme a vast gulf separated white from black and it led Knox into an unfortunate analogy: '[The black man] is no more a white man than an ass is a horse or a zebra' (R. Knox, 'Races of Men', 1850, 245). Knox firmly believed that races were inherently antagonistic, immutable, and properly adapted to one single habitat. It was a thoroughly pessimistic and anti-progressive view of human history, perhaps reflecting his own outlook on life at this time as well as being the logical development of years of study through biological method. According to this theory Knox even explained the 1848 revolutions as racial struggles. 
Although Knox was fundamentally racist it has recently been argued that he used his theories to mount a savage critique of colonialism. Eveleen Richards states that all Knox's inquiries into race were infused with a philosopher's concern for the social and political implications of natural law (Richards, 379). But here the paradoxes of his views are most pointed: while he despised slavery and British colonial policy, he devised a scheme when in Glasgow to found a colony in South Africa which would make it the 'best wool producing company in the world' (NL Scot., MS 2618, fol. 288). Knox's ideas later found popularity with James Hunt, founder of the Anthropological Society of London; and other contemporaries thought that 'Races of Men' was 'his great work, by which he will live' ('The Lancet'). Owing to this work Knox was made an honorary fellow of the Ethnological Society of London in 1860 and honorary curator of its museum in 1862. Early in 1861 he was elected foreign member of the Anthropological Society of Paris. 
Despite success in this field, during the late 1840s and 1850s Knox's life was marred by ignominy and misfortune, including the deaths of his son Robert in May 1854 and his daughter Mary in 1858. Scandal pursued him again, this time in the shape of John Henry Osborne, who had falsely obtained a certificate from Knox testifying to six months' study. Knox had been testing the patience of the Royal College of Surgeons by failing to comply with their administrative regulations (Creswell) and the college took this opportunity to ban him from performing official lectures; this later debarred him from an invitation to lecture at the Royal Free Hospital medical school. In 1848 Knox was struck off the roll of fellows of the Royal Society of Edinburgh. In the 1850s applications for a government appointment in Africa, for a surgical position in the Crimea, and for office at the British Museum were rejected. 
While the last few years of his life were financially stringent, Knox did at least find some professional reward in London, in an appointment as pathological anatomist to the Cancer Hospital at Brompton; he also practised medicine in Hackney, supported by his sister and latterly his only surviving son, Edward. In the summer of 1862 his strength began to fail, and on 9 December he suffered an apoplectic seizure after returning from his duties at the Cancer Hospital; he died without gaining consciousness on 20 December at his home at 9 Lambe Terrace, Hackney. Following his wishes and lifelong deist views he was buried in the nonconformist sector of Brookwood cemetery in Woking, Surrey, on 29 December. 


@@@@@


doc= 15788


Knox, Robert (1815-1883), minister of the Presbyterian Church in Ireland, was the third son of Hugh Knox, for forty years a ruling elder of the parish of Urney, co. Tyrone. He was born at Clady, in that parish. He entered Glasgow University in 1834 and graduated MA in 1837. He subsequently studied in the collegiate department of the Royal Belfast Academical Institution, where during his student days he was an active promoter of the union between the synod of Ulster and the Secession synod, which resulted in the formation of the general assembly of the Presbyterian Church in Ireland in 1840. He was licensed to preach in 1840, being ordained by the presbytery of Strabane, co. Tyrone, in April of that year, and was sent as a missionary to the south of Ireland. Several congregations owed their origin to his labours. On 10 June 1842 he was installed as assistant and successor to the Revd John Whiteside, pastor of the Second Congregation of Coleraine. Next year he became minister of the Linenhall Street Church, Belfast. 
Knox was soon one of the most energetic of the Belfast clergy, being particularly active in promoting the erection of new churches and schoolhouses, and in furthering the work of the town mission, of which he became honorary secretary. He established and edited a monthly periodical entitled the 'Irish Presbyterian', and published many sermons. A prolonged newspaper controversy with the Revd Theophilus Campbell of Trinity Church, Belfast, afterwards dean of Dromore, on the question of baptismal regeneration, brought him into much prominence. The letters were subsequently collected and published. In 1861 he received the degree of doctor of divinity from Union College, Schenectady, New York. He was one of the founders of the Sabbath School Society for Ireland in connection with the Presbyterian church, and one of the earliest and most enthusiastic promoters of the Presbyterian alliance, in which all the Presbyterian churches of the world are represented. 
In 1870 Knox married the daughter of William Gilbert, of Belfast. After his death she married the Revd George Matthews DD of Quebec. Knox died at his home, Windsor Park, Belfast, on 16 August 1883 and was buried in the borough cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 15789


Knox, Robert Bent (1808-1893), Church of Ireland archbishop of Armagh, was the second son of the Hon. Charles Knox (died 1825), archdeacon of Armagh, and his wife, Hannah (died 1852), the daughter of Robert Bent MP, and widow of James Fletcher. He was born at Dungannon Park House, the residence of his grandfather Thomas Knox, first Viscount Northland (died 1818), on 25 September 1808. Though generally thought to have been named Robert Bent, the only name given to him at baptism was Robert. He was educated at Trinity College, Dublin, graduating BA in 1829, MA in 1834, DD per lit. reg. in 1849, and BD and DD in 1858; he was also made LLD from Cambridge in 1888. In 1832 he was ordained deacon and priest by Beresford, bishop of Kilmore. On 7 May 1834 he was collated chancellor of Ardfert, and on 16 October 1841 he was collated to the prebend of St Munchin's, Limerick, by his uncle Edmund Knox (died 7 May 1849), bishop of Limerick, who made him his domestic chaplain. On 5 October 1842 he married Catherine Delia (died 1897), the daughter of Thomas Gibbon Fitzgibbon of Ballyseeda, co. Limerick. They had three sons, including Charles Edmond (later lieutenant-general), and two daughters, who survived him. 
In March 1849 Knox was nominated by Lord Clarendon to the see of Down, Connor, and Dromore, vacated by the death (2 November 1848) of Richard Mant. He was consecrated bishop on 1 May, and enthroned on 3 May at Lisburn and on 5 May at Dromore. Samuel Wilberforce, who was in Ireland in 1861, reported in his diary (26 August) some gossip which was circulating about the appointment: James Henthorn Todd described Knox as 'very foolish, without learning, piety, judgment, conduct, sense, appointed by a job, that his uncle should resign Limerick'; the dean of Limerick, Anthony La Touche Kirwan (died 1868), said that Knox 'used, when made to preach by his uncle, to get me to write his sermon, and could not deliver it' (Wilberforce, 25). 
Knox, as a whig, was not immediately popular in his diocese. Like his predecessor, he resided at Holywood, co. Down. He made no secret of his unpopular opinion that disestablishment was inevitable. He had at first hoped to build a cathedral in Belfast (to add to the three existing cathedrals of the diocese), but abandoned this extravagant plan in order to achieve the more modest aim of increasing the number of churches. The Belfast Church Extension Society was founded by him in 1862; its work enabled him to consecrate forty-eight new or enlarged churches in the diocese. Prior to disestablishment, he organized in 1862 diocesan conferences, and founded a diocesan board of missions. In the House of Lords in 1867, and before the church commission in 1868, he proposed a reduction of the Irish hierarchy to one archbishop and five bishops. He was not a man of great presence or of genial warmth, being quiet and restrained. But his pragmatism and frankness made him an able administrator and an effective speaker. His involvement with many public bodies and charities meant that he became a respected figure within the community. 
When the archbishop of Armagh and primate of all Ireland, Marcus Gervais Beresford, died on 26 December 1885, Knox was chosen as his successor. He left Belfast and was enthroned as archbishop of Armagh on 1 June 1886. As president of the general synod of the Irish church, his qualities of fairness and moderation came to the fore. He was active to the last, presiding at the Armagh diocesan synod a fortnight before his death. He died at the archbishop's palace, Armagh, on 23 October 1893, and was buried on 27 October in the old church (a disused ruin) at Holywood. Besides a sermon (1847), charges (1850 and 1858), and a brief address, 'Fruits of the revival', in Steane's 'Ulster Revival' (1859), he published an 'Ecclesiastical Index (of Ireland)' (1839), a valuable reference book. 


@@@@@


doc= 15790


Knox, Thomas Francis (1822-1882), Roman Catholic priest and scholar, was born in Brussels, Belgium, on 24 December 1822. He was the eldest son of the Hon. John Henry Knox (1788-1872), the third son of the second Viscount Northland, first earl of Ranfurly, and of his wife, Lady Mabella Josephine, 'nee' Needham (1801-1899), daughter of Francis Needham, first earl of Kilmorey. The Knoxes were Irish protestants long settled in co. Tyrone. Knox was educated at a private school in Hampshire. In 1840 he was admitted as a pensioner to Trinity College, Cambridge, where he matriculated in Michaelmas 1841, became a scholar in 1843, and took a first-class BA degree in 1845, coming third in the classical tripos, and being among the senior optimes in mathematics and second chancellor's medallist. Because he had resigned his parish in 1843, J. H. Newman refused to become Knox's spiritual director in March 1845, but offered him a home at his retreat outside Oxford at Littlemore. Later in the same year Knox was staying with F. W. Faber when Faber and his followers decided to convert to Catholicism. He was received into the Catholic church with them by Bishop Wareing at Northampton on 17 November. He told the Oxford Movement's leader, Edward Bouverie Pusey, that the Church of England was 'a delusion of Satan' (Chapman, 119). His worried father suggested that he should travel for two years, and he left at Easter 1846 for North America and the West Indies. 
Wanting to see 'the Church in all its splendour' in Mexico (Kerr, 2.61), he took a mail steamer, the 'Tweed', sailing from Havana to Vera Cruz, but on 12 February 1847 the ship foundered on the Alacranes Reef 95 miles off the north coast of Yucatan. Nearly everyone who was travelling with him in the fore part of the ship perished, but he clambered over the bulwarks and clung overnight to the ship's side, saying the rosary and the 'Memorare' and vowing to the Virgin Mary to enter the ecclesiastical state if saved. Though unable to swim, at daybreak he rode on a spar through boiling breakers to the reef, where the aft of the ship lay aground with the surviving passengers and crew. After two and a half days of standing on the reef, much of the time in tidal water, he and his companions were rescued on 15 February by the Spanish brig 'Aemilio'. 
Knox was detained from keeping his vow by revolution in Yucatan but travelled to the United States. He was at first uncertain of his father's financial support and decided to prepare for ordination in France. On 28 June 1847 he enrolled in the Seminaire de St Sulpice at Issy near Paris, preparatory to entering the Parisian Grand Seminaire. On Newman's urging, he came at the beginning of November to Rome, where Newman and his friends were staying at Santa Croce while serving their novitiate to become Oratorians. He accompanied Newman and Ambrose St John on 3 December 1847 to the Vatican to present the brief for the English Oratory, and met Pope Pius IX: 'Knox was in raptures,' Newman reported to John Dobree Dalgairns; 'the Pope called him Padre Francesco, and Knox declares he won't part with it' (Newman to Dalgairns, 21 Dec 1847, 'Letters and Diaries', 12.135). Knox chose Francis as his name in religion when he was admitted as an Oratorian novice at Maryvale, Old Oscott, near Birmingham, on the inception of the community on 1 February 1848. He accompanied Faber to London in 1849 to establish the London Oratory, which remained his home for the remaining thirty-three years of his life. On 2 June 1849 he was ordained priest by Bishop Nicholas Wiseman at St Edmund's College, Ware, and said his first Mass the following day, Trinity Sunday. In 1865, he succeeded Father J. D. Dalgairns as the London Oratory's third superior, a post which he held for one term (until 1868). 
Knox has been accounted 'the most learned of all the fathers of that time' by the principal historian of the London Oratory, Ralph Kerr (Kerr, 2.62), though this title should probably go to Dalgairns. He became the Westminster diocesan archivist when, in 1876, Manning entrusted the archives to the Oratorians, and he wrote the introductions for 'The First and Second Diaries of the English College, Douay' (1878), and 'The Letters and Memorials of William Cardinal Allen, 1532-1594' (1882), which he edited with Fathers Richard Stanton and Stephen Keogh and other Oratorians. These works appeared as the first and second volumes of the 'Records of the English Catholics under the Penal Laws', the only ones to be published. This task of publishing Catholic records was later taken up by the Catholic Record Society. He also wrote 'The Last Survivor of the Ancient English Hierarchy: T. Goldwell, Bishop of St. Asaph' (republished from 'The Month', 1876), and translated the autobiography of the fourteenth-century mystic Blessed Henry Suso (1865). 
Knox's learning was also put to practical effect. He became the 'defensor matrimoniorum' of the archdiocese of Westminster and, in 1874, the notary in the diocesan process for the canonization of the English Catholic martyrs, preliminary to the beatification of John Fisher and Sir Thomas More. He was a member of the council of the Catholic Union, secretary to a commission of inquiry on Catholic education in England, and lecturer on canon law to ordinands at the diocesan seminary. A high ultramontane, his treatise 'When does the church speak infallibly? or, The nature and scope of the church's teaching office' (1867) took a maximalist line on its subject, but its dry and moderate tone attracted Italian theologians who wanted a work on papal infallibility for international dissemination which was 'not controversial but doctrinal, learned yet popular, brief and yet pithy' (Kerr, 2.63-4). Father Cardella accordingly translated Knox's work into Italian. Pius IX sent Knox a special commendation in 1870, and conferred a doctorate upon him in 1875. He died at his home in London, the Oratory, Brompton, of heart disease on 20 March 1882, and was buried in south London at the Oratorian private cemetery in Sydenham. 


@@@@@


doc= 15791


Knox, Sir Thomas George (1824-1887), consul, was born in January 1824, the eldest surviving son of James Spencer Knox (1789-1862), rector of Maghera, co. Londonderry, and his wife, Clara (died 1862), youngest daughter of the Hon. John Beresford (son of the first earl of Tyrone); he was grandson of William Knox, bishop of Derry. Of robust constitution and always strongly anti-French, Knox arrived in Siam in 1851, after selling out of the army in which he had served in India and China. Like other countries in the East, Siam under King Mongkut was just beginning to open its doors to Westerners after nearly two centuries of fairly strict seclusion; Knox was involved from the start in local politics, first as a military adviser, and then as the husband of a woman of the local nobility, Prang (died 1888), daughter of Phraya Somkok of Bangkok, with whom he had a son and two daughters. 
In 1857, in the interval following the death of the first British consul, Knox was appointed to the indispensable office of interpreter to the new consulate. In 1864 he succeeded the second consul, Sir Robert Schomburgk, and was successively promoted consul-general and agent and consul-general. 
These were years marked by complicated political upheavals in Siam, quite beyond the comprehension of Knox's Foreign Office chiefs in London. Rather than backing British imperial interest in the country, Knox seems to have seen himself as a champion of its sovereignty, and, after the succession of the young King Chulalongkorn ('r'. 1868-1910), as his virtual guardian. Inevitably this provoked suspicion and jealousy among some Siamese, including the king himself, and Knox's successor as consulate interpreter, Henry Alabaster, after quitting the service in 1871 joined Knox's enemies. In late 1874, when he was on home leave, other consular subordinates tried, with only limited success, to prevent the king's party upsetting the existing power balance; in 1879 another faction seized power in protest at the elopement of Knox's elder daughter, Fanny, with Phra Pricha Kolakan, an associate of the king. Knox asked for a gunboat to bolster his position, but, amid Afghan and Zululand crises, Lord Salisbury instead colluded in what was really a huge blow to British prestige in the area by recalling Knox and retiring him with the KCMG as a consolation. His wife remained behind in Bangkok, and his son-in-law was executed. 
Knox died at Eaux Chaudes in the Pyrenees on 29 July 1887, his wife the following year in Siam. His widowed elder daughter lived a migratory life between Europe and south-east Asia, while his younger daughter, Caroline, married Louis Leonowens, the teak trade magnate, only son of Anna, the governess made famous by the film 'The King and I'. In the meanwhile, the so-called Siam question over the fate of the country, the climax to the late nineteenth-century colonial scramble for south-east Asia, came properly to a head despite the best efforts of Knox's successors, W. G. Palgrave and E. M. Satow. 


@@@@@


doc= 15792


Knox, Vicesimus (1752-1821), headmaster and writer, was born on 8 December 1752 at Newington Green, Middlesex, the only son of the Revd Vicesimus Knox (1729-1780), a clergyman and schoolteacher, and Ann, daughter of Devereux Wall. From 1764 the younger Knox, who signed himself first Nock and then Knock until the age of twenty, was educated at the Merchant Taylors' School, London, where his father was a master. He matriculated at St John's College, Oxford, on 13 July 1771 and in the following year his father was appointed headmaster at Tonbridge School, Kent, so beginning an association which lasted over seventy years and involved three generations of the Knox family. The younger Vicesimus graduated BA in 1775 and became a fellow of St John's. He looked back fondly on his time at Oxford, recalling in a later essay 'the blissful region of the common room fire-side! Delightful retreat where never female showed her head' (Knox, 'Essays', 2nd edn, 1779, 1.325). Regardless of these views, Knox, who later became an active proponent of women's education, left St John's in 1778 to replace his father as headmaster at Tonbridge where he remained for the next thirty-four years. Here he met his wife, Mary (died 1809), daughter of a local man, Thomas Miller; they married on 26 December 1778 at St James's, Westminster. The couple had a daughter, Sarah, and three sons, one of whom, Holles Josiah, died in infancy; of their surviving sons Vicesimus (died 1855) became a barrister and recorder of Saffron Walden while Thomas (1784-1843) succeeded his father at Tonbridge in 1812. Ordained in the late 1770s, Knox combined his teaching duties with those of rector of Runwell and Ramsden-Crays, Essex, and, at Lord Vane's bequest, minister of the parochial chapelry of Shipborne, Kent. 
Tonbridge School, governed by the Skinners' Company since its foundation by Sir Andrew Judde in 1553, had not prospered under the headship of the elder Vicesimus Knox. In his six years as headmaster the number of pupils recorded in the school lists averaged just over twenty, the lowest of the century, and chronic ill health forced his resignation in 1778; he died two years later. By contrast, the arrival of the 26-year-old Vicesimus Knox the younger galvanized the school and pupil numbers soon topped eighty, the majority of whom were boarders. With his income swelled by the fees from the boarding pupils, Knox was able to live in fine style. One pupil, Henry Woodgate, writing to his father in 1781, described how the school's fortunes had changed: 'Mr Knox of Tunbridge has a new coach just come out spick and span with a pair of long-tail greys. Is not this quite the thing? My aunt says 'Lor' sir, a schoolmaster's is a vastly fine trade'' (G. Woodgate and G. C. G. Woodgate, 'A History of the Woodgates', 1910, 247). Knox's initial success at Tonbridge was principally due to the high reputation as a scholar that he had acquired at Oxford and to the popularity of his first work, 'Essays Moral and Literary' (1778), whose authorship quickly became known. Three years later he further publicized the school by publishing 'Liberal Education, or, A Practical Treatise on the Method of Acquiring Useful and Polite Learning' (1781), which effectively was both a manifesto and a prospectus. Eagerly purchased by the public, 'Liberal Education' successfully targeted two influential audiences, for it proved indispensable as a professional handbook for fellow schoolmasters and an invaluable guide for parents who were debating how and where to educate their children. Above all, it fulfilled Knox's principal aim of providing a practical, rather than theoretical, treatise on education. 
In the introduction to the study Knox defined his ideal of an enlightened education in comparison with a purely functional schooling, the one 'confined, the other enlarged; one which only tends to qualify for a particular sphere of action, for a profession, or an official employment; the other which endeavours to improve the powers of understanding for their own sake; the sake of exalting the endowments of human nature, and becoming capable of sublime and refined contemplation. ('Liberal Education', 8-9)' Conscious of the competition from private tutors and commercial schools and the criticism of educational and moral standards at contemporary grammar schools, Knox grounded his argument in favour of a public (that is, school-based) rather than private (home-based) education for boys on the assumption that grammar schools had reformed themselves into ideal educational institutions, such as Tonbridge. While maintaining that Greek and Latin were indispensable in a liberal education, he was adamant that the curriculum should include English, French, history, and geography, and ornamental accomplishments such as music, art, and fencing. 'English biography' he particularly recommended as 'more entertaining, and perhaps more useful, than civil history at large'; furthermore he called for a 'biographical work' to be compiled for the use of schools, one that should be 'elegantly written, and consist principally, but by no means entirely, of the lives of the learned' (Knox, 'Works', 1824, 4.45). He also discussed extra-curricular activities, such as private study and foreign travel, and did not neglect to outline his views on the need for reform in the universities. He set out his opinion on female education in two chapters. Although he advised parents to educate their daughters at home, he insisted that the content of their education should not be limited by its domestic setting. In recommending an expansive literary education for girls he asserted that the female 'mind is certainly as capable of improvement, as that of the other sex' ('Liberal Education', 235-6). Furthermore it was essential for women to be liberally and rationally educated since, as mothers, they were responsible for the pre-school instruction of their sons. Knox used his experience as a schoolmaster to underline his point: 'A sensible and well-educated mother is, in every respect, best qualified to instruct a child till he can read well enough to enter on the Latin grammar. I have indeed always found those boys the best readers, on their entrance on Latin, who have been prepared by a careful and accomplished mother. (ibid., 17)' Evidence of how far Knox put into practice at Tonbridge the educational principles outlined in 'Liberal Education' is limited. The dominance of the classics is clearly seen in a surviving curriculum from 1781 which records that boys studied the Latin 'Testament' in the first form and graduated to Homer and Livy in the sixth; the head boy of the time, J. H. Stewart, clearly outstripped his classmates, for his studies include Hebrew and Demosthenes. On Skinners' day, the annual celebration in May of the school's founder, Knox encouraged the boys to show off their debating and oratorical skills. Moreover the pupils were examined by visiting clergy from London. Clearly Tonbridge fulfilled parents' expectations, for the school roll remained steady until the early 1790s, when pupils fell away, reaching a low of twenty-six in 1794. Knox's controversial politics, which were broadcast when 'The Times' reported his involvement in a fracas in the Brighton theatre in August 1793, are usually blamed for the school's failing fortunes. However, during the turbulent years of the war with France he neither resigned nor was asked to leave by the school's governors, and by the time he retired in 1812, forty-one pupils were enrolled. 
Running parallel with Knox's work as an educationist was his considerable career as a writer on conduct, especially that of children and young adults. Certainly the majority who knew Knox as an educator discovered him through his numerous, much reprinted, and ever-expanding collections of essays and sermons. Writing and teaching ran in tandem. In the year of his appointment at Tonbridge his 'Essays Moral and Literary' were published on the recommendation of Samuel Johnson. In the preface to the first, anonymous edition, Knox established his didactic intentions which, as in his later work, he grounded in a practical relationship between writing, education, and personal and societal development: 'to publish without improving' was, he believed, equivalent 'to increasing the weight without adding to the value of the coin', the 'real utility of literary labours' being 'the extent of their influence on the national manners' ('Essays', 1778, iv; 1779, 2.5). To this purpose Knox's first edition of thirty-eight essays combined traditional studies on classical literature, philosophy, and the arts with commentaries on contemporary standards of taste, and the work of modern authors such as Joseph Addison. Knox's insights proved popular and a second larger, and attributed, edition appeared a year later; by 1815 the collection, now in three volumes and numbering 174 essays, reached its seventeenth edition. In these later editions Knox addressed an increasingly diverse range of subjects, among them gardening, household management, the work of Bede, the usefulness of capital letters in correspondence, and the unacceptability of masculine dress for women. The spirit of improvement implicit in these pieces was expressed more directly in numerous articles on the achievement and practice of good conduct within a series of military, civilian, religious, commercial, and mercantile contexts. 
From such studies there developed a Knoxian behavioural ideal -- stable, moderate, integrous, and independent -- which became a staple of his writing in this and other fields and the desired end point for these general exercises in national education. To an extent this archetype was a restatement of a much discussed (and many feared lost) eighteenth-century civic ideal. Yet it is equally true that his depiction of the moral personality was also more innovative, optimistic, and receptive to then fashionable late-century behavioural codes such as sensibility. Though an energetic and, to modern readers, often relentless moralist, Knox was invariably more persuasive than puritanical, being more accommodating of recent social and economic trends than many later critics, too keen to identify him as a conservative, have been prepared to acknowledge. No doubt it was this receptiveness which contributed to the popularity of his advice. Thus Knox's ostensibly stoical ideal is better characterized by an attachment to a modern sensibility manifest in intimate social relations, acts of philanthropy, and displays of emotional compassion by men and women alike. For Knox it was principally via these qualities, rather than those of classical hardiness, that the goal of personal and national improvement was to be achieved. 
It was an attachment which, alongside better-known contemporaries such as Henry Mackenzie and Hannah More, also makes Knox an important contributor to the late eighteenth-century debate on the meaning and application of sensibility, not least because of his unusual readiness to direct these ideals to the cause of political reform. Highly protective of sensibility in its purest and most edifying form, he was also highly critical of what he considered its abuse through affectation, triviality, and ostentatiousness (subjects which exercised him greatly), and in particular the growing fashion for irresponsible modern novels. His concern over aspects of contemporary fiction focused on its popularity among the same middle-class readership to whom he energetically promoted his alternative characterization of the morally robust and civically responsible man and woman of feeling. Ever the educator, Knox was motivated to communicate in an accessible manner which he believed best served by the essay format, about which he wrote and which he also employed in a second collection on conduct, 'Winter Evenings, or, Lucubrations on Life and Letters' (1788), and an anthology of 'polite' eighteenth-century sermons, 'Family Lectures, or, Domestic Divinity' (1791). His own series, 'Sermons; Chiefly Intended to Promote Faith, Hope and Charity', appeared in the following year. Here, as in his earlier works, Knox complemented the accessibility of the essay or sermon format with a self-consciously unpretentious style. The result, as he seldom tired of repeating, was an honest and unsensational message directed not 'to deep, erudite, and subtile sages' but to 'the liberal merchant, the inquisitive manufacturer, the country gentleman [and] the various persons who fill the most useful departments in life' who 'have no objection to kill a little time, by perusing... the pages of a modern volume' ('Winter Evenings', 1.v). Indeed, so frequent were these claims that it is hard not to see them as his attempt to cast as affected and haughty those who questioned the value of another set of homilies. Others suspected a more underhand motive for his apparently disingenuous approach. In the introduction of his 'Sermons', for example, Knox offered the now familiar denial of intended offence or controversy, though he stated that he was resigned to condemnation from less generous unitarian commentators sceptical of his commitment to the Trinity. Yet to critics like John Disney, minister at London's Essex Street Unitarian chapel, Knox's declaration presented an unduly severe characterization of unitarianism, by which he abused his reputation as a polite moralist in order to precipitate the very contest he claimed to avoid through 'responsible' ecumenicalism. 
The content and tone of Knox's theology, like that of his conduct advice, was predominantly reassuring and nurturing. Religion's purpose was 'to afford the poor human nature a BALSAM FOR THE WOUNDS OF THE HEART', and its achievement the socialization of man to a level where, 'pace' unitarians, it became impossible to maintain factionalism in a society dedicated to shared Christian virtues. In contrast to earlier secular writers on social performance, Knox understood refinement and religion to be intimately connected. The personal qualities that ensured the truly civilized individual -- benevolence, sincerity, and humility -- were also those of the Christian, and their display further enhanced the religious individual's capacity for a morally valid sociability. The importance Knox attributed to sensibility as a route to true sociability led him to identify sentimental culture as central to a wider religious vision as set out in subsequent collections, including his 'Christian Philosophy, or, An Attempt to Display the Evidence and Excellence of Revealed Religion', published in 1795. Social and religious ideals came together in the sensitive and compassionate figure of the weeping Christ. 
Though keen to avoid controversy, Knox was committed to an essentially benign religious vision which prompted him to speak out on contentious issues, notably British involvement in military action against revolutionary France. In August 1793 he preached at Brighton parish church against a war which he believed driven by a 'military machine' serviced by a corrupt and misguided administration. Knox's call for 'universal peace' offended members of the Sussex regiment who were present and who confronted him and secured his ejection from the town's theatre several days later. Knox responded in November with a 'Narrative of Transactions Relative to a Sermon', in which he denounced the cowardice of his assailants and reiterated his belief of 'offensive war' as 'at once detestable, deplorable and ridiculous' (p. 96). His translation of Erasmus's 'Antipolemus, or, The Plea of Reason, Religion and Humanity Against War', appeared in the following year. 
For Knox, Britain's readiness to fight was evidence of its corruption and of the prevailing 'spirit of despotism', a phrase which served as the title of his most polemical and best-known study in political science. The study, which defended the early revolution and its British supporters like Charles James Fox, was published in London in 1795. However, with the French government becoming increasingly tyrannous, Knox soon after attempted to recall the work and thereafter refused publication until an anonymous edition appeared in 1821. Though clearly prompted by William Pitt's early response to the revolution, Knox conceived of and discussed his subject in the broadest terms. Man, born in a 'state of simplicity' and possessed of a natural 'benevolence, improvement [and] cheerfulness', had been gradually corrupted by dishonest politicians, courtiers, and manipulative churchmen who sought through a 'spirit of despotism' to maintain the fiction of a 'progress to civilization' (Knox, 'The Spirit of Despotism', 1821, 5). 
As in his theology, Knox linked politics to questions of personal conduct and to the potential for reform at the level of the individual reader. Perpetrators of despotism, whom in Britain he identified as tories and Jacobites, were characterized as selfish, unfeeling, duplicitous, and aggressive -- war being for Knox a calculated means of subduing those who demanded justifiable political reform. By contrast, (whig) defenders of the liberties enshrined by the 1688 settlement were 'men of feeling and good minds' who embodied 'manly sentiment' and displayed an integrity born of a sound educational programme like that in his earlier 'Personal Nobility, or, Letters to a Young Nobleman' (1793), dedicated to Fox. Here Knox combined civic and sentimental languages by calling on the country's natural aristocratic leaders to participate in self-analysis so as to best fulfil their political responsibilities. In 'The Spirit of Despotism' he looked also to a free press, to the judiciary, and to 'the middle ranks of the People' -- in whom he believed the 'Spirit of Truth, Liberty and Virtue' to be strongest -- to resist further erosion of national liberties. It was the duty of such groups to maintain the separation of legislature and judiciary, to resist government attempts to pack the Lords with placemen, and in the Commons to place the principles of political liberty above the demands of party affiliation. Written quickly in response to a charged political situation, it is perhaps not surprising that 'The Spirit of Despotism' provides a number of contradictory statements which undermine its effectiveness as a work of political science. Thus, man is both able (and should be encouraged) to progress and yet is corrupted, not civilized, by that progression; medieval society was both less corrupt and yet also more greatly restricted by a chivalry defended by advocates of despotism such as Edmund Burke; it is the middle class who will restore liberty while bourgeois commercialism exists as one of the means to promote despotism. This said, for a writer who is often wrongly identified for his platitudes and conservatism, 'The Spirit of Despotism' provided whig reformers with a passionate and positive critique both of tory resistance to political change and of former supporters, like Burke, whose defence of the 1688 settlement was thought less progressive than nostalgic. 
Knox's final area of study was English literature. In 1783 he published an anthology, 'Elegant Extracts, or, Useful and Entertaining Passages in Prose', which reached its tenth edition in 1816 (also abridged in 1791 as 'The Prose Epitome'), following this with 'Elegant Extracts... in Poetry' (1789; 8th edn, 1816; also abridged in 1791), and 'Elegant Epistles, or, A Copious Collection of Familiar and Amusing Letters' (1790). As before, Knox's motivation was the education and improvement of a youthful and middling readership -- 'the man of a liberal profession... [and] the mercantile classes' -- otherwise too busy to study classical literature in full ('Extracts... in Poetry', 1805, vi). As in his own writing, the non-fiction essay and its modern exponents, among them Addison, Johnson, Richard Steele, and Hugh Blair, featured prominently in his selection of prose writers. While not ignoring classical writers, one of Knox's principal aims was to identify and introduce to the canon those elements of modern literature he believed of particular benefit for 'the commerce of ordinary life'. His focus also resulted in a noticeably generous coverage of eighteenth-century women writers, including Anna Aiken, Hester Chapone, and Catharine Macaulay ('Extracts... in Prose'); Elizabeth Rowe, Elizabeth Carter, Helen Maria Williams, and Ann Yearsley ('Extracts... in Poetry'); and Elizabeth Montagu, Anna Seward, and the ladies Wortley Montagu, Luxborough, and Bradshaigh ('Elegant Epistles'). Appreciative of established talents and alert, here and in other works, to the potential of female students, Knox combined his promotion of modern women's writing with an ongoing campaign against sources of false learning. Principal among these was the reading of modern fiction -- for Knox an alarmingly introspective, and predominantly female, experience of no discernible social benefit -- whose dangers he believed reached new levels with the current vogue for 'fine sentimentalists' like Laurence Sterne. Knox's own literary tastes, and their influence, are clearly reflected in the coverage of the Tonbridge School library during his mastership. Well stocked with writers featured in the three series of 'Elegant Extracts', the catalogue lists only a handful of continental authors, among them Cervantes and Fenelon, and no works of British fiction before an edition of Walter Scott's novels was purchased in 1819, seven years after Knox's retirement. 
After his wife's death in May 1809 and his retirement from Tonbridge School three years later, Knox moved to Adelphi Terrace, Strand, London. His final decade was spent supervising enlarged and improved editions of his 'Extracts' and, latterly, with a return to the debate on education. When a proposal to diversify the role of grammar schools, by compelling them to offer tuition in reading, writing, and arithmetic to the poor, came before parliament in 1821, Knox dashed off a lengthy protest. In his 'Remarks on the Tendency of Certain Clauses in a Bill now Pending in Parliament to Degrade Grammar Schools' he robustly defended the continued value of a classical education as a training for adult life and argued that a grammar school education should be claimed by 'the mass in middle life... as their birthright' (Knox, 'Works', 1824, 4.280). He was insistent that the classical curriculum that had been taught in grammar schools for several centuries should not be debased by the addition of elementary education in the three Rs. However, he was by no means an opponent of the education of the lowest orders and in a sermon delivered in 1814 had supported the efforts of the National Society to set up more schools where the poor would be taught according to the precepts of the Church of England. Soon after his pamphlet was published the parliamentary bill to reform the grammar schools was shelved. 
Knox's popularity, particularly as a conduct writer and literary commentator, is evident from the numerous editions to which his studies ran, as well as from their publication in the United States where his contribution to the morality of a new nation was recognized with a doctorate from the College of Philadelphia. In Britain Knox's reputation was sufficient for him to be cited in contemporary works, such as Jane Austen's 'Emma' (1816), in which Mr Martin reads aloud to his family from 'Elegant Extracts'. That Martin, a plain, middling farmer, sought edification through the anthology would no doubt have pleased its compiler greatly. Some, of course, were less favourable to Knox's campaign for moral and literary self-improvement. For John Aikin his work suffered from an overly prescriptive focus, his 'great fault' being to set out 'with too confined a view of the ends of education... Does he not breed them all for clergymen and schoolmasters?' (L. Aikin, 'Memoirs of John Aikin', MD, 2 vols., 1823, 1.59); an interesting observation given Knox's emphasis in 'Liberal Education' on learning as more than vocational. Others questioned the consequences of his attempt to reach a broad readership. The 'Critical Review', for example, was sceptical of the intellectual value or utility of essays written for those unused 'to deeper studies, to accurate investigations, or a long train of reasoning' (48, 1779, 120), a view shared by Emma Woodhouse, though not necessarily by Austen who gave a copy of the 'Extracts' to her niece. Supporters, by contrast, commended Knox's ability, the breadth of his writing, and his efforts to promote learning: the 'European Magazine' 'ranked the writer with the English Classics' (81, 1822, 196); James Boswell believed the 'Essays Moral and Literary' superior to his own 'Hypochondriack' papers for the 'London Magazine', while the 'Monthly Review' attributed the 'extensive popularity of his writings', though inferior to Johnson's 'Rambler' studies, to Knox's 'not inconsiderable' merit (I. S. Lustig and F. A. Pottle, eds., 'Boswell: the English Experiment, 1785-89', 1986, 19; 'Monthly Review', 58, 1778, 141). 
Given Knox's contemporary popularity it is striking that he is now so little known. Certainly some of his work has not aged well. Knox was an exhaustive and often exhausting writer who clearly liked the sight of his own pen. The account of the officers' conduct at Brighton, for example, which Knox himself dismissed as trivial, ran to 102 pages and included close analysis of reported exchanges. Modern references to Knox have tended to criticize an intellect and literary style which fell far short of Johnson's. More recently he has become a quotable source in cultural histories of manners and sentimental culture to which he was, undoubtedly, an important contributor. The predominant image to emerge from these accounts is of a social and political conservative peddling an unoriginal message. In certain areas, such as his writing on family relations, this judgement is fair. However, to treat Knox solely as a behavioural writer is to miss his advocacy of civic regeneration, pacificism, and the politics of reform. Attempts by the libertarian right to view his critique of state corruption as promoting freedom born of individualism likewise overlook a commitment to socially responsible conduct. Certainly the range of his output generates contradictions and unanswered questions. And yet common to all areas is the figure of the sociable, benevolent, civic-minded, and politically responsible citizen. In Knox, therefore, sensibility served less as an excuse for fashionable solipsism than as an exercise in individual and societal improvement in which the personal and political were as one. 
Knox died at Tonbridge on 6 September 1821 and was buried in the parish church of St Peter and St Paul where a monument commemorates his dedication 'to the moral and intellectual improvement of man'. His son Thomas remained at Tonbridge School until his death in 1843. 


@@@@@


doc= 15793


Knox, William (1732-1810), government official and pamphleteer, was born at Monaghan, Ireland, the youngest child of Thomas Knox (died 1760), a physician, and his wife, Nicola, the daughter of John King, of co. Fermanagh. He received his early education in local Church of Ireland schools, and particularly benefited from the tutelage of Philip Skelton, the curate at Monaghan, a respected scholar and author of theological treatises. Some time during the late 1740s or early 1750s he took up residence in Dublin, where he not only attended Trinity College but also received the 'first rudiments' of his political education under the patronage of Sir Richard Cox, a prominent member of the Irish House of Commons and a leader of the opposition during the Anglo-Irish political crisis of 1753-6 -- one of those episodic eruptions of the latent tensions between the Irish parliamentary leaders and the English-dominated executive. 
In 1756 Knox, through the influence of his Irish connections, was appointed provost marshal in the colony of Georgia. During the five years he spent in America he became increasingly alarmed by the constitutional practices which prevailed in most of the continental colonies where, as he observed, the lower houses of the legislatures exercised unwarranted sway over governors and their councils. From his perspective as a royal official he viewed such relationships as unduly weighting the balance of colonial constitutions in favour of the democratic elements in America, thus posing a potential threat to the exercise of imperial authority. As a member of the Georgia council from 1757 to 1760 he played a prominent role in the development and implementation of policies and practices which established Georgia as a model royal colony. While in Georgia he also attained the status of a substantial rice planter, who within a decade would earn an income of between $1500 and $2000 per annum from his colonial properties. 
Despite the remarkable success that Knox achieved in only a few years in Georgia, his ambitions and attachments drew him back irresistibly towards the centre of the empire. He arrived in London in 1762 during the last stages of the Seven Years' War, and, with his first-hand experience of America, was provided with numerous opportunities to share his expertise with politicians and imperial officials who were attempting to incorporate newly won territories into the expanded empire. Several of his specific recommendations, particularly those regarding a projected colony in East Florida, were incorporated in the proclamation of 1763 which would establish boundaries and administrative structures in the new imperial possessions in America. In London he acted officially as Georgia's colonial agent and for three years conducted the business of the province to the complete satisfaction of his constituents. In 1765, however, the Georgia assembly summarily dismissed him from his agency after he published a defence of the 'Stamp Act' in the 'Claim of the Colonies to an Exemption from Internal Taxation'. In this pamphlet, although he questioned the expediency and the equity of the stamp duties, particularly in consideration of the unique circumstances of American colonials, Knox nevertheless simultaneously repudiated the arguments raised in America against the right of parliament to tax Americans. This heresy, by Knox's own account, earned him the honour of being 'hung & burn'd in Effigy with Lord Bute and Mr. Grenville at Boston and Savannah' (Dartmouth MS, D. 1778, 2:1817a). 
On 23 September 1765, in Dublin, Knox married Letitia Ford ('b'. 'c'.1741), the daughter of a fellow Irishman, James Ford. Their marriage was long and contented. They had seven children, three daughters and four sons, and Letitia Knox was a gracious hostess whose hospitality substantially enhanced her husband's social and professional status. She also brought him a 'large fortune' (P. Skelton to W. Knox, 25 Oct 1765, Knox MSS) that was more than sufficient to support his pursuit of an official appointment. During the hiatus following the loss of his Georgia agency his interests were advanced by the patronage of Lord Grosvenor, who was so impressed with his knowledge and ideas about imperial affairs that he provided him with an introduction to George Grenville. The former prime minister, who had also been dismissed from office in 1765 and had subsequently assumed a leading role in the parliamentary opposition to the Rockingham administration and its American policies, found use for Knox's colonial expertise and his talents as a writer of political tracts. In collaboration with Grenville, Knox published two pamphlets that established his reputation -- historically as well as contemporaneously -- as a major theorist and commentator on imperial policy. The first of these treatises, 'The Present State of the Nation' (1768), provided the best and most comprehensive expression of his imperial vision -- one which postulated an imperial system in which political and economic advantages and responsibilities would be equally distributed to the mutual benefit of Great Britain and the colonies. More specifically he argued that Great Britain, menacingly burdened by enormous debts arising from the successful prosecution of the great war for empire, had every reason to expect that the American colonies, the great beneficiaries of that war, should bear at least part of the escalating costs of defending the expanded empire. In return, he recommended significant concessions to the colonies in keeping with their enhanced status within the empire: allowing them the opportunity to raise imperial contributions by their own means rather than by parliamentary taxation; revising the navigation system to create new trade advantages for American colonies; and providing for colonial representation in parliament. He also expanded the scope of his imperial reforms to encompass Ireland, which was to be assigned obligations and granted concessions commensurate with those extended to the American colonies. Since Knox's 'The Present State of the Nation' contained explicit attacks on the Rockingham whigs, it not surprisingly drew an immediate response from Edmund Burke, who, in his 'Observations on the State of the Nation' (1769), categorically rejected Knox's analysis of Britain's fiscal difficulties and, characteristically, dismissed his systematic prescriptions for imperial reform. Contemporary critics none the less praised both Knox's and Burke's works in unison for providing the best published representations of the major competing arguments in the current debate over imperial policy. Within a year Knox published a second tract, 'The Controversy between Great Britain and her Colonies Reviewed' (1769), which, in its polemical tone and partisan purpose, marked a sudden and drastic departure from the broader perspectives of his earlier work. Apparently alarmed by evidence that the American position on imperial issues was hardening -- an impression shared by an increasing number of Britons -- and stung by Grenville's uncompromising repudiation of his previous advocacy of concessions for America, he produced a legalistic indictment of the various arguments raised against imperial taxation and uncompromisingly asserted the absolute sovereignty of parliament over the colonies. 
In 1770 Knox's reputation as a political pamphleteer won him an appointment as an under-secretary in the American department. Here, in the years before the American War of Independence, by his own account Knox found himself in the remarkable position of promoting both the coercion and conciliation of America. On various occasions he recommended policies of moderation to avoid undue provocation of the colonies; however, as the British government grew increasingly resistant to American rejection of parliamentary authority, the North administration found his talents as a pamphleteer useful in providing published defences of such policies as the 'Quebec Act' and the 'Coercive Acts' of 1774. With the outbreak of the American war he not only proved himself an effective administrator: he also contributed to the development of major policies, particularly projects for using loyalist forces in America and proposals for peace settlements. When the strains of war precipitated another serious breach between the Irish parliament and the British government during the years 1778 to 1780, Knox played a prominent role in the campaign of conciliation that kept Ireland from going the way of America. At his urging the North administration adopted many of his earlier recommendations for trade concessions as a means of reconciling the Irish to the imperial connection and also sent him to Ireland, where he assisted in the negotiations that brought an amicable resolution of the crisis. 
The end of the American war brought calamity to Knox's private and public fortunes. In America his plantation properties were confiscated by the revolutionary government of Georgia, while at home he was dismissed from office after the Rockingham government, spurred on by his nemesis Burke, dismantled the American department. He experienced a brief but satisfactory reprieve from political exile when, in 1783, acting as an unofficial adviser to the Fox-North government, he drew up the order in council that effectively cut off the valuable American carrying trade with Britain's West Indian colonies. After the fall of this short-lived administration, however, he found himself relegated to the role of supplicant in a lengthy campaign to obtain compensation for his American losses. He maintained an official presence in governmental circles by acting as the provincial agent for the loyalist colony of New Brunswick, but, when the loyalist claims commission honoured his petition for compensation in 1788, he finally withdrew from active politics. During the two decades of his retirement he produced an extraordinary number and variety of publications, ranging over such subjects as slave holding, political reforms in England and Ireland, and theology. He died on 25 August 1810 at his home in Ealing, Middlesex, survived by all seven of his children. 


@@@@@


doc= 15794


Knox, William (1789-1825), poet, was born on 17 August 1789 at Firth, parish of Lilliesleaf, Roxburghshire, the eldest son of Thomas Knox, a farmer, and his wife, Barbara ('nee' Turnbull), the widow of Mr Pott of Todrig. After schooling at Lilliesleaf parish school and Musselburgh grammar school he farmed unsuccessfully at Wrae, near Langholm, Dumfriesshire, from 1812 to 1817. He 'became too soon his own master', wrote Scott, 'and plunged into dissipation and ruin' ('Journal', 29-30). His farming career over, Knox returned to his parents at Todrig. In 1820 the family settled in Edinburgh, and Knox became a writer with the support of John Wilson and Scott, who frequently gave him money. 
As well as contributing to journals such as the 'Literary Gazette', Knox published 'The Lonely Hearth' (1818), 'The Songs of Israel' (1824), and 'The Harp of Zion' (1825). 'Mortality', in 'The Songs of Israel', was reputedly a favourite with President Lincoln. He died in Edinburgh, a few days after a stroke, on 12 November 1825. 


@@@@@


doc= 15795


Knox, William (1762-1831), Church of Ireland bishop of Derry, was the fourth son of Thomas, first Viscount Northland, a title afterwards merged in the earldom of Ranfurly. He was born on 14 June 1762 and was schooled in England and then, from the age of fifteen, was educated at Trinity College, Dublin. He graduated BA in 1781. On 10 September 1785 he married Anne (died 1834), daughter of James Spencer. They had fifteen children, ten daughters and five sons, the eldest, James Spencer Knox, being the father of Sir Thomas George Knox. In 1786 Knox became rector of Pomeroy in the diocese of Armagh, after which he obtained the rectory of Callan in the diocese of Ossory, and became chaplain to the Irish House of Commons. On 21 September 1794 he was consecrated bishop of Killaloe in St Peter's Church, Dublin, and in 1803 he was translated to the see of Derry, where he was enthroned on 9 September. During his episcopacy at Derry he became widely known for his philanthropy and charitable works, helped to restore the cathedral, and published several sermons. He died in George Street, Hanover Square, London, on 9 July 1831 and was buried at the chapel of North Audley Street, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 15796


Knijff, Leendert (1650-1722), painter, was born at Haarlem, Netherlands, on 10 August 1650, where he was baptized four days later. His mother was Lydia Leenderts of Delft, the widow of Jacob Bas of Haarlem; his father was Wouter Knijff ('b'. 'c'.1607, died after 1693), painter, born at Wesel, widower of Gerritje Jans van Houten. Leendert had two elder half-brothers, Jacobus and Johannes. Wouter Knijff specialized exclusively in river scenes, in a manner which owed much to Salomon van Ruysdael and Jan van Goyen. It has been suggested that Leendert studied with his father, but since the son's early speciality was the game piece, in the manner of Jan and Elias Vonck, it is perhaps more likely that he learned his art from a professional still-life painter. By 1681 Leendert was in London, living in the parish of St Martin-in-the-Fields. He returned to Holland in 1693 and again in 1695, when a pass was issued for 'Mr Leonard Knife, a protestant, to go to Harwich or Gravesend for Holland' (Honour, 337). Knijff was one of a number of resident aliens on whose behalf a warrant was sent to the attorney-general, on 8 June 1694, to prepare a bill for the great seal to make them 'free denizens of England' (ibid.). While in London, Knijff extended his repertoire, painting portraits such as the massive (265 x 276 cm) 'Viscount Irwin' (1700; Temple Newsam House, Leeds); animal portraits including 'The Dog 'Caper'' (Christies, 20 November 1981); animal fancy pieces, for example 'Greyhound Catching a Hare' (1697; Temple Newsam House) and 'Pugs, Greyhound and Spaniel with Dead Game' (1698, priv. coll.); and topographical landscapes, consisting largely of bird's-eye views of English country estates. Only a few painted landscapes by Knijff have survived; these include 'Windsor Castle' and 'Hampton Court from the East', both in the Royal Collection; his topographical work is known largely through drawings and prints. Many of his drawings were engraved by Jan Kip for volume 1 of 'Britannia illustrata', or 'Nouveau theatre de la Grande Bretagne', published by David Mortier in 1708. A number of drawings connected with this publication are preserved in the British Museum, including works such as 'Hampton Court from the South' not used by Kip. Knijff's landscape drawings reveal a diligent eye for detail but a mediocre grasp of perspective, and their main importance lies in their unique documentary value. As an artist his most successful works were always his still lifes of dead game such as 'Dead Birds' in the Bredius Museum, The Hague, and the splendid 'Dogs, Dead Peacock and Game' (Christies, 24 February 1939). Knijff married rather late in life, on 26 February 1708, Elizabeth Cox; the couple had two children, Leonard and Lyddia. In financial terms he seems to have done quite well for himself; when he came to draw up his will on 16 April 1722 he could boast of 'being now possessed of One Thousand and seven hundred pounds more or less in the stock of the South Sea Company' (will, PROB 11/588, fols. 272'v'-273'r'). In his directions for the dispersal of his fortune he showed a precise interest in money which suggests the avid investor. His executors were John Boulter and John Coushmaker; Knijff gave each of them 'Twenty Pounds for Mourning, and two pictures a piece such as they shall choose out of those of mine own paintings' (ibid.). The witnesses included Clara Roestraten, widow of the still-life painter Pieter van Roestraten. The will was not proved until 22 December 1722, an unusually long delay, since Knijff was buried in the New Chapel, Broadway, in the parish of St Margaret's Westminster, on 24 April 1722. In May 1723 his pictures were auctioned off, in accordance with his will, to provide funds for the education of his children. When his widow, Elizabeth, came to draw up her will on 31 July 1742 she made no mention of her son, which perhaps suggests that he was no longer alive, and she said that her daughter was dead. The bulk of her estate was left to Lyddia's son, James Ratclife. Elizabeth was buried on 10 July 1747, 'in the Chappell in the Broad Way Westminster as near my late husband deceased as conveniently may'. 


@@@@@


doc= 15797


Knyvet, Sir Edmund (c.1508-1551), landowner and member of parliament, was the eldest son of Sir Thomas Knyvet (c.1485-1512) of Buckenham Castle, Norfolk, and his wife, Muriel (died 1512), daughter of Thomas Howard, second duke of Norfolk, and widow of John Grey, second Viscount Lisle. His father was a prominent courtier (he was master of the horse) who was killed in a sea battle near Brest in August 1512. The family's extensive estates in Norfolk and Suffolk were still in the hands of Edmund's great-grandfather Sir William Knyvet, who did not die until 1515. Edmund's wardship was then purchased by his father's friend Charles Brandon, duke of Suffolk, who had also been the guardian of Knyvet's half-sister Elizabeth Grey. It appears that Suffolk subsequently sold Knyvet's wardship to Sir Thomas Wyndham, who at his death instructed his executors to sell it on to Anthony Wingfield for $400 or, failing that, to the highest bidder. It was not only the fact that he was a minor that delayed Edmund Knyvet's entering upon his inheritance. Edmund's long-lived great-grandfather had married as his second wife Joan, daughter of the first duke of Buckingham, and he left Buckenham Castle and other lands in Norfolk to his eldest son from this marriage, Sir Edward Knyvet. It was not until the latter's death in 1528, followed by that of his heir Robert, that the family lands reverted to Edmund, who secured them only in 1533. At his death they were valued at about $215 a year. 
It was principally as a Norfolk landlord that Edmund Knyvet made his mark. In the early 1530s he warned the third duke of Norfolk that the parishioners of Mendelsham, Suffolk, a village of which he was himself the absentee landlord, were holding large assemblies as members of an independent Christian brotherhood, and in 1536 he joined Norfolk in suppressing the Pilgrimage of Grace. Knighted in 1538 or 1539, he was involved in the election of knights of the shire for Norfolk for the parliament of 1539: the king and his chief minister, Thomas Cromwell, favoured Edmund Wyndham and Richard Southwell, but Knyvet coveted election himself and, always irascible, was angered when he was not chosen. He quarrelled so violently with Southwell that bystanders, fearing public disorder, brought the two men before the duke of Norfolk, who bound them in $2000 each to keep the peace. In a letter to Cromwell, Norfolk described Knyvet as a young man who trusted too much to his wit and was ruled by three or four 'light naughty knaves of Welshmen and others' rather than by his father-in-law (Sir John Shelton) and the duke ('LP Henry VIII', 14/1, no. 800). In November 1539 Knyvet was named sheriff of Norfolk and Suffolk, possibly in an attempt to mollify him. He attended Norfolk at the reception of Anne of Cleves early in 1540. In April that year he was licensed to buy the chantry or college of Thompson, near Thetford, with its estates in Norfolk and Cambridgeshire, and a year later he had a formal grant of them. But almost at once he sold them to John Flowerdew and Edmund Grey. 
Late in April 1541 Knyvet again showed his hotheadedness, when he was charged with striking Thomas Clere, a servant of Henry Howard, earl of Surrey, within the king's tennis court. A recent statute had stated that anyone guilty of such violence at court should have his right hand struck off, and arrangements were made to inflict the penalty -- the statute specified in detail how this should be done, the king's master cook wielding the knife and the sergeant of the poultry providing a cock to test its sharpness. Possibly because Knyvet begged to have his left hand amputated instead, so that his right might still do the king good service, he received a pardon before the blow could be struck. In January 1546 he was required to serve with 200 men in the army that Henry VIII was preparing for his war with France. 
Increasingly at odds with the Howards, and especially with the earl of Surrey, Knyvet testified against the latter when he was charged with treason in December 1546. On this occasion he also claimed to have urged Surrey to speak no ill of the dead when in 1540 the earl was exulting over the execution of Thomas Cromwell. Knyvet benefited from the disgrace of the Howards, receiving a lease of some of their lands, including the Norfolk manor of Wymondham, and purchasing additional estates from the king. In 1547 he was finally elected to the Commons as a knight of the shire for Norfolk. He successfully withstood the Norfolk rebels in 1549, and went on to serve under John Dudley, earl of Warwick, in the suppression of Ket's rebellion. He died in London on 1 May 1551, before the end of the parliament. His very brief will, made on 18 April 1550, left all his goods and chattels to his wife, Anne, the daughter of Sir John Shelton of Carrow, Norfolk. He was survived by his wife and two sons, and settled a manor on the younger son. Although he named his wife and John Flowerdew executors of his estate they renounced the duty and administration was granted to his elder son, Thomas. Despite his bad relations with the Howards it is possible that Knyvet was the poet 'E.K.' who contributed several verses to the famous anthology compiled by Mary Shelton (Knyvet's sister-in-law) which also included poems by Sir Thomas Wyatt and Surrey. Knyvet's younger brother Sir Henry was a gentleman of the privy chamber and in 1540 was sent as ambassador to Charles V. 
Knyvet has often been confused with his uncle, another 


@@@@@


doc= 15798


Knyvet, Sir John (d. 1381), justice and administrator, was the eldest son of Richard Knyvet of Southwick, Northamptonshire (died 1353), the keeper of Rockingham Forest in that county, and Joanna, daughter and heir of Sir John Wurth. Knyvet was practising in the courts by 1347; in 1354 he became serjeant-at-law, and from 1356 to 1361 served as a king's serjeant. On 24 June 1361 he was appointed a justice of the court of common pleas and was knighted, and on 29 October 1365 he was raised to the office of chief justice of the king's bench. In the parliament of 1362 he served as a trier of petitions for Aquitaine and other lands overseas, and afterwards in each parliament until 1380, except while he was chancellor, was a trier of petitions for England, Scotland, Wales, and Ireland. 
On 5 July 1372, after the death of Sir Robert Thorpe, Knyvet was appointed chancellor. His period of office may have seen significant developments in chancery's emerging function as a court of equity. Speeches which he made at the openings of parliament in 1372, 1373, and 1376 are recorded in the parliament rolls. However, in January 1377 Edward III's government reverted to the custom of appointing ecclesiastical chancellors, and Adam Houghton was appointed to succeed Knyvet on 11 January. But the former minister remained in high standing with the court, for on the day after his dismissal Knyvet was retained for life as a member of the king's council, with an annuity of $200 payable from the hanaper of the chancery. Before he was replaced Knyvet was also appointed 'ex officio' as one of Edward III's executors. He did not again hold judicial office, but was appointed to the first continual council of Richard II's minority government (July-October 1377) and had his annuity confirmed by the new king on 27 February 1378. 
Knyvet's principal residence probably remained Southwick, where the hall shows evidence of extensive rebuilding during his tenure. He held large estates in Northamptonshire and throughout East Anglia, and his local connections are reflected by his frequent appointment as justice of assize, gaol delivery, and oyer and terminer in the central and eastern counties. During the 1350s he was also regularly appointed as a justice of the peace in Northamptonshire, and more occasionally in Bedfordshire, Buckinghamshire, Norfolk, and Suffolk. He had close connections with the royal family, serving as steward of Queen Philippa's estates, counsellor of the Black Prince, and justice of the forest in Lancashire to John of Gaunt. He received fees from the abbot of Ramsey and was in the service of William de Bohun, earl of Northampton, becoming guardian to the latter's son Humphrey. 
About 1358 Knyvet married Eleanor (died 1388), daughter and coheir of Ralph, Lord Basset of Weldon. They left five children: John, Robert, Richard, Henry, and Margery, and their descendants established themselves as a leading family in Norfolk. Knyvet died on 16 February 1381; a few months later the escheators' investigations of his lands were disrupted by the outbreak of the peasants' revolt. 


@@@@@


doc= 15799


Knyvet, Sir Thomas (c.1485-1512), courtier and sea captain, was the eldest son of Edmund Knyvet of Hilborough, Norfolk (died 1503/4), himself the eldest son of Sir William Knyvet of Buckenham, Norfolk ('c'.1448-1515). Thomas's mother was Edmund's wife, Eleanor (died after 1540), daughter of William Tyrell of Gipping. He came to notice at court towards the end of Henry VII's reign, jousting in the tournaments of May and June 1507 and serving as an esquire for the king's body. He was closely attached to the Howard family from the time of his marriage, by 9 July 1506, to Muriel (died 1512), daughter of Thomas Howard, earl of Surrey and later second duke of Norfolk (1443-1524), and his first wife, Elizabeth Tilney (died 1497), and widow of John Grey, Viscount Lisle (died 1504). From 1509 he emerged as one of the favourites of Henry VIII, taking a leading part in many tournaments and revels at court. The king made him knight of the Bath at his coronation on 23 June 1509 and appointed him bearer of the king's standard on 27 July 1509 and master of the horse on 22 February 1510. He was also rewarded with local offices on the crown lands, customs licences, and a lease of those Lisle estates not already allocated to his wife in dower. Muriel served as a lady-in-waiting to Queen Katherine, and their links with the queen were presumably reflected in the names of two of their children, Katherine and Ferdinand; another, Anne, would serve the queen in the 1520s and receive a dowry from her mistress. 
On the outbreak of war with France in 1512 Knyvet was given command of the 'Regent', one of the two largest ships in the fleet led by his brother-in-law, Sir Edward Howard. On 10 August, in an engagement outside Brest, the 'Regent' grappled and boarded the 'Cordeliere', the largest ship in the French fleet. The 'Cordeliere' caught fire and both ships burnt, killing some 600 or 700 men on the 'Regent' and 900 or more on her opponent. Sir Thomas, who according to one report was killed by gunfire before the conflagration, was among the dead. Sir Edward Howard vowed to avenge Knyvet's death before he saw the king again, and was killed in the attempt in April 1513. Knyvet's widow died in childbirth between 13 and 21 December 1512, leaving their three sons and two daughters to be brought up by their grandmother, Eleanor Knyvet. The eldest son, Edmund (1508-1551), eventually succeeded to most of his great-grandfather's estates, while his brother Henry (died 1546) became a gentleman of Henry VIII's privy chamber. Four of Sir Thomas's five brothers also served the king at court or in the navy. Sir Thomas Knyvet's portrait, which does not survive, was painted by the Venetian artist Antonio da Solario, and he was commemorated in a poem by John Leland; his fatal encounter with the French inspired a poetic exchange between Thomas More and Germain de Brie. 


@@@@@


doc= 15800


Knyvett, Thomas, Baron Knyvett (1545/6-1622), courtier, was the younger son of Sir Henry Knyvet 
(or Knyvett; died 1546)
, soldier, gentleman of the privy chamber, and sometime ambassador to the emperor Charles V, and his wife, Anne, heir of Sir Christopher Pickering of Killington, Westmorland, and widow of Sir Francis Weston (executed in 1536). After his father's death, Knyvett's mother married John Vaughan (died 1577). His grandfather Sir Thomas Knyvet of Buckenham, Norfolk ('c'.1485-1512), had been master of the horse to Henry VIII, while his elder brother Henry Knyvet (1537?-1598), of Charlton, Wiltshire, a soldier and distinctly belligerent country gentleman, was MP for Wootton Bassett and Malmesbury in several Elizabethan parliaments. 
Thomas Knyvett was a fellow-commoner at Jesus College, Cambridge, in 1564-5 and attended Gray's Inn in 1566. He was admitted to the privy chamber by 1572, and remained a gentleman of the bedchamber to Queen Elizabeth and to James I for the rest of his life. He was returned as a knight of the shire for Westmorland in 1572, and was elected as an MP for Westminster in all but one parliament between 1584 and his elevation to the Lords. He was seneschal of Penrith Castle in 1577. On 21 July 1597 he married Elizabeth, widow of Richard Warren, an Essex gentleman, who had died the previous March. Elizabeth was the eldest daughter of Sir Rowland Hayward, lord mayor of London in 1570-71 and 1591, and his wife, Joan ('nee' Tyllesworth). Knyvett's marriage may explain the timing of a lease in reversion of lands in Yorkshire, granted to him that same year, without fine, in consideration of his loyal service to the crown. He and his wife had no children. Elizabeth was appointed governess to King James's two youngest daughters, Mary and Sophia, both of whom died young. 
Knyvett was steward and receiver of the lordship of Pickering from 1597 to 1599. He was created an honorary MA at Oxford when accompanying Queen Elizabeth on her visit to the university in 1592. Warden of the Tower mint from 27 September 1599, he was thereafter constantly at odds with the man he replaced, Sir Richard Martin, who remained a master of the mint. Some doubt surrounds the date of his knighthood, but he was probably knighted in 1601 between April and October (most likely in May). In favour with the new king, James I, Knyvett was given the manor of Stanwell, Middlesex, on 5 August 1603. 
By 1597 Knyvett had been appointed keeper of Whitehall Palace and it was in this capacity that he conducted a search of the vaults under the House of Lords on the night of 4 November 1605, an operation which resulted in the arrest of Guy Fawkes, posing as John Johnson, servant to the earl of Northumberland's kinsman Thomas Percy, and standing guard over 18 hundredweight of gunpowder. Knyvett's promotion to the peerage as Lord Knyvett of Escrick, Yorkshire, may have been intended as a reward for this great service to the crown, or, more likely, as a recognition of his long and distinguished career at court. He took his seat in the Lords on 4 July 1607, and served as a privy councillor to Queen Anne. Knyvett's will, made in 1620, bequeathed his estate to his wife and strikingly declared his religious faith; by God's goodness he had attained 'thorough many conflictes in this my pilgramage to the three skore and fifteeneth yeare of my life'; he firmly asserted his belief in: 'one Supreame eternall infinite and omnipotent power divine by the most Glorious name of god The father the sonne and the holie ghost Three personns and one God in essence and power of Creatinge Redeeminge and governinge all his creatures accordinge to his good will and pleasure I beleeve withall every Article of the Nicen Athanasian & Apostolike Creed literallie with out ambiguitie or doubt by which profession I was receyved at my Baptisme to be a member of the Church of Christ. (will)' Knyvett died at his house in King Street, Westminster, on 27 July 1622 and was buried on 1 August. His widow died that September and, despite Knyvett's testamentary request for a modest monument, they were buried together in a magnificent tomb at Stanwell church. This may be the work of their descendants, for the tomb is of a somewhat later style. The Escrick estate was inherited by Knyvett's niece, Katherine Howard, countess of Suffolk (d. 1638), daughter of Sir Henry Knyvet of Charlton and wife of Thomas Howard, first earl of Suffolk. 


@@@@@


doc= 15801


Knyvett, Charles (1752-1822), musician and singer, was born on 11 February 1752 in the parish of St Margaret's, Westminster, the son of Charles Knyvett (1710-1782) and his wife, Jane, 'nee' Jordan (1714-1785). Educated at Westminster School from 1762, he was a boy chorister at Westminster Abbey under Benjamin Cooke and was appointed joint organist (with William Smethergell) of All Hallows Barking in November 1770. On 16 June 1772, at St Marylebone, he married Rose Alleway ('c'.1752-1807). Her family came from Sonning in Berkshire and Knyvett later acquired property there. 
Knyvett performed occasionally at the theatre: among his engagements, in May 1775 he was paid for fourteen nights' harpsichord playing at Drury Lane, and in June 1790 he accompanied Mrs Billington when she sang Purcell's 'Mad Bess' in character as Ophelia in 'Hamlet'. When he joined the Royal Society of Musicians in 1778 he was described as 'a Sober Industrious Man' (Matthews, 87). He was an organist in the oratorios at Covent Garden from 1789 to 1792, sang in the Chapel Royal choir from 1786, and was appointed organist there in 1796. 
Knyvett was a principal alto at the Handel commemoration concerts from 1784. The 'Two Master Knyvetts' in the 1784 choir were his sons Charles ['see below'] and Henry (1774-1843), who became an army officer; a third son, the singer and composer William Knyvett, was born in 1779. Between 1785 and 1799 the elder Charles sang every year at the Concerts of Ancient Music. He played the organ at the Three Choirs meeting in 1780 and sang at the Cambridge festival during the 1780s. With the tenor Samuel Harrison he founded the Vocal Concerts, a fashionable subscription series which ran each spring from 1792 to 1795. Knyvett appeared as singer and piano accompanist in these concerts, which featured English songs and glees. He sang for the Noblemen's and Gentlemen's Catch Club, the Je ne sais quoi Club, and the Anacreontic Society. Parke described him as 'perhaps the best catch singer in England' (Parke, 2.236), while Stevens remembered his 'rich strain of humour' ('Recollections of R. J. S. Stevens', 76) at these convivial meetings. Knyvett moved on terms of friendship with aristocratic patrons of the catch clubs and Concerts of Ancient Music. In 1800 he edited 'A Collection of Favorite Glees' submitted by candidates for two prizes given by the prince of Wales (afterwards George IV), one of which was won by his son William. The younger Charles and William performed with their father, and a number of three-part glees were published as sung by the Messrs Knyvett. Charles senior died at his house in Blandford Place, Pall Mall, on 19 January 1822 after a lingering illness. 




@@@@@


doc= 15802


Charles Knyvett (1773-1852), musician and singer, was born on 23 March 1773 in the parish of St George's, Hanover Square, London. The 'Dictionary of National Biography' says that he was a chorister of Westminster Abbey under Sir William Parsons, but this statement is not supported by the records. Apprenticed to his father for five years, by the age of twenty-one he was a professional pianist, singer, and music teacher. He married Jane Laney (died in or after 1807) on 1 September 1795; they had seven children. In 1802 he was appointed organist of St George's, Hanover Square, and his 'Selection of Psalm Tunes' as sung at that church appeared in four editions between 1823 and 1850. He also published some keyboard works and glees and became an eminent teacher of thoroughbass and piano. Knyvett died on 2 November 1852, having retired to the estate he inherited at Sonning, Berkshire, after his father's death. 


@@@@@


doc= 15803


Knyvett, William (1779-1856), singer and composer, was born on 21 April 1779 in London, the third and youngest son of Charles Knyvett (1752-1822), a musician, and his wife, Rose, 'nee' Alleway ('c'.1752-1807). He was educated by his father, by the glee composer Samuel Webbe, and by Giambattista Cimador. In 1788 he sang in the treble chorus at the Concerts of Ancient Music, and in 1795 appeared there as the principal alto. In 1797 he became a gentleman of the Chapel Royal and shortly afterwards a lay clerk at Westminster Abbey. He was appointed composer of the Chapel Royal in 1808, succeeding his father. He helped his father run the Vocal Concerts at Willis's Rooms, and in 1811, with his brother Charles and Thomas Vaughan, established the Vocal Subscription Concerts, which continued until 1822. From 1832 to 1840 he conducted the Concerts of Ancient Music, and he also conducted at the Birmingham festivals from 1831 to 1843 and the York festival in 1835. 
One of the finest alto singers of his day, Knyvett sang in London and at provincial festivals, and formed a trio with Samuel Harrison and James Bartleman. The glee 'With sighs, sweet rose' was composed for him by John Wall Callcott. 
Knyvett was a popular composer for the voice, and his songs and glees included 'My love is like the red, red rose' (1803), 'The Bells of St Michael's Tower' (1810), 'The Boatie Rows' (1810), and 'As it fell upon a day' (1812). His glee 'When the fair rose' was awarded the prince of Wales prize at the Harmonic Society in 1800. He was also commissioned to write anthems for the coronation of George IV ('The king shall rejoice') and Queen Victoria ('This is the day the Lord has made'). 
Knyvett was married twice. His second wife, whom he married in 1826, was Deborah Travis (1790-1876), a singer, of Shaw, near Oldham, Lancashire. She was one of the Lancashire chorus singers at the Concerts of Ancient Music from 1813 to 1815, and appeared as a principal from 1815. She was much in demand, especially as an oratorio singer, until her retirement in 1843. Knyvett died in poverty on 17 November 1856 at Clarges House, Ryde, Isle of Wight. 


@@@@@


doc= 15804


Koehler, George Frederick (1758-1800), army officer, was born on 14 January 1758, the only child of George Frederick Koehler (1732-1763), a bombardier in the Royal Artillery and a native of Frankfurt am Main, Germany, who had emigrated to England in 1753, and his English wife, Elizabeth (Betty) Dean, 'nee' Haley (died 1793). In 1758 Koehler senior was given a Bengal cadetship and sailed to India; he was promoted second lieutenant, Bengal artillery, in October 1761 and was killed on 12 August 1763 at the battle of Gheria. The infant Koehler was baptized at Woolwich, Kent, on 7 May 1758. He was raised on the proceeds of the $2000 (presumably from loot or trade) which his father had left to him and his mother and attended the Royal Military Academy, Woolwich, as a private student. In his fortifications examination on 15 December 1779 he submitted 'the completest series of drawings ever produced at the Academy' ('Records of the Royal Military Academy', 26), and as a consequence was offered, on 20 January 1780, a second lieutenantcy in the Royal Artillery. 
In 1781 Koehler sailed with Admiral Darby's relief fleet to the besieged fortress of Gibraltar. There he soon gained the confidence of the governor, General George Augustus Eliott, who appointed him his aide-de-camp and assistant engineer. After the famous sortie against the Spanish lines of 26-7 November 1781, Eliott presented Koehler with his own sword in recognition of his conduct. Koehler also demonstrated his technical expertise by inventing a gun carriage which allowed the gun barrel to be depressed to an angle of 70 degree, which enabled accurate counter-battery fire against the Franco-Spanish siege cannon, sited far below the Rock. At the first trial, on 15 February 1782, twenty-eight shots out of thirty fired took effect in one traverse of the San Carlos battery, at a distance of 1400 yards. Koehler's accomplished drawings of the siege were also well regarded: Eliott sent some to London with his dispatches; others were later published as engravings by T. Malton. 
Once the defence of Gibraltar had been brought to a successful conclusion, Koehler used a twelve-month passport granted him by Eliott and travelled in Italy and Germany, returning to England in October 1784. His close connection with General Eliott (later Lord Heathfield) continued in the following years. In 1789 Koehler accompanied him on a tour of Germany and the Low Countries. When the Brabant rebellion broke out soon after, Heathfield's warm endorsement of Koehler's abilities was remembered, and in December 1789 Count Dillon, acting for the Belgian Congress, asked Koehler (although still only a first lieutenant) to be colonel commandant of its artillery. In the event, he also received the rank of major-general. It was a measure of his creditable performance as a commander of horse and foot as well as of artillery that when, in November 1790, the Austrians crossed the Meuse and approached Brussels, the congress, desperate to stave off defeat, appointed Koehler general commandant of its entire army. But by then the situation was irretrievable and, after the fall of the Belgian republic, Koehler retired to England. 
In the summer of 1791, in the wake of the Ochakov crisis, the British government sent Koehler to survey the defences of European Turkey. He remained there two years. On his return he was offered the post of deputy quartermaster-general at Toulon (then occupied by the British at the invitation of the Toulon anti-Jacobins), which entailed his promotion from brevet captain to brevet major (October 1793). Koehler, however, arrived only in time to play a role in the port's evacuation, commanding the artillery at Fort La Malgere so as to cover the British withdrawal and then spiking the guns. He was sent afterwards to Corsica with Sir Gilbert Elliot and Lieutenant-Colonel John Moore to reconnoitre the French defences (14-20 January 1794). Their report favoured a British attack, and Koehler remained ashore to liaise with General Paoli, the Corsican resistance leader, pending the fleet's arrival. In the operations which followed, Koehler played his part in the capture of San Fiorenzo but became disillusioned by the indecision of his commanders before Bastia, the chief French garrison. At the end of March 1794, claiming pressing personal affairs, he returned to England. He married, on 30 June 1794, Ann Pass (1771-1800), of St Marylebone, Westminster. They set up home at Etchilhampton, near Devizes, Wiltshire. 
Koehler's unscheduled return to England was not approved by the military authorities. He was even rebuked by his patron, the master-general of the ordnance, the duke of Richmond. Koehler's dissatisfaction increased. Although now a captain-lieutenant of artillery and (since 12 April 1794) a brevet lieutenant-colonel, he felt undervalued. In early 1795 he would have accepted an offer to enter the Turkish service had not the government, worried by the possibility of an adverse Russian reaction, expressed its reservations. For the next three years he occupied staff positions at home as assistant quartermaster-general of the southern and north-eastern districts successively. He was promoted captain of artillery on 9 December 1796. 
Koehler's chance of accelerated advancement came when, in 1798, Napoleon Bonaparte invaded Egypt and the British government, anxious to help the Turks expel the French, decided to send a military mission, including artillery, stores, and 100 personnel, to Constantinople. With his knowledge of Turkey, Koehler was an obvious choice to take command. Having stipulated that, to reflect his status, he must have the local and temporary rank of brigadier-general (8 November 1798), the permanent rank of colonel (gazetted 1 January 1800), and remuneration of $1000 per annum, Koehler left England with the officers of his party in December 1798 and travelled overland to Constantinople, where he arrived in March 1799. Once he was there the Turks asked him to inspect the defences of the Dardanelles. When, in September, they tried to get him to repeat the exercise, Koehler realized that the Turks were not keen to have him join their army in Syria. Indeed, rather than have Koehler to hand urging them to fight, the Turks preferred to negotiate a French withdrawal from Egypt, a policy in which Britain's acting minister at Constantinople, Spencer Smith, and his brother Commodore Sidney Smith, the hero of Acre, were actively colluding. To this end both brothers intrigued against Koehler. The arrival in November of the new ambassador, Lord Elgin, eventually secured permission for Koehler to go to the Turkish army at Jaffa; but Elgin implied that Koehler, whose exaggerated pretensions irritated his hosts, had contributed to his own difficulties: 'General Koehler... claims to himself the respect paid to a Bonaparte or a Suvorov' ('Fortescue MSS', 6.91). 
Koehler arrived at Jaffa in July 1800, after undertaking a mission to Cyprus. As he discovered, the battleworthiness of the Turkish army left much to be desired: he believed 2000 European troops to be the match of 15,000 Turks. In October, during a respite from his duties, Koehler and his wife, who had accompanied him to the East, visited Jerusalem. Shortly after their return, however, there was an outbreak of plague in the Turkish camp at Jaffa. First his wife died, and then, fifteen days later, on 29 December 1800, Koehler himself succumbed. He was buried at Jaffa the next day. 
Koehler died intestate and with no known relatives. His property, valued at $7842 8's'. 4died, went to the crown. In 1820 there began the protracted case of 'Bauer v. Mitford', by which Koehler's German relatives attempted to establish their kinship. The proceedings passed to the court of chancery, and in 1859 judgment was delivered in the family's favour. Following the rejection of the crown's appeal by the House of Lords on 24 July 1861, the original value of Koehler's estate, together with $14,429 12's'. 6died interest, was paid to the descendants of Koehler's paternal uncles. 


@@@@@


doc= 15805


Kollmann, Augustus Frederic Christopher (1756-1829), music theorist, was born on 21 March 1756 in Engelbostel near Hanover, Germany, the elder son of Christoph Johann Heinrich Kollmann, the Engelbostel organist and schoolmaster, and his wife, Sophia Margaret Hachmeister. After studying in Engelbostel and at the Hanover Gymnasium, Kollmann became a pupil of and assistant to Johann Christoph Bottner, organist of the Marktkirche, the principal church in Hanover. In his autobiographical account of about 1824 Kollmann described Bottner as 'an able organist in J. S. Bach's style' (Sainsbury, 2.22). In 1779 Kollmann was admitted to the Konigliches Schullehrer-Seminar, the academy in Hanover where schoolteachers were trained; his masters included Bottner. Kollmann said in his autobiographical account that he learned there his 'methodical and systematical manner of teaching, which has been very advantageous to him, not only for school instruction, but also in teaching music, and particularly in writing his musical treatises' (ibid.). 
On 10 December 1781 Kollmann was appointed organist and schoolmaster of Kloster Lune, a former convent near Luneburg which had been converted to a protestant home for noble ladies. Although he remained there only until the following July, his loss was felt deeply, the superintendent recording that in Kollmann all didactic talents had been combined and were elevated by the best moral character. 
Kollmann left because he had been selected by the Hanoverian government to fulfil George III's command that someone be found to serve as organist and schoolmaster of the Royal German Chapel in St James's Palace, London. According to the Chapel Royal cheque book Kollmann was sworn as porter of His Majesty's Lutheran Chapel on 17 September 1782. He remained at the chapel for the rest of his life, living in apartments in the friary court of the palace. Until Queen Charlotte's death in 1817, when the chapel school was closed, he spent part of four days every week teaching German and music to boys under the age of twelve. One of his scholars was the bookseller and publisher Henry George Bohn (1796-1884). 
Kollmann married Christina Catherina Ruel (1745-1823) at St Luke's, Chelsea, on 26 October 1783. They had two children, 
Kollmann endeavoured to develop a theory that would account for every note in a musical composition. His 'particular study', he explained in his 'New Theory of Musical Harmony' (1806), was 'to find out a simple method, by which every note, that is useful in music, might obtain as positive a rule, as it denotes a positive sound' (2nd edn, 1823, 4). In this theory the 'regularity' of a musical composition could be proved by showing how it could be derived from a simple musical entity by successive application of a small number of rules. Kollmann's theory was a pioneering attempt to provide what would now be called a generative theory of tonality, the 'musical language' that has governed most European music composed from about 1600 to 1900 and much composed subsequently. Exploiting the ancient analogy between music and language, Kollmann divided his theory into grammatical and rhetorical parts. His most mature statement of these parts is in the 1823 edition of the 'New Theory' and the 1812 edition of his 'Essay on Practical Musical Composition' respectively. 
Kollmann also exemplified aspects of his theory in musical compositions with 'theoretical explanations'. Although some of these compositions curiously transcend the common practice of their time, Kollmann noted in his autobiographical account that he had applied himself principally to music's 'theoretical department' and his achievements are most significant there. 
Kollmann was one of the earliest advocates of the music of J. S. Bach in England. Besides printing several Bach compositions in his treatises and, in 1806, a separate edition of Bach's 'Chromatic' fantasy, he proposed in 1799 an edition of Bach's forty-eight preludes and fugues, the 'Well-Tempered Clavier', which had not yet been published anywhere in its entirety. After Kollmann's proposal was noticed in a German music periodical by Professor Johann Nicholas Forkel of Gottingen University, three European publishers produced editions of the '48' and Kollmann abandoned his plan. However, he assisted Samuel Wesley in 1808-10 with information about Bach and lent a manuscript of the '48' to Wesley and Charles Frederick Horn when they were preparing their edition of this work. Kollmann translated excerpts from Forkel's biography of Bach in his 1812 magazine the 'Quarterly Musical Register'. 
Kollmann died, probably in his apartments at St James's Palace, on 19 April 1829. His funeral on 27 April proceeded to St Mary's German Lutheran Church at the Savoy, where he was buried in the same vault as his wife. The funeral service, which included one of Kollmann's own hymns, was read by Frederick William Blomberg, chaplain to the royal household. 
George Kollmann was born in London on 30 January 1789, probably at St James's Palace. He made his debut performing his father's piano concerto in London in 1804. He designed and manufactured a novel pianoforte featuring down-striking action, for which he received a patent in 1825. His keyboard skills, shown particularly in a series of 'grand concerts' demonstrating this invention in 1838-9, received critical acclaim, but he was declared bankrupt in 1840. He also received patents in 1836 and 1839 for improvements in railways and locomotive carriages. Despite various efforts these inventions were never adopted. He died on 19 March 1845 at St James's Palace, having been suffering from kidney disease following a spinal injury, and was buried at St Mary's German Lutheran Church at the Savoy. 
Johanna Kollmann was born on 20 July 1786, probably at St James's Palace, and first appeared publicly as a singer in 1806. She assisted her brother in his pianoforte business and succeeded him as organist of the Royal German Chapel. She died at St James's Palace on 11 May 1849 and was buried at St Mary's German Lutheran Church at the Savoy on 21 May. 


@@@@@


doc= 15806


Konig, Charles Dietrich Eberhard (1774-1851), botanist and mineralogist, was born in Brunswick and educated at the University of Gottingen, where he studied botany. In 1800 he was invited to England to arrange the natural history collections of Queen Charlotte at Kew Palace. The following year Konig went to work for Sir Joseph Banks in Soho Square, London, as assistant to Jonas Dryander, Banks's librarian. During this period he launched and edited 'Annals of Botany' in conjunction with Dr John Sims, writing, translating, and illustrating many of the articles. In 1807 he became assistant keeper in the British Museum's department of natural history and modern curiosities, and turned his attention to mineralogy, cataloguing and arranging the whole collection over the next ten years. 
In 1813 Konig succeeded Dr Shaw as keeper of the department. He continued to spend most of his time on the minerals, although he did rearrange and name the bird collection in the early 1820s; he was said to show an 'excessive contempt for fossils' (Torrens, 69) in 1819. In spite of this he published a paper on the human skeleton from Guadeloupe in the 'Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society' in 1814, and the first part of 'Icones fossilium sectiles' in 1825. Konig also wrote many of the geological articles for Abraham Rees's 'Cyclopaedia' (1802-20), after September 1811. In 1837 he was relieved of responsibility for botany and zoology, becoming keeper of the museum's mineralogical and geological branch. Konig was a difficult man, and had bad relations with both John E. Gray, keeper of the zoological branch, and Robert Smirke, architect of the new British Museum building. Konig died suddenly at the museum on 29 August 1851, while still in office. 


@@@@@


doc= 15807


Koczwara, Frantisek (c.1750-1791), musician, was born in Prague about 1750. He seems to have been an itinerant musician in Germany and the Netherlands but had moved to England by 1775. He lived in various places around England; the string quartets (op. 3, 1775) indicate that he lived in Bath, whereas the trios (op. 5) of a year later give a London address. In 1783 he moved to Dublin, where he played violin in the band at the Smock Alley Theatre; he also performed at the Chester music festival in September of that year (presumably on his way to Ireland). While in Ireland he composed perhaps his most popular work, 'The Battle of Prague' (op. 23, 'c'.1788), and performed for the Irish Musical Fund. 
According to Pohl, Koczwara was engaged to play double bass at the new Italian opera house in London by Giovanni Gallini in 1790, but as that theatre was being rebuilt that year and did not open until March 1791 it is possible that as an interim measure he played for Gallini and Giardini at the Little Haymarket Theatre. He had certainly returned to London by May 1791, as he played in the Concerts of Ancient Music and the Handel commemoration of May 1791. Fetis claimed to have performed, at the age of eight, a Mozart sonata and Koczwara's own 'Battle of Prague' (the latter at sight) for the composer when he visited his father's house in Mons, although his dating of spring 1792 is clearly erroneous. Fetis also described how Koczwara played the violin, viola, cello, piano, oboe, flute, bassoon, and cittern. 
Koczwara's compositions are mainly piano works and chamber music for piano and stringed instruments. 'The Battle of Prague', a sonata for piano and optional violin and cello, was extremely popular, particularly in Boston, USA, where it was 'indispensable to climax every concert'. According to Parke, Koczwara often sought to pass off his own works as being by more popular (and commercially successful) composers such as Haydn and Pleyel, although Newman decries 'the utter banality and triteness of this ['Battle of Prague'] sonata'. 
Koczwara is most famous for the manner of his death. Although more polite generations would describe his death merely as suicide, the book 'Modern Propensities, or, An Essay on the Art of Strangling' (London, 'c'.1792) contained the memoirs of Susannah Hill, the woman tried at the Old Bailey on 16 September 1791 for the composer's murder. At her trial, Hill described how, on 2 September 1791 at a house of ill repute in Vine Street, Covent Garden, Koczwara had drunk a great deal of brandy and asked to be hanged in order to raise his passion. When she cut him down minutes later he was dead. Although auto-erotic asphyxia was not defined for another two hundred years, the case against Hill was dismissed. 


@@@@@


doc= 15808


Kratzer, Nicolaus (b. 1486/7, d. after 1550), astronomer and maker of scientific instruments, was born in Munich, probably the son of a saw smith, named Hans. The date of his birth can only be deduced from a portrait by Hans Holbein the younger from 1528 (Paris, Louvre), which bears the inscription 'Imago ad vivam effigiem expressa Nicolai Kratzeri monacensis qui Bavarus erat quadragesimum primum annum tempore illo complebat 1528' ('Live portrait of Nicholas Kratzer of Munich in Bavaria, done in 1528 when he was forty-one'). 
Kratzer was probably trained in his father's craft. He left his native town for Cologne and matriculated at the university there on 18 November 1506, and took his BA in 1509. Then he went to the University of Wittenberg. During the following years Kratzer probably practised instrument making, but until his arrival in England in 1517 or 1518 almost nothing is known except the fact that about 1515 he copied out some astronomical treatises in the Carthusian monastery of Maurbach, near Vienna. The purpose of his move to the court of Henry VIII is shrouded in mystery, but the background was obviously known to Erasmus of Rotterdam and his correspondents. In 1517 Peter Giles wrote to Erasmus that Kratzer was on his way to England with astrolabes, armillary spheres, and a Greek book. In 1520 Kratzer, now called 'deviser of the King's horologes', was given leave of absence for a diplomatic mission. In Antwerp he became acquainted with Albrecht Durer, who made a silver-point portrait of him, now lost. How long Kratzer stayed in the Low Countries is not certain, but in the spring of 1521 he was in the service of Thomas More, then treasurer of the exchequer, in England. It has been frequently stated that in 1517 Kratzer was among the first fellows of Corpus Christi College, Oxford, but there are no contemporary references extant. That he stayed in the town is certain, but his status in the university is open to considerable doubt. On his own evidence he was lecturing at the king's command on elementary astronomy, the construction of the astrolabe, and Ptolemy's geography. Probably, like his colleague, the Spanish humanist Juan Luis Vives, he was one of Cardinal Wolsey's lecturers residing at Corpus. Between 11 February and 23 March 1523 Kratzer was incorporated, first as BA, then as MA. 
When on 21 April 1521 the assembly of divines under the chairmanship of Cardinal Wolsey condemned Luther's doctrines, Kratzer was commissioned to commemorate the event by erecting a sundial outside St Mary's Church, together with a notice on the condemnation by the Oxford divines. (This dial survived until 1744, but disappeared during rebuilding of the church wall.) Soon after his arrival in Oxford in 1521 Kratzer made another dial which stood in the orchard of Corpus. It was a polyhedral dial combined with a hemispherical dial on the upper surface of a carved stone, topped with a spherical dial supported by iron arches. This dial vanished before 1710, but Robert Hegge, a fellow of Corpus enthusiastic about sundials, had made a description and executed a drawing which is preserved in the college library. A portable dial made for Cardinal Wolsey and resembling in shape and function the stone dial in Corpus is preserved in the Museum for the History of Science at Oxford, and recently a fragment of a stone dial has been attributed to Kratzer. 
Concerning his activities as an astronomer, it seems that Kratzer was mainly engaged in making scientific instruments (especially sundials), although in 1529 Kratzer, Hugh Bozvell, and Hans Bour were sent to Cornwall to survey the King's woods and mines, and to try to smelt the ore. Whether he was responsible for the construction of the dial for an astronomical clock at Hampton Court palace executed by the French clockmaker Nicolas Oursian is not certain. Two manuscripts by Kratzer are extant. One is a set of instructions for an instrument which he called 'horoptrum', the other is a collection of treatises on scientific instruments copied by Kratzer when he stayed in Maurbach. They deal with portable sundials, ring dials, the cross-staff, the 'new' quadrant of Profatius, the celestial globe, the astrolabe, and equatoria for calculating planetary positions. While this is not original, Kratzer made at least one unique design for an adjustable vertical dial with a semicircular scale which may be classified as a compound solar instrument. 
Hans Holbein the younger was greatly interested in time and horology, and he and Kratzer became intimate friends. In the portrait of 1528 Kratzer is depicted as a maker of astronomical instruments surrounded by rulers, compasses, and sundials. Some of these instruments also appear on the famous double portrait of the French ambassador Jean de Dinteville and his friend George de Selve, painted by Holbein in 1533 (London, National Gallery). In the representation of scientific instruments Holbein certainly relied on instructions given to him by Kratzer, and there is good reason for thinking that Kratzer collaborated with the artist in the overall esoteric design of the painting. When he was about fifty Kratzer married, his wife's name being Christiana; they had at least one daughter. In the preface to Guido Bonatti's 'Tractatus de astronomia' (1550), edited by Nicolaus Prugner, then professor for astronomy in Tubingen, Kratzer is mentioned. In all probability he died shortly afterwards, since no reference to him after Prugner's preface has been found. Some of Kratzer's books passed into the possession of John Dee and Richard Forster, physician to the earl of Leicester. 


@@@@@


doc= 15809


Krause, William Henry (1796-1852), Church of Ireland clergyman, was born on 6 July 1796 on the island of St Croix, West Indies. At an early age he was brought to England, and educated at a school in Fulham, Middesex, and afterwards at another in Richmond, Surrey. In 1814, having made up his mind to enter the army, he obtained a commission in the 51st light infantry, then in the south of France. In the next year he took part in the battle of Waterloo. At the end of the war he was placed on half pay, and soon afterwards returned to St Croix, where his father still lived. 
In 1822, while staying with a fellow officer in Ireland, Krause underwent a religious conversion and resolved to take holy orders. He also met Miss A. E. Ridgeway and they were married on 13 January 1823. She died on 17 September 1824 after their only daughter was born. Krause returned to England and sought ordination from the established church but was unsuccessful. In 1826 he was appointed by the earl of Farnham 'moral agent' on his Irish estates, his duty being to look after the schools and to promote the religious and moral welfare of the tenantry. While carrying out these functions he entered himself at Trinity College, Dublin, on 5 April 1826. He graduated BA in 1830 and MA in 1838. On 26 March 1838 he was ordained for the curacy of Cavan by the bishop of Kilmore, and for two years ministered there. He also acted as secretary to the local Hibernian Bible Society. In 1840 he was appointed incumbent of the Bethesda Chapel, Dublin, where he became one of the best-known evangelical clergymen. He died in Dublin on 27 February 1852, probably of a heart attack, having preached twice on the Sunday before his death. Three volumes of his sermons were published posthumously in 1859. 


@@@@@


doc= 15810


Kuper, Sir Augustus Leopold (1809-1885), naval officer, was born in London on 16 August 1809, the son of William Kuper DD KH (died 27 Nov 1861), later chaplain to Queen Adelaide. He entered the navy in April 1823, and after serving on the South American and Mediterranean stations was promoted lieutenant on 28 February 1830. During the next seven years he served almost continuously on the home station, and the coast of Spain or Portugal. He married, in June 1837, Emma Margaret, (died 1877), eldest daughter of Sir Gordon Bremer; they had at least four sons and one daughter. In July 1837 Kuper was appointed first lieutenant of the 'Alligator' (28 guns) with his father-in-law. He assisted Bremer in forming the settlement of Port Essington in north Australia, and on 27 July 1839 was promoted by him to the command of the 'Pelorus' (18 guns). In a violent hurricane at Port Essington the 'Pelorus' was driven on shore, high and dry, and was got off with great difficulty and labour after eighty-six days. On 5 March 1840 Bremer, then senior officer in India, appointed Kuper acting captain of the 'Alligator' (5 guns), and in June 1841 moved him to the 'Calliope' (26 guns), in which he was confirmed by the Admiralty with seniority from 5 June 1841. In the 'Alligator', and afterwards in the 'Calliope', he was active during the First Opium War, and was honourably mentioned for his conduct at the capture of Chusan (Zhoushan) in July 1840, at the capture of the Bogue (Humen) forts in February 1841, and in the operations leading up to the surrender of Canton (Guangzhou). He was made a CB on 21 January 1842. From 1850 to 1853 he commanded the frigate 'Thetis' in the Pacific, and for a few months in 1855 the 'London' in the Mediterranean. 
On 29 July 1861 Kuper was promoted rear-admiral, and in the autumn of 1862 succeeded Sir James Hope as commander-in-chief in China, in the aftermath of the Taiping uprising. Kuper's first task was to capture the Taiping stronghold Kahding (Jiading), which he did on 23 October 1862. He was quickly called away to arrange matters in Japan, where the great nobles were angry at the treaties with Western nations, and the threatened introduction of foreigners and foreign customs. On 14 September 1862 a small party of British riding in the country was savagely attacked by retainers of the daimio of Satsuma, and one was killed. Reparation and compensation were demanded both from the imperial government and from the prince of Satsuma, and as they were not given, Kuper was requested to bring the squadron into the Bay of Yokohama. He arrived there in March 1863, and under this threat, following the suspension of diplomatic relations, the Japanese government agreed to pay the $100,000 demanded. But Satsuma proved less compliant, and on 14 August Kuper brought the squadron before Kagosima. The next day three steamers belonging to the prince were seized. Thereupon his batteries opened fire, and were speedily silenced. Satsuma's palace was shelled, and by an accident the greater part of the town was burned. On 16 August 1863 the prince submitted to the British demands. 
The following year the daimio of Nagato, whose batteries commanded the Strait of Simonoseki, the ordinary and most convenient channel into the inland sea, closed the navigation to foreigners. The French and Dutch squadrons, and one United States warship, made common cause with the British, and acted under the orders of the British admiral. The ships opened fire at 4 p.m. on 5 September, and by the next day all the batteries had been silenced and stormed. On 7 September negotiations began, and it was soon agreed that all ships of all countries passing through the Strait of Simonoseki should be treated in a friendly manner. The battle led not only to the opening of the inland sea, but to the downfall of the old 'country' party in Japan, and to a social and political revolution there. 
In 1865 Kuper returned to England. He had no further service. He had been made a KCB on 25 February 1864, for his services at Kagosima; and on 2 June 1869 he was made GCB. On 6 April 1866 he became a vice-admiral, and on 20 October 1872 admiral. Kuper died at his home, The Rock, South Brent, near Totnes, Devon, on 29 October 1885. 


@@@@@


doc= 15811


Kurz, (Wilhelm) Sulpiz (1834-1878), botanist, was born on 5 May 1834 at Augsberg, Bavaria, the son of Aloys Kurz, an engineer. His father died in 1842 and he and his mother moved to Munich where he attended school. He then entered Munich University where he was a pupil of C. F. P. von Martius, the professor of botany and traveller in Brazil. In 1854, having quarrelled with his family, Kurz went to Delft in the Netherlands, where he worked as an apothecary. In 1856 he enlisted in the subordinate medical services of the Dutch East India army under the alias of Johann Amann. He arrived at Batavia in September 1856, and subsequently served at Banka and the Celebes, taking advantage of his travels to collect plants widely. On his return to Batavia in September 1859 he was appointed to assist at the botanical garden at Buitenzorg, a post which he occupied until 1863. In that year he was induced by Thomas Anderson, superintendent of the Royal Botanic Garden, Calcutta, who was visiting the Dutch possessions, to return with him to Calcutta as curator of the herbarium. This appointment he held until his death. 
Kurz became very familiar with both Indian and Malayan floras, and was frequently dispatched on botanical missions. In 1866 he spent three months on the Andaman Islands, the subject of a detailed report published in 1870. Two expeditions to Burma, in 1867-8 and 1870-71, prepared him for his most important work, his 'Forest Flora of British Burma' (2 vols., 1877). In November 1877 Kurz went on leave, and proceeded on a tour to Burma and the Straits Settlements for the benefit of his health. He died at Pulo-Penang on 15 January 1878 of fever complicated by a thigh abscess. A monument in his memory was erected in the Royal Botanic Garden, Calcutta. 
Kurz published over sixty reports and papers, seventeen of which appeared in the 'Journal' and 'Proceedings' of the Asiatic Society of Bengal, of which he was elected a member in 1869. Other papers were published principally in the 'Journal of Botany, British and Foreign' (1866-76) and 'Flora' (1871-5). 


@@@@@


doc= 15812


Kyan, Esmonde (1750-1798), Irish nationalist, was the third son of Howard Kyan (1711-1766), landowner, of Mount Howard, and Frances Esmonde (died 1785), daughter of Lawrence Esmonde and sister of Sir James Esmonde, seventh baronet (1701-1767), of Ballinastragh, co. Wexford. Early in his life he served as an artillery officer in the British army. After leaving the army he lost his left arm, having been fired on by a debtor; he was subsequently fitted with an artificial arm. However, this did not inhibit his activity as a United Irish artillery officer during the insurrection of 1798. He was married twice, first to Mary Ann Byrne on 16 March 1774 in the Franciscan chapel at Wexford. They had five daughters. After her death he married Margaret Furlong of Kincone, Ferrybank, Wexford, and they had two sons, who both died young, and one daughter. John Howard Kyan (1774-1850), inventor of kyanizing; was his nephew. 
5 feet 6 inches in height and regarded as handsome, Kyan was one of the outstanding figures in the social, commercial, and political life of co. Wexford. He was a senior partner in the banking and minting firm of Kyan and Carnac. His instinct for humour and wit was noted by friends and even recorded by enemies in battle. He became an early adherent to the United Irish Society and, because of his army experience, achieved military rank at colonel level in the north-east (Ballaghreen) area of co. Wexford. At the outbreak of the rebellion in co. Wexford on 26 May 1798 he was arrested and lodged with other suspects in the market house at Gorey. Following the remarkable rebel victory at nearby Tubberneering he was rescued from imminent execution, and he immediately took command of the captured artillery pieces with such effect that the crown forces under General Loftus abandoned north Wexford. He was badly injured at the battle of Arklow and never completely recovered. 
Kyan was recuperating at his wife's family home at Ferrybank when, on 21 June, he heard of the killing of loyalists by a mob on the adjacent Wexford Bridge; he crossed the bridge, confronted the crowd, and saved several lives. He marched north with the insurgent division which headed for the Wicklow Mountains following defeat at the major battle of Vinegar Hill on 21 June 1798. Unable to withstand the rigours of the march, he returned to Ferrybank, where he was arrested. He was tried and then hanged on 24 June 1798 on Wexford Bridge within twenty-four hours of his arrest. Had he reached the Wicklow Mountains his life would have been saved under the surrender terms arranged with General Dundas. His brother-in-law, Patrick Furlong, recovered his body from the Slaney River and had it interred beside the Furlong family grave in Ardcavan churchyard, Castlebridge, co. Wexford. A simple monument was erected in 1938 to mark Kyan's last resting place. 


@@@@@


doc= 15813


Kyan, John Howard (1774-1850), inventor of kyanizing, was born on 27 November 1774 in Dublin, the elder of two sons (there were also five daughters) of John Howard Kyan (1743-1801) of Mount Howard, Ballymurtagh, in co. Wicklow, and his wife, Phillis (died 1808), daughter of Thomas Sutton, count of Clonard. The nationalist Esmond Kyan (1750-1798) was his uncle. His father was the owner of valuable copper mines in co. Wicklow, and for some time at the end of the eighteenth century worked them himself. Kyan was educated to take part in the management of the mines, but soon after he entered the concern its fortunes declined, and in 1804 his father died almost penniless. In the same year, Kyan married his cousin Ellen Kyan, daughter of James Kyan of Carlow. They had three sons, the eldest of whom was the Revd William Edward Kyan of Ballymurtagh, and seven daughters. For a time Kyan was employed at a vinegar works at Newcastle upon Tyne, but subsequently moved to London, to Greaves's vinegar brewery in Old Street Road. 
The decay of the timber supports in his father's copper mines had already directed Kyan's attention to the question of preserving vegetable substances, in particular timber, and as early as 1812 he began experiments with a view to discovering a method of preventing the decay. Eventually he found that bichloride of mercury (or corrosive sublimate) gave the best results, having first applied it to timber in 1825. Without revealing the nature of the process, he submitted a block of oak impregnated with that substance to the Admiralty in 1828 and it was placed in a so-called 'fungus pit' at Woolwich, where it remained for three years exposed to all the conditions favourable to decay. When taken out in 1831, it was found to be perfectly sound, and after further trials it still remained unaffected. Kyan patented his discovery in 1832 (nos. 6253 and 6309), extending the application of the invention to the preservation of such materials as paper, canvas, cloth, and cordage. A further patent was granted in 1836 (no. 7001). The preservative action of a solution of bichloride of mercury was previously well known, and Kyan's process merely consisted in the submersion of timber or other materials in a tank containing a solution of corrosive sublimate in water (1 lb bichloride of mercury to 5 gallons of water). Kyan maintained that permanent chemical combination took place between the mercurial salt and the woody fibre, but this was contested. The process attracted great attention and Michael Faraday chose it as the subject of his inaugural lecture at the Royal Institution on 22 February 1833, on his appointment as Fullerian professor of chemistry. 
In 1835 the Admiralty published the report of a committee appointed by the board to inquire into the efficacy of the process and the effect if any on health from the use of a mercury compound. Tests were largely inconclusive, but a number of ships were built with 'kyanized' timbers and a great future was predicted for the method. In 1836 Kyan sold the patent rights to the Anti-Dry Rot Company, an act of parliament being passed which authorized the raising of share capital of $250,000. Tanks were constructed at Kyan's timberyard at Grosvenor basin, Pimlico, at the Grand Surrey Canal dock, Rotherhithe, and at the City Road basin. The idea of kyanizing caught the imagination, to judge from the opening verse of a song that appeared in 'Bentley's Miscellany' for January 1837: '
Have you heard, have you heard, Anti-dry Rot's the word? 

Wood will never wear out, thanks to Kyan, to Kyan! 

He dips in a tank any rafter or plank, 

And makes it immortal as Dian, as Dian! 

' Among the early applications of the process was the kyanizing of the palings round the Inner Circle, Regent's Park, which was carried out in 1835 as an advertisement, small brass plates being attached to the palings at intervals stating that the wood had been submitted to the new process. Kyanized timber was used in the construction of a number of large buildings in London and elsewhere. When wooden railway sleepers became general (in place of the stone blocks used on the early lines), a very profitable business for Kyan's company was anticipated, and for a time these hopes were realized. But it became evident that iron fastenings could not be used in wood treated by the method, on account of corrosive action, and it was said that the wood became brittle. The salt was somewhat expensive, and Sir William Burnett's method of preserving timber by chloride of zinc, and afterwards the application of creosote for that purpose, proved severe competitors. Doubts began to be expressed as to the real efficacy of kyanizing and the process gradually ceased to be employed. 
Besides the invention with which his name is associated, Kyan took out patents in 1833 (no. 6534) for propelling ships by a jet of water ejected at the stern, and in 1837 (no. 7460) for a method of obtaining ammoniacal salts from gas liquor. He was also the author of 'The Elements of Light and their Identity with those of Matter Radiant or Fixed', 1838. He died on 5 January 1850 at New York, where he was engaged on a plan for filtering the water supplied to that city by the Croton aqueduct. 


@@@@@


doc= 15814


Kyd, Robert (1746-1793), botanist and army officer, was born in Forfarshire. Little is known of his family and early life. He may have studied medicine at Edinburgh. In 1764 he obtained a cadetship and was appointed ensign in the Bengal Engineers. The following year he was promoted to lieutenant. He became captain on 3 April 1768, major on 29 May 1780, and lieutenant-colonel on 7 December 1782. On the latter date he was appointed secretary to the military department of inspection in Bengal, a post he seems to have held until his death. He was a man of cultivated tastes, fond of botany, and had amassed a fine collection of plants at his home near Calcutta. 
In April 1786 Kyd proposed to the government of Bengal the establishment of a garden to grow nutritious plants such as certain palms, the sago from Malaya, and the Persian date. He suggested that these should be propagated and then distributed throughout British India as alternative sources of food in times of famine. Encouraged by a favourable response, he submitted a more ambitious plan a few months later, greatly extending the range of crops to be grown, and, for the first time, calling his project a 'botanical garden'. However, he made it quite clear that he did not envisage a traditional botanical garden but rather a nursery raising 'stock for disseminating such articles as may prove beneficial to the inhabitants, as well as to the natives of Great Britain, and which ultimately may tend to the extension of the national commerce and riches' (Kyd to governor-general, 1 June 1786, Natural History Museum, London, Dawson Turner collection, 7, fols. 57-67). That summer a site for the garden was chosen on the west bank of the River Hooghly a few miles from Calcutta. With Kyd in charge of operations, the ground was cleared, plants were acquired from overseas and from other parts of the Indian subcontinent. Kyd was made honorary superintendent in May 1787. By 1790 about 4000 plants were in cultivation. Kyd was disappointed by the poor response to his appeal for plants useful in horticulture. Nevertheless, during the six years he was in charge he laid the foundations of what was eventually to be the premier botanical garden in Asia. When the young Joseph Hooker visited it in 1848, he declared that it had 'contributed more useful and ornamental tropical plants to the public and private gardens of the world than any other establishment before or since' (J. D. Hooker, 'Himalayan Journals' 1, 1854, 3-4). 
Kyd died at Calcutta on 26 May 1793, and was buried in the South Park Street cemetery there. A memorial urn, executed by the sculptor Thomas Banks, was put up in 1795 on a site selected by William Roxburgh in the botanical garden. 'Kydia', a genus of the plant family Malvaceae in Sikkim and south-east Asia was named after him by Roxburgh. 


@@@@@


doc= 15815


Kyd, Stewart (d. 1811), radical and legal writer, a native of Arbroath, Forfarshire, was educated at Arbroath grammar school and, from the age of fourteen, at King's College, Aberdeen. Abandoning a design of entering the church, he settled in London, and was called to the bar from the Middle Temple. He became a firm friend of the radical politicians Thomas Hardy and John Horne Tooke, whose political opinions he admired. In November 1792 he joined the Society for Constitutional Information. On 29 May 1794 he was arrested and examined by the privy council, but was soon discharged. He was again summoned before the council on 4 June, and three days later was committed to the Tower on a charge of high treason, with Hardy, Tooke, and ten others. On 25 October all were brought up for trial before a special commission at the Old Bailey, but after the acquittal of Hardy, Tooke, and Thelwall, the attorney-general declined offering any evidence against Kyd, and he was discharged. In June 1797 he ably defended Thomas Williams, a bookseller, who was indicted for blasphemy in publishing Thomas Paine's 'Age of Reason'. The substance of his defence was printed during the same year in a collection entitled 'The Speeches at Full Length... of Thomas Erskine, and Stewart Kyd'. He was also the author of a number of legal works, including 'A Treatise on the Law of Awards' (1791) and the two-volume 'A Treatise on the Law of Corporations' (1793-4). Kyd died in the Temple, London, where he was living, on 26 January 1811. 


@@@@@


doc= 15816


Kyd, Thomas (bap. 1558, d. 1594), playwright and translator, was baptized on 6 November 1558 at the church of St Mary Woolnoth in London, the son of Francis Kyd and his wife, Anna (died 1605). 
Kyd's father achieved distinction as warden of the Company of Scriveners in 1580. Thomas entered Merchant Taylors' School in 1565, and may have remained a pupil there under the noted educationist Richard Mulcaster until 1575. The school curriculum included Latin, French, and Italian, a good grounding for the future translator. At Merchant Taylors', plays in both Latin and English formed part of the boys' training, and Kyd is likely to have taken part in these exercises. He may have performed before Queen Elizabeth at court, and before a paying audience in Merchant Taylors' Hall early in 1574, in the first known commercial production by a boys' company (Shapiro, 14). His failure to attend either Oxford or Cambridge university has been attributed to hints of Catholic sympathies in his writings, but the evidence is very slender. 
Kyd may have taken up his father's profession of scrivener, as his neat handwriting in the few surviving holograph scraps suggests, and as Thomas Nashe's gibe about his following 'the trade of 'Noverint'' possibly confirms ('Preface' to Robert Greene's 'Menaphon', 1589). According to Thomas Dekker's pamphlet 'A Knight's Conjuring' (1607) Kyd was a playwright for the Queen's Men between 1583 and 1585. None of his early work is known to survive. 
If evidence for the details of Kyd's life is scant, evidence for his authorship of the works associated with him is no less so. 'The Spanish Tragedy' (1587?) was not formally attributed to him until 1773, when Thomas Hawkins, the editor of a three-volume play-collection, 'The Origin of the English Drama', cited a passing reference in Thomas Heywood's 'Apology for Actors' (1612) to 'M. 'Kid', in the 'Spanish' Tragedy'. The date of composition of the play is unknown, with speculation ranging from 1583 to 1591. It must have been written before 23 February 1592, for on that date it was performed at the Rose Theatre by Lord Strange's men for Philip Henslowe. This is unlikely to have been the play's first performance, since Henslowe did not mark it as 'ne' (new). A balance of evidence suggests a date of composition before 1588, given the absence -- in a play about Spain -- of any reference to the Armada, and given plausible allusions in Nashe's 'Preface' to 'Menaphon' (1589) and in his 'Anatomie of Absurdities' (1588-9). The year 1587 fits the known facts and plausible speculation. 

'The Spanish Tragedy' proved excellent box-office. Philip Henslowe, who held the early rights, recorded twenty-nine performances between 1592 and 1597, a record almost unsurpassed among his plays. The publication record is still more impressive, with at least eleven editions between 1592 and 1633, a tally unequalled by any of the plays of Shakespeare. There are more than one hundred allusions to 'The Spanish Tragedy' in contemporary literature (Dundrap, 2.607-31). Additions and revisions were commissioned, from Ben Jonson among others; Anne Barton, arguing a case from Jonson's engagement with Elizabethan literature generally, takes the view that Jonson, commissioned by Henslowe to refurbish a dated though still theatrically potent text, may have assumed a style not his own, in a bold and arguably successful act of theatrical ventriloquism. It is, however, unlikely that the 'Additions' which have survived (printed 1602) are Jonson's. Their authorship is unknown. Stage success was not confined to England. Six adaptations, three in German and three in Dutch, have survived, and performances are recorded in Frankfurt (1601), Dresden (1626), Prague (1651), and Luneburg (1660) (R. Schonwerth, 'Die niederlandischen und deutschen Bearbeitungen von Thomas Kyds 'Spanish Tragedy'', Litterarisch-Historische Forschungen, 26, 1897; Erne, 154). 
By 1587-8 Kyd had acquired a patron to whom he refers, but whom he does not name, in a letter written in later years in connection with his difficulties with authority. The patron, according to the letter, was patron of a company of players, which narrows a wide field considerably. Ferdinando Stanley, Lord Strange (after 1593 earl of Derby), has been mooted, as has Henry Radcliffe, earl of Sussex, but neither suggestion is wholly convincing. Lukas Erne's advocacy of Henry Herbert, second earl of Pembroke, has the advantage of placing Kyd in relationship to an influential literary circle, and of making sense of his dedication of 'Cornelia' (1594; translated from Garnier) to Mary Herbert, countess of Pembroke, wife of Henry Herbert and herself the author of a translation of Garnier's 'Antoine' (1592) (Erne, 274-8). 
The most substantial information about Kyd's later life concerns his serious brush with authority in May 1593. On 11 May the privy council instructed its officers to seek out the source of certain 'libels', or inflammatory writings, directed against foreigners resident in London. During the investigation Kyd's rooms were searched and the officers found, not what they were looking for, but material considered equally incriminating. This was a three-page manuscript consisting, according to an endorsement by one of Kyd's accusers, of 'vile heretical Conceiptes denyinge the deity of Jhesus Christe or Savior' (BL, Harley MS 6848, fols. 187-9). The 'conceipts' have been identified in the twentieth century as transcripts from an Elizabethan theological tract, John Proctour's 'The Fall of the Late Arian' (1549), a tract which, in rebutting them, quotes 'heretical', or unitarian, views, possibly those of a parish priest, John Assheton (W. D. Briggs, 'On a document concerning Christopher Marlowe', 'Studies in Philology', 20, 1920, 153-9; G. T. Buckley, 'Who was the late Arian?', 'Modern Language Notes', 49, 1934, 500-03). The zealous officers were presumably unaware of the origin of the manuscript's contents, as Kyd must also have been, and he was arrested and imprisoned. 
From his prison cell, and afterwards, Kyd wrote to the lord keeper, Sir John Puckering, pleading his innocence. In one of his letters, he explained that the incriminating documents were not his but Marlowe's 'shufled wth some of myne (unknown to me) by some occasion of wrytinge in one chamber twoe yeares synce' (BL, Harley MS 6849, fols. 218-218'v'). In a second letter Kyd wrote more fully about Marlowe's notoriously subversive views, accusing his fellow playwright of being blasphemous, disorderly, holding treasonous opinions, being an irreligious reprobate, and 'intemperate & of a cruel hart'. Marlowe was arrested on 18 May, but was released from prison two days later. On 30 May he died in a pub brawl at Deptford, the victim, it has been suggested, of shady dealings associated with the spymaster Sir Francis Walsingham (C. Nicholl, 'The Reckoning: the Murder of Christopher Marlowe', 1992; see also J. Masten, 'A New History of Early English Drama', ed. J. D. Cox and D. S. Kasten, 1997, 357-82). Both of Kyd's letters follow the date of Marlowe's death. Whether Marlowe's arrest was prompted by verbal accusations from Kyd to privy council officers can only be a matter of speculation. The 'conceipts', it has been suggested, were possibly a deliberate plant, put in place by the officers as part of an officially inspired effort to blacken Marlowe's name (Nicholl, 288-9). Kyd's release from prison preceded his death in 1594, perhaps hastened by torture, by no more than a year. He was buried at St Mary Colechurch in London on 15 August 1594. 
Of Kyd's other writing, little has been said in print. A major problem is one of attribution. The theatrical entrepreneur Philip Henslowe refers on twenty-two occasions between February 1591 and January 1593 to performances of plays he names 'Jeronymo', 'The Comedy of Jeronymo', 'Spanes comodye donne oracioe', and 'The Comodey of Doneoracio', with further variations of spelling. Recent scholars take 'Jeronimo', in its several forms, to refer to 'The Spanish Tragedy', while the various 'comedy' titles are thought to refer to 'The First Part of Ieronimo', a play printed in quarto in 1605. This play deals with events which precede the action of 'The Spanish Tragedy', and may have been written by Kyd as a forepiece or first part for his famous tragedy. It was so edited and published by Andrew S. Cairncross (1967). Equally, the play may have been written, possibly by a hack writer, to cash in on the success of 'The Spanish Tragedy'. Accurate determination is made difficult by the poor state of the printed text. Lukas Erne proposes a complex origin, arguing that the play preserves elements of Kyd's original forepiece (which he calls 'Don Horatio'), in particular that play's 'political level', but suggests that this has been incorporated by a lesser writer into a new drama, with a new storyline substituted for the 'private level' of Kyd's play. The theory is attractive but unproven. The play as it survives is unsatisfactory not only textually, but as a piece of theatre, though it offers features that make attribution to Kyd not implausible. 

'Soliman and Perseda', entered on the Stationers' register in November 1592, may have been written in 1588 or 1589. Its relation to 'The Spanish Tragedy' is once again a matter of speculation. It may have been written to capitalize on the earlier play's success, since it represents a scaling-up of the tragedy's play-within-the-play. The evidence for Kyd's authorship, including an apparent allusion noticed by Helen Gardner in one of Donne's poems ('John Donne: the 'Elegies' and the 'Songs and Sonnets'', 1965, 112-18) is attractive if inconclusive. The play's most notable character, Basilisco, a boastful, amorous, and inventive 'miles gloriosus' prefigures Shakespeare's Falstaff, especially in his 'ubi sunt' meditation on the deceits of honour ('Soliman and Perseda', V.iii, ll. 67-92). 

'Cornelia', Kyd's translation of Robert Garnier's tragedy-of-grief 'Cornelie', was entered on the Stationers' register on 26 January 1594, and dedicated to Lady Bridget Fitzwalter, countess of Sussex, as well as to the countess of Pembroke, perhaps in a bid to win her patronage after the debacle of May 1593. The translation, a free one, was probably known to Shakespeare (analogies have been found with 'Julius Caesar'), but the neo-Senecan genre proved a dead end in English theatre. Kyd's other acknowledged translation, 'The Householder's Philosophy', renders Tasso's 'Il padre di famiglia' in vigorous prose, expanding on the original's account of home and estate management. 
Kyd's authorship of a 'Hamlet' earlier than Shakespeare's holds an extensive if shadowy place in the annals of English scholarship. The case rests on the interpretation of phrases in Nashe's 'Preface' to 'Menaphon' (1589), and has been both supported and rejected by leading scholars. Most recently, Lukas Erne has argued that Nashe's satiric phrases do indeed imply that Kyd was the author of an early 'Hamlet'. He also reinforces suggestions, made by E. K. Chambers and W. W. Greg, among others, that traces of a Kydian 'Hamlet' may be found in a small section of the first quarto of Shakespeare's 'Hamlet'. Shakespeare's debt to Kyd, however, remains no more than speculation. 

'The Spanish Tragedy' has been successfully revived on the modern stage, though the record is blank before the twentieth century, except for a performance watched by Pepys at a minor theatre, the Nursery, on 24 February 1668 (Pepys, 'Diary', 9.90). Notable twentieth-century productions have included those directed by Michael Bogdanov for the National Theatre (Cottesloe and Lyttleton, opened 22 September 1982), and Michael Boyd's production for the Royal Shakespeare Company (Swan Theatre, Stratford upon Avon, opened 30 April 1997). 
The play's importance to the literary historian is considerable. As the first, or one of the first, in a line of tragedies of revenge, 'The Spanish Tragedy' inaugurates an influential genre. Assuming the 1587 dating is correct, the play features the first Machiavellian villain (Lorenzo), and may be the first to include a play-within-the-play. Equally significant, Kyd developed in 'The Spanish Tragedy' a robust and serviceable blank verse which, though some of its rhetorical practices soon came to seem outmoded, nevertheless provided Elizabethan theatre with its earliest convincing voice. This, together with his creation of memorable character, his development of the framing action, and his exploration of the double plot, confirms Kyd as the most important innovator, with Marlowe and Shakespeare, of the great age of English drama. 


@@@@@


doc= 15817


Kyffin, Maurice (c.1555-1598), author and soldier, is more than likely to have been the son of Thomas Kyffin and Catrin Llwyd, who are known to have had four children. If so, he may have been born before his parents were married. Both his probable parents belonged to landed families in or near Oswestry, then a largely Welsh-speaking town. Kyffin's coat of arms is depicted as the end-piece of his best-known work, 'Deffynniad Ffydd Eglwys Loegr'. He was clearly a man of learning, but all that is known about his education is that he studied poetry under the most famous Welsh bard of his age, Wiliam Llyn, who lived in Oswestry, and that in London, from 1578 to 1580, he was one of the pupils and friends of the polymath John Dee. About 1580 to 1582 he was tutor to Lord Buckhurst's three sons, whom he prepared for entry to Oxford University. He appears to have been on close and friendly terms with a wide circle of scholars and litterateurs, who numbered among them such celebrated figures as John Dee, William Camden, Edmund Spenser, Sir John Harington, William Morgan, Dr David Powel, Gabriel Goodman, Roger Cook, and his own brother, Edward. He wrote a considerable amount of verse in English and Welsh, and many of his Welsh poems are preserved in manuscript form. His most celebrated English poem is 'The Blessednes of Brytaine', the first impression of which was printed in 1587 and the second in 1588. Inspired by the dire threat to Elizabeth and her realm from her Catholic enemies at home and abroad, it praised in lavish terms the 'inestimable benefits', especially in religion, conferred upon the kingdom by the queen's 'incomparable blessed rule'. It was dedicated to the earl of Essex and recounted the close, but unspecified, connection between its author's father and the earl's father and grandfather. In 1588 Kyffin also published an English prose translation of the comedy 'Andria', written by the Latin poet Terence. In the same year he was appointed surveyor of the muster rolls to the English army in the Netherlands and in 1591 deputy treasurer to the English forces in Normandy. 
Maurice Kyffin returned to London in 1594 to complete his literary masterpiece, 'Deffynniad Ffydd Eglwys Loegr', a translation into Welsh of Bishop John Jewel's 'Apologia' for the faith of the Church of England, which had originally appeared in 1562. Kyffin's Welsh text, published in 1595, became one of the classics of the language. In spite of its author's having lived much of his adult life outside Wales and his being reluctant to publish in Welsh, believing that he might achieve greater fame by writing in English, his book is remarkable for its smooth and powerful expression. He avoided the pitfalls which often beset translators, for instance of being too dependent on the style and idiom of the original author. Yet his own misgivings were not wholly unjustified; his name was virtually unknown in Wales until 1671, when a second edition of 'Deffynniad Ffydd' was published. A Welsh poem written by him 'c'.1595 indicated that he spent some time in the Fleet prison. He also directed an English sonnet to Sir Robert Cecil asking for his help in distress and a petition to the queen seeking service in France. 
It was not in France, but in Ireland, however, that in 1596 Kyffin found an opening as comptroller of the musters to the army, although the eighteen months or so that he spent there proved to be a very stormy period. In his dispatches to Burghley and others he described the appalling conditions he encountered in Ireland: a country devastated by famine, rebellion, brutal warfare waged by both sides, and especially the exploitation of populace and soldiers as a result of the corrupt practices of commanders and officials. He was particularly downcast by the intrigues and peculation indulged in by his colleague Sir Ralph Lane. Kyffin himself was praised by Burghley and other leading figures for his honesty and conscientiousness. He died on 2 January 1598 and was buried in Christ Church, Dublin, though his grave has since been lost. In his will, drawn up in 1595, he did not mention his parents but only his brother, Edward, to whom he left $130 and most of his books, and two sisters, Elyn Kyffin, or Davies, and Thamesine (later Onslow). The will was emphatically protestant in its opening phrases and provided legacies for the poor of the French church ($3) and the Italian church ($1) in London, and $3 for the poor, especially the parents of maimed and diseased children. His brother was his executor and proved the will on 20 April 1599. 




@@@@@


doc= 15818


Kyle, James Francis (1788-1869), vicar apostolic of the northern district of Scotland and historical collector, was born at Quarryholes, near Abbeyhill, in Edinburgh, on 22 September 1788, the eldest son of the four children of James Kyle (died 1799), commissioner of roads and bridges for the war office, and his wife, Margaret Strachan, daughter of a Banff doctor. Although the elder James Kyle was a protestant, after his premature death, his son was brought up in his mother's faith as a Catholic. He was educated for three years at Edinburgh high school, before attending the Roman Catholic seminary at Aquhorties in Aberdeenshire from October 1799. His maternal uncle wanted to make him heir to his East India Company fortune and connections, but Kyle chose instead to enter holy orders, being ordained as priest in 1812. He remained at Aquhorties for twenty-seven years, becoming a master in 1808 and later prefect of studies. His scholarly instincts, however, were not to be truly fulfilled: in January 1826 he was sent as a missioner to the parish of St Andrew in Glasgow, where he spent several arduous years and much family money in the Clyde Street church. On 13 February 1827 he was appointed bishop 'in partibus' of Germanicia and vicar apostolic of the newly created northern district of Scotland. He was consecrated at Aberdeen by Bishop Alexander Paterson of the eastern district on 28 September 1828. 
Kyle proved to be an effective vicar apostolic, though he initially faced the problems relating to the new seminary at Blairs. This house and estate had been donated to the Scottish missions by the wealthy John Menzies of Pitfodel, and Kyle had been appointed mainly to manage the new foundation. The donor's disappointment with the educational system developed at the seminary, and conflicts over the tenancy of the accompanying land, plagued Kyle's early career as vicar apostolic. He was supported, however, by the coadjutor of the western district, Bishop Andrew Scott, whose active and energetic character complemented Kyle's more cautious and intellectual one. A portrait of Kyle, probably painted about this time, shows a long-faced man with dishevelled dark hair: his expression is solemn and rather reserved. 
Owing to the intractability of Menzies and Charles Gordon (1772-1855), who was overseeing the conversion of Blairs, Kyle chose to fix his episcopal headquarters at the parish of St Gregory, Preshome, from where he presided over a district of 13,000 square miles. With the foundation of the new district, new finances had become available, and Kyle was able to build many new chapels and schools. His high view of the position of the priest -- he had opposed the mixing of clerical and secular students at Aquhorties, and he now deplored the tendency of highland priests to supplement their incomes by farming -- further indicated the vigorous new direction of Scottish Catholicism. 
Despite a useful episcopal career, Kyle was more significant as a collector of early historical documents relating to the history of Catholic Scotland, some of which were formerly in the Scots College in Paris. He numbered his letters and papers at 30,000, but a modern estimate suggests that he collected up to 75,000. Kyle supplied Prince Aleksandr Lobanov-Rostovsky with sources for his publication of the letters of Mary, queen of Scots, and he also succeeded in deciphering the secret letter code of the queen. Kyle died at Preshome on 23 February 1869, and was buried in the church there. His collections are now deposited at Columba House in Edinburgh: to him the Scottish Roman Catholic church owes the best part of its pre-Reformation archives. 


@@@@@


doc= 15819


Kilvington, Richard (c.1305-1361), philosopher and theologian, was the son of a priest from the diocese of York, and was probably born in Kilvington in Yorkshire. He studied and taught at Oxford and must have matriculated no later than 1319. MA by 26 September 1331, when he was included in a list of Oxford graduates sent to Pope John XXII requesting the reservation of benefices, he was BTh by 28 August 1335, when he was granted papal reservation of a benefice in the gift of the abbey of St Albans, and DTh by 1339. During his years at Oxford the controversies surrounding the views of William Ockham (died 1349) dominated the intellectual life of the university, but Kilvington should be counted among those opposed, or at least uncommitted to Ockhamism, with an outlook closer to that of his other near contemporary Walter Burley (died 1345). 
Kilvington was one of the philosophers commonly known as the 'Oxford calculators', but -- unlike the majority of these -- he was not a fellow of Merton College. He was probably a member of Oriel College, as he bequeathed a substantial number of books to its library. The works composed during his Oxford career include: 'Sophismata'; 'Quaestiones super librum de generatione et corruptione'; 'Quaestiones morales super libros ethicorum'; commentary on the 'Sentences' of Peter Lombard (described in some manuscripts as 'Quaestiones theologicales'); 'De intentionibus et remissionibus potentiarum'; and 'Quaestiones super libros physicorum'. The 'Tractatus de intentionibus et remissionibus potentiarum' previously attributed to him is now known to be a work of his contemporary Richard Swineshead. A sermon he preached, 'De adventu domini', survives (Bodl. Oxf., MS Auct. F.inf.1.2). Kilvington enjoyed the patronage of Richard Bury (died 1345), bishop of Durham, and lived in his household, presumably in the bishop's London palace near St Paul's. Both men accompanied Edward III and his queen to Antwerp in the summer of 1338, and Kilvington was one of the ambassadors appointed to negotiate with the French king Philippe VI in July 1339. After Bury's death he continued in royal service, and is mentioned in 1350 as a king's clerk and as going with royal 'protection and safe conduct' on necessary business to the papal curia in Avignon, where he made useful contacts. By 18 March 1350 he was archdeacon of London. On 5 April 1354 he was provided to the deanery of St Paul's on the petition of Cardinal Pierre du Cros, who described Kilvington as his chaplain. 
The principal English supporter of Richard Fitzralph, archbishop of Armagh (died 1360), in his campaign against the pastoral privileges of the friars, in 1356 Kilvington invited Fitzralph to preach at St Paul's Cross in the courtyard of the cathedral. Their quarrel with the mendicants gave rise to sermons, treatises, lawsuits (including one at the papal curia involving Kilvington's former master, Cardinal Pierre du Cros), and papal bulls. It also provoked polemical poetry, in Latin and English, on both sides of the controversy. The anonymous author of one of these works laments the plight of the mendicants: the two Richards, who are described as the lion and the leopard, the worst of wild beasts, are trying to turn London against the friars by their preaching. As the son of a priest, Kilvington is regarded as particularly reprobate. He is almost certainly the author of the defence of Fitzralph, 'In causa domini Ardmachani allegationes magistri Ricardi devoti viri contra fratres' ('Allegations on behalf of the lord [archbishop] of Armagh by the devoted master Richard against the friars', Paris, Bibliotheque Nationale, cod. lat. 3222, fols. 111'v'-116'v'), and probably also of the 'Replicaciones... contra opusculum ffratris Rogeri Conewey' ('Replies to the little work of Brother Roger Conway', Paris, Bibliotheque Nationale, cod. lat. 3222, fols. 159-194'v'). In this case he must have followed Fitzralph to Avignon, participated in the hearing before the commission of cardinals, and returned home after the archbishop's death in November 1360. He was dead by 9 September 1361, possibly a victim of the plague, and was buried in St Paul's Cathedral. 


@@@@@


doc= 15820


Kymer, Gilbert (d. 1463), dean of Salisbury and physician, is first noticed in university records as principal of Hart Hall, Oxford, in 1411, a post he still held in 1414. He received his MA in 1412, and was in that year senior proctor of the university. His DM was awarded about 1423 and he was bachelor of civil law by 1433. He was elected university chancellor on 10 December 1431 and had resigned by March 1434. During that time, he rented a school from University College. Elected chancellor again in February 1447, he resigned on 11 May 1453. As chancellor, he resided in Durham College in March 1449, in Lincoln College in July 1450 and January 1451, and in Coventry Hall in June and July 1452. 
Some sources say Kymer married before 1420, but left his wife so as to be able to take holy orders. He came to hold numerous livings, starting with Lutterworth in Leicestershire, and was successively treasurer and dean of Salisbury, where he died on 16 May 1463, and was buried in the cathedral; his effigy survives in the window of the south transept. His will, dated 14 October 1462, was proved on 12 July 1463 and shows him a wealthy and generous man. 
In 1423 Kymer appears to have migrated from Oxford to London. There, he joined forces with university-educated physicians and learned surgeons to form a 'Comminalte' ('commonalty') for the regulation and education of medical practitioners, modelled perhaps on the inns of court or on one of the medical licensing bodies associated with urban universities on the continent. It was to be governed by a rector of physicians ('rector medicorum'), the first being Kymer himself. The ordinances of the 'Comminalte' were presented to the mayor and aldermen of the City of London and were granted on 15 May 1423. Kymer's associates were the physician John Somerset, medical bachelor Thomas Southwell, and surgeons John Harwe and Thomas Morstede. On 10 September 1424 the 'Comminalte' judged a legal case, when Harwe and others were charged with incompetence by a patient, William Forest. Kymer presided and found for the defendants, ruling that malign astrological influences had caused Forest's misfortune. By 10 November 1424 the organization had faded from the London scene. 
Kymer's only surviving medical writing dates from 1424, a regimen of health for Humphrey, duke of Gloucester, which is dated 6 March of that year and was written in Hainault, Flanders. The document, which survives in a single fifteenth-century manuscript (BL, Sloane MS 4, pp. 63-102), has twenty-six short chapters, dealing in detail with the duke's mode of living. The table of contents and two chapters, largely on the ill effects of the duke's sexual appetite, were printed by T. Hearne in 'Liber niger Scaccarii' (2.550-59). In 1456 Kymer was one of several physicians and others to obtain a licence to practise alchemy from Henry VI. His associates included William Hatteclyffe, John Faceby, John Kirkeby, and Wolfard Koer. The outcome of their enterprise is not known, but Thomas Norton, in his 'Ordinal of Alchemy' ('c'.1490), mentions that Kymer had written a work on alchemy, now lost. Duke Humphrey's famous gift of books to Oxford University seems to have been made at least in part on Kymer's advice. His first gift, in 1439 of 120 books, was delivered by Kymer himself. Kymer owned a considerable collection of medical books, including Bodleian Library, MS Bodley 362, which includes a copy of John Gaddesden's 'Rosa anglica' with works by other medical authors, including Bernard de Gordon. This book was copied by Kymer's own scribe, Hermann Zurke of Greifswald, Mecklenburg. 


@@@@@


doc= 15821


Kynaston, Edward (bap. 1643, d. 1712?), actor, the son of Thomas Kynaston, was baptized at Oswestry, Shropshire, on 20 April 1643. One source suggests that Edward 'was well descended. The Kynastons were anciently possessed of a genteel estate at Oteley in Shropshire' (Betterton, 116). On 5 July 1654 he was bound as an apprentice to John Rhodes in the Company of Drapers for nine years. With Thomas Betterton, Kynaston was introduced to the stage in Rhodes's troupe at the Cockpit, Drury Lane, in March 1660. In the first season Edward played several female parts, including the title role in John Suckling's 'Aglaura', Ismena in Beaumont's and Fletcher's 'The Maid in the Mill', and Arthiope in William Davenant's 'The Unfortunate Lovers': 'he being then very Young made a Compleat Stage Beauty, performing his Parts so well... that it has since been Disputeable among the Judicious, whether any Woman that succeeded him so Sensibly touch'd the Audience as he. (Downes, 19)' How far Kynaston was successful in these roles, even in a theatrical world infected by the continental preference for actresses, is hinted at by his performance as the Duke's Sister in John Fletcher's 'The Loyal Subject' on 18 August 1660, where Pepys thought him 'the loveliest lady that ever I saw in my life, only her voice not very good' (Pepys). Cibber recalls that 'Ladies of Quality prided themselves on taking him with them in their Coaches to Hyde-Park in his Theatrical Habit, after the play' (Cibber, 67). When the Rhodes company was absorbed into the two patent house monopoly, Kynaston became a player with Thomas Killigrew's King's Company at the Vere Street Theatre. He was sworn in on 6 October 1660, and for the first season continued to play these female roles, mixing them with young male parts, such as Otto in Fletcher's and Massinger's 'The Bloody Brother', Corporal Cocke in Heywood's 'The Royal King', and the more troubling title role in Ben Jonson's 'Epicoene', a woman who turns out to be a boy in disguise. 
The Burney collection notes record that Edward married Maria in 1661, which might be the marriage registered in the parish of St Giles-in-the-Fields, London, between Edward Kynaston and Mary Carter on 6 March 1662. According to the parish registers, this Edward and Mary had five surviving children, John, Elizabeth, Arabella, Sarah, and Anne. Kynaston quickly became a leading player within the King's Company and had the means to acquire a whole acting share by 1663. His roles at Vere Street and the new theatre in Bridges Street, Covent Garden, where the company moved in 1663, included Roseilli and Caraffa in John Ford's 'Love's Sacrifice', the idealistic Acacis in John Dryden's and Robert Howard's 'Indian Queen', the flawed leader Mahomet Boabdelin in both parts of Dryden's 'The Conquest of Granada', and the excessively honourable Guymor in his 'The Indian Emperor', and the title role in Orrery's 'The Black Prince'. He also managed young comedic leads such as Peregrine in Jonson's 'Volpone', Valentine in William Wycherley's 'Love in a Wood', and probably Volscius in the duke of Buckingham's 'The Rehearsal'. 
Edward's involvement in the scandalous 'Rehearsal' play was not his only foray into satirical personation. Pepys records that a performance of William Cavendish's 'The Heiress' was cancelled because 'Kinaston, that did act a part therein, in abuse to Sir Charles Sedley, being last night exceedingly beaten with sticks, by two or three that assaulted him, so as he is mightily bruised and forced to keep his bed' ('Pepys', 1 Feb 1669). Kynaston had recovered enough to act by 9 February and the incident did no harm to his reputation. After the disastrous burning of the Bridges Street Theatre in 1672, the King's Company occupied the old Lincoln's Inn Fields Theatre and then moved into the rebuilt Drury Lane playhouse in March 1674. Kynaston continued to take important, theatrically demanding roles such as the powerful, controlling Scipio in Lee's 'Sophonisba', Harcourt in Wycherley's 'The Country Wife', Freeman in his 'Plain Dealer', the villainous Morat in Dryden's 'Aureng-Zebe', and Leonidas in his 'Marriage a la mode'. 
As well as being a key player in the company, Kynaston had become involved in the management of the troupe: by May 1676 he held 11/4 shares, worth 6's'. 3died every acting day for life, with $100 to his executors. After a breakdown in company management in September 1676 the lord chamberlain appointed Kynaston and three other leading actors, Charles Hart, William Cartwright, and Michael Mohun, to lead the group. This management committee did not take adequate steps to right the company's difficulties, and Hart was appointed with sole responsibility shortly after this, although Kynaston continued to figure on the many documents related to the company's battle with its patent holder, Charles Killigrew. Kynaston announced his decision to retire in 1677 and no new roles are recorded for him, although the King's Company roster was in great disarray during this period. Matters came to a head when, on 14 October 1681, Kynaston and Hart signed a secret agreement with the rival Duke's Company. The King's Company was in dire financial straits by the early 1680s with poor returns for shareholders. All the same, the terms the fifth columnists were prepared to accept are startling. For 5's'. a day each they agreed not to 'play among or effectually assist the King's Company of Actors' and to make over to the Duke's Company 'all the Right, Title and Claim which they or either of them may have to any Plays, Books, Cloaths, and Scenes in the King's Playhouse'. In addition they promised to: 'promote with all their Power and Interest an Agreement between both playhouses, and Mr Kynaston for himself, promises to endeavour, as much as he can, to get free, that he may act at the Duke's Playhouse, but he is not obliged to play unless he have ten Shillings per Day allowed for his Acting, and his Pension then to cease. (Gildon, 8-9)' The companies merged in 1682 and moved into the Drury Lane Theatre. Kynaston appears to have maintained a position as shareholder within the new company and in September that year Charles Hart died and bequeathed his share to Kynaston. Edward was clearly not without means and he may have been the Edward Keynaston of the fashionable Great Queen Street, listed in the baptism registers of St Giles-in-the-Fields on 1 March 1684, and the Kinnaston with property in St Martin's Lane, St Paul, Covent Garden. 
In the enlarged United Company it was a sign of how highly Kynaston was regarded that he was immediately encouraged to perform, adding a range of new roles, the first of which was the King in Dryden's and Lee's 'The Duke of Guise', a late tory contribution to the Exclusion crisis, on 28 November 1682. Roles he originated included the domestic despot Lord Bellguard in John Crowne's 'Sir Courtly Nice', Don Antonio in Thomas D'Urfey's 'Banditti', and the faithful lover Bellmour in Aphra Behn's 'The Lucky Chance'. In his playing of Muley Moloch in Dryden's 'Don Sebastian', Cibber thought 'he had a fierce Lion-like Majesty in his Port and Utterance that gave the Spectator a kind of trembling Admiration' (Cibber, 68). Cibber recalls his 'piercing eye, and in characters of heroick life, a quick imperious vivacity, in his tone of voice, that painted the tyrant truly terrible'. He found him particularly noteworthy as the King in 'Henry IV' where 'every sentiment came from him, as if it had been his own, as if he had himself, that instant, conceiv'd it, as if he had lost the player and were the real king he personated' (Cibber, 69). Kynaston's range as a performer is illustrated by the roles he tackled, and Cibber also praised the variety Kynaston could offer within roles, finding moments of bathetic laughter as the villain in 'Aureng-Zebe' and quiet menace in 'Henry IV', where lesser actors might have chosen bullying volume. 
By the 1690s Kynaston was earning $3 a week but acting less frequently, according to a complaint filed by Christopher Rich and Thomas Skipwith, who were trying to stop the older players from defecting to form a new company in 1695 (Milhous, 244). However, Kynaston continued to take on new roles in the Actors' Company including Hystaspes in John Banks's 'Cyrus the Great', Friendly in fellow actor Doggett's 'The Country Wake', the avenging prince of Libardian in Delariviere Manley's 'The Royal Mischief', Paulinus in Charles Hopkins's 'Boadicea', and the earl of Warwick in Mary Pix's 'Queen Catherine'. A manuscript cast of Southerne's 'Fatal Marriage' lists Kynaston as the heartless father-in-law, Count Baldwin, which might indicate that Kynaston was still playing as late as 24 April 1701. Little is known of the last years of his life, although he remained a ground rent shareholder at the Drury Lane Theatre. He is probably the Edward Kynaston who was buried in St Paul's, Covent Garden, London, on 30 July 1712. 


@@@@@


doc= 15822


Kynaston, Sir Francis (1586/7-1642), writer and founder of an academy of learning, was born in Oteley, Shropshire, the eldest son of Sir Edward Kynaston (died after 1638), gentleman, and his wife, Isabel, daughter of Sir Nicholas Bagenall. He matriculated at Oriel College, Oxford, on 11 December 1601, aged fourteen, and graduated BA from St Mary Hall on 14 June 1604. Admitted to Lincoln's Inn on 9 October 1604, he was called to the bar in 1611. He was awarded an MA degree from Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1609. His marriage in 1613 to Margaret, daughter of Sir Humphrey Lee, bt, produced one son. Knighted by James I on 1 January 1618, he represented Shropshire in the parliament of 1621. Named taxor of Cambridge University in 1623, he was proctor in 1634. In 1625 he became esquire of the body to Charles I. 
Kynaston was almost certainly responsible for a substantial tract entitled 'True presentation of forepast parliaments', probably written in 1629. It survives in at least five manuscript copies and was the subject of extensive notes by Secretary Francis Windebanke, which identify the author as 'Sir Fr: Ken:' (TNA: PRO, SP 16/233/51-2). Kynaston was provoked into writing by an anonymous book exalting the antiquity and authority of parliament, and more generally by what he perceived as the exaggerated reverence for the House of Commons and disrespect for kingship by many MPs in the 1620s. True parliaments, he argued, did not exist under the ancient Britons or Saxons, but instead originated in an assembly convoked by Henry I for the purpose of taking oaths of fealty from his subjects after he had usurped the crown. An elected House of Commons emerged still later through an edict of Henry III, proving that medieval kings had the authority to alter parliamentary procedures and privileges. Parliament's proper function was to offer the king advice and assistance solely with respect to those issues he and his council laid before it. Although parliaments often helped to draft laws, ultimate legislative authority remained in the king alone. Kynaston strenuously objected to the idea that MPs were mainly responsible to their 'countries' rather than the king, which he thought had spread dangerously in recent years. He also criticized counties and boroughs for electing inappropriate representatives in order to please powerful local patrons. 
Between 1633 and 1635 Kynaston published three works of translation. 'Musae querulae: de regis in Scotiam profectione' (1633) presented Latin poems on the king's journey to his coronation in Edinburgh and English renditions by Kynaston on facing pages. 'Musae aulicae autore Ionstono' (1635) did the same for Latin panegyrics to Charles and Henrietta Maria by Arthur Jonston, a Scottish physician to the king. In 'Amorum Troili et Creseidae libri duo' (1635) Kynaston published a translation of Chaucer's 'Troilus and Criseyde' on facing pages with the original. The text was prefaced by a large number of Latin and English dedicatory poems hailing Kynaston for having rescued Chaucer from the oblivion into which his antiquated language had thrust him, by making it possible for readers to appreciate his wit 'without a dictionary' (W. Cartwright, prefatory poem). The manuscript, together with that of his unpublished translation of Robert Henryson's 'Testament of Cresseid', survives in the Bodleian Library in Oxford. 
In 1635 Kynaston also founded an academy, the Musaeum Minervae, at his house in Bedford Street, Covent Garden. For this he obtained a licence under the great seal, a grant of arms, and a common seal. Charles I contributed $100 to the project. The text of a masque written by Kynaston and presented to Prince Charles to mark the opening of the academy was printed under the title 'Corona Minerva' (1635). The next year Kynaston published 'The Constitutions of the Musaeum Minervae', describing the academy's regulations and curriculum. Only sons of peers and gentlemen were to be admitted, for training by a regent and six 'professors' in subjects that men of high birth needed to understand. These included heraldry, the rudiments of the common law, antiquities, coins and medals, husbandry, anatomy, physiology and 'physic', astronomy, optics, navigation and cosmography, various branches of mathematics, music, ancient and modern languages including Hebrew, Greek, Latin, Italian, French, Spanish, and High Dutch, and skill at weapons. Additional instruction in riding, dancing and behaviour, painting, sculpture, and writing rounded out the curriculum. Strong emphasis was to be placed on ideals of honour and lineage, conveyed by 'exciting' students to emulate the accomplishments of old English 'worthies' and their own virtuous ancestors. 
Late in 1636 Kynaston became involved with a Covent Garden neighbour, Edward Mae, in a project to develop a 'hanging furnace' for use by the Royal Navy. This apparently consisted of an enclosed stove suspended by iron bars, intended to replace the heavy brick piles used to contain cooking fires on board ship. The invention received a trial, though with unknown results. By the late 1630s Kynaston had run heavily into debt and was in danger of being disinherited by his father. Francis Windebanke and the king himself interceded on his behalf. 
Kynaston's last published work appeared in the year of his death, 1642. This was a facetious and slightly bawdy romance set in ancient Britain, entitled 'Leoline and Sydanis', to which Kynaston appended a number of love poems. In the dedicatory epistle he described himself as 'old and stricken in years', and claimed to have a number of pieces of 'solid learning' ready for the press, none of which has since been identified. He was buried at Oteley. The Musaeum Minervae does not seem to have survived his death and the outbreak of the civil war. Letters of administration of his estate were granted to his son, Edward, on 13 November 1649. 


@@@@@


doc= 15823


Kynaston, Herbert (1809-1878), headmaster, second son of Roger Kynaston ('c'.1777-1847), and Georgiana, third daughter of Sir Charles Oakeley, governor of Madras, was born at Warwick. From 1821 he was educated at Westminster School, where he was badly injured by an explosion of fireworks in his pocket. He was elected to a studentship at Christ Church, Oxford, in 1827, where he obtained the college prize for Latin verse in 1829, took a first class in classics in 1831, and was appointed tutor and Greek reader in 1836. He graduated BA in 1831, MA in 1833, and BD and DD in 1849. He was university select preacher in 1841. In 1834 he was ordained, and served as curate of Culham, Oxfordshire. Four years later, at the early age of twenty-eight, he was elected to the high-mastership of St Paul's School, London, on the retirement of Dr John Sleath. On 2 August 1838, shortly after his appointment, he married Elizabeth Selina, daughter of Hugh Kennedy of Cultra, co. Down. 
During the thirty-eight years of his successful rule at St Paul's, Kynaston carried through many innovations. The practice of taking boarders ceased, a mathematics master was appointed, and teaching in modern languages was instituted. M. M. Demogeot and Montucci, the French commissioners who visited the school in 1866, especially mentioned the paternal manner in which the high-master dealt with the boys ('De l'enseignement secondaire en Angleterre et en Ecosse', 1868, 241). School tradition suggests that his benign regime, in which he declined to use corporal punishment, was ineffectual. In 1864 the public-school commissioners noted a decline in the academic performance of the school, though this was largely attributable to the unsuitability of the school's location. Kynaston, however, opposed its removal to a more salubrious site. 
In 1850 Lord Truro, an old Pauline, presented Kynaston to the City living of St Nicholas, Cole Abbey, with St Nicholas Olave, which he held until the parishes were amalgamated with St Mary Somerset in 1866. He resigned the mastership of St Paul's in 1876, and the only preferment that he held at the time of his death was the prebendal stall of Holborn in St Paul's Cathedral, to which he was presented by Bishop Blomfield in July 1853. He died at 31 Alfred Place West, South Kensington, on 26 October 1878, and was buried at Friern Barnet on 2 November. 
Kynaston's taste and scholarship led to his nomination as a candidate for the chair of poetry at Oxford in 1867, but he was defeated by his college contemporary, Sir Francis Hastings Doyle. Few scholars of his age surpassed him as a composer of Latin verse. He was the author of numerous poetical compositions in praise of Dean Colet, the founder of St Paul's School, which were produced each year at the apposition. Among these the 'Number of the Fish' (1855), and the 'Lays of the Seven Half-Centuries' written for the seventh jubilee (1859), were the best-known. To the wider world he was most familiar as a writer and translator of hymns, of which he published two volumes, in 1862 and 1864. 


@@@@@


doc= 15824


Kynaston, John (1728-1783), author and literary scholar, was born on 5 December 1728 at Chester, son of Humphrey Kynaston, mercer of Chester. On 20 February 1745 he was admitted to Manchester grammar school; he proceeded with an exhibition to Brasenose College, Oxford, where he matriculated on 20 March 1746. He was elected a scholar on 1 August following, and graduated BA on 16 October 1749 and MA in 1752. He was elected fellow on 14 June 1751. In 1752 he left Oxford and moved to Wigan. 
In 1761 Kynaston published a Bridgman oration spoken in Brasenose College chapel, 'De impietate C. Cornelio Tacito falso objectata'. In 1764 he issued 'A collection of papers relative to the prosecution now carrying on in the chancellor's court in Oxford, against Mr. Kynaston, by Matthew Maddock, clerk... for the charge of adultery alleged against the said Matthew Maddock'. He was a frequent contributor to the 'Gentleman's Magazine', and in his obituary the editor, John Nichols, wrote that Kynaston's 'friendly labours have frequently embellished our Magazine', and that Nichols's own 'literary labours were facilitated by his valuable correspondence' ('GM', 627-8). Those friendly and literary labours were some thirty or more letters to that periodical, contributions that establish Kynaston as a scholar and critic, some of whose letters, notably on the plays of Shakespeare, should be better known. He wrote to some considerable extent on 'The Tempest', 'Hamlet', and 'Othello', and also on 'Macbeth', 'A Midsummer Night's Dream', 'Antony and Cleopatra', 'All's Well that Ends Well', 'The Two Gentlemen of Verona', 'Titus Andronicus', 'Julius Caesar', and 'Richard II'. In some of his observations he anticipated later scholars and editors, such as Edmond Malone, both in emendations and glosses, and he took courteous issue with a few of Dr Johnson's notes on the plays. He was the first to explain Hamlet's 'A little more than kin, and less than kind', quoting the old play 'Gorboduc' in illustration. His letters show his familiarity with the Greek and Roman writers, and also with the Elizabethan dramatists, eighteenth-century poets, and French literature. His most extended effort was six letters, dating from January 1772 to November 1773, on 'Two curious tesserae theatrales found near Herculanem'. He wrote the Latin inscription on the monument of Dr Peter Francis le Courayer in Westminster Abbey. He also took an active part on behalf of Mary Blandy, the patricide hanged on 6 April 1752. A writer in the 'Gentleman's Magazine' states that Kynaston was much with her 'from the time of her conviction till her body was secured from indecent treatment' ('GM', 803). He died at Wigan in June 1783. 


@@@@@


doc= 15825


Kinder, Philip (b. 1597, d. in or after 1665), writer and physician, was born on 12 April 1597, the second son of William Kinder ('c'.1540-1623), of Sneinton, Nottinghamshire, and Katherine, daughter of William Dunn of Nottingham. His father had graduated from Brasenose College, Oxford, with a degree in medicine, and Philip chose the same profession, graduating from Pembroke College, Cambridge, in 1616 with a licence to practise medicine, which he was doing 'from his chamber by the East gates in Leicester' by 1620, apparently following Paracelsian principles (MS Ashmole 788, fol. 48; MS Ashmole 429, fol. 43). At some point he married Elizabeth, daughter of John Barkley of Warwickshire, but there were no children. 
After his father's death in 1623, Kinder moved back to Sneinton, and by 1629 he was receiving an annuity of $20 p.a. from the Pierrepoints, a powerful family of that town. For reasons probably arising from Kinder's lack of deference, this relationship turned to mutual hostility which eventually caused Henry Pierrepoint and three of his servants to attack Kinder in the cloister of Westminster Abbey in the year 1630. According to Kinder, who took his case to the Star Chamber, they had meant to kill him. Pierrepoint received a royal pardon, and, despite further suits, Kinder was unable to receive satisfactory compensation for his injuries. 
In 1640 Kinder was at York with the king's army, probably in the service of the Hastings family of Ashby-de-la-Zouch. He completed a detailed survey of the monuments in York Minster, but the manuscript was lost at Nottingham in 1643 (MS Ashmole 788, fol. 188). After the outbreak of the civil war, the royalist cavalry commander Henry Hastings appointed Kinder to be his agent at the Oxford court, but Kinder complained of being ill rewarded for his services. In 1649 he contributed a Latin memorial inscription and a short English poem to 'Lachrymae musarum' (1649), the memorial volume for Hastings's nephew. Kinder was in the garrison of Ashby Castle when it fell to the parliament in 1646. In the period 1650-54 Kinder was at Aston upon Trent; his fortunes were at a low ebb, and he had to remind various influential acquaintances of their promises of money and help. 
Kinder wrote Latin, studied Greek and Hebrew, and understood Spanish and Italian. His own writings in verse and prose, Latin and English, include some unusually accomplished verses as well as drama, topography, genealogy, astrology, and literary criticism. Throughout his life he composed Latin epitaphs for his friends, family, and acquaintances. 
While at university Kinder had written a Latin comedy, 'Silvia', and a theological treatise which survives in his miscellany. He also composed 'The Ball', a text for a revel or series of danced entries representing the ancient and modern poets (MS Ashmole 788, fols. 205, 103, 3). In 1629 he contributed a Latin elegiac verse to a posthumous volume of verse by his friend and correspondent Sir John Beaumont of Grace Dieu (J. Beaumont, 'Bosworth-Field', 1629). In 1628 he began to develop his 'Trismegeticall Invention', a 'Universal Character' consisting of a system of number-symbols with which, he claimed, any document could be translated into at least ten languages within two hours. In this he anticipated the 1653 'Logopandecteision' of Sir Thomas Urquhart, and like Urquhart he composed a pedigree for himself beginning with Adam and continuing 'without intermission of Centurie or name' (Kinder, 'Surfeit', 28-30; MS Ashmole 788, fols. 50-51, 162). 
Probably in the 1630s, and as a bid for royal patronage, Kinder composed 'Eugenia', a Latin treatise that purports to trace the descent from the protoplast Adam, 'of all the Emperors, Kings and Princes of the universal world' (Kinder, 'Surfeit', 23-4). His royalism also expressed itself in the hagiographic tone of his Latin life of Charles I and his fine verses 'The Antiparode' which end 'Honour and Beautie are but Dreames / Since Charles and Mary lost theire Beames' (MS Ashmole 788, fol. 22'v'). In his 'Terminalia' he prophetically interprets the writings of Esdras, John the Divine, Merlin, Ambrose, and St Malachias the Primate as histories of the world, the church, England, and the papacy (MS Ashmole 788, fols. 64-102). In 1636 he provided prefatory verses for William Sampson's 'Virtus post funera vivit'. He may have translated Boethius's 'De consolatione philosophiae' (MS Ashmole 788, fol. 171). 
In the 1650s he composed a pair of treatises, the first upholding papism from the church fathers, the second protestantism. Kinder's purpose was to show the irrelevance of the patristic authors to modern religious controversy (Kinder, 'Surfeit', 10-13). At about the same time, he also wrote 'The Court of Astraea with the Arraignment of Romances', which looks back to the bonfire of the romances in 'Don Quixote', and forwards to Boileau's 'Les heros de roman' (written in 1666). In 1656 there appeared his only published work, 'The Surfeit to ABC', a series of meditations on books and ideas, including the observation that historians of classical antiquity are too naive in their use of literature as evidence: 'As if one in future ages should make all 'England' in ages past to be a 'Bartholomew'-Faire, because 'Ben. Johnson' hath writ it. Or that the condition of all our 'English' women may be drawn out of 'Shackespeers' merry wifes of 'Windsor'. (Kinder, 'Surfeit', 58)' As well as being an astronomer, Kinder was an expert in the 'art of 'shadowes'': he produced logarithmic calculations for 'sun-dialls' and an 'ad hoc' method for calculating the time by measuring shadows (Kinder, 'Surfeit', 60-61; MS Ashmole 788, fols. 206, 210). His miscellany manuscript contains not only literary and antiquarian material but also accounts of prophecies and of a vision seen on the night of 16 November 1658 (MS Ashmole 788, fol. 102). 
In 1658-60 Kinder was living at Wilson, near Melbourne in Derbyshire. By 1661 he was living at Walton-on-Trent where he consolidated his epistolary friendship with Charles Cotton, who encouraged him to write his best-known work, the project for a 'History of Darby-shire' (1663). About 1662 he moved back to Nottingham, whence he wrote his last dated letters in 1665. 


@@@@@


doc= 15826


Kyngesbury, Thomas (fl. 1351-1396), Franciscan friar, was a member of the Franciscan convent at Oxford by 1351, and had taken the degree of DTh there by 'c'.1369. He was twenty-sixth provincial minister of the English Minorites from 1379 or 1380 to 1390 or 1392. At the beginning of the great schism he induced the English Franciscans to take an oath of adherence to Urban VI ('r'. 1378-89). He was in favour at court; about 1390 Richard II urged Boniface IX ('r'. 1389-1404) to provide him to the next vacant bishopric, and he preached before Richard on 25 March 1396. In August of that year Robert Morton of Bawtry, Nottinghamshire, escheator and knight of the shire, made a bequest of $10 to him. 
Kyngesbury was buried at Nottingham. Although no writings of his remain, he clearly encouraged the study of science in his order. Thus in 1380, at the instance of Joan, princess of Wales (died 1385), he requested the friar John Somer to write a 'kalendarium' for the years 1387-1462. He also authorized a treatise on music entitled the 'Quatuor principalia musice', which was written by the Oxford Minorite John Tewkesbury (though sometimes erroneously attributed to Simon Tunstede), 'with the authority and consent of Friar Thomas de Kyngusbury, Master, Minister of England, A. D. 1388' (Little, 250-51). 


@@@@@


doc= 15827


Kynnesman, Arthur (1682-1770), schoolmaster, was born in London on Christmas day 1682, the son of Harold Kynnesman, a mercer. He was educated at Christ's Hospital and, with an exhibition from his school, was admitted sizar to Trinity College, Cambridge, on 30 June 1702, whence he graduated BA (1706) and MA (1709). He was ordained deacon on 23 September 1710 and priest on 22 March 1713. 
For some time Kynnesman was an usher at Westminster School but in 1715, recommended by Robert Freind, headmaster of Westminster, he was appointed master of the grammar school at Bury St Edmunds. Here he adopted the system of teaching practised at Westminster, expanded the school to some 150 pupils, and secured for it an excellent reputation. The dramatist Richard Cumberland was a pupil and left an affectionate account of his headmaster. Kynnesman was extremely proud of his school and of his pupils' achievements, and he once boasted to his college friend Richard Bentley (Cumberland's grandfather) that he would make Cumberland as good a scholar as his grandfather, to which Bentley replied joshingly, 'Pshaw! Arthur, how can that be, when I have forgot more than thou ever knewst?' ('Memoirs', 24). Kynnesman continued the tradition of performing school plays to audiences of parents and the local gentry, and raised money to buy books for the library by taking a collection after each play. Cumberland described him as 'an excellent master, a very sufficient scholar', who had 'all the professional requisites of voice, air and aspect, that marked him out at first sight as a personage decidedly made on purpose -- 'habere imperium in pueros'' (ibid., 23). 
Kynnesman resigned as headmaster in 1745 and took up the post of rector of Barnham, Suffolk; for a few months in 1751 he was reader of St James's, Bury, and in 1766 he obtained the living of Eriswell in Suffolk. In 1768 he published his only work, 'A Short Introduction to Grammar' (2nd edn, 1775). His wife, a former Miss Maddocks of Troston, Suffolk, died in 1766. He himself died on 10 July 1770 at Bury and was buried on 17 July at Barnham, next to his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 15828


Cynesige (d. 1060), archbishop of York, seems to have come from the eastern Danelaw, perhaps from Rutland where he inherited the manor of Tinwell. He is said to have been born by caesarean section, but the story was probably invented to supply a miraculous start to the life of a man who was later honoured as a saint at Peterborough. John of Worcester and Symeon of Durham describe him as a royal clerk at the time of his appointment to York, but Peterborough tradition maintained that he had been a monk of that house. If he was a royal priest he may have been the Cynesige 'presbyter' who witnessed three Abingdon charters of 1050, but it seems unlikely that he was the Cynesige 'presbyter' who witnessed a Devon charter of 1026. Whatever his background, his promotion to York in 1051 implies that he was at least acceptable to the faction opposed to Earl Godwine, and that may account for the fact that although his pontificate coincided with the first part of that of the simoniacal Stigand at Canterbury, Cynesige apparently did not play as large a part in the political life of the country as did his successor Ealdred. In 1059, however, he and Earl Tostig and Bishop AEthelwine of Durham, the chief men of Northumbria, conducted Malcolm of Scotland to his meeting with Edward the Confessor. Cynesige was presumably present at that meeting, and at others at which he witnessed four of the five known royal charters from the period of his archiepiscopate. 
In 1056 Cynesige presided over a council in London at which he consecrated Herewald bishop of Llandaff in the presence of Edward the Confessor. In May 1060 he apparently consecrated Earl Harold's minister at Waltham, Essex. He is also said to have consecrated two bishops of Glasgow, Magsue and John, but it is doubtful whether they ever resided in that diocese. They were probably titular bishops of Glasgow, working as suffragans in the York diocese. 
In his own diocese Cynesige continued the work of his predecessor AElfric at the houses of secular canons (there were no monasteries in the diocese). At Beverley he carried on the work on the dormitory and refectory, and built a stone tower, probably at the west end of the church. He gave bells to Beverley, and to Stow, Lincolnshire, and Southwell, Nottinghamshire, and he also gave books and ornaments to Beverley. Peterborough tradition recorded that, unlike his household, he lived an ascetic life, eating simple food and travelling on foot to preach in the towns and villages of his diocese in Lent. 
Cynesige died on 22 December 1060 at York, and was buried, in accordance with his wishes, at Peterborough Abbey, to which he gave with his body the estate at Tinwell and $300 worth of ornaments, which were later taken by the Confessor's queen, Edith. The abbey seems to have attempted to promote a cult of Cynesige, who was called by its twelfth-century chronicler 'sanctus'. Cynesige was certainly not a martyr, so there must have been some aspect of his character, probably an element of asceticism, which encouraged the attempt at canonization. If he was unable to enforce similar standards on his household, he may have lacked authority. Later in the middle ages, Cynesige's bones, like those of his predecessor AElfric, were placed in a chest and built into the north wall of the chancel, near the high altar of the abbey church. They were rediscovered when the altar was destroyed in 1643. 


@@@@@


doc= 15829


Kynton, John (1450s-1536), Franciscan friar and theologian, was born in the 1450s, perhaps in Lincolnshire or Yorkshire where he is known to have had personal ties. He entered the Franciscan order at the Stamford convent, probably while still in his teens. His age might explain the fact that although he took minor orders in December 1472, he was not ordained to the priesthood until March 1477. Kynton remained at Stamford until the early 1480s when he was sent to study at the Franciscan convent at Oxford. Nothing is known of him during this period, but it seems he acquired a considerable reputation as a scholar. He incepted for his doctorate early in 1495 and was permitted to remain at the university as a teacher. 
Kynton's teaching took him, unusually for a regular, beyond his own convent into the wider academic community. In 1502 he was appointed praelector in theology at Magdalen College, a residential position that he held for almost two decades. During this period Kynton emerged as one of the most influential figures in the faculty of theology. He was elected senior theologus three times between 1502 and 1530 and was deputed to preach the Easter day sermon in 1515. He also became prominent in university government, serving as the chancellor's commissary for no fewer than seven terms between 1503 and 1517. Kynton's stature as a scholar also brought him to the attention of church leaders. In 1521 he was one of five scholars called upon by Cardinal Wolsey to examine the teachings of Martin Luther. It may have been as a result of this that he was appointed to the university's most prestigious chair, the Lady Margaret professorship in theology. Kynton remained in post for several years, but early in 1530 his reputation was badly damaged when the archbishop of Canterbury, William Warham, accused him of forgery. The details of the case are obscure, but it is likely to have precipitated his resignation from his chair in October 1530. In spite of these troubles Kynton remained at Oxford and was involved in scholarly discussions of the king's divorce in 1531. He died at Oxford on 20 January 1536 and was buried in Durham College chapel. 


@@@@@


doc= 15830


Kenningham, John (d. 1399), Carmelite friar and theologian, probably came from Suffolk; though his family is unknown, he mentions in one of his surviving works that his father had died when he was a boy. He entered the Carmelite order at the Ipswich convent, but must have been sent to Oxford in the 1360s, since by the time of his determinations against John Wyclif (died 1384) he was already a doctor of theology. In 1393 he was elected prior provincial of the order in England; on 18 May 1399 he was appointed vicar provincial for the Irish province, but six days before this he had died at the York convent and was buried there. He preached before Richard II on All Saints' day 1392. In 1392-3 and 1397-8 he acted as confessor to John of Gaunt, duke of Lancaster, was at various times resident in Gaunt's household, and was witness to his will. On 27 January 1399, shortly before his own death, Kenningham was summoned by Richard II to attend a council at Oxford to advise on possible solutions to the papal schism. 
Kenningham disputed with his younger contemporary John Wyclif through a series of exchanges in Oxford, probably conducted about 1372-3. Neither side of the argument survives complete, and aspects of the sequence remain unclear; part of Kenningham's side is preserved in the manuscript of 'Fasciculi zizaniorum', while Wyclif's contributions are found much more fragmentarily in a single copy. It would seem that the early stages on both sides are lost; Kenningham, in the first (perhaps summarized) document, refers to material 'in ultima determinatione mea' ('Fasciculi zizaniorum', 4-13); this was answered by Wyclif (ibid., 453-76), followed by another riposte from Kenningham (ibid., 14-42), and another by Wyclif that in the single manuscript breaks off very early in the argument (ibid., 477-80). In all of the material thus far Kenningham speaks of Wyclif as 'magister', whereas Wyclif refers to his opponent as 'doctor'. The third and fourth determinations of Kenningham (ibid., 43-72, 73-103), between which Wyclif had evidently replied, frequently speak of Wyclif as 'doctor'; this makes probable a date of 1372-3 for the sequence. The debate primarily concerned the implications for the study of scripture of Wyclif's views on universals, in particular the problem of the compatibility of Wyclif's insistence that 'si aliquid fuerit vel erit, ipsum est' ('if anything has been or will be, it has real existence at the present'; ibid., 8) with certain biblical passages that seem only intelligible if understood as contingent or indeed temporary. Other topics included the endowment of the church; Kenningham also tantalizingly states that Wyclif 'dicit se non credere quod Christus dixit panem esse corpus suum' ('says that he does not believe that Christ said that the bread is his body'; ibid., 54), and endeavours to enlarge the sense of 'esse', both pointing forward to his final eucharistic views. Though Kenningham nowhere resorts to polemic, his tone often appears slightly patronizing and ironic; he claims that Wyclif was forced to retreat from some of his points, a claim that the fragmentary material from the other side in part bears out. 
Whether Kenningham continued to oppose Wyclif in Oxford after 1373 is unclear. On 28 May 1382 he was present at the Blackfriars Council in London when a list of Wyclif's views were anonymously condemned; two days later he preached the sermon after the procession in London, in which, on the commission of the archbishop of Canterbury, he pronounced the conclusions false and all those excommunicate who taught, favoured, or heard them. Ten years later, on 28 May 1392, he was present at the trial of the Cistercian Henry Crump in the Carmelite house at Stamford. 
The Carmelite John Bale lists nineteen works of his earlier co-religionist, all but two with incipits. Five of these correspond to the surviving parts of Kenningham's arguments with Wyclif in 'Fasciculi zizaniorum' (the last is divided by Bale into two parts). Though no entry appears for Kenningham in Bale's 'Index', the remainder derive from Bale's early access to Carmelite sources; several notes concerning him survive in Bale's notebooks. None of these other works has so far been traced, and there is no reason to connect a commentary on 'Ecclesiasticus' in BL, Royal MS 2 D.iv, ascribed at the start to Kyngisham, with the opponent of Wyclif. 


@@@@@


doc= 15831


Kyrle, John (1637-1724), philanthropist and landscape designer, was born on 22 May 1637 at the White House, in the parish of Dymock, Gloucestershire, the eldest son of three children of Walter Kyrle (died 1660) of Ross, Herefordshire, barrister, JP, and MP for Leominster in 1640, and his wife, Alice Mallet (died 1663), daughter and heir of John Mallet of Berkeley, Gloucestershire. The family of Kyrle or Crull had been settled in the vicinity of Ross-on-Wye since the thirteenth century. Kyrle was educated at Gloucester and at Balliol College, Oxford, where he matriculated on 20 July 1654. He was admitted a student of the Middle Temple in 1657, but retired to Ross without being called to the bar. He inherited an estate worth $500 per annum but added to this considerably during his lifetime, eventually assembling a mixture of freehold and copyhold property scattered throughout Herefordshire and west Gloucestershire. He was also the owner of New Mill, the principal corn mill in Ross, and he derived $100 per annum from the fallage of timber in Dymock Wood. Kyrle never married but lived with his kinswoman Judith Bubb, who was his 'active assistant' in good works and, in his own words, 'a very good and fine girl and a great scholar' (Davies Herefordshire Collection, AB/50, fol. 234). He spent all his life in Ross, living in a three-storied framed house adjoining the market place, which was said to have been built by his father in 1620. In politics he was a staunch loyalist and had a monogram cut into the wall of the new market hall which read 'Love Charles to the Heart'. The only local office he held was high sheriff in 1683. He declined the office of JP. 
Kyrle owes his fame largely to the eulogy of him in Alexander Pope's third 'Moral Epistle', published in 1732, eight years after his death. During his lifetime he had already earned the title of the Man of Ross or, according to Thomas Hearne, the Great Man of Ross. Kyrle never officially practised as a lawyer, but he seems to have regularly acted for his neighbours in litigious matters. For instance, in 1674 he settled a dispute about the distribution of local taxes between the borough of Ross and its rural parish. In an informal way Kyrle appears to have acted for the absentee lord of the manor of Ross, Lord Weymouth. He was called upon to arbitrate in a dispute over the traditional dole for the poor of the town, paid out of the tolls of the market place. A deed of 1690 indicates that he insisted that the keeper of the market pay the poor people of Rudhall's Hospital 56's'. 8died a year. He also left $40 in his will to the recently founded Blue Coat School. The eulogist literature which proliferated around the Man of Ross during the next two centuries claims many other virtuous acts. He provided portions for poor brides, ensured the poor had decent funerals, enabled debtors to re-establish themselves in trade, paid the fees of poor apprentices, and provided simple medicines for the sick. 
It was this pattern of philanthropy on Kyrle's part which came to the attention of Pope, perhaps on one of his several visits to Holme Lacy House, a few miles from Ross, but most of his information came from his publisher, Jacob Tonson, who lived near Ledbury. He was looking for an exemplary character 'to distinguish real and solid worth from showish or plausible expense, and virtue fro' vanity' ('Correspondence of Alexander Pope', 3.290-91). Not all contemporaries were as impressed as Pope was with Kyrle's good character. Thomas Hearne was informed by Matthew Gibson, the rector of Abbey Dore, that his wife, Kyrle's niece, regarded the Man of Ross as the 'vainest man living' who 'always hated his relations' (Money-Kyrle, 227). In the late eighteenth century Thomas Dudley Fosbroke and Charles Heath, both local writers, were able to confirm Pope's claims using the reminiscences of, among others, Mrs Clarke of Hill Court and the sexton of Ross church, William Dobbs. 
Pope was also attracted to Kyrle because of his delight in horticulture, architecture, and urban improvement. Beyond Ross churchyard, on the sandstone cliff above the Wye, Kyrle acquired from Lord Weymouth, on a lease of 500 years, the Clevefield, which he planted and laid out as an ornamental promenade. The Prospect, as the town end of the walk became known, was also enhanced by a fountain supplied by water pumped up from the Wye, which, via a reservoir, also fed public cocks in the town. It was surrounded by walls with three classical gateways, two of which survive today. It was made accessible to the public. 
Below the Prospect the causeway towards Wilton Bridge was also planted, while round the churchyard Kyrle established his favourite tree -- the elm. His hands-on approach to gardening was regarded as something of an oddity, but Pope applauded this man who consulted 'the Genius of the Place' and engaged in extensive gardening where good sense rather than fashion was the guiding principle. Indeed, a later writer commented that Kyrle had 'a taste for what is now termed the picturesque' ('Saturday Magazine', 165), creating in a precocious manner a landscape essential for the role that Ross was to play in the late eighteenth century as a centre for the Wye tour. 
Kyrle was said by Fosbroke to be 'skilled in Architecture, (and a great patron of workmen)' (Fosbroke, 10). In 1721 he supervised the replacement of the top of the spire of Ross church and designed some new pinnacles. The vicarages of Foy and Much Marcle in Herefordshire were 'rebuilt or altered under his direction' (ibid., 152), and Hill Court, close to Ross, rebuilt by Richard and Joseph Clarke about 1700, has also been attributed to him. Nearly a century later, the elderly Mrs Clarke remembered that Kyrle had frequently been a guest of the Clarkes, and in the garden there is a gateway very close in style to those on the Prospect. 
Kyrle died in Ross on 7 November 1724 in his eighty-eighth year and, following an extended period of mourning, he was buried on 20 November. In his will he asked to be buried in the chancel of Ross church, at the feet of the late rector, Dr Whiting, his friend and the founder of the town's Blue Coat School. The grave was marked with a simple stone inscribed with the initials J. K. Pope noticed that he lacked a memorial, but in a letter to Tonson assumed this was a deliberate act of self-effacement. In 1749 an inscribed stone was provided which commemorated Kyrle and his heir Vandrewort Kyrle. But this was far from satisfactory for the Wye tourists, who demanded something more impressive. This was satisfied in 1776 with the erection of a pyramidical tablet in variegated marble with a bust in relief, paid for by the will of Lady Constantia Dupplin. 
Kyrle's landscaping continued to be admired, although Heath referred to vandalism caused by 'idle people' in 1799. Few agreed with William Gilpin, who found the walks 'amusing' but decided, according to his strict criteria, the view was 'not picturesque' (Gilpin, 14). Several prints of the period show the elms, burgeoning woods, and summerhouse, which terminated the walk, but the tourists wanted more, and Kyrle's own garden behind his house, now the King's Arms, became a place of pilgrimage. 
Public access to the Prospect continued until 1837, when the landlord of the newly built Royal Hotel annexed the walks, demolished one of the gates, and planted part of the area with cabbages. This event became a 'cause celebre' in Ross in the 1840s and a riot occurred in 1848. Eventually, about 1860, the lease was recovered and the Prospect was given in perpetuity to the inhabitants of the town. In the nineteenth century another generation of pious philanthropists rediscovered Kyrle, and the story of his life was often repeated in campaigning magazines such as 'The Sketch' and the 'Saturday Magazine'. In 1877 the Kyrle Society was founded by Miranda and Octavia Hill to promote gardening among the industrious classes. 


