@@@@@


doc= 15932


Lambert, Daniel (1770-1809), the most corpulent man of his time in England, was the elder of two sons of a Daniel Lambert who had been huntsman to the earl of Stamford. He was born in Blue Boar Lane, Leicester, on 13 March 1770 and was apprenticed to Benjamin Patrick of Messrs Taylor & Co., an engraving and die-sinking firm in Birmingham; but in 1788 he returned to live with his father, who was keeper of the bridewell in Leicester. The elder Lambert resigned in 1791, and the son succeeded to his post. It was at this time that Lambert began to amass the bulk for which he was later to achieve fame. By 1793 he weighed 32 stone, despite his athletic enthusiasm for activities such as walking, swimming, and hunting. Moreover, he drank only water, and slept less than eight hours a day. The prison closed in 1805 and Lambert was granted an annuity of $50. 
The next year Lambert decided to profit from his previously merely annoying corpulence. He had a special carriage constructed and went to London, where in April 1806 he began 'receiving company' from midday until 5 in the afternoon at 53 Piccadilly. Lambert's exhibition of himself aroused curiosity, leading to the publication of descriptions of him. 'When sitting' (according to one account) 'he appears to be a stupendous mass of flesh, for his thighs are so covered by his belly that nothing but his knees are to be seen, while the flesh of his legs, which resemble pillows, projects in such a manner as to nearly bury his feet'. Lambert's limbs, however, were well proportioned; his face was 'manly and intelligent', and he possessed a quick wit. He was a well-known breeder of fighting cocks and was famous for his greyhounds. He revisited London in 1807, when he exhibited himself at 4 Leicester Square, before making a series of visits in the provinces. He was at Cambridge in June 1809, and proceeded to Huntingdon and Stamford, where, according to a newspaper, he 'attained the acme of mortal hugeness'. He died at the Waggon and Horses inn, 47 High Street, Stamford, on 21 June 1809. His coffin was built on two axles and four wheels and required 112 square feet of elm wood for its construction. His body was rolled down a gradual incline from the inn to the burial-ground of St Martin's, Stamford Baron (for Lambert's epitaph see 'Notes and Queries', 4th ser., 11.355). 
Lambert's sudden death was probably caused by the stress placed on his heart by his immense proportions. At his death he was 5 feet 11 inches in height, and weighed 523/4 stone (336 kg). His waistcoat had a girth of 102 inches (with his other clothes, it is preserved in Stamford Museum). This weight greatly exceeded that of the two men hitherto especially famed for their corpulence, John Love (died 1793) of Weymouth (26 stone) and Edward Bright (died 1750) of Malden (42 stone). An American contemporary, Miles Darden, outweighed Lambert at 71 stone. For a time after Lambert's death his name became a synonym for hugeness; George Meredith, in 'One of our Conquerors', describes London as the 'Daniel Lambert of cities' and Herbert Spencer, in his 'Study of Sociology' (1873), refers to a 'Daniel Lambert of learning'. There are several portraits of Lambert; the best is an oil by Benjamin Marshall in Leicester Museum and Art Gallery. Lambert's portrait also appeared on a large number of public house signs in London and the eastern midlands. 


@@@@@


doc= 15933


Lambert, George (1699/1700-1765), landscape and scene painter, is of unknown parentage. His birth date is computed from Vertue's note on him in September 1722 as 'a young hopefull Painter in Landskape aged 22 much in imitation of Wotton. Manner of Gasper Pousin', adding that he 'learnt of... Hassel' (Vertue, 'Note books', 3.6). The suggestion that he was therefore a pupil of the portrait painter Warner Hassels ('fl'. 1680-1710) remains conjectural. A book-plate for 'George Lambart' (an occasional early spelling of his name), flanked by figures of Music and Painting and displaying arms shared by the Lamberts of Banstead, Surrey, and the earls of Cavan, is accepted as having been designed by William Hogarth for him. According to Samuel Ireland it was vouched for by Lambert's pupil John Inigo Richards, who recalled that it 'was stuck in all his books; and that his library consisted of seven or eight hundred volumes' (Ireland, 1.155). Lambert is not known to have travelled abroad, married, or fathered children. He seems to have lived most of his life in some comfort in London in a rented house in the Great Piazza, Covent Garden, and travelled about the country sketching houses and views. By all accounts a jovial, clubbable man, his reputation, according to Edwards, was that of a 'person of great respectability in character and profession' (Edwards, 19). His friend the actor William Havard extolled his virtues, adding that 'He was modest to a Fault -- for it hurt him in his Profession' (Highfill, Burnim & Langhans, 'BDA'). Lambert was named executor in the wills of the distinguished and wealthy carver John Boson (died 1743) and the painter John Thornhill and had a lifelong involvement in the affairs of artists as a professional body. He was a signatory to Hogarth's copyright bill of 1735, and in 1746 he was one of several leading artists elected governors of the Foundling Hospital, to which he presented a large overmantel landscape in 1757 (still with the Thomas Coram Foundation, London). Like many artists he was also a freemason and is recorded as a member of the Fountain Lodge in the Strand in 1723. 
Lambert appears to have divided his artistic career equally between the theatre and landscape painting. From December 1726 he is traceable on the payroll of Lincoln's Inn Fields Theatre run by John Rich, with whom he moved to the newly built Covent Garden Theatre in 1732, remaining there for the rest of his life. From 1740 he received $100 a year, paid quarterly. In its painting room Lambert is said to have 'wrought day and night in his vocation' (Rosenfeld and Croft-Murray, 104), and it is there that the impromptu gatherings of artists, eminent craftsmen, men of letters, and fashionable society became consolidated in 1735 into the famously convivial Beefsteak Club (subsequently known as the Sublime Society of Beefsteaks), which continued in its first incarnation until 1868. Lambert's highly regarded scenery remained in use until destroyed by fire in 1808. 
In 1725 Vertue mentions Lambert's portrait by John Vanderbank, now known only from Faber's engraving of 1727. It is lettered 'Georgius Lambert, Chorographiae Pictor', echoing the fact that he was indeed the first English artist to devote himself exclusively to landscape painting. Richards's sale in 1811 included a 'Portrait of Mr. Lambert by Wilson'; a portrait of him by Thomas Hudson is said to have graced the Beefsteak Club, and in 1782 Samuel Ireland claimed to own a portrait of him by Hogarth. Lambert's output can be followed through signed and dated paintings for almost every year of his life, from 1722 until 1764. It includes paintings in the classical mode inspired by Gaspard Dughet, straight copies or adaptations of Nicolas Poussin, Claude, Salvator Rosa, and the Dutch masters, topographical English landscapes and country-house views, pastoral and rustic scenes, and decorative overmantels and overdoors. A number were engraved from 1734 onwards by E. Kirkall, G. Vandergucht, F. Vivares, E. Burtenshaw, J. Mason, and P. Canot. Lambert himself produced, at some unspecified date, two etchings after Salvator Rosa, and one architectural ruin scene dedicated to James Robinson of Wandsworth. According to Vertue, Lambert took up pastel painting about 1742, and about half a dozen examples, dated between 1742 and 1746, survive; most are versions of his oil paintings. The figures in his landscapes, which vary greatly in quality, were as a rule added by other hands, among them Francis Hayman's and Hogarth's; a number of other artists such as J. I. Richards, Samuel Wale, Thomas Dall, and Jacopo Amigoni, with whom he worked in the theatre, are likely candidates. Contemporaries also often ascribed his figures to Ferg, presumably Francis Paul. In views which required shipping he collaborated with Samuel Scott, as in 1731-2 with his first major commission, a set of six views of the settlements of the East India Company (office of Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs, London) for its house in Leadenhall Street, and later in the lost set of five views of Mount Edgcumbe and Plymouth of 1754-5 (known from engravings). 
Lambert's early style in the 1720s is close to that of John Wootton in its broad handling and strong colours. Lambert, however, understood better the principles of harmonious composition which underlay the style of Gaspard Dughet, then overwhelmingly in vogue with collectors. As a result some of his most successful pictures are confident interpretations of Gaspard's ideal landscapes (for example, 'Classical Landscape', 1745, Tate collection), a skill which earned him the accolade of 'the English Poussin'. His greatest merit is to have been the first to apply these rules to the English landscape itself. His four views of Westcombe House, Blackheath (1733, Wilton House, Wiltshire), set a new bench-mark for the genre. Having broken away from the hitherto standard head-on house portrait, Lambert integrated the house into the landscape in a way which is both naturalistic and picturesque. His two panoramic views of Box Hill, Surrey, also of 1733 (Yale U. CBA; Tate collection), are the first known views of the English landscape pure and simple, painted for its own sake, without the excuse of a hunt or a country house. With his views of 'The Great Falls of the Tees' (pastel, 1746, priv. coll.) and 'The Entrance to Cheddar Cliffs' (1755, Englefield House, Berkshire) he is also the first to give English landscape a dramatic status equal with the famous views of Italy. Successful compositions were frequently recycled in various sizes: at least six versions of 'View of Dover Castle' were painted between 1735 and 1751. He often painted compositionally balanced sets and pairs, contrasting evening with morning, or tranquil scenes with stormy ones, and he was also the first to introduce a sense of local weather into his views. The best examples of this are his views of Copped Hall, Essex (1746, priv. coll.), where two aspects of the distant house are contrasted by giving one a tranquil sunny setting and the other a dramatically wind-tossed one. But perhaps his greatest innovation was to combine, from the 1730s onwards, the two genres of ideal and topographical landscape into 'capriccios' of his own devising. Good examples are 'Arcadian Landscape with Sarcophagus, and (?)Beeston Castle' (1736) and 'Capriccio with Pope's Villa at Twickenham' (1762, both priv. coll.), in which the Thames valley is nearly overwhelmed by wild mountain scenery. From about 1760 his works show a greater feeling for light and hazy distance, suggesting an affinity with his younger colleague Richard Wilson, and not surprisingly some of his later works (such as 'Hilly Landscape with Coastal Inlet at Sunset', 1763, Cardiff) were long ascribed to Wilson. 
From 1755 Lambert sat on a committee, under the chairmanship of Francis Hayman, which advocated the establishment of a national academy of arts. In December 1761 he was elected chairman of the newly established Society of Artists of Great Britain. Between 1761 and 1764 he exhibited sixteen oils at the society's annual exhibitions. In November 1764 the society petitioned for incorporation by royal charter, with Lambert as its first president. It received the royal seal on 26 January 1765, and one hopes that Lambert was aware of this before he died at his lodgings in the Great Piazza, Covent Garden, a few days later, on 31 January. He was buried on 5 February in the church close at the end of the church warden's pew door at St Paul's, Covent Garden. In his short will, dated 29 December 1764, he left everything to his faithful servant Ann Terry and named his 'dear good friend' John Moody of Twickenham sole executor. The handsome contents of his lodgings and a large collection of his own paintings were sold at Langfords, Covent Garden, on 18 December 1765. 
Lambert is known to have taught John Inigo Richards, Theodosius Forrest, John Collet, and the Norie brothers, and possibly William Taverner, Jonathan Skelton, and C. W. Bampfylde. His best-documented pupil, however, is 


@@@@@


doc= 15934


Lambert, George Jackson (1794-1880), organist and composer, the son of George Lambert, organist of Beverley Minster, was born at Highgate, Beverley, Yorkshire, on 16 November 1794. He had his first lessons from his father, and from the age of sixteen he studied in London under Samuel T. Lyon and William Crotch. In his early career he performed at the Royal Chapel, Chelsea College, and Royal College, Windsor. He also played in the band of the Royal Italian Opera. He was a skilled violin, viola, and cello player, and is said to have became a great favourite of the prince regent. In 1818 Lambert succeeded his father as organist at Beverley, and held the post until 1874, when ill health and deafness compelled him to retire. His father, who died on 15 July 1818, was organist at the minister for forty-one years, according to the epitaph on his tombstone in the graveyard, so that the office of organist at Beverley was held by father and son for the almost unprecedented period of ninety-seven years. 
The younger Lambert was an excellent organist and published several compositions, including overtures, instrumental chamber music, organ fugues, and piano pieces. Some quartets and a septet were played at the meetings of the Society of British Musicians but never published. His 'Grand quattuor' for piano, violin, viola, and cello was played at the fourth concert of the Beverley Musical Society in May 1876; another piece was performed by the Hull Philharmonic Society. Lambert was also a talented artist and painter. He executed cork models of Melrose Abbey, Beverley Minster (which took him seven years), and St Mary's Church, where his sister Elizabeth (died 1830) was organist for some years. He married a sister of J. M. Robinson of Beverley and had two sons, George (died 1872), who took holy orders, and Henry William (died 1872), who adopted music as a profession. Lambert's wife predeceased him in 1877. Lambert himself died at Highgate, Beverley, on 24 January 1880, in the same house in which he had been born. His funeral took place at Beverley Minster on 28 January, and he was interred in the private burial-ground in North Bar Street Within. 


@@@@@


doc= 15935


Lambert, Henry (d. 1813), naval officer, younger son of Captain Robert Lambert (died 1810), entered the navy in 1795 on the 'Cumberland' in the Mediterranean, and in her was present in the action off Toulon on 13 July 1795, when the 'Alcide' struck to the 'Cumberland'. He afterwards served in the 'Virginie' and 'Suffolk' on the East India station, and having passed his examination on 15 April 1801 was promoted lieutenant of the 'Suffolk', from which he was moved in October to the 'Victorious', and in October 1802 to the 'Centurion'. Continuing on the East India station, he was promoted commander of the 'Wilhelmina' on 24 March 1803, and captain of the 'San Fiorenzo' on 9 December 1804. In February 1805 he distinguished himself by the capture of the French frigate 'Psyche', commanded by Captain Bergeret; he was confirmed in his rank on 10 April 1805. 
In June of the following year Lambert returned to England. In May 1808 he was appointed to the 'Iphigenia', which he took first to Quebec and afterwards to India. In 1810 the 'Iphigenia' was employed in the blockade of Mauritius; she was also one of the squadron under Captain Samuel Pym in the disastrous attack on the French squadron in Grand Port beginning on 22 August, which resulted in the loss or destruction of three of the four frigates. On the afternoon of 27 August the fourth frigate, the 'Iphigenia', with the men of two of the others on board, and with little or no ammunition remaining, was attempting to warp out of the bay, against a contrary wind, when three other French frigates appeared off the entrance. Disabled, unarmed, and crowded with men, the 'Iphigenia' could not resist. Lambert surrendered, on an agreement that he, the officers, and crew should be sent on parole to the Cape of Good Hope or to England within a month. In the event the prisoners were detained in Mauritius, and were released only when the island was captured by the British on 3 December, and the 'Iphigenia', then in French service, was recovered. Lambert was then tried by court martial for the loss of his ship, and was honourably acquitted. 
In August 1812 Lambert commissioned the frigate 'Java' (38 guns), formerly the French 'Renommee', captured off Tamatave on 21 May 1811. On the voyage to the East Indies she fell in with the United States frigate 'Constitution', off the coast of Brazil, on 29 December 1812. Lambert could have avoided action, but he chose the bolder course, hoping to damage the 'Constitution' enough to cause her commander, Commodore Bainbridge, to abandon his cruise. Poorly manned and heavily laden with stores, the 'Java' was at a considerable disadvantage during the engagement. After about an hour Lambert was fatally wounded by a musket-shot in the breast; the defence continued until the 'Java', close to sinking, was forced to haul down her colours. On the second day she was cleared out and set on fire. On 3 January 1813 the 'Constitution' anchored at San Salvador, where the prisoners were landed, and where, on 4 January, Lambert died; he was buried on the following day. 


@@@@@


doc= 15936


Lambert, James (bap. 1725, d. 1788), watercolour painter and topographical artist, was baptized on 29 December 1725 at Willingdon, near Eastbourne, Sussex, the youngest of the eight children of John Lambert (1690-1764), a flax dresser, and his wife, Susan Bray (1687-1771), daughter of Thomas Bray of Chiddingly, Sussex. About 1730 the family moved to the Cliffe, a suburb of Lewes, Sussex, where Lambert lived for the rest of his life. He attended a common writing-school and later received instruction from a music-master. From 1745 until his death he served as the parish organist, publishing volumes of psalms (1756) and hymns (2nd edn, 1774) and teaching music at least from 1756 until 1758. By 1754 he was in business as a sign painter and gilder and by 1758 as a stationer. 
Lambert's ambition was to be a landscape painter. He probably received instruction from a distant relative, George Smith ('c'.1714-1776), of Chichester, perhaps after his marriage on 29 April 1760 at Stopham, Sussex, to Mary Winton (1736-1810), daughter of Francis Winton of Sompting, Sussex, a farmer. (Their one child died in infancy.) He exhibited at the Free Society of Artists between 1768 and 1773 and at the Royal Academy between 1774 and 1778. His pictures combined elements both of Claudean pastoral and of Dutch picturesque rustic imagery; some featured sheep and cattle prominently. For one such the Society of Arts awarded him a premium of 15 guineas in 1770. About 1776, William Groombridge was his pupil in landscape painting. 
More remunerative, from about 1772, was Lambert's quick response to the rising demand for topographical watercolours, with the assistance of his less talented nephew James Lambert (1741-1799). While local gentry commissioned views of their houses, John Elliot (1724-1782) requested images of Lewes's antiquities and Jasper Sprange views for engravings in his 'Tunbridge Wells Guide' (1786); visitors ordered copies from Lambert's shop stock. His largest client was Dr William Burrell (1732-1796), for whom he worked between 1776 and 1784 and who bequeathed to the British Museum in London 269 watercolours, mainly of medieval buildings, by the two Lamberts. The Sussex Archaeological Society also has many of the Lamberts' works. Those pictures entirely by the elder Lambert are competent but uninspired compositions. 
The elder James Lambert died, probably in the parish of St Thomas-at-Cliffe, on 7 December 1788 in straitened circumstances, administration of his estate being granted to creditors. He was buried on 19 December at St John-sub-Castro Church, Lewes. He was survived by his wife. His natural diffidence and taciturnity had held him back from the London art world beyond the exhibitions, but in eastern Sussex he was the first painter to be an artist rather than solely an artisan. 


@@@@@


doc= 15937


Lambert, James (1742-1823), Church of England clergyman and classical scholar, was born and baptized on 7 March 1742 at Melton, Suffolk, the son of Thomas Lambert ('bap'. 1703), vicar of Thorp, near Harwich, and afterwards rector of Melton, and his wife, Anne. His father had been educated at Trinity College, Cambridge (BA, 1723), and he himself followed suit. After being educated at the grammar school of Woodbridge he was admitted a sizar of Trinity College, Cambridge, on 23 April 1760, aged eighteen. He graduated BA as tenth wrangler and senior medallist in 1764, and proceeded MA in 1767, having obtained a fellowship in 1765. Ordained deacon at Norwich on 12 August 1764, he served the curacies of Iken, and of Alderton and Bawdsey, in Suffolk. He was assistant tutor of Trinity College for some years, and on 7 March 1771 was elected regius professor of Greek, after delivering a prelection, 'De Euripide aliisque qui philosophiam Socraticam scriptis suis illustravisse videntur'. There was no other candidate. Lambert is principally known for having promoted the education of the eminent classical scholar Richard Porson after Porson, aged eleven, had impressed him in an examination at Trinity. 
Lambert gave up his assistant tutorship in 1775 and for some years superintended the education of Sir John Fleming Leicester (1762-1827) and his brothers in London and at Tabley, Cheshire. He returned to Trinity with his pupil in 1782, having resigned the Greek professorship on 24 June 1780. Lambert was unorthodox in his theology and increasingly adopted Arian views, which caused him to refuse any preferment in the church. He supported the Feathers tavern petition of 1772 that called for an end to subscription to the 'Thirty-Nine Articles' ['see also 'Feathers tavern petitioners]. The controversial Socinian content of his lectures on the Greek 'New Testament' caused the master of Trinity to bar undergraduates from attending them. He was also a strong supporter of John Jebb, of Peterhouse, in his proposal for annual examinations at Cambridge, and was a member of the syndicate appointed in 1774 to consider schemes for this and other improvements in the university course of education; their proposals, however, were all thrown out by narrow majorities in the senate. In 1789 he was appointed bursar of his college, and he held the office for ten years. His radical religious and political opinions continued to cause friction in the college and the university. With Thomas Jones, tutor of Trinity, he was an ally of the Unitarian William Frend when Frend was tried by the university in 1794 for promoting Jacobinism. 
Lambert died on 28 April 1823, aged eighty-one, at Fersfield parsonage, Norfolk, where he was staying with his friend Mr Carter, the incumbent. He was buried in the parish church. A road near Cambridge, connecting the Trumpington and Hills roads, is known as Via Lambertina. 


@@@@@


doc= 15938


Lambert, John (d. 1538), religious radical, was a native of Norfolk. His family name was Nicholson, but at an unrecorded date he changed his surname to Lambert. He was educated at Cambridge, where he graduated BA in the year 1519/20. Shortly afterwards he was the subject of an exchange of letters between Queens' College and its patron Katherine of Aragon. It would appear that Lambert (as he was already known) aspired to become a fellow and had gained the support of the queen. The master and fellows were reluctant to admit him, and asked for the right of free election, but must ultimately have submitted, since Lambert is subsequently recorded as a fellow, though only between Michaelmas 1521 and Easter 1522. It is possible that during the early 1520s he attended the gatherings for religious discussion held in Cambridge's White Horse tavern; according to John Bale it was at this time that he was exposed to the evangelical teaching of Thomas Bilney, a leading figure at these meetings. 
Lambert left Cambridge some time after 1522, and his subsequent movements are obscure. He himself later told Archbishop William Warham that he had been ordained within the diocese of Norwich. John Foxe states that Lambert was forced to leave England and take up residence in Antwerp, where he became preacher and chaplain to the English House. Foxe also suggests that during the late 1520s Lambert met John Frith and William Tyndale in the Low Countries. There is uncertainty, too, over the events in Lambert's life in the early 1530s. Foxe claims that he was 'disturbed' by Sir Thomas More and carried back from Antwerp to England to answer charges relating to the translation of heretical texts. He was probably examined on a charge of heresy before convocation on 27 March 1531, and was certainly imprisoned during the period 1531-2 and questioned by Warham, firstly at Lambeth and later at the archbishop's manor house at Otford. Foxe prints forty-five articles which were 'ministered' against Lambert, together with the latter's replies to them. Lambert is careful not to answer directly questions relating to the sacrament of the altar. He does, however, express a number of proto-protestant views including rejecting 'ear-confession', denying knowledge of purgatory, and questioning the efficacy of going on pilgrimages. In these replies Lambert also refers to the doctrine of justification by faith stating that, 'it is the usage of Scripture to say, faith only doth justify, and work salvation, before a man do any other good works' (Foxe, 1583, 1117). There is no record of the result of these examinations and Lambert appears to have been discharged following the death of Warham on 25 August 1532. After this Lambert may have resigned from the priesthood -- Foxe records that he taught Latin and Greek, and claims that he contemplated getting married and joining the Grocers' Company. It is not clear, however, that he actually took either of these steps. 
Some time before 13 March 1536 Lambert was accused of heresy by the duke of Norfolk, who complained of attacks made by Lambert upon the worship of saints. Questioned by Archbishop Cranmer and bishops Shaxton and Latimer, Lambert refused to change his beliefs concerning saints despite being offered a compromise by his examiners, who were afraid that his extremism would discredit their own reforming cause. How Lambert's examination ended is uncertain, but for the next two years he was active in evangelical circles in London, one of a group of gospellers whose impassioned sermons proclaimed 'only belief, only, only, nothing else' (Brigden, 266). Finally, in 1538 he was accused of holding heretical views on the sacrament of the altar. Imprisoned by Cranmer, he appealed to Henry VIII. 
Lambert's trial before Henry on 16 November 1538 was a grand political and public occasion that gave rise to much contemporary comment. John Husee writing to Lord Lisle gives a detailed description of how the King's Hall of York Place was set out with 'scaffolds, bars and seats' on both sides of the hall. At noon, according to Husee, Lambert was brought before Henry, the latter sitting with 'the most parts of lords temporal and spiritual' and was confronted with a number of articles, the most important of which concerned the sacrament of the altar. Husee writes that, 'It was not a little rejoicing unto all his Grace's commons, and also to all others that saw and heard, how his Grace handled and used this matter; for it shall be a precedent while the world standeth' ('Lisle Letters', 5.1273). Sir Thomas Elyot voiced a similar view of this event in the preface to his 'Dictionary', writing of: 'a divine influence or spark of divinity which late appeared to all them that beheld your Grace sitting in the throne of your royal estate as Supreme Head of the Church of England next under Christ, about the division and condemnation of the pernicious errors of the most detestable heretic, John Nicolson, called also Lambert.' In his 'Actes and Monuments' John Foxe gives a very different version of this event. He describes the king in extremely negative terms, telling how during the examination Henry's brows were 'bent unto severity' showing 'a mind full of wrath and indignation'. He recounts a number of exchanges between Henry and Lambert, perhaps the most famous being one concerning the sacrament of the altar. '
Lambert: I answer, with St. Augustine, that it is the body of Christ after a certain matter. 

The King: Answer me neither out of St Augustine, nor by the authority of any other; but tell me plainly whether thou sayest it is the body of Christ or no. 

Lambert: Then I deny it to be the body of Christ. 

The King: Mark well! for now thou shalt be condemned even by Christ's own words, 'Hoc est corpus meum'. 
(Foxe, 1583, 530)' A number of bishops also took part in the examination of Lambert, notably John Stokesley and Cranmer, although it seems unlikely that Stephen Gardiner took the leading role given to him by Foxe. By the end of the day Lambert had been condemned with the sentence of death being read out by Thomas Cromwell. Lambert was executed by burning at Smithfield on 22 November 1538. 
John Bale credited Lambert with translating some of the writings of Erasmus into English, but the only work that can be safely ascribed to him is 'A treatyse made by Johan Lambert unto Kynge Henry the viii concernynge hys opynyon in the sacrament of the altar' (1548?; STC 15180). In this text Lambert bases his arguments concerning the nature of the sacrament of the altar on the writings of the 'ancient doctors' of the church and not on the work of continental protestant writers. His views as expressed both in this treatise and during his examinations place him within the same tradition of native English religious teaching as Thomas Bilney and John Frith. It should be noted, however, that Lambert's 'Treatyse' was edited by Bale, and that although it is not particularly radical in terms of mid-Tudor protestantism it is possible that Lambert's views as originally uttered were more extreme then those presented in this tract. The chronicler Charles Wriothesley records that in 1538 Lambert was charged and convicted of holding some relatively radical views, for instance that infants were not to be baptized and that Christ did not partake of the flesh of Mary, as well as of such mainstream protestant beliefs as the rejection of the real presence in the mass and the view that the scriptures could not be interpreted without faith. 


@@@@@


doc= 15939


Lambert, John (bap. 1619, d. 1684), parliamentary soldier and politician, was baptized on 7 September 1619 at Kirkby Malhamdale, near his home at Calton, Yorkshire. Lambert (who sometimes spelled his name Lambart) was possibly the younger son from Josias Lambert's second marriage, to Anne Heber. The family had been established at Calton by his great-grandfather, also John Lambert ('fl'. 1516-1566). It is probable that Lambert was educated at Trinity College, Cambridge, and at the inns of court before returning to Yorkshire to marry Frances Lister (died 1676), daughter of Sir William Lister of Thornton in Craven, on 10 September 1639. This marriage cemented his links with the Lister family that had been established before the death of his greatly indebted father, Josias, in 1632. The Lister connection brought him further into the orbit of some of the leading Yorkshire gentry families such as the Fairfaxes and Belasyses. With the outbreak of civil war Lambert aligned himself, with his Lister kin, with the forces of Lord Fairfax. 
Lambert was immediately a very active participant in the numerous skirmishes and battles of the northern army. He was noted for his part in the sally from Hull (11 October 1643) and at the battle of Nantwich (25 January 1644), and he played a prominent role in the successes at Bradford (March 1644) and Selby (April 1644). At Marston Moor Lambert was part of the right wing of cavalry that was routed by Goring but which with Sir Thomas Fairfax and five or six troops forced itself through the royalists and joined Cromwell's victorious left wing. Following Sir Thomas Fairfax's appointment as commander of the New Model Army Lambert, then commissary-general of Lord Fairfax's army, was temporarily in charge of the northern forces. In March 1645 he was wounded when Sir Marmaduke Langdale raised the siege of Pontefract. In January 1646, with the end of the war in the north, Lambert was given the command of Montagu's foot regiment in the New Model and participated in the south-west campaign. 
Lambert's conduct during his successful military career marked him out for increasing political employments. Recovering from injury in London during December 1644 Lambert kept Sir Thomas Fairfax informed of political developments, including the self-denying ordinance. (In this and his few other remaining letters of this period he signed himself Lambart.) At York in 1644 Lambert had been one of the treaty negotiators. He later acted in this role, alongside Henry Ireton, at the capitulations of Truro, Exeter, and Oxford, in the last of which he remained as governor. Such employments established links between leading army officers, particularly Ireton and Lambert, and those royalists such as Sir John Berkeley who came to favour negotiation with them. 
With the dispute between parliament and army in 1647 Lambert was prominent among the officers who opposed enlisting for Ireland before their demands had been met. On 17 April 1647 a meeting of over 100 officers chose a powerful committee, including Lambert, to represent their views. Lambert and the committee of officers represented the sense of the army in 'The Petition and Vindication of the Officers of the Armie', which was laid before parliament on 27 April. The regiments proceeded to make their grievances known through regimental returns. Lambert was very active in organizing and directing this action. On 15 May in Saffron Walden church the officers met to listen to these regimental grievances. Colonel Sheffield and other 'presbyterian' officers questioned the right of Lambert and others to collect these regimental grievances without informing the troops fully of parliament's latest offers. Lambert in turn told them they had cut themselves off from their comrades by volunteering for Ireland and by their failure to endorse the army's March petition. A committee was formed, including Lambert, to present a summary of the regimental returns. In 'A Vindication of 167 Officers' (26 June 1647) Lambert was accused of manipulating the presentation of the regimental returns. The unity of the army was restored however by the resignation of Sheffield and other like-minded officers in the face of the determination of Lambert and the majority to resist parliament. On 2 July Lambert was one of the five army commissioners in the first meeting to treat with parliament's commissioners. At a council of war at Reading on 5 July Lambert was also one of the officers appointed to draw up charges against the eleven members whom the army branded 'incendiaries'. 
It is in line with these employments, and his collaboration with Ireton, that Lambert's contribution to the projected settlement of 1647 needs to be considered. In June 1647 Lambert and other officers met the king at Childerley Hall, near Cambridge. When Charles arrived at Newmarket, Lambert, with Colonel Robert Hammond, took him a message from Fairfax. The result of the army's control of the king was 'The Heads of Proposals', which according to Berkeley 'Ireton had drawn', though probably with some input from the army's allies in parliament ('Memoirs of Sir John Berkeley', 363). Bulstrode Whitelocke believed Lambert had assisted Ireton in drawing up the heads, and when Ireton presented them to the army council on 17 July 1647 it was Lambert who clarified some issues for Cromwell (Firth, 1.212). 
When, in the summer of 1647, the northern forces revolted against their commander Poynts and sought firmly to align themselves with the New Model, Lambert was sent north to command them. His close links with the northern troops, established since 1642, and in particular with those, such as Captain John Hodgson, who had led the revolt against Poynts, coupled with his leadership skills, quickly calmed the situation in the north. Indeed at the time some believed his appointment was due to his connections with the 'adjutators' in the northern forces. Lambert succeeded in disbanding the supernumerary forces, restoring discipline, and mending the relationship with the civilian population, leading to him receiving much praise for his 'fairness, civility and moderation' ('Perfect Diurnall', 13-20 Sept 1647, 1734). 
With the revolt of northern royalists and the invasion of Hamilton's Scottish army in July 1648, Lambert once more showed himself to be a skilled military leader. He forced Langdale into Carlisle before capturing Appleby and neighbouring castles. Lambert's military strategy around Carlisle forced the Scots to advance to Langdale's aid before their army was properly prepared. In the face of the royalist control of Pontefract, the defection of Scarborough, and the weight of Hamilton's forces Lambert led an organized retreat of his forces to Bowes and Barnard Castle, aiming to hold Stainmore Pass against Hamilton. From there he had to retire further to Richmond and then Knaresborough. There, on 13 August, Cromwell arrived, and their combined forces defeated the Scots at Preston (17-19 August 1648). Lambert pursued Hamilton, who surrendered at Uttoxeter (25 August 1648). In October 1648 Lambert was sent to Edinburgh with an advance party of six regiments of horse and one of dragoons to support Argyll's party. 
Lambert supported the 'Remonstrance of the Army' (16 November 1648), and 'The Declaration of Lambert's Brigade' (12 December 1648) justified the army's actions and expressed the bitterness felt by army officers towards parliament. Although named to the court to judge Charles I, Lambert was preoccupied by the northern royalist revolt and particularly the siege of Pontefract, whose resistance he finally ended in March 1649. He did not however oppose the court's proceedings or the subsequent execution of the king. 
During the invasion of Scotland in 1650-52 Lambert, now a major-general, was second in command to Cromwell but emerged as the leading fighting commander, even to the extent of being judged to have saved the ailing Cromwell and the English forces from disaster. Still only thirty-one, Lambert's military genius became more evident as the campaign proceeded and as the 51-year-old Cromwell's health collapsed. Taking over command of his kinsman John Bright's foot regiment Lambert again led his forces from the front, being twice wounded and briefly taken prisoner at Musselburgh (30 July 1650). At Dunbar (3 September 1650), according to Captain John Hodgson, Lambert, backed by Cromwell, persuaded the council of war to adopt the tactics which ultimately led to victory. Having spent most of the previous day observing the Scottish forces Lambert saw how their left wing, being piled up against the steep slope of Spott Burn glen, would be unable to assist their right wing if subjected to a concentrated attack. Lambert was nominated to head the English attack and implement this plan. Lambert led a brigade of three regiments to secure the pass over the Berwick Road which would protect the passage of the main force across Spott Burn ford so that it could fall on the Scots' right. Following an hour-long struggle Lambert's brigade achieved its objective but was then charged by the Scots' cavalry. When Lambert was reinforced by Major Packer, leading Cromwell's horse regiment, the Scots were pushed back. A second combined horse and foot charge ensured the collapse of the Scots' right. The rest of the Scottish forces were then engaged and crushed. 
Lambert followed the victory at Dunbar with further blows against Scottish forces. On 1 December he routed an attack on his quarters at Hamilton, destroying the western army and capturing its leader, Colonel Ker. With further success at Aire, Lambert secured the surrender of Colonel Strachan. Briefly in charge of all forces during Cromwell's illness, Lambert forced the surrender of Blackness. 
July 1651 witnessed Lambert's most notable personal victory. Managing to cross over into Fife, something which Cromwell and Monck had previously failed to achieve, Lambert, though outnumbered, destroyed a force of 4000 led by Sir John Browne at Inverkeithing. Deciding not to occupy the town Lambert prepared to defend the excellent ground provided by the Ferry hills. Lambert, with a few of his cavalry, led the Scots towards his main body and a party of infantry set to ambush them. Receiving news that Cromwell had withdrawn to Linlithgow and would not be reinforcing him, Lambert, rather than facing being trapped on a peninsula, decided to attack. Concentrating three-quarters of his total force on his right wing and leaving his left wing to prevent him being outflanked Lambert charged up the face of the ridge on the heights of which the Scots had drawn up. Two thousand Scots were killed and Lambert took between forty and fifty colours and 1400 prisoners. 'Such was the gallantry of Major-General Lambert, that had it not been for his armor he had been lost, a brace of bullets being found between his coat and his arms' ('Mercurius Politicus', 24-31 July 1651, 965). Inverkeithing was a decisive victory. At the time it was seen as ending all of Charles II's hopes of using the Scots to secure his three kingdoms; and more recently the victory has been seen as more decisive than Dunbar. 
With Charles II now forced to advance into England Lambert, with Cromwell's cavalry, harried his rear and succeeded in joining with Thomas Harrison at Warrington (15 August 1651) briefly to check the Scots. At Worcester Lambert captured Upton Bridge (28 August 1651), thus securing passage of the Severn for the English forces. Ludlow claimed that Lambert was prominent in the tactical decisions for the attack on Worcester. During the actual assault on Worcester (3 September 1651) Lambert's horse was shot from underneath him. 
Lambert's military record bears comparison with that of any of his contemporaries. By the time of Worcester, although still only thirty-two, Lambert had been in arms for nine years. The enthusiasm of his troops to serve under him was testimony not only to his care of them but also to an awareness of his tactical appreciation and the preparation that preceded his most notable successes at Dunbar and Inverkeithing, crucial elements in a general campaign that otherwise would have seen an ageing Cromwell out-generalled. 
Lambert did not hold a civil office of real political importance until he became one of the eight commissioners for Scotland on 22 October 1651. He was widely seen as the unofficial head of the commissioners for Scotland and his main task was to prepare for the union of the two former kingdoms. At the same time he still led the army in suppressing those Scots who held out. It was while settling Scotland that, on 23 January 1652, Lambert, following the death of Ireton, was appointed lord deputy of Ireland. 
Lambert arrived in London on 24 February to prepare to leave for Ireland. When he bought the rectory of Wimbledon on 13 May Lambert was referred to in the deed of enrolment as the lord deputy (TNA: PRO, C54/3676/23). On 17 May it was reported that Lambert would begin his journey on 24 May. On 19 May, however, parliament, which had appointed him for only six months, 'considered of the businesse of Ireland, and passed a Vote, that no Commission be granted to any Lieutenant of Ireland after the expiring of the present Commission to the Lord Deputy Lambert' ('Perfect Diurnall', 17-25 May 1652, 1887). Lambert was offered the posts of commander-in-chief and commissioner for the civil government. These appointments would simply have made him 'primus inter pares' in the Irish council. Lambert refused the commission and Cromwell secured the place for Charles Fleetwood, but requested that $2000 out of his arrears as lord lieutenant should go to Lambert. Following Lambert's refusal of the lesser post he also declined a similar position in Scotland. Despite the fact that he held no official position in either country, Lambert was later to be heavily involved in the affairs of Scotland and Ireland through his role on the council of state under the protectorate. It was he who reported on the ordinances for the Union with Scotland, chaired the committee on Irish lands, and headed the Irish committee. 
Some contemporaries believed the loss of the lord deputy post was due to Cromwell and that when Lambert later realized this it began the rift between the two men. Lucy Hutchinson, who attacked Lambert for laying out $5000 on his preparations, believed that this had all been a scheme of Cromwell's to get the position for Fleetwood, who had recently married Cromwell's daughter, and Ireton's widow, Bridget. In connection with Fleetwood's appointment, Hutchinson remarked on the bitterness between Frances Lambert and Bridget Fleetwood. Edward Ludlow regarded this episode as a design by Cromwell to turn Lambert against the Rump, and he claimed that Lambert now began to press Cromwell for the dissolution of parliament. 
Whatever Cromwell's part in the revocation of the Irish post, the political manoeuvres of the republicans in the Rump and especially those of Sir Arthur Hesilrige also played a part. Between Hesilrige and Lambert there was real animosity. On 31 January 1652 Hesilrige was appointed president of the council of state for a month. In early February the house debated a report recommending Lambert as commander of military forces in Ireland. The tellers in parliament for the motion to abolish the post were Hesilrige and Henry Marten. However, Lambert, like many in the army, had other reasons for antagonism towards the Rump. Legislation that the army had pushed for had been long delayed. Even that which was passed, for example the 'Act of General Pardon and Oblivion' (24 February 1652), did not fully meet the demands of the army. Since Worcester the army had wanted fresh elections and a new parliament. The revocation of the Irish post just added to Lambert's frustration with parliament. 
On 20 April 1653, when Cromwell first dissolved the parliament and then moved on to dismiss the council of state, Lambert and Harrison were with him. Harrison's wish for a council of seventy was opposed by Lambert, who believed power should be entrusted to a much smaller body of about ten or twelve. The subsequent parliament of 139 'puritan notables' appeared to signify a defeat for Lambert. Although elected to the interim council of state for the first time in April 1653, where he was its first president, co-opted to sit as an MP in July, and chosen for the first council of state, appointed on 9 July, Lambert took no part in Barebone's Parliament once it was convened. It was said that 'Lambert forbeares the Parlt and Councel much of late, he solaces at Wimbleton, and hath the visits of the most eminent of the Northerne Gentry' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Clarendon 46, fol. 113). Lambert was not chosen as a member of the second council of state (1 November). 
From mid-October at the latest Lambert was preparing an alternative settlement. He appears to have been biding his time while the radicals in parliament discredited themselves. On 19 November he returned from Yorkshire. On 24 November it was reported that 'There hath been some late discontents between the General and Harrison in so much as Harrison is retired, and its said Lambert is sent for up hither' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Clarendon 47, fol. 113). The council had sent for Lambert and on 23 November appointed a committee under Cromwell to confer with him and other officers concerning the Scottish situation. 
The moderates in the parliament, led by Sir Charles Wolseley, William Sydenham, Sir Gilbert Pickering, Edward Montagu, Philip Jones, Sir Anthony Ashley Cooper, Henry Lawrence, and John Desborough, all of whom were on the council of state and would be on the new council established under the protectorate, organized a resignation and abdicated their power to Cromwell. Colonel Goffe and Lieutenant-Colonel White entered the parliament with musketeers and dispersed the members who had remained there. It is most likely they were acting under orders from Lambert. It is perhaps significant that in council on 26 December it was ordered that 'the warrant issued by Major-General Lambert on 12 December for restraining all boats and vessels from the port of Dover, be taken off' ('CSP dom.', '1653', 311). One contemporary simply commented, 'what Lambert hath aimed at he has affected' (Thurloe, 'State papers', 1.632). 
Lambert's settlement, the 'Instrument of government', introduced on 16 December, was the written constitution that was the foundation of the protectorate. At the installation of Cromwell as protector it was Lambert who had a prominent place in the proceedings. He rode with Cromwell in his carriage and it was Lambert who handed Cromwell the sword of state. At the time there was comment that Lambert was to be made a duke and general of the three nations and would be the next protector. However, the army was not one united body behind the instrument. In the hectic days before 16 December accounts state that Lambert was presenting the majority of officers with a 'fait accompli'. The most visible army opposition came in the three colonels' petition (18 October 1654). Most disagreement was based on the power given to the single person, especially the power to oppose parliament. It was also noted that Cromwell's successor, probably Lambert, might use the army totally to destroy parliaments. 
Lambert's central role in the new regime is demonstrated by his activity in council, membership of key committees, and by his role in promoting important ordinances made by the council before 3 September 1654. For example, Lambert was on committees for chancery regulation, the duchy court, and the regulation of JPs. He was also involved in the army committee and in managing the affairs of Ireland and Scotland. He was also on all the committees considering how best to raise the necessary moneys to fund the army, navy, and civil administration. Indeed, the reorganization of the exchequer has been seen as a significant achievement of the protectorate, and his part in this was central. Alongside this Lambert played a key role in the establishment of Durham University. 
The instrument, through its separation of the legislative and executive powers and its concentration of authority in the council as a body and not in the protector, placed tight restrictions on Cromwell's position. In the months leading up to the first protectorate parliament Lambert had his wish of a small council controlling affairs and ruling by ordinance. Contemporaries clearly saw Lambert as the dominating influence in the protectorate, appearing to be semi-independent of Cromwell through his various offices and increasing wealth. Lambert was a major-general, colonel of two regiments, a leading member of the council, warden of the Cinque Ports, and was estimated to have an income of about $6500 per annum. 
Despite Lambert's influence the protector was far from being controlled by him and the protectorate councillors were not a unified group following a single line. Indeed, most had stronger links with Cromwell than with Lambert. There was policy disagreement, Lambert's opposition to Cromwell and other councillors' determination to follow the 'western design' being a notable example. Gradually, however, a much more serious rift opened between Lambert and Cromwell with regard to their respective views on the nature of a political settlement. 
The pragmatic imposition of central government on the localities through the major-generals has widely been attributed to Lambert, though it was probably a wider council measure. Lambert was, however, prominent in the introduction of the original and the additional instructions of 22 August and 4 October 1655 and 19 June 1656. He was major-general of five northern counties -- Yorkshire, Durham, Cumberland, Westmorland, and Northumberland -- but, because of his other duties, this work was undertaken by two deputies, colonels Charles Howard and Robert Lilburne. When the major-generals came under attack in parliament Cromwell abandoned them and thus piqued Lambert. Lambert vigorously defended them and pushed for the decimation tax to be continued: 'The quarrel is now between light and darkness, not who shall rule, but whether we shall live or be preserved or no' ('Diary of Thomas Burton', 1.319). Lambert and the major-generals believed that they could control parliament, through the elections and expulsion, and that the issue over the direction of settlement had finally to be decided. When the parliament reassembled it was clear that the major-generals had not got the house they wanted. Cromwell's opposition to decimation and the militia severely undermined Lambert's position. The outwardly religious dispute that followed merely deepened the split. 
When Lambert's former quartermaster, the Quaker James Nayler, was brought before parliament accused of 'horrid blasphemy' Lambert, who was on close terms with many of radical religious views, was the leading officer to support him. His own religious preferences, behind his outward latitudinarianism, remain as obscure as they were to his contemporaries, who regarded him at various times as anything from a Catholic to an atheist. Lambert's position with regard to the Nayler case needs to be seen in light of the disputes over the major-generals and decimation. For Lambert the constitutional issues crucially underpinned the religious issues. The political framework of Lambert's instrument was the safeguard for a tolerant religious approach. A close associate of Lambert, Adam Baynes, made the point that 'for the Instrument of Government says, all shall be protected that profess faith in Jesus Christ' ('Diary of Thomas Burton', 1.59). The essence of Lambert's defence of Nayler was that he did not want parliament to have unlimited judicial power. He was worried that future parliaments might attempt to prosecute those who had acted in the name of past parliaments. The instrument had, in part, sought to counter the power of parliament with a more influential council. 
Cromwell's apparent indecision over whether to take the title of king seems to have driven the final wedge between the two men. Although Cromwell asserted that the title of king had been in an early draft of the instrument, in 1657 Lambert led the army's opposition to kingship, a crucial factor in Cromwell's decision not to accept the title. Some contemporaries believed Lambert's opposition was not motivated by principle. Similarly they attributed his removal from office to Cromwell's fear of what he might achieve. That he was solely motivated by ambition would be a misreading of the issues at stake. Lambert saw that kingship represented a wholesale shift towards civilian government. The main issue for Lambert was that those who had won the war, the military, had to maintain a powerful voice in government. The men behind 'The humble petition and advice' could not be expected to act as trustees of the army's interest. 
On 24 June 1657 parliament decided to impose an oath on all councillors. Lambert opposed this move, refused to take the oath of loyalty required by the new constitution, absented himself from the meetings of the council, and removed himself to Wimbledon. On 23 July 1657 Cromwell sent for him to resign his commands. 
Lambert's estate at the outbreak of civil war was worth less than its nominal $300 value. Lambert claimed that the military impact of the civil war lessened its value further as well as disrupting the wool trade in which he had an interest. However, the success he made of his military career and his subsequent political role saw a significant rise in Lambert's fortunes. Lambert was attacked as one of the officers whose 'parks and new houses and gallant wives had choked them up' (Griffith, 18-19). As well as his army pay Lambert received various gifts and grants of land for his military success, the most notable being $300 p.a. of land in Pontefract and $1000 p.a. in Scotland (9 November 1651). His new wealth was spent on various purchases such as Kirkby Malhamdale fee-farm rent, Ampleforth, Braunton Dean, and Nonsuch as well as works of art, through Baptist Gaspars, fine clothing, and books. 
However, there was a less obvious element to Lambert's participation in land speculation. Lambert acted on behalf of his kin in relation to property in Ripon, Burton, Wennington, and Ecclesall. A notable example was his securing of Sheriff Hutton for the royalist Sir Thomas Ingram. Similarly, he acted with various royalists, including his Catholic kinsman John, Lord Belasyse, to secure property for the Vavasors. Such actions belie his increasingly hardline public attitude to royalists. They are, however, in line with the workings of his kinship network prior to 1642 which had kept his own estates secure following the death of his father. They are also mirrored by the actions of his royalist kin, Belasyse and Ingram, after the Restoration to protect Lambert's estates during his long imprisonment. Kinship was thus a determining factor in many of Lambert's investments. 
The most notable of Lambert's purchases was the manor of Wimbledon. Following his purchase of the rectory of Wimbledon Lambert, on 17 May 1652, purchased Wimbledon House, formerly belonging to Henrietta Maria, for $16,822 17's'. 8died It was there that Lambert tended his notable gardens and followed his artistic pursuits. Lambert is most associated with the Guernsey lily, 'Nerine sarniense', and his gardening led him to be satirized in 1660 as the Knight of the Golden Tulip, but, following his dismissal, it also was an opening for royalist advances to him. As lord of the manor Lambert held regular manor courts under his own steward, a fellow soldier, William Claxton. 
Despite Lambert's dismissal in July 1657 Cromwell allowed him a pension of $2000 per annum. Some saw this as a means to prevent any further opposition from Lambert. The royalists tried to exploit Lambert's dismissal but despite numerous royalist approaches, including a scheme by which his eldest daughter would be married to either Charles II or the duke of York, Lambert kept to his gardens. In the last six months of his life Cromwell received Lambert at Whitehall and appears to have attempted a reconciliation. It was recorded that 'Cromwell fell on his neck, kissed him, inquired of dear Johnny for his Jewell (so hee calls Mrs Lambert) and for all his children by name' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Clarendon 57, fols. 175-6). 
With Richard Cromwell as protector Lambert slowly returned to national politics. Sitting in the 1659 parliament as MP for Pontefract Lambert spoke in favour of Richard but also sought to limit his powers over the military and his negative voice in legislation, commenting that 'The best man is but a man at the best. I have had great cause to know it' ('Diary of Thomas Burton', 3.189). Lambert also objected to the admission of the Irish and Scottish members and generally he appears to have been trying to ingratiate himself with the republican grouping. 
Despite having no official position within the army Lambert maintained some contacts with those junior officers intriguing at Wallingford House. His exact role in their pressure which led to the dissolution of parliament (22 April 1659) is, however, not clear. When the junior officers forced the recall of the Rump, Lambert was restored to his commands and became colonel of two regiments. Naturally for someone of his ability and past record as soon as he had been invited onto the general council Lambert took a leading role. He was prominent in the negotiations which preceded the restoration of the Rump, and in the presentation of the army's declaration to Lenthall which invited the Rump to return (7 May) and a larger declaration which stated their political demands (13 May). The restored parliament made Lambert a member of a committee of safety (9 May) and council of state (13 May) as well as a member of the seven-man commission for the nomination of officers (4 June). Lambert's response to the long-delayed 'Indemnity Act', however, reflected his continued ambivalent attitude to parliaments. 'I know not why they should not be at our mercy as well as we at theirs' ('Memoirs of Edmund Ludlow', 2.100). 
Despite this, parliament had little choice but to send Lambert, its most capable commander, to face the rising of Sir George Booth. Lambert efficiently destroyed Booth's forces at Winwick Bridge, Cheshire (19 August), before recapturing Chester (21 August) and Chirk Castle (24 August). Lambert used the $1000 jewel parliament had voted him to pay his troops. These troops took up Fleetwood's submission to the parliament that Lambert be made, once more, a major-general. 
This demand, with calls for godly reform, a senate, a proper command structure, and for no officer to be dismissed without court martial, was voiced in Lambert's officers' Derby petition. Although Lambert's role in this was unclear it aroused further suspicion of his motives among many MPs who had long feared his talents and questioned his ambition. Such doubts could only have been heightened by Lambert's strengthening of his links with Sir Henry Vane when he returned to London, for both favoured rule by a small elite. The general council of the army, however, vindicated the petition and repeated its request for arrears. When parliament learned that Lambert, Desborough, and other leading officers were seeking subscriptions to their petition they cashiered Lambert and those whom they regarded as his accomplices (12 October 1659). In response, Lambert appealed to the troops around London, most of whom responded and marched on Westminster with him. On 13 October Lambert's force surrounded the regiments of Morley and Moss and the Horse Guards that were drawn up to protect parliament. Finding the gate of Scotland Yard barred by the Horse Guards Lambert walked forward to them alone and persuaded the soldiers to join his own. When Lenthall arrived to attempt to enter parliament Lambert ordered him home. Hesilrige and the MPs soon capitulated and ordered their last defenders, Morley's troops, back to quarters. As they marched out of Westminster Hall these troops gave Lambert an ovation. Lambert now recovered his position as a major-general and became a member of the committee of safety which took over from parliament's council of state. 
This body sent Lambert to deal with the advancing forces of Monck, who had declared for parliament (3 November). For Monck, Lambert in many ways represented the factors that had driven him to declare for parliament, the spectre of military rule and particularly the increasing Quaker threat, many being in his forces and his attitude to the sect seemingly tolerant. Although Lambert had a larger force he sought to avoid conflict. His delay saw the disintegration of his army, which, unlike Monck's, had not received any money. Fleetwood and Desborough in London had an increasingly fragile grip on power and as Portsmouth (3 December) and the fleet (13 December) declared for parliament the troops in London itself also acknowledged its authority (24 December). When Lambert's old commander Thomas Fairfax led the Yorkshire gentry in support of parliament (1 January 1660) the Irish brigade in his forces deserted him and his force dissolved. Offered a general indemnity, along with all his soldiers, Lambert submitted. Ordered to retire to his Yorkshire house (26 January), Lambert was further ordered to repair to Holmby, Northamptonshire. This was followed by a proclamation for his arrest (13 February) claiming that he had been in London provoking a mutiny. When he appeared before the council of state on 5 March Lambert hoped to be permitted to enter the Swedish army but he was unable to meet the $20,000 security demanded of him and was placed in the Tower. 
On 10 April Lambert escaped from the Tower and attempted to rally forces against the approaching Restoration, staging a rendezvous at Edgehill. Lambert's actual aim was unclear, his personal motivation was still questioned, and his increasing identification in many minds with the Quaker threat meant he was an isolated figure. Despite this he still managed to assemble a number of officers and about six troops of horse. However, these soldiers had no will to fight when approached by troops under colonels Ingoldsby and Streeter near Daventry (22 April). Lambert was taken prisoner and escorted to London. At forty-one his career was over. 
Although not a regicide, Lambert was initially excepted by the Commons from the 'Act of Indemnity' for punishment not extending to life, but when the Lords voted that he be wholly excepted both houses then stated that if he was attainted they would petition that the death penalty be remitted. Lambert was sent from the Tower to close confinement in Castle Cornet, Guernsey, in October 1661. His wife, Frances, petitioned that she and their ten children be allowed to reside in a house that the king had allowed him to have. On 17 February 1662 a licence for Frances and three of her children 'to go and remain with her husband' was directed to Sir Hugh Pollard, then governor of Guernsey ('CSP dom.', '1661-2', 276). In July 1661 the Cavalier Parliament demanded that Lambert should be proceeded against. After repeated requests Charles II finally agreed to bring Lambert back from Guernsey. 
At the start of April 1662 the duke of York sent ships for Lambert and Vane, who was imprisoned on the Isles of Scilly, to be returned to the Tower for trial. On 25 April the then governor of the Tower, Sir John Robinson, received a warrant to allow Lambert's wife and her children 'to have access to her husband, and to converse with him in the presence of his keeper' ('CSP dom.', '1661-2', 350). Lambert was arraigned in the king's bench for high treason. On 19 June Lambert stood before the bar, 'trying to excuse and justify the crimes of which he was accused. He was for all the world not upset about them and did not speak to deny his deeds, but tried all the time to make them appear less serious, and appealed to the King's Mercy, by which he won the judges' hearts. (Exwood and Lehmann, 92-3)' Although Lambert was sentenced alongside Vane to be executed, the king commuted his sentence to life imprisonment. He was returned to Castle Cornet. 
At times Lambert was allowed out of close confinement. In 1663-4 Frances petitioned that she be allowed to live with her husband, whom she felt should have more liberty because he was ill. A warrant allowing Lambert more liberty was issued in November 1664. At times of danger, however, Lambert was put under increased scrutiny. When a plot to free him was discovered in late 1664 it was ordered that he 'be kept a close prisoner and if at any time an enemy should appear before the island that he be shot for having had correspondence with the king's enemies' (TNA: PRO, SP 47, MS calendar). Again at the time of a threatened invasion in July 1666 orders were given that Lambert should be shot if troops arrived on the island. One of the reasons given by Charles II for dismissing Lord Hatton as governor was his failure to keep a strict vigilance over Lambert. Given Hatton's pre-1660 links with Lambert and the marriage of Mary Lambert to one of his sons, Charles Hatton, the authorities were also probably worried about his loyalty. 
During his long imprisonment it is clear that Lambert's financial problems and general affairs were managed by those who had been part of his kinship circle before the civil war and others with whom he had become connected as a result of his military and political career. In December 1667, after an appeal by Lord Belasyse, Viscount Fauconberg, and Sir Thomas Ingram, Lambert was allowed to take a house with his wife and family on the island. Of Lambert's kinship circle, also notable in helping him were his sons-in-law: John Blackwell, Daniel Parrott, John Hooke, and Dr Daniel Cox. In 1670 Lambert was transferred to St Nicholas Island. While he was imprisoned off Plymouth, Samuel Pepys, Miles Halhead, James Yonge, Charles II, and the duke of York are all recorded as having visited Lambert. In 1676 his wife, Frances, died. Lambert remained imprisoned on St Nicholas Island until his own death in March 1684. He was buried in St Andrew's parish church, Plymouth. 
Lambert played a significant role in the events of 1642-60. Militarily he ranks with any of his contemporaries and during the Scottish campaign he arguably surpassed his older commander Cromwell as the leading general of the English forces. His evident military genius and care for his troops saw him worshipped by them and described by one contemporary as the 'Armyes Darling' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Carte 131, fol. 189). It was this military genius and popularity alongside his youthful dynamism, rather than a close relationship with Cromwell, that saw him rise to the height of his power in the 1650s. However, it was the very same factors that also earned him the distrust of many. This in turn, when added to his general religious tolerance and personal links with those of Catholic to Quaker beliefs, while appearing to hold no firm views himself, was to prove fatal to his cause in 1659-60. Although an aesthete his experience since 1642 ensured he would always seek to preserve military influence in government. Politically Lambert is most remembered as the author of the instrument and as prominent in the establishment of the protectorate, but this is to overlook the scale of his general role, especially in the years 1653-7, when, still in his thirties, he was one of the most influential men in the state and would almost certainly have been chosen by the council as protector if Cromwell had died at this point. The survival of a Lambertian protectorate, however, would, as the events of 1659-60 suggest, have been limited by his narrow power base. 


@@@@@


doc= 15940


Lambert, John (b. c.1775, d. in or after 1811), traveller and painter in Canada, was born in England. In 1806 he went to Lower Canada with his uncle James Campbell, who had been sent by the privy council committee for trade to promote the cultivation of hemp in the colony after established supplies from northern Europe had been cut off by Napoleon. Although Lambert was reported to have been involved in the hemp project (see 'DNB'), this seems unlikely, as in 1806, well before the failure of the scheme in 1810, he had set off on his travels around the continent. His journey was recorded in 'Travels through Lower Canada, and the United States of North America' (3 vols., 1811), which ran to four editions in the absence of much competition. The text is a dense compilation of statistics and detailed description relieved by lithographs after his own watercolours. The work has proved valuable to later historians for his description of local life, which reflects his desire to be just and the fact that he mixed with people from all walks of life. He also edited Washington Irving's 'Essays' (1811) and helped secure for Irving a wider English audience. Nothing is known of his later life. 


@@@@@


doc= 15941


Lambert, Sir John (1772-1847), army officer, was born on 28 April 1772, the son of Captain Robert Alexander Lambert RN ('c'.1732-1801), second son of Sir John Lambert, second baronet, and his wife, Catherine, daughter of Thomas Byndloss of Jamaica. He was commissioned ensign in the 1st foot guards on 27 January 1791, and promoted lieutenant and captain on 9 October 1793. He served at the sieges of Valenciennes and Dunkirk, and was in the action of Lincelles in 1793. He was adjutant of the 3rd battalion in the campaign of 1794, served with it in Ireland during the uprising of 1798, and in the expedition to the Netherlands in 1799. He was promoted captain and lieutenant-colonel on 14 May 1801. He served in Portugal and Spain in 1808, was present at Corunna, and commanded the light companies of the guards in the Walcheren expedition of 1809. He became colonel in the army on 25 July 1810, and embarked for Cadiz in command of the 3rd battalion on 30 May 1811. In January 1812 he was sent to Carthagena with two battalions. He remained there three months, and in October joined Wellington's army at Salamanca. 
On 4 June 1813 Lambert was promoted major-general, and was appointed to a brigade of the 6th division. He commanded it at the battles of the Nivelle, the Nive, Orthez, and Toulouse, and was mentioned in dispatches. He received the thanks of parliament and the gold cross, and was made KCB on 2 January 1815. Having been sent to America, he joined the army under Sir Edward Pakenham below New Orleans on 6 January 1815, with the 7th and 43rd foot regiments. In the unsuccessful attack on the American trenches, made two days afterwards, he commanded the reserve. When Pakenham was killed, and General Gibbs mortally wounded, the chief command devolved on Lambert. He decided not to renew the attack, withdrew the troops which had been sent across the Mississippi, and, after retreating on 18 January, re-embarked his force on the 27th. It went to the Bay of Mobile, where Fort Bowyer was taken on 12 February, and next day news arrived that peace had been signed. 
Lambert returned to Europe in time to command the 10th brigade of British infantry at Waterloo. The brigade joined the army from Ghent only on the morning of 18 June, and was at first posted in reserve at Mont-St Jean. After 3 p.m. it was moved up to the front line to support the 5th (Picton's) division, and one of its regiments, the 27th, which had to be kept in square near La Haye-Sainte, lost two-thirds of its men, a heavier loss than that of any other regiment. Lambert received the thanks of parliament, the order of St Vladimir of Russia (3rd class), and that of Maximilian Joseph of Bavaria (commander). He commanded the 8th infantry brigade in the army of occupation in France. On 19 October 1816 he married Jane (died 22 May 1864), daughter of John Morant of Brocklehurst Park, New Forest. 
Lambert was promoted lieutenant-general on 27 May 1825, and general on 23 November 1841. He was given the colonelcy of the 10th regiment on 18 January 1824, and was made GCB on 19 July 1838. He died at Weston House, Thames Ditton, Surrey, on 14 September 1847, aged seventy-five. 


@@@@@


doc= 15942


Lambert, Sir John (1815-1892), civil servant and musicologist, was born on 4 February 1815 at Bridzor, near Wardour Castle, Wiltshire, the youngest surviving son of Daniel Lambert, a surgeon, of Hindon, and afterwards of Milford Hall, Salisbury, and his wife, Mary Muriel, the daughter of Charles Jinks of Oundle, Northamptonshire. He was a Roman Catholic, and in 1823 he entered St Gregory's College, Downside, near Bath. In 1831 he was articled to a Salisbury solicitor and he practised in Salisbury from 1836 to 1857. In 1838 he married Ellen Reade (died 1891), the daughter of Henry Shorto of Salisbury. They had three sons and four daughters, of whom two sons and three daughters survived. Lambert took a leading part in local politics, and was a strong advocate of free trade; he was involved in anti-cornlaw agitation, and reformed the sanitary condition of the city. In 1854 he was elected mayor of Salisbury, the first Roman Catholic to be mayor of a cathedral city since the Reformation. In 1857 he was appointed a poor-law inspector. 
In 1863 Lambert went to London at the request of C. P. Villiers, president of the poor-law board, to advise on the measures necessary to deal with the poverty caused by the American civil war, and the 'Union Relief Acts' and 'Public Works (Manufacturing Districts) Act' of that year were prepared as a result of his recommendations. After the passing of the 'Public Works Act' Lambert superintended its administration. In 1865 he prepared statistics for the 'Representation of the People Acts', which were introduced in 1866 by Russell and Gladstone, and gave similar assistance to Disraeli in connection with the 'Representation of the People Bill' of 1867. Before the resignation of Russell's administration he was offered the post of financial minister for the island of Jamaica, which he declined. In 1867 he drew up the scheme for the 'Metropolitan Poor Act', and under it was appointed receiver of the metropolitan common poor fund. 
Lambert was a member of the parliamentary boundaries commission of 1867, and of the sanitary commission which sat for two or three years. In 1869 and 1870 he went to Ireland at Gladstone's request to gather information in connection with the Irish church and land bills, and prepared special reports for the cabinet. From 1871 to 1882 he was permanent secretary of the new Local Government Board, and was entrusted with the organization of the department. As a member of the sanitary commission he compiled in 1872 a summary of the sanitary laws, and in the same year he was chairman of the commission which drew up the census of landed proprietors in Great Britain. This was issued as a blue book, known as 'The Modern Domesday Book', and provided the raw material upon which John Bateman based his statistical compilation 'The Great Landowners of Great Britain and Ireland' (1876). In 1879 Lambert prepared a report for the select committee of the House of Lords on the conservancy of rivers, and also reorganized the audit staff of the Local Government Board. He was chairman of the boundaries commission of 1884-5. In 1885 he was sworn of the privy council. 
Lambert was a gifted musician, and was especially interested in medieval church music. He helped to revive the singing of plainchant, and at the end of his life was converted to the new theory of plainchant from the Solesmes congregation in France. He was a member of the Academy of St Cecilia at Rome, and received a gold medal from Pius IX for his services in promoting church music. His musical publications included 'The Vesper Psalter' (1849), an edition of Janssen's 'A Grammar of Ritual Music' (1849), 'First Series of Hymns and Songs for the Use of Catholic Schools and Families' (1853), and 'Dulcis Jesu memoria' (1856), a Gregorian hymn from the 'Sarum Graduale' in modern notation. His works were widely used in Europe, especially in Belgium. Lambert was also the author of 'Catholic Sacred Songs' (1853), 'Modern Legislation as a Chapter in our History' (1865), and 'Vagrancy Laws and Vagrants' (1868). He was very fond of flowers, and published papers on the cultivation of orchids. 
Lambert was made a KCB in 1879. He died on 27 January 1892 after a long illness, at his home, Milford House, Elms Road, Clapham Common, London, and was buried at St Osmund's Church, Salisbury, which he had founded. 


@@@@@


doc= 15943


Lamberton, William (d. 1328), administrator and bishop of St Andrews, came of a family which first settled in Berwickshire, but which held lands in north-east Scotland by the late twelfth century and later in Stirlingshire also. Details of his birth, education, and early career are not certain; he had certainly received a university education by early 1293 and become a canon of Glasgow. By the time of his appearance at King John's first parliament in February 1293 he was chancellor of Glasgow Cathedral. He seems to have been sent abroad for further study by Bishop Robert Wishart of Glasgow, probably in the year or two before July 1295. 
In common with most of the Scots nobles and prelates, Lamberton swore fealty to Edward I in 1296 following the English invasion and the deposition of King John. He was also, however, a supporter of the rebellion against the English occupation which culminated in Wallace's victory at Stirling Bridge on 11 September 1297. Shortly before the battle Bishop William Fraser of St Andrews had died in exile, and on 3 November 1297 Lamberton was elected to the vacant see, no doubt with the backing of both William Wallace and his co-leader, Andrew Murray. (Fordun states that it was Lamberton who brought Fraser's heart back to St Andrews for burial, which, if true, may indicate that he was in France at the time of Fraser's death.) Lamberton was consecrated at the curia in June 1298 and used his time there and his journey home through France to further the diplomatic aims of the Scots in their conflict with the English king. 
Lamberton returned to Scotland in the summer of 1299 and was immediately embroiled in the difficult political situation. There were extreme tensions within the Scots guardianship which had been elected to rule in the name of the ousted King John -- in August that year a dispute between supporters of the two guardians (John Comyn and Robert Bruce, earl of Carrick) ended in a brawl in the council chamber in the presence of an English spy. The dispute was settled by imposing Lamberton as a third, and senior, guardian, an arrangement which lasted for some months. Even after Bruce's resignation from the guardianship Lamberton remained in office, until in October 1300 he and his fellow guardians were replaced by Sir John Soulis, perhaps as sole guardian. 
It is possible that Lamberton's demission of office as guardian was designed to allow his participation in further diplomatic efforts abroad. Certainly, for much of 1301 he was out of the country, and may have gone with the important embassy to Rome which was led by the canon lawyer Baldred Bisset. Two of Bisset's companions on the embassy were clerks of Lamberton from the St Andrews diocese, and it seems that preparation of the famous instructions issued to the embassy, and of the 'Processus' presented by Bisset, may have been influenced by those active in Lamberton's circle, if not by the bishop himself. Whether or not he visited the curia at this time, he was undoubtedly involved in negotiations at the French court in late 1301, attempting to avert the possible signing of an Anglo-French treaty without the inclusion of the Scots. Although he visited France again with a similar mission in 1302-3, his errand was unsuccessful, and the Anglo-French treaty went ahead in May 1303, leaving the Scots diplomatically isolated. Negotiations continued, but in February 1304 most of the Scots nobles submitted to Edward I, one of the conditions of their surrender being that Lamberton and Matthew Crambeth, bishop of Dunkeld, were to be included among those offered the English king's peace. Following his return to Scotland Lamberton swore fealty to Edward in May 1304. The sincerity of his commitment to Edward I must be open to question, since only a few weeks after his submission he entered into a covert bond of friendship with Robert Bruce, earl of Carrick, who was to seize the throne less than two years later. The bond's terms are vague, but must be taken to indicate that Lamberton now accepted that the political future lay with Bruce rather than with King John or his supporters, such as Wallace. 
During the period which followed Lamberton seems to have gained the trust of the English king. Late in 1305 he was appointed to be part of Edward's council in Scotland, and indeed led that council by the turn of the year. In September 1305 (less than a month after the execution of Wallace), however, Edward I had issued an ordinance for the government of Scotland, which was, in effect, an act for the incorporation of Scotland in the English dominions. The implications of such an act for the ecclesiastical government of Scotland cannot have endeared it to Lamberton or the other Scottish bishops and, notwithstanding his position of trust, may have incited him to further support and encourage the intended coup by Bruce. When Bruce eventually made his bid for the kingship in March 1306, Lamberton celebrated mass for the new king after the enthronement ceremony, thus placing himself firmly on the side of those backing the new regime and in opposition to the English king. Lamberton was among the 'traitors' sought by Edward as early as May 1306, and his men fought for King Robert in the defeat at Methven on 19 June. Lamberton himself was captured by the English soon after the battle, and only his priesthood saved him from execution. He was imprisoned until May 1308, after which, in accordance with a papal demand, he received a conditional release. He was not allowed to return to Scotland until the following year, when he may have been a member of a team negotiating a truce. Later in the same year he represented Bishop Antony (I) Bek of Durham in Scotland, making inquiry into the affairs of the templars, and, remaining there, he was then able to set about restoring the administration of his diocese, which had been severely disrupted by the wars for many years. He seems to have done this with the agreement of the English authorities, even although the work involved much contact with what the latter regarded as the rebel administration of Scotland. 
By the early months of 1312, however, Lamberton had once again made it clear that his loyalty lay with the Scottish king and government. He was active as a diplomatic agent for King Robert in the later phases of the war, and was also able effectively to continue the reconstruction of his diocese. In July 1318 a major landmark was reached for both diocese and kingdom: the dedication of the new cathedral of St Andrews, a symbol not only of the restoration of the see, but also of the victory of the national church and kingdom over attempts at subjection from the south. 
The position of both national church and government grew stronger, yet in the later years of the reign relations between the Scottish government and the papacy again became strained, resulting in 1319 in the excommunication of the king and his supporters, including Lamberton and other bishops. All the excommunicates ignored their summonses to the curia, and Lamberton continued to act as bishop, politician, and diplomat for some years to come. He was regularly involved in negotiations for truces and for peace, although he was not among those who eventually negotiated the 'final' peace with the English. This was agreed upon shortly before Lamberton's death, which took place in St Andrews on 20 May 1328. He was buried in his cathedral on 7 June. 
Lamberton's career as Scotland's senior bishop had spanned the entire course of the wars of independence. His allegiance to the 'national' cause was not as unwavering as that of some others -- in that respect he has sometimes been unfavourably compared with Bishop Wishart of Glasgow -- but the political realism which led him to submit to the English power when it was in the ascendant gave him a position from which he was able to influence the path of the kingdom despite the fluctuations of the political, military, and diplomatic struggle. His contribution to the ecclesiastical and political fortunes of the country in that difficult period was therefore immense. 


@@@@@


doc= 15944


Lamborn, Peter Spendlowe (1722-1774), engraver and miniature painter, was born at Cambridge, the son of John Lamborn (died 1763) and his second wife, Elizabeth Susanna Spendlowe. He went to London to study engraving under Isaac Basire and while there probably also engraved for the publisher John Boydell. The opportunities for teaching may have drawn him back to Cambridge, where from 1756 he engraved the majority of the forty-eight plates for James Bentham's 'History of the Cathedral Church of Ely' (1771). He married on 6 January 1762 Mary, daughter of Hitch Wale of Little Shelford, Cambridgeshire, with whom he had three sons and a daughter; she and Lamborn exhibited at the Society of Artists in London from 1764; he was elected fellow in 1771. Besides his views of Cambridge colleges, Lamborn provided various other topographical illustrations and plates, mostly relating to East Anglia, but including illustrations for Martyn's and Lettice's translation (1773) of Bayardi's 'Antiquities of Herculaneum'. His portraits included 'Samuel Johnson', drawn from life, 'Oliver Cromwell', after the Cooper portrait at Sidney Sussex College, and other university notables. The historian Thomas Dodds considered that Lamborn's views of colleges were 'more harmonised with the graving tool' than his earlier dry-point work (BL, Add. MS 33402, fol. 246). At his death in Cambridge on 5 November 1774 Lamborn was living in Free School Lane, in St Edward's parish, though his wife and children were settled on the farm that he had purchased at Little Shelford. He was buried on 8 November at Great St Mary's, Cambridge. 


@@@@@


doc= 15945


Lambourne, Reginald (fl. 1351-1377), astrologer, was a fellow of Merton College, Oxford, in 1353, where he served as second bursar in 1353-4 and where he associated with William Rede (died 1385), a colleague devoted to the study of astronomy and astrology. Lambourne composed an astrological weather prediction for the years 1368-74, evidently addressed to Rede upon his elevation as bishop of Chichester in 1368. Still a fellow of Merton in 1357, Lambourne had entered the Benedictine order by 1363, when he is recorded as a monk at Eynsham Abbey, Oxfordshire. In that year he wrote a letter discussing the astrological interpretation of lunar eclipses of March and September. The recipient is not specifically indicated, but the name 'Jo. London' appears at the end of the letter, suggesting identification with John of London, a monk of St Augustine's Abbey, Canterbury, who had an abiding interest in astronomical calculations. Lambourne was still at Eynsham in 1367; some time afterwards he migrated to St Mary's Abbey, York. But apparently he could not settle down at St Mary's and in January 1377 he made a direct appeal to the Holy See 'fearing attacks from his enemies upon his status and good name' (Emden, 'Oxf.', 2.1086). The nature of the dispute is unclear, but it was severe enough for Lambourne to leave the Benedictine order. Later in the same year he returned to Oxford and joined the Franciscan order; he was styled MA and DTh at this time. Lambourne died at Northampton, but the year of his death is not recorded. 


@@@@@


doc= 15946


Lambton, John (1710-1794), army officer, born on 26 July 1710, was the fourth and youngest son of Ralph Lambton (died 1717), landowner, and his wife, whom he married in 1696, Dorothy, daughter of John Hedworth of Harraton, Durham. His elder brothers were Henry Lambton (1697-1761) and Major-General Hedworth Lambton (died 1758), who was an officer in the Coldstream Guards from 1723 to 1753 and in 1755 raised the 52nd (originally 54th) foot at Coventry. Educated at Westminster School, John was appointed ensign in the Coldstream Guards on 12 October 1732, became lieutenant in 1739, was regimental quartermaster from February 1742 to January 1745, and became captain and lieutenant-colonel on 24 January 1746. On 28 April 1758 he was appointed colonel of the 68th foot (later 1st Durham light infantry), then made a separate regiment. It had been raised two years previously as a second battalion of the 23rd Royal Welch Fusiliers, but had been chiefly recruited in Durham, a local connection subsequently maintained. During the Seven Years' War Lambton commanded the regiment in the unsuccessful attack on St Malo, Brittany, in September 1758. When county titles were bestowed on line regiments in 1782, it was styled the 'Durham' regiment. Lambton, who became a full general, retained the colonelcy until his death. He succeeded to the Lambton estates after the deaths of his elder brothers. In the second half of the eighteenth century the freeman franchise Durham city was represented in parliament by members of the Lambton and Tempest families. Following the death on 26 June 1761 of his brother Henry, MP for Durham city since 1734, Lambton stood. He was opposed by Ralph Gowland, the candidate of Henry Vane, first earl of Darlington, and his party, who by creating new honorary freemen, mostly unconnected with the city, gained a majority. However, on petition Lambton, who asserted the rights of the historic resident freemen, was seated in May 1762. An independent, he voted sometimes for and sometimes against the government, and there is no record of his speaking in the house. He represented the city in five succeeding parliaments until his acceptance of the Chiltern Hundreds in February 1787, and was said to be popular with the citizens for the stand he made for their rights and privileges. Reportedly in 1793 he refused a peerage. Lambton married on 5 September 1763 Lady Susan Lyon (died 1769), daughter of Thomas, eighth earl of Strathmore, and they had two sons and two daughters. He died on 22 March 1794. His elder son, William Henry Lambton (1764-1797), MP for Durham city (1787-97), was father of 'Radical Jack', John George Lambton, first earl of Durham (1792-1840). 


@@@@@


doc= 15947


Lambton, John George, first earl of Durham (1792-1840), politician, was the eldest son of William Henry Lambton, MP for the city of Durham, and his wife, Lady Anne Barbara Frances Villiers, second daughter of George, fourth earl of Jersey; he was born in Berkeley Square, London, on 12 April 1792. His father, a supporter of Charles James Fox, died in 1797. 'I have never felt the blessing of a father's care or advice', Lambton wrote in 1817, 'and, I fear, I have suffered much from it' (New, 17). 
The Lambtons were a Durham landed family. By 1826 coalmines were earning the estate $50,000 annually, although Lambton was reported to be $900,000 in debt: he economized by limiting expenditure during a visit to Paris to $1000 a month. He told Thomas Creevey that 'a man 'might jog on'' with an annual income of $40,000 ('Creevey Papers', 374). Creevey called him King Jog. 
Lambton (as he was known to his family) suffered recurrent poor health -- he complained in 1822 that it was 'damned hard that a man with $80,000 a year can't sleep!' ('Creevey Papers', 391) -- which probably explains his outbursts of temper, lovingly chronicled and sometimes exaggerated in contemporary diaries. A sympathetic observer noted in 1832 that 'his haughty and disdainful demeanour as well as petulant and ungovernable temper' made him 'generally unpopular' ('Holland House Diaries', 166). J. C. Hobhouse saw insecurity behind the arrogance: 'he did not attach so much value to his character, or opinions, as to give himself a sufficient amount of self-confidence in matters of importance' (Hobhouse, 5.75-6). Lambton acknowledged that 'there is no one who more keenly feels a slight than myself' -- in cabinet in 1831 he treated opposition 'as a personal reflection upon himself' ('Holland House Diaries', 8) -- but such attitudes mainly characterized his dealing with social equals. He accepted sharp criticism from Joseph Parkes and Charles Buller. 'Everybody has always been afraid of him' ('Lord Melbourne's Papers', 434-5), a puzzled Melbourne noted in 1838. Although acknowledged as a fine orator, he was intimidatingly taciturn, 'lacking the slightest power or turn for conversation' ('Creevey Papers', 391). Florid colouring created an impression of smouldering intolerance: he looked 'like a picture by Murillo of a young Spanish Jesuit' (Sheil, 2.45). In 1832 Palmerston, an unfriendly observer, described him in cabinet as 'sullen, silent, & sulky... not condescending to take part in the discussions of mortal men' (Bourne, 524). 
At the age of six Lambton was entrusted to the Bristol physician Thomas Beddoes, a radical supporter of the French Revolution, who laid the foundation of a broad education which enabled him to survive three undistinguished years at Eton College. Beddoes gave him a grounding in chemistry (Lambton later encouraged the experiments of Humphrey Davy with the miners' safety lamp, and his Durham home, Lambton Castle, was one of the first houses in Britain to be lit by gas). 
When Lambton left Eton in 1808 his guardians wished to send him to Edinburgh University, but he insisted on joining the army, and was commissioned as cornet in the 10th hussars on 9 June 1809. By 1811 he had tired of military life. He fell in love with Henrietta (Harriet) Cholmondeley, illegitimate daughter of Lord Cholmondeley, and evaded his guardians' disapproval by marrying her in Scotland on 1 January 1812. An Anglican ceremony followed at Malpas in Cheshire on 28 January 1812. Harriet Lambton died on 11 July 1815, leaving three daughters. 
Keen on cricket -- he took 61 wickets and scored 600 runs in 1812 -- and horse-racing, Lambton also had a feeling for his family inheritance and marked his coming of age in 1813 by resuming massive reconstruction of Lambton Castle to the design of Joseph Bonomi, commissioned by Lambton's father in 1796. Creevey thought the 'highly collegiate' dining-hall like a 'family vault'. 
Barely twenty-one, on 20 September 1813 Lambton was returned at a by-election as MP for co. Durham, declaring himself a reformer but 'no friend... to wild and improbable theories' (Reid, 1.68). His election brought him into contact with the whig aristocrat Earl Grey ['see 'Grey, Charles, second Earl Grey], whose daughter Louisa Elizabeth Grey he married on 9 December 1816. Loyalty to the Grey clan led him to oppose J. C. Hobhouse at the Westminster by-election in 1819, and to fight a duel in 1826 with his Eton contemporary T. W. Beaumont, who was defending his Northumberland seat against Lambton's brother-in-law Lord Howick. 
Lambton's radical reputation was founded on a few set-piece orations, beginning with his maiden speech on 12 May 1814, in which he attacked the transfer of Norway to Sweden. He made a similar protest over Genoa on 21 February 1815. In May 1817 he criticized the expense of Canning's embassy to Portugal. At a Durham county meeting on 21 October 1819 Lambton denounced the use of troops against a Manchester reform meeting (the Peterloo massacre). Brougham later claimed that Lambton, 'in no profession, independent in fortune', might have done more to oppose repression (Thomas, 360). He had done enough to be regarded as a danger to the established order, as Sir Thomas Liddell bluntly told him when refusing his electoral support in 1820. 
On 6 December 1819 Lambton proposed a sweeping measure of parliamentary reform, including shorter parliaments, a wide franchise, and a redistribution of seats. His initiative was overtaken by Lord John Russell's specific proposal for the disfranchisement of the corrupt borough of Grampound. On 17 April 1821 Lambton renewed his proposal, but was humiliated by being accidentally prevented from voting for his own motion. He ceased to be a frequent Commons speaker, and spent the winter of 1826-7 in Italy for his health. On his return Lambton leaned towards support of the new prime minister, the liberal tory George Canning, placing some strain on his relations with Grey. From Canning's successor, Lord Goderich, Lambton received the peerage which he claimed 'as a matter of right' (New, 94), since his whig grandfather had refused a title from the tainted Pitt in 1793. In 1833 he claimed that he had accepted a title so that 'one who was born, bred, and educated among the people' (Reid, 1.341) might argue their cause in the upper house. Lambton was created Baron Durham on 29 January 1828. 
It was claimed in 1829 as 'a well-known fact' that Durham wanted a Wellington-Grey coalition ('Creevey Papers', 543), but on 22 November 1830 he became lord privy seal in his father-in-law's cabinet, though refusing to accept the $2000 salary. Grey quickly commissioned Durham to draft a reform bill. Durham convened a committee of himself, Russell, Duncannon, and Sir James Graham, which worked intensively at his London house, 13 Cleveland Row, and produced a bold scheme on 14 January 1831. Durham overcame Russell's reluctance to include the secret ballot, perhaps because he did not wish to be upstaged as he had been in 1819, but the cabinet struck out the proposal. 
Throughout the reform crisis Durham opposed compromise. He successfully pressed the cabinet on 21 April 1831 to call an election on the issue. To circumvent procedural devices designed to delay a dissolution, ministers persuaded William IV to prorogue parliament in person. Durham's role in the plot was to chivvy the master of the horse, Lord Albemarle, from his breakfast to summon the king's carriage. When the protesting Albemarle asked 'Is there revolution?', Durham replied 'There will be if you stay to finish your breakfast' (Brock, 191). Durham also favoured a large creation of peers to force the bill through the Lords, and stalked out of a cabinet dinner on 7 March 1832 when Grey prevented him from arguing his case. He was in a minority of one when he pressed the issue to a vote on 11 March. Only the likelihood that his departure would trigger the collapse of the ministry deterred him from resignation. He spoke in support of the bill in the second reading debate in the Lords on 13 April, and on 22 May, probably from a brief by Francis Place, defended the creation of new constituencies in the London suburbs. On 7 June 1832 he was one of four commissioners who signified the royal assent on behalf of the king. 
Durham felt himself excluded from a political battle fought largely in the Commons, although Grey replied, deploring his ill-tempered refusal to discuss amendments on their merits. Durham was under great stress in 1831-2 caused by a tragic series of bereavements. On 24 September 1831 Charles, his 'beautiful and remarkable son', died aged thirteen after a long illness. Durham's mother died unexpectedly on 21 April 1832. After 'terrible sufferings' the youngest daughter from his first marriage, Harriet, followed on 30 May. 'In eight months I have lost son, mother, and daughter', Durham wrote. 'I shudder to think who could be the next victim' (Reid, 1.299). It was not long before he knew. His second daughter, Georgiana, died on 3 January 1833. In December 1836 the surviving child of his first marriage, Fanny, 'the blessing of my life from her earliest childhood', died in Ireland just two months after her marriage (New, 284). 
Durham was devastated by these blows: he needed laudanum to sleep. On 30 November 1831, his first cabinet appearance after his son's death, he 'lost all command of himself' in a violent clash with Grey. Durham felt that the ministry was losing its resolve over reform, and that the high personal price he had paid for his political involvement entitled his views to more consideration. The diary of Lord Holland, who witnessed the 'distressing' scene ('Holland House Diaries', 88-9), does not support Greville's version, recorded third-hand, that the diatribe included an accusation that Grey contributed to the boy's death by forcing Durham to remain in London throughout his illness ('Greville Memoirs', 2.226-7). 'No two men are more unlike than Durham when in good humour, and Durham in his angry, tetchy and, I am afraid one must add, usual mood', Holland noted in December 1831 ('Holland House Diaries', 93). 
Durham resigned from the cabinet on 14 March 1833, and on 23 March he received the earldom for which 'he had long panted with childish vanity' ('Holland House Diaries', 207). Out of office Durham followed a threefold strategy. First he disputed the leadership of the radicals with Brougham, especially in speeches at Edinburgh on 15 September and Glasgow on 29 October 1834. Secondly he energetically cultivated the press, and was thought to have 'The Times' and 'Morning Chronicle' 'under his immediate control' (Aspinall, 380). In the publicity battle Durham broke cabinet confidentiality to claim responsibility for the 'Reform Bill'. Thirdly he exploited a long-standing friendship with Leopold, king of the Belgians, to cultivate his sister, the duchess of Kent, as 'the avenue to Court favor' (H. R. V. Holland, 391) when her daughter, Princess Victoria, came to the throne. At Cowes in September 1833 Durham entertained Victoria with a firework display including the Lambton motto, 'Le jour viendra'. 
The re-formed whig ministry under Melbourne appointed Durham ambassador to St Petersburg in July 1835, perhaps to get him out of the country. Durham had undertaken a special mission there in 1833, and relations with Russia were cordial during his term -- not surprisingly, since Durham was 'completely bit by the Emperor Nicholas' ('Greville Memoirs', 2.2), whose critics he termed 'Russophobites'. Durham's return to Britain in June 1837 coincided with the death of William IV, and there was speculation that he would join Melbourne's weak ministry. 
On 22 July 1837 Melbourne asked Durham to consider tackling the problem of Canada. In the mainly French-speaking province of Lower Canada (later Quebec) the elected assembly had reached stalemate in quarrels with successive governors-in-chief over the control of the colonial government. Durham decided to 'have nothing to do with the settlement of that unfortunate question' (Martin, 'Durham Report', 13). In December 1837 news arrived of rebellion in Lower Canada. Ministers were forced to suspend the constitution and required a governor-in-chief who could be trusted to wield dictatorial power. Durham's motives for accepting the task in January 1838 remain conjectural. His later claim that he had been 'told that their Existence as a Govt' depended on his acceptance suggests that he assumed that he had acquired the whip hand over his former associates. The critical Greville marvelled at 'the general applause' ('Greville Memoirs', 4.54) for his appointment. Realization that Melbourne controlled access to the young queen may also have persuaded him that the day predicted in the Lambton motto had not yet arrived. 
Durham's mission quickly ran into problems. Although appointed to tackle a crisis, he delayed his departure until 24 April 1838. The interval was spent in assembling a lavish outfit, even including musical instruments, prompting Sydney Smith's explanation 'that Durham is going to make overtures to the Canadian people' (Reid, 2.165). On 2 April a motion to limit Durham's expenditure was defeated by just two votes in the Commons. Durham made two controversial appointments to his staff: both his legal adviser, Thomas Turton, and the colonization theorist Edward Gibbon Wakefield had been involved in sex scandals. Even the easy-going Melbourne felt that if 'their abilities... were superhuman they would not counterbalance the discredit of their characters' ('Lord Melbourne's Papers', 428-9). 
Durham arrived in Canada on 29 May 1838 with wide powers as governor-in-chief of British North America and high commissioner. Ruling Lower Canada through a special council, composed mainly of his own associates, he began to overhaul all aspects of the administration. To pave the way for a general amnesty, on 28 June 1838 Durham issued an ordinance exiling eight imprisoned rebel leaders to Bermuda, on pain of death should they return. Brougham attacked this as an abuse of power. It soon transpired that Durham had no authority over Bermuda. Ministers briefly attempted a defence, but were forced to disallow the ordinance. Unluckily, Durham learned of this from an American newspaper on 19 September. Melbourne suspected that Durham would 'concoct a general arrangement... boast of the effect he produced while there' and blame any failures 'on the manner in which he has been treated' ('Lord Melbourne's Papers', 432). On 9 October 1838 Durham issued a forthright proclamation announcing his resignation. He departed on 1 November, after barely five months in Canada. 
On his return Durham intended to 'be the plaintiff & not the defendant' (Martin, 'Durham myth', 54), but found the political world unsympathetic. The Bermuda ordinance proved that Turton's 'law is not a jot better than his morals' ('Greville Memoirs', 4.123), and the proclamation was generally condemned. As Melbourne had predicted, when Durham arrived at Plymouth on 30 November he boasted of his success in Canada, but news quickly followed of a second revolt in the province, and his critics now alleged that he had fled from problems of his own creation. 
The unauthorized publication of Durham's 'Report on the affairs of British North America' in 'The Times', beginning on 8 February 1839, caused another sensation. Wakefield was probably responsible, possibly because ministers were pressing for deletion of his ideas on land policy. Durham's enemies denied that that he was the author of the report, alleging that he merely signed the dubious production of his shady entourage. Durham's work on the 'Reform Bill' and a major report he produced on Russian affairs in 1836 are testimonies to his intellect. The production of a text of 120,000 words in two months suggests collaboration, and a persistent tradition points to Charles Buller, his secretary, as co-author. 
Durham's report recommended the union of Lower Canada with English-speaking Upper Canada (now Ontario) to Anglicize the French Canadians and as a step to a union of all the British North American provinces. He avoided the contentious term 'responsible government', but argued for limited colonial self-government, reserving tariffs and the disposal of public lands to Britain, and brushing aside the problem of enforcing imperial authority. Because of the brevity of his stay in Canada and his magnificent isolation from ordinary settlers -- his three-week visit to Montreal and Upper Canada in July 1838 was like a royal progress -- Durham hardly acquired any profound understanding of its problems. 
Durham's report was later hailed by historians as the blueprint for the Commonwealth, a hagiography which in the 1970s provoked exuberant rebuttal. Although Melbourne expected that legislation would 'probably be based, at least to some degree' on Durham's proposals (Maxwell, 1.159), the verdict of ''Magna Carta' of the Second British Empire' (R. Coupland, ed., 'The Durham Report', 1945, xlvi) cannot be sustained. Durham's fame as a proconsul has died with the British empire, but in modern Quebec he remains a symbolic cultural threat. 
Durham's 'Report on the affairs of British North America' was published as a parliamentary paper ('Parl. papers', 1839, 17). Editions were published by Ridgway (1839) and Methuen (1902), without named editors. C. P. Lucas published an extensive edition (3 vols., 1912) and R. Coupland a short version (1945). G. M. Craig edited 'An Abridgement' (1963) with the 'Carleton Library', published by McClelland and Stewart (Toronto). A French translation, edited by M.-P. Hamel, was published in Quebec in 1948. 
Durham's health suffered in Canada, and he took little part in politics after his return, speaking in the Lords 'like a man of great decision, mixed with some impatience' ('Leeds Mercury', 23 Feb 1839). By May 1840 he was gravely ill, probably with tuberculosis. He died on 28 July 1840 at Cowes, and was buried at Chester-le-Street. Tradition related that on his deathbed Durham had said, 'The Canadians will one day do justice to my memory.' In contemporary usage, 'the Canadians' usually referred to French-Canadians: Reid, in 1906, emended this to 'Canada' (Reid, 2, title-page). Durham was survived by his son George and three daughters, one of whom, Mary, married in 1846 Lord Elgin, the governor-in-chief of British North America who presided over the province's transition to self-government. Their vow, as newly-weds, 'to build a monument' to Durham's memory added a sentimental note to his mythic role in Canadian nationhood. More tangibly, a Greek temple was erected by public subscription on Penshaw Hill in 1844, and still looms over the Durham countryside. 
Durham left $250,000, all to his widow. The estate had liabilities of $635,000, but much of this was probably planned refinancing of the Lambton collieries. In religion he was a liberal Anglican, and a strong foe of reactionary clergy such as Henry Phillpotts. Durham favoured freemasonry as a means of uniting classes. He became deputy grand master for England in May 1834. 
Essentially, Durham was an eighteenth-century figure. So were many of his contemporaries. The most notable among them were granted lifespans sufficient to adjust to the Victorian world. Durham died at the age of forty-eight with his personal and political contradictions unresolved. 


@@@@@


doc= 15948


Lambton, William (1753x69-1823), army officer and geodesist in India, was born at Crosby Grange, near Northallerton, in the North Riding of Yorkshire. The date of his birth is a matter of some conjecture, and he seems to have been at some pains to keep both his birth and his parentage a mystery. Davison Ingledew gives his date of birth as 1756, Phillimore has 1753/1756, and Keay suggests some time in the 1760s. No parish registers have been found to answer the question conclusively, and Lambton's childhood remains obscure. It is assumed that his parents were of humble means. He is known to have had a sister, Dorothy (died 1827). He was educated at Borrowby, after which some neighbouring gentlemen and a clergyman entered him at the grammar school at Northallerton, where there was a foundation for four free scholars. He finished his education under the mathematician Dr Charles Hutton, though at which institute, if any, remains a mystery. 
On 28 March 1781 Lambton was appointed ensign in Lord Fauconberg's foot, a 'provincial' or home-service regiment. In 1782 he transferred with the rank of ensign to the 33rd (West Riding) regiment, later the 1st battalion duke of Wellington's regiment, and joined the regiment in New York. While serving with the 33rd he was, according to some reports, briefly taken prisoner at Yorktown. In 1783 he went with the 33rd to Nova Scotia and subsequently New Brunswick. On 9 May 1784 he was promoted lieutenant. The following year he was appointed barrack-master at Saint John, New Brunswick, by both the war office and the Board of Ordnance. Since it was a double appointment, his post of barrack-master carried a double salary, namely $400 per annum. In New Brunswick Lambton helped divide and allot land to British loyalist refugees from the United States and was involved in surveying and delineating the boundary between the United States and Canada. While observing a solar eclipse in Canada he failed to attach a smoked glass lens to his telescope and suffered permanent damage to his left eye, which thereafter gave him a rather distracted and glazed expression. During the period he was surveying in New Brunswick a mountain was named Lambton's Mountain after or by him. This name appears on some early maps, but the peak later became known as Big Bald Mountain. In 1795 Lambton's regiment was ordered home, but he remained in Canada, apparently because family responsibilities would not allow him to relinquish his large salary. 
The 33rd regiment was ordered to the East Indies in 1796, and Lambton was then obliged to choose between his civil and military positions. He chose to go to India with his regiment, which was then commanded by Arthur Wesley, later Wellesley. Lambton sailed for England and from there went with the regiment to the Cape in 1796, to Bengal in 1797, and subsequently to Madras in September 1798. He had not served with his regiment for twelve years and, though middle-aged, was still a lieutenant. Through a letter of introduction from his Canadian patron, Brooke Watson, to Sir Alured Clark, commander-in-chief in India, he soon secured the staff position of brigade major to the king's troops under Fort St George (1799). Two papers, on the 'Theory of walls' and on the 'Maximum of mechanical power and the effects of machines in motion', were communicated by Lambton to the Asiatic Society about this time ('Asiatic Researches', vol. 6). Both exhibit an impressive command of mathematics and astronomy, and this was noticed by Wesley, who became a useful patron, inviting Lambton to share his quarters in Madras. Lambton appears to have acquired his scientific knowledge through his own studies while in Canada. 
Lambton served as brigade major to General David Baird in the expedition against Seringapatam, Tipu Sultan's stronghold, in the Fourth Anglo-Mysore War. Lambton's ability to find directions by the stars saved his brigade during a night march in the course of the campaign, when Baird was mistakenly leading his troops south towards enemy lines rather than north to safety. Lambton corrected the mistake. After the storm and capture of Seringapatam on 4 May 1799, in which he played an active and very creditable part, Lambton accompanied his brigade in its march to secure the surrender of the hill forts in Mysore. His journal from August to December 1799 is among the Mornington papers (BL, Add. MS 13658). When the brigade was broken up Lambton was appointed brigade major of the troops on the Coromandel coast, antedated from 22 August 1799. 
In 1799 Lambton presented a memorial to the governor of Madras in council, suggesting a trigonometrical survey connecting the Malabar and Coromandel coasts. Lambton stressed to the government the practical benefits which would flow from his geodetic survey: it would provide an extendable lattice into which more detailed but less geodetically accurate local or regional surveys could be fitted. No less pressing was his desire to 'accomplish a desideratum still more sublime, viz., to determine by actual measurement the magnitude and figure of the earth' (Phillimore, 2.250). It was this scientific end which finally secured approval for Lambton's scheme. The Madras governor, Edward Clive, engaged the support for the scheme of his uncle Nevil Maskelyne, the astronomer royal. Their backing won over an initially hostile James Rennell and secured moneys to fund and continue the survey, which, like all others, dramatically overran its budget. Colonel Colin Mackenzie had already secured permission to undertake a survey in Mysore. Mackenzie's survey had broad topographical aims, recording the historical, natural, and economic character of the area; Lambton's was strictly trigonometrical. The two surveys were authorized to proceed in co-operation with one another. Phillimore's account shows the two to have been on cordial terms and that they co-operated professionally. Edney, however, suggests that relations were far from cordial and that Mackenzie resented what he regarded as the undue favour shown to Lambton. 
Lambton's survey proposals were approved on 6 February 1800, and he began work immediately. Between 1800 and 1802 he conducted a preliminary survey in Mysore, measuring a base-line at St Thomas's Mount, Madras, in 1802. His next task, between 1802 and 1803, was the measurement of a degree along the Coromandel coast. Between 1803 and 1806 he measured triangles across the peninsula from east to west and started the measurement of the central arc, then between 1806 and 1807 he took the triangulation down the south coast to Tanjore. From 1807 to 1810 he extended the central arc to Cape Comorin and undertook a general survey and the construction of a map of the southern part of the peninsula. Between 1811 and 1815 he extended the central arc through the ceded districts into Hyderabad, with a connection to the eastern coast at Guntur. In 1815 he measured his sixth base-line, at Bidar, extending his arc to this point. Lambton was exacting in the demands he made for instruments and punctilious in their use, modelling his instrumentation and practice on those of William Roy. His theodolite was by William Carey, once apprenticed to Jesse Ramsden, and modelled on that used by Roy. His chain was also modelled on Roy's. In 1817 he submitted his third report, which described his progress up to 1815. The composition of such reports, the making of astronomical observations, and particularly the computation to reduce errors made in field observations occupied more and more of his time, and he increasingly left fieldwork to his assistants. 
Lambton became captain in the 33rd foot, without purchase, on 25 June 1806, and purchased his majority in the regiment on 1 March 1808. When the 33rd returned home from Madras in 1811, Lambton remained behind as superintendent of the Indian survey at the company's expense. He became lieutenant-colonel by brevet on 4 June 1814 and was placed on half pay in consequence of the reduction of the army on 25 December 1818. In June 1818 his survey was transferred from Madras to be under the control of the supreme government at Fort William and was named the great or grand trigonometrical survey (GTS) of India. Against the wishes of Colin Mackenzie, who since 1815 had been the first surveyor-general of India with authority over all the surveys in the three presidencies, and who had argued that the trigonometrical survey should also come under his authority, Lambton's GTS was thus answerable only to government and not to Mackenzie. Lambton was elected a corresponding member of the French Academy (1817) through the influence of his French former assistant John Warren, and a fellow of the Royal Society (1818) and of the Asiatic Society. 
In 1818, his third report complete, Lambton proposed extending the arc northwards, and the government agreed Agra as an appropriate end point. With this in mind, in 1822 he began to move his headquarters from Hyderabad to Nagpur. But Lambton never reached Nagpur. He died of heart disease according to some reports, of pulmonary tuberculosis according to others, and of his doctor's treatment according to yet others, at Hinganghat, 50 miles south of Nagpur, on 20 or 26 January 1823 and was buried there at what later became the Christian cemetery. His fine instruments, library, and papers were disposed of hastily and against the express wishes of his assistants, notably George Everest, at a camp auction, and some autobiographical notes, numerous other private papers, and some of his instruments were lost. Everest, who had been appointed Lambton's chief assistant in 1817, describes him at that period as 6 feet tall, erect, well-formed, bony, and muscular. He was a fair-complexioned man, with blue eyes, and he seemed 'a tranquil and exceedingly good-humoured person, very fond of his joke, a great admirer of the fair sex, partial to singing glees and duets, and everything, in short, that promoted harmony and tended to make life pass easily' (Phillimore, 3.468). 
Lambton died unmarried, but in his will he named two natural children, William Lambton ('b'. Pondicherry, 12 July 1809) and Eliza Lambton ('b'. Hyderabad, 6 August 1819), and their respective mothers, Kummerboo, an Indian Muslim woman, and Frances, a half-European, half-Indian woman. He had a second natural son, John William ('b'. 26 December 1820), whose mother may have been Frances, and who is thought to have died young. William and Eliza were bequeathed substantial legacies, their mothers nominal allowances. William also received his father's small theodolite and his silver case of mathematical instruments. The residue of his estate was bequeathed to the two sons of his sister Dorothy, then in Yorkshire. Lambton's will was disputed acrimoniously in chancery, with the two natural children claiming that their bequests had not been honoured, yet the one surviving residuary legatee was receiving moneys. 
Lambton's great arc was, by the time of his death, nearly 10 degrees or over 700 miles long. It was longer than the European arc which Lambton so much admired, and a model of its time. It was Everest who completed the arc after Lambton's death, but the project was Lambton's, as was the dedication and skill which ensured the establishment of the GTS as the then foremost geodetic establishment in the world. Lambton's results reflected the prevailing limits on instrumentation, method, and scientific understanding of effects such as local attraction, and within fifty years were superseded by a retriangulation; but his achievement remained formidable and the foundation for the subsequent achievements of others. 


@@@@@


doc= 15949


Lamont, David (1753-1837), Church of Scotland minister, was born on 20 April 1753, the son of John Lamont (1700-1776), minister of Kelton, Kirkcudbrightshire, and Margaret (died 1795), daughter of John Affleck of Whitepark. His grandfather John Lamont of Newton in Fife was descended from Allan Lamont, second minister of Scoonie, Fife, after the Reformation. He was licensed by the presbytery of Kirkcudbright in May 1772 and ordained as minister for the parish of Kirkpatrick-Durham in that county in August 1774. He was made DD by the University of Edinburgh in 1780 and was appointed chaplain to the prince of Wales in 1785. On 24 July 1799 he married Anne (died 1857), daughter of David Anderson, an excise officer; they had one son, John (1805-1873), an advocate, afterwards a brewer in London. In 1822 Lamont became moderator of the general assembly of the Church of Scotland and chaplain in ordinary for Scotland two years later. As moderator of the general assembly he read an address to George IV and preached before him in St Giles's, Edinburgh, during his visit to Scotland. 
A liberal in politics and theology Lamont held a prominent place among the moderate clergy who dominated the Church of Scotland at the time. Contemporaries described him as a popular preacher, an able debater in church courts, and an eloquent platform speaker. A considerable landowner, he divided his property into small holdings, promoted local manufactories, formed benevolent societies among his tenants and parishioners, and was said to have 'gained the affection and esteem of all who witnessed his generous and enlightened exertions'. Between 1780 and 1797 he published six works, including 'Sermons on Important Subjects' (1780-97) and 'Subscription of the Confession of Faith of the Church of Scotland' (1790). He also contributed an 'Account of the parish of Kirkpatrick-Durham' to Sir John Sinclair's 'Statistical Account of Scotland' (1791-9). He died on 7 January 1837. 


@@@@@


doc= 15950


Lamont, Johann von (1805-1879), astronomer and geophysicist, was born John Lamont on 13 December 1805 in Corriemulzie, near Braemar, Aberdeenshire, the only child of Robert Lamont, forester, and his second wife, Elspeth Ewan. In 1817, after his father's death Father Gall Robertson recruited him for the Scottish Benedictine monastery of St James in Regensburg, Bavaria, while his mother and stepbrother emigrated to the United States. The prior of the monastery, Benedikt Deasson, devoted himself to the boy's education in mathematics and mechanics. During the summer of 1827 Lamont spent his vacation at the observatory in Bogenhausen, near Munich. The director, Johann Georg von Soldner, appreciated Lamont's work and appointed him as his assistant in March 1828. Two years later Lamont obtained a doctorate from the University of Munich. After Soldner's death in 1833 Lamont provisionally headed the observatory, and he was appointed director in July 1835. He enjoyed the support of Friedrich von Schelling, president of the Bavarian Academy of Sciences, of which he became an extraordinary member in 1835 and an ordinary member in 1836. In 1837 he began lecturing on practical astronomy at the University of Munich and succeeded Franz von Paula Gruithuisen as professor of astronomy on 20 December 1852. For a short period Lamont was a member of the senate of the University of Munich (1857-9). 
Lamont's scientific work focused on astronomy, meteorology, and terrestrial magnetism. In order to do precise measurements in these fields he devised numerous new instruments in a private workshop that ultimately became part of the observatory in 1853. An outstanding 10.5 Paris inch refractor (approximately 11.25 standard inches) with a focal length of 15 feet, built by the famous workshop of Utzschneider-Fraunhofer, served him in the late 1830s for observing objects of relatively low luminosity, such as the satellites of Saturn and Uranus, the relative motion of star clusters, and Halley's comet in 1836. After 1840 Lamont's astronomical work focused mainly on positional astronomy and resulted in a catalogue of 80,000 stars, of which 12,000 had been previously undiscovered ('Observationes astronomicae in specula regia Monachiensi institutae', published as 'Annalen der Koniglichen Sternwarte bei Munchen', 20 vols. in ten bound books, 1848-74). Lamont was also the first in Europe to devise a chronometer for recording the transit time of stars across the meridian (1850). 
In the 1840s Lamont's attention was drawn to meteorology and terrestrial magnetism. As atmospheric conditions determined the quality of astronomical observations, he became interested in the study of weather and proposed a network of meteorological stations. In an effort to co-ordinate measurements he founded a meteorological association in 1842, and published the 'Annalen fur Meteorologie und Erdmagnetismus' from 1842 to 1844. His work, though remaining fragmentary due to lack of funding, laid the foundation for meteorological science in Bavaria and introduced new meteorological measuring and recording devices. 
Lamont's interest in geophysics and terrestrial magnetism, to which he contributed his most important works, was closely linked to the initiative by C. F. Gauss and W. Weber that aimed at obtaining data on the earth's magnetic field by means of regular and simultaneous measurements at different observatories all over the world. Having built a magnetic observatory in 1840 with funds from the Bavarian government Lamont participated in the international campaign between 1841 and 1845, and he devised a whole range of new instruments, such as automatic recording apparatuses and portable theodolites, which were suited for expeditions (see J. von Lamont, 'Handbuch des Erdmagnetismus', 1849). In the late 1850s he extended his measurements to many places in Bavaria and travelled to France, Spain, Portugal, Belgium, Holland, and Denmark. Beside these main lines of work Lamont also participated in triangulation measurements between Austria and Bavaria, established statistics on Bavarian population, wrote on issues of law, health, and royal genealogy, and held popular lectures. 
Lamont, of modest character and liberal to charities, did not marry and led a solitary life, though he did take part in the reunions of the 'Catholic Casino' in Munich. Lamont was a member of numerous European academies, including the Royal Society of London, and received among other honours the order of Gregory the Great (conferred by Pius IX) and the order of the crown of Bavaria, the latter bringing with it the title of nobility. Lamont died on 6 August 1879 from the effects of a youthful spinal injury and was buried in the churchyard in Bogenhausen. On his gravestone was engraved: 'et coelum et terram exploravit' ('he explored the sky as well as the earth'). Upon his death he bequeathed his savings to a foundation which he had established in 1853 to support students of astronomy, mathematical physics, and mathematics, and whose capital amounted to 160,000 marks. 


@@@@@


doc= 15951


Lamont, John (fl. 1636-1671), diarist, was probably the son of Thomas Lamont ('c'.1586-1636), minister of Scoonie, Fife, from 1614 onwards, and his wife, Margaret Cockburn, and grandson of Allan Lamont, also minister of Scoonie, and of Kennoway, whose ancestors came from Argyll. He is known chiefly because of his diary, which runs from March 1649 to April 1671 but is plainly incomplete both at the beginning and at the end. It covers a particularly significant period of Scottish history, which includes the proclamation of Charles II as king of Scotland, the Cromwellian invasion, the enforced union with England in the 1650s, and the Restoration, but such nationally important events are only briefly recorded. In addition the diary records births, marriages, and deaths in various Fife families, including Lamont's own, as well as in various Scottish noble families, making it of considerable genealogical interest. It is particularly informative about the affairs of the family of Lundin of Lundin, to which his brother Allan was factor and chaplain at Lundie. It is possible that Lamont may himself have been factor to this family at some time, but details of this are unknown. 
Judging by the diary Lamont never married, and died some time after 1671. His most likely heir would have been his brother Allan's son John, born in 1661, who probably inherited the manuscript diary among Lamont's other papers. This John Lamont was, like his father, factor at Lundie, and was at some time a skipper in Over Largo. In 1695 he acquired the estate of Newton in the parish of Kennoway. This caused confusion when the diary was first published by Archibald Constable as 'The Chronicle of Fife' in 1810. It was described as the diary of John Lamont 'of Newton', and attributed to the nephew rather than the uncle, who never owned the Newton estate. This mistaken identification was repeated when the diary was published a second time in 1830 by the Maitland Club. The confusion was resolved by Walter Wood in an appendix to his 'East Neuk of Fife' (1887), which differentiated between uncle and nephew and identified the former as the diarist; the latter was the grandfather of David Lamont (1753-1837), the prominent Church of Scotland minister. 


@@@@@


doc= 15952


La Mothe, Claude Groteste de (1647-1713), Reformed minister and religious controversialist, was born in Orleans, France, the second of four sons of Jacques Groteste, sieur de la Buffiere (died in or after 1685), advocate of the Paris 'parlement' and elder of the Reformed church at Charenton, and of his wife, Anne Groteste du Chesnay. Like his brothers he took the title of a family property, in his case that of La Mothe. Having gained a doctorate in law from the University of Orleans in 1664, the following year he was received as an advocate by the Paris 'parlement'. After theological study, in 1675 he became minister of the protestant church at Lisy-sur-Orcq, near Meaux, in the Ile-de-France. By contract dated from Paris on 23 June 1679 he married Marie (died 1726/7), daughter of Jean Berthe, a Parisian banker, and his wife, Suzanne Marchand; the bride brought a dowry of 36,000 livres. Called in 1682 to the wealthier and more prestigious church at Rouen, Groteste de La Mothe entered into the charge there, but when the vacancy at Lisy proved impossible to fill he returned to his original post. When the last protestant provincial synod was held at Lisy in August 1683, he acted as clerk and gained general approval for his wisdom. 
That year, in what was celebrated by the Jesuits as a significant coup, Groteste de La Mothe's brother Marin Groteste, sieur des Mahis (1649-1694), abjured his protestantism; in time he became a Catholic priest and apologist. Subsequently his parents and youngest brother, Abraham, also converted. However, with the revocation of the edict of Nantes in 1685, Groteste de La Mothe and his wife were granted permission to leave France, taking some of their substantial property (perhaps as much as 60,000 livres), while the rest was confiscated or entrusted to relatives. By 23 November they were in London. Here in 1686 Groteste became minister of the conformist French church at St Martin Orgar; he was naturalized on 16 December 1687. He transferred to the linked churches of Swallow Street in 1689 and Hungerford Market and le Quarre in 1690; by September that year he seems to have been acting as secretary of a nascent association of refugee ministers in London. By this time he habitually signed himself C. G. de La Mothe. 
In 1691 La Mothe also became a chaplain to the duke of Schomberg. In this capacity, and as spokesman of the ministers' conference, he wrote in French a work translated as 'Two Discourses Concerning the Divinity of our Saviour' (1693), an assertion of their collective orthodoxy on this point and a firm rejection of the Socinian position of which they had been suspected. Stephen Nye in 'Reflections upon Two Discourses' (1693) mocked him as 'an eminent Demagogue of the French Nation', and the 'Refugees for Conscience' in general as uncomprehending 'Informers and Persecutors', vainly trying to influence the English bishops and law courts, but La Mothe was undaunted (pp. 3, 21). His 'The Inspiration of the New Testament Asserted' (1694) was located in a well-tilled area of apologetics, but he considered there was still scope to counter 'Libertinism' with a more thoroughgoing exposition of the divine inspiration of scripture. That February his colleagues at the four conjoined churches noted that, without their consent, La Mothe had accepted a call to the chief conformist French church at the Savoy; he apparently suffered no lasting resentment, and was to remain there for the rest of his life. 
La Mothe, whose well-connected relatives included his nephew Jean or John Robethon, secretary to William of Orange since before 1688 and later a servant of George I as elector and king, was in contact through correspondence with men of influence in France, the Netherlands, and Germany. Combining pre-eminence among the French pastors and friendship with Englishmen of varying shades of political opinion, including the whiggish Archbishop Thomas Tenison, the tory Francis Atterbury, and the suspected Jacobite George Smalridge, he became a bridge between the Anglican establishment and other European protestants. Having collected quotations from sermons preached by English clergy in support of Queen Anne's appeal of 1703 on behalf of protestant refugees from the new French province of Orange, he published them at The Hague as a demonstration of Anglican charity. 'Correspondance fraternelle de l'eglise anglicane avec les autres eglises reformees et etrangeres' (1705) claimed a close relationship between the Church of England and the continental Reformed churches. La Mothe's criticism of high-churchmen who through their 'rigidity' refused to acknowledge this provoked a backlash, which in turn prompted him to publish the much more ambitious 'Entretiens sur la correspondance fraternelle' (1707). This traced a flourishing partnership since the Reformation, which had cooled only in the days of Archbishop Laud; taking up the mantle of the founder minister and apologist of the Savoy, Jean Durel, he appended letters from Geneva and elsewhere approving both the church and episcopacy. 
In April 1706 and December 1707 respectively, La Mothe became the first naturalized Englishman to be elected to the newly founded Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge (SPCK) and to the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel (SPG). Actively involved in both, he channelled donations from his own community, organized relief for persecuted Vaudois protestants and French versions of the 'Book of Common Prayer' for Huguenots in North America, and helped examine potential missionaries. He proclaimed to foreigners the worth of the SPG in 'Relation de la Societe etablie pour la Propagation de l'Evangile' (1708), a translation of White Kennett's 1706 work accompanied by sermons of his own. Applauding recent British initiatives such as charity schools and parish libraries, it called on all protestants to join in the formidable task of converting the nations. In April 1708 the SPCK in its turn formally thanked La Mothe for his 'Caracteres des nouvelles prophecies' (1708), four sermons exposing the so-called Cevenol or French Prophets. When these three exiled leaders of an unsuccessful protestant rising had arrived in London in 1707 and solicited political support through the medium of 'divinely inspired' warnings, the Savoy and Threadneedle Street churches had united to dissociate themselves from co-religionists who were undermining their credibility. In his 'Nouveaux memoires pour servir a l'histoire des trois Camisars' (1708) La Mothe offered the evidence they had collected for the 'fraud', which he perceived as favoured by Socinians and infiltrated by papists. The latter were the target of his 'Politique du papisme en Angleterre', published at Rotterdam the following year. Convinced that England was the primary target of Rome's onslaught on the Reformed, he decried what he saw as a fifth column sowing division between the Anglicans and their brethren, and between the French refugees and their hosts; in response he proposed a society dedicated to combating Catholicism. La Mothe consistently regarded Lutherans as partners of the Reformed. When the conversion and subsequent marriage of Elizabeth Christine of Wolfenbuttel to Charles III of Spain tarred them with popery, La Mothe gained the gratitude of Tenison and other supporters of the Hanoverian succession with his well-researched defence of Lutheran conduct, 'Memoires de la pretendue declaration de l'Universite de Helmstad' (1710). In the final years of his life he collected material for another apology for his adopted church and country, 'Charitas Anglicana', but it is unclear where and when it was published. 
In 1712 La Mothe was elected a member of the Royal Society of Berlin. In July 1713, in collaboration with Henri de Massue de Ruvigny, earl of Galway, he was busy collecting funds for Huguenots released from the galleys. However, in his last years he was overtaken by a long and serious illness. Being 'within two fingers of death' concentrated his mind on the duties of the suffering and recovering believer, laid out during a brief respite in 'Les devoirs du chretien convalescent' (1713). His will, made on 3 September 1713 from Chelsea, made no reference to his physical condition but gave evidence of his varied interests and connections. Beneficiaries included the French church at the Savoy, the charity house in Soho, the SPG, 'the society which meets at Mr Shute's, minister, in Bartlet Buildings', and a cousin in the Netherlands. Apart from Madame La Mothe's, the largest bequests were to his eldest brother, Jacques Groteste, sieur de la Buffiere (whose financial sufferings and insecurity as a protestant remaining in France feature in surviving correspondence), his youngest brother, Abraham (whose Catholicism had not impaired good relations), and his nephew Robethon, then in Brunswick. La Mothe died on 30 September 1713 and was probably buried at the Savoy Chapel, Westminster. Condolences from many quarters reached his widow and executor. Until her death, between late October 1726 and early January 1727, she continued to correspond with family and friends abroad; many of the couple's letters (those from 1703 written to and from a house in St Martin's Lane, Westminster, 'by the French pewterer's') survive among the papers of La Mothe's colleague at the Savoy, Israel Antoine Aufrere, deposited at the Huguenot Library, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 15953


La Motte, John (1577-1655), merchant, was born in Colchester on 1 May 1577, the son of Francis La Motte, a weaver and cloth merchant who had fled to the town in 1564 from Ypres in Flanders. Presumably he was apprenticed in his father's craft. By the second decade of the seventeenth century, during which he moved to London, he had become a highly successful merchant. In 1615 he was residing in the parish of St Bartholomew by the Exchange; by 1618 he lived in Broad Street and had become a freeman of the Weavers' Company. About this time he married Anne Tivelyn from the Dutch/Walloon community in Canterbury; the couple had two daughters, Hester and Elizabeth. 
Initially La Motte joined his local parish church, and throughout his life he continued to attend godly lectures there. After having served as constable in 1619, he became church warden in 1621. Five years later he was elected an elder of the Dutch church in London, unusually without having first served the community as a deacon. By that time La Motte had become a widower, and in 1626 he married the extremely wealthy Elizabeth van Poele, widow of the former clerk of the signet, Sir Levinius Munk (died 1623), who had been a prominent member of the London Dutch church. La Motte's business acumen and financially astute marriages guaranteed him a place among the London merchant elite, and in 1629 he was elected upper bailiff of the Weavers' Company. He was also able to play a leading part in one of the major charitable causes of his age, the collections for the Reformed refugees from the Rhine Palatinate, which commenced in England in 1628. Among his many business ventures was an interest in the East India Association, organized by another member of the Dutch church, Sir William Courten, to compete with the East India Company, and licensed in 1635. In this capacity he collaborated closely not only with a group of wealthy Dutch and Walloon merchants resident in London, but also with a group of 'new' English merchants in the City, of whom the most prominent was Maurice Thomson. 
In March 1648 La Motte was elected an alderman of the City of London, but, pleading old age and infirmity, he was discharged the following month on payment of a fine of $600. Despite his frailty, he lived another seven years and continued to serve as an elder of the Dutch church. He died in Broad Street, London, on 13 July 1655 and was buried at St Bartholomew by the Exchange. By this time he owned the manors of Ramsey and Brudwell, in Essex, and lands at Fowlmer, in Cambridgeshire. His will, proved on 8 August 1655, divided his considerable estate, half going to his grandson Maurice Abbot, son of Elizabeth La Motte and Sir Maurice Abbot, and the other half to his surviving daughter, Hester, who had married Sir Thomas Honeywood, and her family and other relatives and friends. La Motte's deep concern for Christian charity, evident in his funeral sermon and in many donations during his lifetime to the Dutch community in London, was also reflected in his will. He left bequests for the inmates of Bridewell, of which he was a governor, and for the poor in Christ's Hospital; to the Dutch churches of London, Colchester, Sandwich, and Canterbury; and to the parishes of Fowlmer and St James, Colchester; as well as to the Weavers' Company. La Motte's piety and godliness impressed his contemporaries: while John Goodwin, minister of Coleman Street, had dedicated one of his early works to him, Samuel Clarke included him in his hagiography of great puritan men and women. 


@@@@@


doc= 15954


Lampe, John Frederick (1702/3-1751), composer and bassoonist, of unknown parentage, was said to be a native of Saxony (Burney, 'Hist. mus.', 2.1001), and, according to his tombstone epitaph, was born in late 1702 or early 1703. Lampe's treatise 'A Plain and Compendious Method of Teaching Thorough Bass' (1737) states he was 'Sometime Student at 'HELMSTAD' in 'SAXONY''; he was therefore assumed to have been born in Helmstadt, but his birth is not recorded in Helmstadt archives. Record of Lampe's 1718 matriculation as a law student at the university there, however, links him to nearby Brunswick, and he has also been connected with St Catherine's School in that city. Nothing is known of his career before he arrived in London about 1725, when he became a bassoon player in the opera band. According to Burney, Handel had the first British contrabassoon made for Lampe to play for George II's 1727 coronation (Burney, 'Account', 'Introduction', 7). 
The pantomime 'Diana and Acteon' (1730), written for the Drury Lane dancing-master Roger, is the earliest theatre work attributed to Lampe. 'Wit Musically Embellish'd' (1731), a collection of original ballads, was his first musical publication; in it he says that most of the songs were written for his students or patrons. The poet Henry Carey may have numbered among those students (Hawkins, 2.895). In 1732, as part of a concerted English opera 'revival', Lampe set Carey's 'Amelia' for the Little Theatre in the Haymarket. The following season Lampe wrote music for Thomas Lediard's masque-like 'Britannia' and arranged John Gay's 'Dione' and also Henry Fielding's 'Tragedy of Tragedies' as 'The Opera of Operas'. For the 1733-4 season he was employed at Drury Lane, where he achieved his first major success with the pantomime 'Cupid and Psyche, or, Columbine Courtezan'. Theatre politics meant Lampe wrote little theatrical music from 1734 to 1737, and he instead completed his thorough-bass treatise. 
In 1737 Lampe returned to the Haymarket Theatre with his enormously successful 'Dragon of Wantley', a burlesque opera by Carey. Reputedly a favourite with Handel and with George II, it was performed every season until Lampe's death and its popularity continued throughout the century, though its 1738 sequel, 'Margery, or, A Worse Plague than the Dragon', was less successful. The composer married his leading lady, Isabella Young (bap. 1716?, d. 1795) ['see under 'Young family], on 31 January 1737. Lampe continued to work in satirical and comic vein, writing music for pantomimes and mock operas such as 'Pyramus and Thisbe' (1745). He wrote another treatise, 'The Art of Musick' (1740), and composed many songs, published in the collections of others -- such as 'British Melody' (1739) and 'The Musical Entertainer' (1737-40) -- and in collections of his own, for instance 'Lyra Britannica' (1741). Lampe's two hymn collections set to words by Charles Wesley demonstrate the Wesleys' influence on him from 1745 onwards. John Wesley's diary for 29 October 1745 reveals that Lampe 'had been a deist for many years, till it pleased God, by the 'Earnest Appeal', to bring him to a better mind' ('Journal', 3.226). 
In September 1748 Lampe, Isabella, and a small company went to Dublin at Thomas Sheridan's invitation, where he conducted theatrical performances and concerts. Benjamin Victor called the musicians Sheridan's 'woeful Bargains', as 'the Tot of their Salaries... was near fourteen hundred Pounds a Year' (Victor, 1.143). In November 1750 Lampe moved to Edinburgh for a similar engagement at the Canongate Theatre. He died in Edinburgh on 25 July 1751, and was buried on 28 July in Canongate churchyard, where his monument predicted, somewhat over-optimistically, that his 'harmonious compositions shall outlive monumental registers, and, with melodious notes, through future ages, perpetuate his fame'. 


@@@@@


doc= 15955


Lamphire, John (1614-1688), college head and physician, was the son of George Lamphire, apothecary, of the parish of St Lawrence, Winchester. He entered Winchester College as a scholar in 1627, and on 19 August 1634 matriculated from New College, Oxford, where he was elected fellow in 1636, graduated BA in 1638, and proceeded MA in 1642. In 1640 he wrote Latin verses for an Oxford collection celebrating the birth of Prince Henry -- the first of seven such contributions over the next thirty years. By the time the parliamentary visitors expelled him from his fellowship in 1648, he was college bursar. Through the 1650s, Lamphire practised as a physician in and around Oxford. Among the royalist wits who met at a city coffee house in 1655, he was, according to Anthony Wood (later his patient) 'sometimes the naturall droll of the company' ('Life and Times of Anthony Wood', 1.201). In 1654 he was associated with the publication in Oxford of Hugh Lloyd's 'Phrases elegantiores'. 
In late April 1660 Lamphire was one of thirty-nine Oxfordshire royalists whose 'Declaration' disavowed revenge. The restoration of his fellowship was ordered on 19 May by the House of Lords, and on 16 August he was elected Camden professor of history in succession to Lewis du Moulin. Six weeks later, on 30 October, he was created MD, and he continued to practise medicine, treating Anthony Wood's deafness. Lamphire's edition of his friend Thomas Masters's 1642 oration, 'Monarchia Britannica sub Elizabetha, Jacobo', appeared for the first time in 1661. On 2 September 1662 Clarendon appointed him principal of New Inn Hall, from where on 30 May 1663 he was translated to the headship of Hart Hall. When parliament went to Oxford in 1665 to escape plague it was at Lamphire's suggestion that the Commons moved that the university be thanked formally for its defiance of the parliamentary visitors in 1647. 
Wood called Lamphire 'a public spirited man, but not fit to govern', being 'much given to his pleasures'; he 'layd out much on the Principal's lodgings' ('Life and Times of Anthony Wood', 1.475, 2.56). As a justice of the peace, Lamphire improved Oxford's roads and drainage; he also corresponded with secretaries of state Joseph Williamson and Leoline Jenkins, exchanging gifts which included his bottled 'fountain water that has crossed the equinoctial line four times' without corruption and had a secret anti-scorbutical ingredient ('CSP dom.', '1676-7', 151-2). On 27 February 1679 his election as university MP was frustrated when 'the vice-chancellor shew'd himself false' ('Life and Times of Anthony Wood', 2.443). 
Lamphire was associated with further Oxford publications: Lancelot Andrewes's 'Preces privatae' (1675), Robert Pinck's 'Quaestiones' (1680), and Thomas Lydiat's 'Canones chronologi' (1675), printed from Lamphire's twenty-two volumes of Lydiat manuscripts, part of his substantial manuscript collection. He died, unmarried, at Hart Hall on 30 March 1688 and was buried in New College chapel on 2 April. His will, dated 9 December 1681, provides for relatives, numerous friends, and various Oxford institutions; it includes books and manuscripts for the university library and $50 'towards the mending of the Heighway betwixt St. Clements Church and the bottom of Hiddington Hill'. 


@@@@@


doc= 15956


Lamplugh, Thomas (bap. 1615, d. 1691), archbishop of York, was the son of Christopher Lamplugh (died in or before 1625) of Little Riston, Yorkshire, and his wife, Anne (1594/5-1661), daughter and coheir of Thomas Roper of Octon in the East Riding of Yorkshire. There is an interpolation in the register of Lamplugh, Cumberland, dating Lamplugh's baptism as taking place on 13 June 1615, but he was probably born and baptized at Thwing in Octon. It appears that Lamplugh went to live with his uncle Thomas Lamplugh of Ribton Hall, Bridekirk, near Cockermouth in Cumberland, and he was sent to St Bees grammar school. He matriculated at Queen's College, Oxford, on 10 October 1634, aged sixteen, as the son of Thomas Lamplugh of Dovenby, Cumberland, but this entry has been altered with the original stating that he was the son of Christopher Lamplugh and aged nineteen. This alteration may be explained by the fact that Cumbrian students received privileges at Queen's which were not available to those from Yorkshire. 
Lamplugh graduated BA on 4 July 1639 and proceeded MA on 1 November 1642, the same year in which he became a fellow of his college. Lamplugh survived the parliamentarian visitation in 1648, taking the covenant, but it seems that he used his weekly lectures each Sunday at St Martin's, Carfax, to uphold the doctrines of the Church of England where, according to Thomas Hearne, 'all the honest loyal men in Oxford came to hear him' ('Remarks', 2.48). He also travelled to Bishop Robert Skinner's house at Launton to assist in the private ordination of Church of England clergymen. He proceeded BD on 23 July 1657, and became minister of Holy Rood, Southampton, according to his will 'the place where I first began to exercise my ministry publicly' (Jabez-Smith, 'Joseph Williamson and Thomas Lamplugh', 156-7). In 1659 he became rector of Binfield, Berkshire, and Charlton-on-Otmoor, Oxfordshire. 
Following the Restoration, Lamplugh was able to show his true colours. He was named to the royal commission charged with reinstating ejected members of the university. He was created DD by royal mandate on 9 November 1660. Anthony Wood, for one, was unimpressed by Lamplugh's skill in retaining his fellowship, 'a great cringer formerly to Presbyterians and Independents, now to the prelates and those in authority' ('Life and Times', 1.365). In 1661 Lamplugh was elected to convocation as a proctor by the Oxfordshire clergy. He was presented by the king on 3 July 1663 to the archdeaconry of Oxford, but the appointment was challenged by Thomas Barlow, who received a favourable verdict at the Oxford assizes in March 1664. On 9 November 1663 Lamplugh was licensed to marry Katherine (1633-1671), daughter of Dr Edward Davenant of Gillingham, Dorset. They had five children, three of whom predeceased their mother; one son, also Thomas, survived his father. The king then presented him to the archdeaconry of London, Lamplugh being collated on 27 May 1664. He also became rector of St Anthony's, London. He was admitted principal of St Alban Hall in August 1664, prompting Wood to comment that he had a wife and 'looked after preferment; neglected the Hall' (ibid., 2.19) during his nine-year tenure. He was incorporated at Cambridge University in 1668. He was presented to a prebend of Worcester by the king on 23 May 1669. On 1 July 1670 he was collated vicar of St Martin-in-the-Fields, London, remaining there until his elevation to the episcopate. In November 1672 a warrant was issued by the king for Lamplugh to be made dean of Rochester, and he was installed on 6 March 1673, a successor being presented in 1676. 
On 3 October 1676 Lamplugh was elected bishop of Exeter, being consecrated on 12 November at Lambeth Palace. Lamplugh was a diligent diocesan, attending services in his cathedral and seeking to win over moderate dissenters to the church. Moreover he promoted the repair of parochial churches. He received a writ of summons for a seat in the House of Lords on 10 February 1677, where he supported the court, holding two proxies at the beginning of the October 1678 session. He delivered the 5 November sermon to the House of Lords in 1678, which was subsequently printed -- his only publication. On 15 November he voted to add the test on transubstantiation to the oaths of allegiance and supremacy in the new 'Test Bill', thereby evincing his anti-Catholicism. He was also one of eleven peers on 29 November who supported an address from the Commons asking the king to remove the queen from Whitehall. Generally he supported the earl of Danby during this session of parliament. Lamplugh went on visitation in autumn 1679 and was very active in the tory reaction in his diocese, ordering the laws against dissenters, whether protestant or papist, to be put into execution. In April 1680 he reported to Archbishop Sancroft on the suppression of meeting-houses in his diocese. He voted in the Lords on 23 November 1680 against a joint committee with the Commons to consider the safety of the kingdoms. 
Lamplugh was one of the few bishops to order James II's second declaration of indulgence to be read in his diocese in May 1688. However, on 28 May he added his signature to the seven bishops' petition for its withdrawal. Lamplugh left Exeter shortly before the prince of Orange arrived in November 1688, after exhorting his flock to remain loyal to King James. His return to London to wait on James resulted in his appointment to the archbishopric of York which had been vacant for over two years. He joined with Archbishop Sancroft and several other bishops on 17 November in petitioning James II for a free parliament. He was duly elected to the see of York on 28 November and was confirmed on 8 December 1688. Thus, following the king's initial flight from London, Lamplugh was a senior figure when the peers assembled on 11 December to oversee the government of the city. Indeed he was often the most senior peer present. On James II's return to London, Lamplugh was one of the bishops attending the king to negotiate concessions to the church. On the eve of the king's second departure Lamplugh said that 'if he saw His Majesty's face no more, he hoped that they should meet together in heaven' (Beddard, 60). However, he supported the request that Prince William take on the administration of the government until the Convention met. 
Lamplugh voted for a regency on 29 January 1689 and opposed a motion on 31 January to declare William and Mary monarchs. He voted on both 4 and 6 February against King James having abdicated the throne but he took the oaths to William and Mary on 4 March. On 11 April 1689 he assisted Bishop Compton in crowning the new monarchs. In the Lords, Lamplugh voted against the rehabilitation of Titus Oates in May and July 1689. 
Lamplugh died at the archiepiscopal residence, Bishopthorpe, on 5 May 1691, and was buried in York Minster. His will of 2 May prayed for the end to breaches in the unity of the church 'that they may no longer rend and tear out the bowels of their tender indulgent but now sadly afflicted mother' (Jabez-Smith, 'Joseph Williamson and Thomas Lamplugh', 156-7). He remembered Dr Christopher Potter and Dr Gerard Langbaine, both provosts of Queen's College, with bequests to their sons. His son Thomas was his executor. 


@@@@@


doc= 15957


Lampson, Sir Curtis Miranda, first baronet (1806-1885), fur merchant and telegraph cable promoter, the fourth son of William Lampson of Newhaven, Vermont, USA, and his wife, Rachel, daughter of George Powell of Louisborough, Massachusetts, was born in Newhaven, Vermont, on 21 September 1806. He worked first as a clerk in a store in Newhaven, before moving to New York in 1825. He married on 30 November 1827, in New York, Jane Walter, youngest daughter of Gibbs Sibley of Sutton, Massachusetts; they raised three sons and one daughter, Hannah Jane, who married Frederick Locker-Lampson. The eldest son, George Curtis (1833-1899), became second baronet. He moved to England in 1830, and set up in business as a fur merchant, in Friday Street, in the City of London. He was afterwards senior partner in the firm of C. M. Lampson & Co. at 9 Queen Street Place, Upper Thames Street, London. On 14 May 1849 he was naturalized a British subject. On the formation of the company for laying the Atlantic telegraph cable in 1856, he was appointed one of the directors, and soon after vice-chairman. For ten years he devoted much time to its organization. The great aid he rendered was acknowledged in a letter from Lord Derby to Sir Stafford Northcote, who presided at a banquet given at Liverpool, on 1 October 1866, in honour of those who had been active in laying the cable, and on 16 November Lampson was created a baronet of the United Kingdom. He was deputy governor of the Hudson's Bay Company, and one of the trustees of the fund that was given by his friend George Peabody for the benefit of the poor of London. Shortly before his death he was elected to the Athenaeum in recognition of his distinguished service. 
He died at his London house, 80 Eaton Square, Westminster, on 12 March 1885; the value of his personalty in England was sworn at around $400,000. 


@@@@@


doc= 15958


Lancaster, Charles William (1820-1878), gun maker, the eldest son of Charles Lancaster, a gun maker, of 151 New Bond Street, London, and his wife, Mary, 'nee' Warrington, was born at 5 York Street, Portman Square, London, on 24 June 1820. He was educated at a private school and left at an early age to enter his father's factory, where he learned the business of a gun maker, and soon became a clever designer of models and a competent mechanic. The study of rifled projectiles and the construction of rifles was his chief pleasure, and he soon attained the highest skill as a rifle shot. 
In 1846 Lancaster constructed a model rifle, with which he conducted successful experiments at Woolwich over distances of 1000 and 1200 yards; the duke of Wellington then ordered some similar guns for the rifle brigade at the Cape of Good Hope. During 1844 and 1845 Lancaster devoted himself to solving the problem of rifled cannon. In July 1846 he submitted to the Board of Ordnance a plan for firing smooth-sided conical projectiles from rifled cannon, and imparting the necessary rotatory motion by modifying the form of the base of the projectile. Further experiments, however, did not encourage him to go on with this scheme. In 1850 he conceived the idea of the oval bore as the proper form for all rifled arms and cannon, and his name will always be associated with this system. In order to make his invention known, he constructed full-size working models of the 68-pounder, the largest gun then in the service, for the Great Exhibition of 1851. At the request of the government these models were not exhibited, but a 68-pounder oval-bore gun, made and rifled at Birmingham, with accurately turned shells, was sent to Shoeburyness for trial. The shooting of this gun directed attention to the oval-bore system, and Lancaster assisted the war department with subsequent experiments made at Woolwich, and for some time superintended production of the guns in the Royal Arsenal. He was elected an associate of the Institution of Civil Engineers on 6 April 1852, and wrote a paper, in their 'Minutes of Proceedings' (40.115), 'On the erosion of the bore in heavy guns'. 
In 1852 Lancaster experimented upon the.577 pattern Enfield rifled musket, and some carbines bored to his own specification were sent to the School of Musketry at Hythe, and found to be effective. In January 1855 the Lancaster carbine was adopted as the arm for the Royal Engineers, and was used by that corps until it was superseded by the Martini-Henry rifle in 1869. During the Crimean campaign oval-bored rifle cannon were used and did good service; they were, it is said, the first rifled guns used in active service by the army and navy. Shortly after the war heavier guns were required for armour piercing, and experiments carried out at Shoeburyness, in which Lancaster assisted, led to a complete revolution in rifled artillery. For the oval-bore system of rifling he received $4000 from the government in 1867. His transactions with the War Office, however, led to disputes, and he set out his grievances in a pamphlet. Between 1852 and 1860 he had received awards totalling $16,600 but considered these sums an inadequate reward for his services. Lancaster took out upwards of twenty patents, chiefly in connection with firearms, between 1850 and 1872. His last invention was a gas-check, applicable to large rifled projectiles. He travelled much in Russia, where the tsar had a special gold medal of large size struck in his honour. 
In 1868 Lancaster married Ellen, daughter of George Edward Thorne and Ann Thorne of Old Stratford, Northamptonshire; they had two daughters. While making arrangements for retiring from business Lancaster was seized with paralysis, and died at his house, 11 Redcliffe Road, Brompton, west London, on 24 April 1878. His wife survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 15959


Lancaster, Henry Hill (1829-1875), essayist and advocate, born on 10 January 1829 at Glasgow, was the son of Thomas Lancaster, a Glasgow merchant, and his wife, Jane, 'nee' Kelly. He was educated first at the high school, Glasgow, and afterwards at Glasgow University. A distinguished student, he proceeded in 1849 as a Snell exhibitioner to Balliol College, Oxford. In 1853 he obtained a first class in 'literae humaniores' as well as third class honours in the new school of law and modern history, and in the following year he was awarded the Arnold prize for an essay on 'The benefits arising from the union of England and Scotland in the reign of Queen Anne'. He graduated BA in 1853 and MA in 1872. He settled in Edinburgh on leaving Oxford, passed as an advocate there in 1858, and proved himself an able and industrious lawyer. He defended the university in 'Jex Blake v. the University of Edinburgh', and 'The Athenaeum' in the action brought against that journal by Keith Johnston. In 1862 he married Margaret ('b'. 1836/7), daughter of John Graham of Skelmorlie Castle, Ayrshire, and his wife, Elizabeth; they had at least one son and two daughters. 
During Gladstone's first government (1868 to 1874) Lancaster was advocate-depute. He took an active interest in the cause of education. In 1858 he served as secretary to a commission of inquiry into the state of King's and Marischal colleges, Aberdeen; and in 1872 was a member of a royal commission on Scottish educational establishments. 
In his leisure Lancaster contributed to the daily Edinburgh press, and in November 1860 he began a connection with the 'North British Review' with an article on 'Lord Macaulay's place in English literature'. He took a strong interest in Scottish political history, and was a contributor on that subject for the 'Edinburgh Review'. He died suddenly from apoplexy, on 24 December 1875, at 5 Ainslie Place, Edinburgh. In 1876 his more important essays were reprinted privately in two volumes, with a prefatory notice by Benjamin Jowett, and many were published as 'Essays and Reviews' (1876). His son, Thomas Harvey Lancaster, was rector of Edinburgh Academy. 


@@@@@


doc= 15960


Lancaster, Hume (bap. 1814, d. 1850), marine painter, was born at Warnford, Hampshire, where he was baptized in August 1814, the ninth and youngest child of Richard Hume Lancaster (1772-1853), rector of Warnford from 1802 until his death. His father was a talented amateur artist, particularly of landscapes, some of which are in the Tate collection. Hume Lancaster became an artist. Many of his paintings, which were often executed on a large scale, show the coasts of France, the Netherlands, and south England, and views of the Scheldt River in Belgium. From 1836 to 1849 he exhibited paintings at the Royal Academy, the British Institution, and the Society of British Artists, of which he was elected a member in 1841. On 30 December 1834 Lancaster married Dinah Frood, painter, at the church of St John the Evangelist, Lambeth, London. Their son, Henry Hume Lancaster, was baptized on 20 May 1843 at St Pancras Old Church, London. Dinah Lancaster exhibited a landscape at the British Institution in 1840. Some of Hume Lancaster's pictures were engraved in the prize annual of the Art Union of London for 1848. Although his talent was undisputed, Lancaster made little money from his work and by 1846 he was declared insolvent. He was living in poverty and without appropriate recognition when he died at Erith in Kent on 3 July 1850, aged thirty-six; he predeceased his father (with whom he is sometimes confused). 


@@@@@


doc= 15961


Lancaster, Sir James (1554/5-1618), merchant, was one of at least three sons of James Lancaster of Basingstoke. He was born at Basingstoke and brought up among the Portuguese, as a gentleman, soldier, and merchant. He returned to England before February 1587 and in 1588 commanded the 'Edward Bonaventure', a merchant ship of 250 tons, serving in the fleet against the Armada. He commanded the same ship in the first English voyage to the East Indies with George Raymond as general in the 'Penelope' and Samuel Foxcroft in the 'Merchant Royal'. They left Plymouth on 10 April 1591, were becalmed for nearly a month in the doldrums, and reached Table Bay on 1 August, the first English ships to use the roadstead. Losses from scurvy had been such that the 'Merchant Royal' was sent home to allow adequate manning of the other ships. A few days after rounding the Cape the 'Penelope' was lost with all hands in a storm. In another storm four men were killed and many injured by lightning. In an affray at the Comoros they lost the master, some thirty men, and their boat. After refitting at Zanzibar they made a difficult voyage to Penang, losing many men from sickness. They put to sea again on 1 September, plundered three ships, and called at Junkceylon and the Nicobars. Forced by a mutinous crew to head for home, they were becalmed for some six weeks in the doldrums, ran short of victuals, and made for the West Indies. Lancaster and others landed on Mona Island but one of those left on board cut the cable; the ship drove to Hispaniola and was surrendered to the Spaniards. Lancaster and his companions were taken off by a French ship and landed at Dieppe, whence they reached Rye on 24 May 1594. The voyage had been financially disastrous but had revealed the vulnerability of the Portuguese monopoly in the East. 
The object of Lancaster's second voyage was to plunder Pernambuco. He left with three ships in October 1594, took prizes, and was joined at the Cape Verde Islands by John Venner in return for a quarter of the booty. The town was easily taken, and they captured the contents of an East India carrack that had been unloaded for trans-shipment. Three Dutch and four French ships were chartered to transport the plunder. A party landed to attack a redoubt built to command the harbour entrance. They succeeded but, against the orders of Lancaster, who was ill, they pursued the Portuguese, were repulsed, and lost thirty-five men. They left for England the same evening with fifteen ships, all laden. They reached home safely, though not together; the booty made Lancaster a rich man. In 1598 he was made a commissioner for managing the earl of Cumberland's voyage, but seems not to have taken part in it. In 1601 he was receiving a pension of $50 per annum but it is not known why and he surrendered it in 1610. 
In 1600 Lancaster became a director of the newly founded East India Company. He was in command of the four ships of its first expedition, the 'Hector', 'Susan', 'Ascension', and the 'Red Dragon', of at least 400 tons, in which he himself sailed. They left Woolwich on 13 February 1601 but were delayed by contrary winds and did not leave Torbay until 20 April. Becalmed in the doldrums they did not reach Table Bay until 9 September; by then they had lost 105 men from scurvy, the flagship having lost fewer than the others because Lancaster had provided his crew with lemon juice. They called at St Mary's Island and spent from Christmas until 6 March at Antongil Bay. After spending nearly three weeks in the Nicobars they sailed to Achin, where the sultan readily permitted them to trade without paying custom dues. Lancaster sent the 'Susan' to Priaman to buy a full lading of pepper, and joined the Dutch in plundering a richly laden Portuguese vessel. The 'Ascension' and 'Susan' were sent home while the 'Hector' and 'Red Dragon' went to Bantam. Terms for trade there were agreed and a factory established, while a pinnace bought from the Dutch was sent to the Moluccas to obtain cloves and nutmegs. Lancaster was given a letter and present for Queen Elizabeth and left Bantam on 20 February 1602. When near the Cape the 'Red Dragon' was so badly damaged in a storm that the crew wanted to abandon her, which Lancaster refused to do. He ordered the 'Hector' to leave him and make for home, but his order was disobeyed. Both ships anchored in the Downs on 11 September. Lancaster was received by the king and knighted for his achievements in the following year. 
Lancaster lived in London in Bevis Marks, served as a director of the East India Company more than once, and was consulted by members. His interest in the north-west passage is attested by the name Baffin gave to Lancaster Sound when he discovered it in 1616. Lancaster died in London on 6 June 1618 and was buried on the 9th in All Hallows parish church, London Wall. His will does not mention a wife or children, but does mention a surviving brother Peter and another, deceased, John, and a brother-in-law Hopgood. The bulk of his property he bequeathed to various charities, especially in connection with the Skinners' Company, of which he became a freeman in 1579, and to Mistress Thomasyne Owfeild for distribution to the poor. 


@@@@@


doc= 15962


Lancaster, John (1569/70-1619), Church of Ireland bishop of Waterford and Lismore, was a native of Prescot, Lancashire, and probably the third son of Thomas Lancaster of Rainhill, Lancashire. Educated at Eton College, he was admitted to King's College, Cambridge, on 28 August 1587, aged seventeen, graduated BA in 1592, proceeded MA in 1597, and held a college fellowship during 1590-97. A chaplain to James I, he arrived in Ireland in 1607 bearing a letter from the king directing that he be granted the first available bishopric. On 5 January 1608 he was nominated to Waterford and Lismore, a see long held 'in commendam' by the pluralist Miler Magrath, archbishop of Cashel. 
Lancaster was Waterford's first resident bishop for nearly thirty years. Churches and communities had been devastated in the uprisings of Elizabeth's reign, and much of the see land had been alienated by the four previous bishops, especially in the west, where the episcopal manors of Lismore and Ardmore were now held by Richard Boyle, earl of Cork. Lancaster's episcopate was marked by a determined effort to increase the revenues of his diocese, which he calculated at no more than $40 for Waterford and $60 for Lismore. In 1610 he was awarded a grant 'in commendam' of various benefices in his own and adjacent dioceses, to which in 1614 was added the vicarage of Mothel, co. Waterford. He introduced a bill into the Irish House of Commons to have his predecessors' sales of diocesan property declared null and void, but, owing to the intervention of the earl of Cork, 'by a general clamour and consent [it] was cast out of the house' (Grosart, 2.101). In 1618 he succeeded in obtaining for his diocese a grant of 546 acres of escheated land in co. Wexford. 
In Waterford the great majority of the citizens were Roman Catholic, and the city was imbued with the spirit of the Counter-Reformation. Lancaster built a new episcopal residence, provoking the hostility of the mayor by using timbers and other materials from St Peter's Church. His determination to assert his authority by refusing to allow the mayor to hold up his sword of office in the cathedral precincts resulted in an angry complaint to the government. In March 1618, successive mayors and sheriffs having refused to take the oath of supremacy, the corporation was abolished, the city being placed under direct rule from Dublin. 
Lancaster appears to have been twice married. By his first marriage he had two sons. The elder, John, was precentor of both Lismore and Waterford. In 1616 Boyle granted him the vicarage of Mothel, 'and he promised me to assure his mother-in-law [i.e. stepmother] $30 a year during her life', to commence after the bishop's death (Grosart, 1.125). The younger John Lancaster married Elizabeth, second daughter of Sir Edward Harris, justice of the common pleas, and had a son, John, admitted to Trinity College, Dublin, in 1638 aged fifteen. He died on 18 April 1630. There is a monument to his wife in Kinsalebeg churchyard near Youghal. The bishop's younger son, Joshua, of Grange, co. Tipperary, married Mary, daughter of Gilbert Waters of Cullen, co. Tipperary, and had a daughter, Elizabeth. He died in October 1634. 
In 1619 Lancaster was at Ardfinnan attempting to wrest the episcopal manor from Miler Magrath's daughter when fire destroyed the hut containing his personal effects and records, including the 1487 rental of the diocese known as the black book. Magrath commented acidly that its destruction was a greater loss to the church than if all the protestant bishops of Munster had been drowned. Shortly after this (at some time between April and July 1619) Lancaster died; he was buried in Waterford Cathedral. 


@@@@@


doc= 15963


Lancaster, Joseph (1778-1838), educationist, was born in Kent Street, Southwark, London, on 25 November 1778, the youngest son of Richard Lancaster (1742-1821) a former soldier working as a cane sieve maker. Joseph's mother, Sarah Lancaster, 'nee' Faulkes (died 1811), who had borne ten children, kept a small shop near St George's Fields. Lancaster received little formal education, attending local schools in Southwark and working for his father. The accounts of his early life are vague and contradictory. At the age of fourteen he attempted unsuccessfully to get to Jamaica as a naval volunteer 'to teach the poor blacks the word of God' (Corston, 2). Later he decided to become a dissenting minister and joined the Society of Friends, changing to teaching as the Quakers had no ministry. According to his first biographer, William Corston, Lancaster set up his first day school with the help of his father about 1798, after working as an assistant in other schools. This school moved into larger premises when numbers began to increase. He was well suited to be a schoolmaster as he had enormous enthusiasm, great self-confidence, a fluent tongue, and an instinctive understanding of young children, assets helped by a somewhat impressive appearance. He also possessed a capacity for self-advertisement which attracted help from local supporters. At a time when child labour was uncontrolled and parents expected their offspring to add to the meagre family income as soon as possible, such children as attended any school rarely stayed long or learned much. Lancaster had little difficulty on this score, as he provided free meals in addition to charging low fees. 
About 1801 Lancaster established a 'free-school' in a barn-like building near Borough Road, Southwark, advertising free instruction to those who could not afford to pay even a moderate fee. Before long the numbers of children at Lancaster's school were overwhelming and to avoid paying assistants he adopted the method whereby the older boys, the monitors (led by a monitor-general), taught the younger children under the general supervision of the master. What was forced on him by necessity was turned into an advantage and Lancaster set about proclaiming the effectiveness and cheapness of his monitorial plan. Many of his claims were exaggerated, not least his assertion that by his method a great proportion of children could finish their education in the 'three Rs' in twelve months. Lancaster possessed considerable organizing powers. Some of his maxims, such as 'a place for everything and everything in its place' and 'let every child at every moment have something to do and a motive for doing it' became proverbial. A soldier's son, he sometimes compared his pupils to well disciplined troops and, like soldiers, his best monitors and pupils were rewarded with silver-plated badges worn on their caps or suspended by a chain. A keen rivalry was fostered among his pupils by an elaborate system of rewards, including toys or money for the diligent, while the mischievous, or unsuccessful, were dealt with by a system of humiliating penalties which were designed to expose the victim to the ridicule of his fellows. Lancaster's expenses were reduced by the device of using sand tables and slates instead of writing books, as well as sheets pasted on the walls instead of reading books. Groups of children, under the control of a monitor, learned the alphabet by repeating simple words, and practised figures. Passages extracted from the 'Bible' or suitably pious books furnished scripture lessons. Lancaster himself was a keen reader and stressed the need for a good library. 
By 1803 Lancaster's success in coping with several hundred boys simultaneously was attracting interest outside Southwark. The first of several editions of the book explaining his aims and describing his monitorial methods, 'Improvements in Education as it Respects the Industrious Classes of the Community' (1803), was well subscribed. Eminent visitors from all over London came to see the remarkable school at Borough Road, many of them donating funds for the furtherance of the work. According to William Corston, 'foreign princes, ambassadors, peers, commons, ladies of distinction, bishops and archbishops, Jews and Turks, all visited the school with wonder-waiting eyes' (Corston, 11). Soon the attention of the prodigiously rich duke of Bedford and other nobility was directed to Lancaster's methods. The climax of interest in the school came in 1805 when Lancaster was given an audience by George III, who congratulated him on his achievement and donated a subscription of $100 from himself and suitably graduated subscriptions from the rest of the royal family. No doubt some of the enthusiasm for Lancaster's school arose out of public curiosity to view an unusual and well-advertised spectacle. But there was also a genuine interest, for Lancaster appeared to have solved one of the social problems of the day -- how to provide a basic education for the rapidly increasing numbers of illiterate children in city streets without employing large numbers of teachers and great quantities of equipment. Most of the upper class believed that the children of the poor should at least be taught to read the 'Bible' and learn habits of subordination and obedience. Witness George III's words to Lancaster, which were displayed in large letters in the schoolroom at Borough Road: 'It is my wish that every poor child in my dominions is taught to read the Holy Scriptures.' 
Lancaster was never known for his personal modesty (the Quaker reformer, Elizabeth Fry, noticed a want of humility in his manner) and the extent of his fame began to go to his head. He envisaged the foundation of monitorial schools all over the country erected in the image of what he now called the Royal Free School. He spent such funds as supporters donated to him in setting up at Borough Road a slate factory, a printing office, and a girls' school run by two sisters. He maintained his best monitors, his 'house lads', as apprentice schoolmasters, preparing them to go out like educational missionaries and start monitorial schools elsewhere. In 'Improvements in Education', he emphasized the importance of well trained and well remunerated teachers. On 5 June 1804 Lancaster married, in Sarah Trimmer's words, 'a pretty Quaker', Elizabeth Bonner ('c'.1780-1820), daughter of Henry Bonner of Southwark, and she gave him his only child, also named Elizabeth (Betsy). Soon after his marriage he set out on the first of a series of extravagant coach tours around the country, publicizing the merits of his system and whipping up a good deal of local enthusiasm. At Maiden Bradley in Wiltshire he established a rural monitorial school which for a time absorbed his interest and his money, though it eventually fell into neglect. After the first of several visits to Ireland in 1806, establishing schools, he returned to Southwark heavily in debt to local tradesmen and was confined in the king's bench debtors' prison. Even after his release the constant risk of being arrested again persuaded Lancaster to spend much of his time on lecturing tours in the provinces and Ireland, accompanied by some of his young apprentices, many of whom were devoted to him. Meanwhile the Borough Road monitorial school was left mainly in the hands of his assistants. 
Financial difficulties, however, were not Lancaster's only problem. He had opened his school for children of all religious denominations and though the 'Bible' was read diligently, no sectarian instruction was given. At first the Anglican clergy had donated subscriptions to the school, especially when it received royal approval. But this support changed into opposition when in 1805 Sarah Trimmer, after visits to Lancaster's school at Southwark, began to attack him in her correspondence and pamphlets as the 'Goliath of Schismatics' and his school at Borough Road as inimical to the interests of the established church. Mrs Trimmer particularly attacked Lancaster's methods of 'emulation and reward', complaining that his medals and orders of merit for his 'nobility' gave the children ideas above their station in life. She asserted that Lancaster had taken many of his ideas for his monitorial system from Dr Andrew Bell, whose Madras System, pioneered by Bell in India, was regarded favourably by the Anglican church. Lancaster had admitted his debt to Bell for some of his ideas and Bell had also professed his admiration for Lancaster's school. But after Mrs Trimmer's attack had divided their supporters, they drifted into hostility, widened by Bell's jealousy of the royal patronage given to Lancaster. 
The Anglican attack helped to rally nonconformist and secular support to Lancaster, including a powerful defence of his system in the whig 'Edinburgh Review'. In 1808 a small committee was formed to raise money to pay off his debts and put the finances and administration of the institutions at Borough Road on a sounder basis. The earliest of these supporters included Corston and Joseph Fox, a leading member of the Baptist sect. But the most influential member of the group was William Allen, a wealthy manufacturing chemist and well-known Quaker philanthropist, who was greatly impressed on his first visit to Borough Road in 1808. Allen, who became treasurer to the new committee, had friends in high places, including the royal dukes of Kent and Sussex. It was due to Allen more than to anyone else, that the Borough Road institutions were established on a permanent footing. But in spite of the financial support and economies of the committee, the need for funds remained pressing, especially as Lancaster's tours brought a demand for teachers of his monitorial system, the reputation of which was beginning to spread overseas, as well as throughout the British Isles. In 1810, therefore, an enlarged committee was formed under the presidency of the duke of Kent including, in addition to Allen and his friends, such educational enthusiasts as James Mill, Henry Brougham, and Samuel Whitbread, who had introduced a bill into parliament aiming to set up a national system of elementary schools based on Lancaster's system. This enlarged committee called itself the Royal Lancasterian Institution for the Education of the Poor of Every Religious Persuasion. Meanwhile the rival followers of Bell set up the National Society for Promoting the Education of the Poor in the Principles of the Established Church, with the support of the tory 'Quarterly Review' and the Anglican clergy. 
Between 1808 and 1811 Lancaster produced a number of pamphlets at The Royal Free School Press, including 'The British System of Education' and 'Report of J. Lancaster's Progress from the Year 1798', recording fifty new schools for 14,000 pupils and acknowledging the financial assistance of his supporters. But he was, in fact, increasingly resentful of the control exercised by Allen and the committee. In 1812, without any reference to his trustees, he opened a boarding-school at Tooting for wealthy pupils, using money subscribed for Borough Road. He persuaded some of the apprentice schoolmasters to join him at Tooting and sent the committee a bill for their maintenance. Eventually after long and often acrimonious negotiations between Lancaster and the committee, a general meeting held at the Freemasons' Tavern in 1813 and attended by Lancaster and the leading members of the committee accepted a constitution and rules for the Institution for Promoting the British System for the Education of the Labouring and Manufacturing Classes of Society of Every Religious Persuasion. Lancaster was offered the position of salaried superintendent, the collapse of the Tooting project leaving him again heavily in debt. He agreed to these arrangements with reluctance accusing the leading members of the new society of usurping his authority and seizing his property. These arrangements soon came to an end, for in 1814 an unsavoury scandal made Lancaster's removal inevitable. According to Francis Place, who had joined the committee in 1812 and played a prominent part in its affairs for a time, a youth named William Brown, who was still apprenticed to Lancaster, informed Corston that Lancaster 'used to flog his apprentices for his own amusement' (BL, Add. MS 27823). On the evidence of an inquiry into Lancaster's conduct towards his apprentices, which ran contrary to his moral pronouncements in 'Improvements in Education', he was called before the committee but forestalled further action by resigning as superintendent. Meanwhile he advertised a new monitorial school in Westminster to be financed by money sent to him by a supporter in Spain. After Lancaster's final withdrawal, the institution was renamed the British and Foreign School Society, much to the resentment of Lancaster who in 'Oppression and Persecution' (1816) accused his 'pretended friends', Allen and Fox, of driving him away from the institutions he had created at Borough Road and excluding his name from the title of the society 'as if Britons and foreigners had combined in its invention'. The Westminster project having collapsed, he resumed his travels around England, Ireland, and Scotland, lecturing on his monitorial system and establishing local committees. But his extravagance became increasingly wild. He had already been declared a bankrupt and disowned by the Society of Friends which disapproved of his spendthrift conduct and ostentatious appearance. His wife's mental illness had disrupted his family life. Eventually a few friends, including David Holt, a Quaker mill owner from Manchester, organized a subscription to pay for Lancaster's passage to America and in 1818 he crossed the Atlantic with his wife and daughter. 
Monitorial schools on the Lancasterian plan had already been set up in New York and Philadelphia and for a time Lancaster regained something of his old popularity. He was warmly welcomed by supporters in the United States and received by the president in Washington. But plans to establish model schools at Philadelphia and elsewhere collapsed because of Lancaster's ill health, his preference for lecture tours, and disputes over payment for himself and his assistants. Early in 1820 Lancaster moved to Baltimore where he opened another school and produced a treatise entitled 'The Lancasterian System of Education with Improvements by its Founder' (1821). On 6 December 1820, however, his mentally afflicted wife, Elizabeth, died at Baltimore. Six years later, on 23 February 1827, he married Mary Robinson, the widow of an English miniature painter, John Robinson, who had emigrated to America. By that date Lancaster had left the United States and established himself at Caracas in the new state of Venezuela. Simon Bolivar, the president of Columbia (which then included Venezuela) had met Lancaster during a visit to Borough Road in 1810 and a proposal for a monitorial school at Caracas had already been made. Again, however, the results were disastrous, as problems of language, of religious instruction (for Catholicism was dominant in Caracas), and of finance inevitably arose. Relations between Lancaster and the British consul, who regarded him as an impostor and resented Lancaster's attitude to himself, rapidly deteriorated. After a brief period of cordial relations with Bolivar, who attended Lancaster's marriage to Mary Robinson in Caracas, Lancaster was abandoned by the 'liberator', being left heavily in debt. Both he and his second wife, who had three children by her first marriage, were obliged to leave Caracas at some personal risk to themselves. Meanwhile Lancaster's daughter, Elizabeth, had married Richard Jones, one of several former apprentices who had joined Lancaster in America and they had settled in Mexico with their family. 
Back in the United States, Lancaster returned to New York and after visiting various cities on the north-eastern seaboard of America, established himself at Montreal in September 1829 where, as at other Canadian cities, he was at first welcomed, though his schools failed to flourish. During these years of increasing penury, he became virtually estranged from his wife, Mary, though she eventually rejoined him in the United States. On his return again to New York, some of his old friends, such as Roberts Vaux, tried to assist Lancaster and a subscription list was opened in America and Britain, to which Allen and other former supporters contributed, to purchase him an annuity. In 1833 he produced his last attempt at self-justification, 'An epitome of some of the chief events and transactions in the life of Joseph Lancaster, containing an account of the rise and progress of the Lancasterian system of education and the author's future prospects of usefulness to mankind'. He also reopened correspondence with Corston in England, giving him the impression that he was still received everywhere with enthusiasm. 'With properly trained teachers and monitors', he wrote in 1838, 'I should not scruple to undertake to teach ten thousand pupils in different schools all to read fluently in three weeks to three months, idiots, absentees and truants excepted' (Salmon, 64). But shortly after writing this letter, he was seriously injured in a street accident in New York and died a day later, on 23 October 1838. He was buried at the Friends' burial-ground in Houston Street, New York. 
'Be assured I shall stand in my place here and hereafter,' Lancaster wrote to an acquaintance in 1834 (McCadden, 73), when enthusiasm for monitorial methods was already declining, in spite of the original impact of the system of mutual instruction at home and abroad following the success of the Borough Road model school. Lancaster himself had become an increasing embarrassment over the years. Place's unkind dictum that Lancaster was 'adapted to the teaching in the school but to nothing else' and became 'mischievous, ridiculous and childish' as he was 'caressed by the great' (BL, Add. MS 27823) was sadly true of a life which was mainly one of failed prospects, broken engagements, sordid quarrels, and endless debts. Even his relations with his own family deteriorated into mutual recriminations and neglect. 'That old serpent, Mr Lancaster,' wrote the British minister in Caracas, 'is the most black and dangerous being in the place' (Dickson, 246) and this was an opinion shared by many acquaintances, though some few friends never lost faith in him. His biographer, David Salmon, was probably correct in suggesting that Lancaster's creative energy, which had achieved much for the children of the poorer classes, had been pretty well exhausted at thirty and it would have been better for his reputation if he had died many years earlier. Even so, his name was to survive in English educational history as one of the foremost pioneers of mass schooling and effective teacher training in the early industrial era. 


@@@@@


doc= 15964


Lancaster, Nathaniel (b. in or after 1700, d. 1775), Church of England clergyman and satirist, was born in Cheshire, though further details of his parentage and childhood are unknown. The earl of Cholmondeley was an early patron, and through him Lancaster was introduced to 'the exalted scenes of polished life' (Nichols, 2.379). In 1721 he was ordained deacon by John Wynne, bishop of St Asaph. At this time he was described as a 'literate', which indicates he did not have a university education but was considered sufficiently learned; before his ordination he made his living as a schoolteacher. In 1724 he was ordained priest by the bishop of Lincoln and was appointed rector of St Martin's, Chester, by Francis Gastrell, bishop of Chester, on 12 June of the following year. In January 1733 he was made chaplain to Frederick, prince of Wales, and on 12 February he was granted the degree of doctor of laws by the archbishop of Canterbury, a noteworthy distinction given his apparent lack of a university education and one that may have originated with the prince. Five days later Lancaster married the widow of Captain Brown, who brought with her an inheritance of $20,000; they had two daughters. On 1 September 1737 he became rector of Stanford Rivers, near Ongar, Essex -- a crown living in Frederick's patronage -- where he remained for the rest of his life. Following Frederick's death Lancaster was appointed by the prince's widow, Augusta, as one of her chaplains in May 1751. 
As a young man Lancaster had been a talented and witty conversationalist in polite society. In later years he turned to writing as a way of satirizing what he came to see as the excessive delicacy of modern manners. His treatise 'The Pretty Gentleman, or, Softness of Manners Vindicated' (1747) offered a spoof defence of refined gentlemen such as the fictional fop William Fribble, recently satirized in David Garrick's play 'Miss in her Teens'. Ostensibly a critique of Garrick's bluff tone, Lancaster's study was equally critical of what he saw as the enervated demeanour of overly delicate British manhood. Two further publications -- a sermon, 'Public virtue, or, Love of our country' (1746), and 'The Plan of an Essay upon Delicacy' (1748) -- addressed the same problem from different perspectives: the first offered a civic-minded call for public duty in the face of encroaching temptation, and the second a detailed guide to the correct ways for men and women to adopt a refined or delicate character. A similar dichotomy can be seen in Lancaster's work as a JP for Essex: a letter to the London bookseller Jacob Robinson tells how he frequently felt both compassion for defendants and a sense of duty to uphold the law ('GM', 1784, 345). 
A man 'of strong natural parts, great erudition, refined taste, and master of a nervous, and at the same time elegant style' (Nichols, 2.379), Lancaster published only one further work, a long rhapsodical poem, 'Methodism Triumphant, or, The Decisive Battle between Old Serpent and Modern Saint' (1767). Whatever else he wrote was regularly burnt, in a life which became increasingly reclusive and penurious. Indeed, so great was this indebtedness that after Lancaster's death, on 20 June 1775, the rectory was pulled down on account of the state of disrepair into which it had fallen during his tenancy. 


@@@@@


doc= 15965


Lancaster, Thomas (d. 1583), Church of Ireland archbishop of Armagh, was possibly a native of Cumberland. He had graduated BTh by 1536, probably from Oxford University. He was the rector of Offekerque in the pale of Calais from 1536 to 1540. 
About 1550 Lancaster published a tract, 'The ryght and trew understandynge of the supper of the lord and the use thereof faythfully gathered out of ye holy scriptures', a copy of which is in the British Library. The book was dedicated to Edward VI but was published under a 'nom de plume' (Johan Turke) as its eucharistic theology was more advanced than that authorized in the first 'Book of Common Prayer'. Lancaster's protestantism commended him to Sir James Croft, Edward VI's viceroy in Ireland, and he was nominated to the vacant see of Kildare in April 1550. He was consecrated on 11 July 1550. He was allowed to hold the deanery of Kilkenny 'in commendam' on account of the poverty of Kildare. 
Bishop Lancaster was married, although his wife's name is unknown, and on that ground he was deprived of his ecclesiastical offices by a Marian royal commission in 1554. With the accession of Elizabeth to the throne, however, Lancaster was made a royal chaplain. He was granted the rectory of South Hill, Cornwall, and was presented to the treasurership of Salisbury Cathedral by the queen in 1559. He was highly favoured by John Jewel, bishop of Salisbury, becoming vicar-general and official principal of Salisbury as well as Jewel's suffragan bishop of Marlborough in 1560-61. He was a member of the lower house of convocation and on 5 February 1563 was in the minority of fifty-eight who approved of the proposed six formulas committing the established church to ultra-protestant doctrine and practices, as against the fifty-nine who opposed the change. In the same year he signed the petition of the lower house of convocation for reform of church discipline. He was admitted as principal of St Edmund Hall, Oxford, on 26 February 1565, an office which he held until 1568. 
When Sir Henry Sidney became Elizabeth's viceroy in Ireland Thomas Lancaster secured a royal licence in October 1565 to attend upon him and to absent himself from his spiritual duties. He accompanied Deputy Sidney throughout much of his time in Ireland. It was probably on Sidney's recommendation that Elizabeth decided to promote Lancaster as the Church of Ireland archbishop of Armagh and primate in the summer of 1567. Cecil was pleased that the 'lusty good priest, Lancaster' was to be promoted ('CSP Ire.', Elizabeth, xxi, no. 70). On 28 March 1568 Elizabeth informed the Irish lords justices that she had chosen 'Thomas Lancaster, one of our ordinary chaplains, heretofore bishop of Kildare in our said realm, and therein for his time served very laudably, and since that time has been very well acquainted in the said part of Ulster, having been lately in company with our said deputy in all his journeys within our said realm, and has preached right faithfully. (ibid., xxiii, no. 86)' Because the see of Armagh was left virtually bankrupt by his predecessor, Adam Loftus, Lancaster was allowed to retain the treasurership of Salisbury and the rectories of South Hill and Sherfield, Hampshire, 'in commendam'. He was also granted the archdeaconry of Kells and the rectory of Nobber, Meath diocese, and the prebend of Stagonil, Dublin. Furthermore, Lancaster was loaned $200 by the queen to allow him to become established in Armagh and she secretly made provision to lend him further sums not exceeding $50 if he so required. Archbishop Lancaster was reconsecrated with episcopal orders on 13 June 1568 by Archbishop Loftus of Dublin, Bishop Brady of Meath, and Bishop Daly of Kildare in Christ Church, Dublin. He preached his own consecration sermon on the subject of regeneration. 
Elizabeth ordered that Armagh Cathedral and other ruined churches in Ulster be renovated after the devastation wrought by the wars waged by Shane O'Neill, lord of Tyrone. She ordered too that the residence of the archbishop at Armagh be restored, but she secretly intended it to house a provincial council which was to govern the north of Ireland on her behalf. The restoration proceeded slowly, but Elizabeth's provincial council for Ulster was never established. Archbishop Lancaster himself was unable to visit Armagh city in person for fear of his life and was obliged to confine his ministry to those parishes of his archdiocese which were situated in the English pale. It cannot be said that Lancaster's ministry was blessed with much success. The advent of his successor, John Long, was greeted with the hope of a fresh start for the Reformation in Ireland. Archbishop Long himself was of the opinion that there were not forty Irish born Christians in the whole of Ireland, a sorry reflection on Lancaster's fifteen years as primate of the Church of Ireland. 
Archbishop Lancaster died at Drogheda in December 1583. He was buried in the vault of Primate Octavian del Palatio in St Peter's Church, Drogheda. Lancaster had intended to found a grammar school by the name of Queen Elizabeth College in Drogheda, and to endow eight exhibitions tenable for scholars at St Edmund Hall, Oxford, but the project failed to materialize as his deathbed will was successfully challenged on the grounds that he was 'crazed and sickly' and surfeited with red herring and alcohol when he composed it (TCD, MS 553). He was survived by a son and two daughters. 


@@@@@


doc= 15966


Lancaster, Thomas William (1787-1859), Church of England clergyman and writer, born at Fulham, Middlesex, on 24 August 1787, was the son of the Revd Thomas Lancaster of Wimbledon, Surrey. He matriculated from Oriel College, Oxford, on 26 January 1804, and graduated BA (with a second class in 'literae humaniores') in 1807, and MA in 1810. In 1808 he was elected to a Michel scholarship at Queen's College, and in the following year to a fellowship on the same foundation. After being ordained deacon in 1810 and priest in 1812, he became in the latter year curate of Banbury, Oxfordshire, and vicar of Banbury in 1815. He resigned his fellowship at Queen's on his marriage in 1816 to Anne, 'nee' Walford (1775/6-1860), of Banbury. They had no children. 
Lancaster's relations with his parishioners were not happy, and although he retained the living of Banbury for over thirty-three years, he lived in Oxford for about half that time. In 1849 the bishop of Oxford, Samuel Wilberforce, persuaded him to exchange Banbury for the rectory of Over Worton, a small village near Woodstock. He did not find the new living more congenial than the old, and continued to live in Oxford, where he frequented the Bodleian Library. In 1831 he preached the Bampton lectures, taking for his subject the popular evidence of Christianity. He was appointed a select preacher to the university in 1832, and a public examiner in 1832-3. From 1840 to 1849 he acted, with little success, as undermaster ('ostiarius', or usher) of Magdalen College School, and was for a time chaplain to the dowager countess of Guilford. 
Lancaster was one of the old-fashioned 'high and dry' school, opposing the broad church and the Tractarians with equal fervour from the university pulpit. Besides his Bampton lectures, Lancaster published quite widely, engaging in the theological pamphlet wars of the 1830s but also writing works such as 'The Harmony of the Law and the Gospel' (1825), 'A Treatise on Confirmation' (1830), an edition (1834) of Aristotle's 'Nicomachean Ethics' widely used in its day, and 'Vindiciae symbolicae' (1848), a treatise on creeds and articles. Lancaster had partly prepared for press a collection of his sermons when he died, on 12 December 1859, at his lodgings in High Street, Oxford. He was buried in Holywell cemetery, and his sermons were published by subscription (1860). His wife died on 8 February 1860, aged eighty-four. 


@@@@@


doc= 15967


Lancaster, William (1649/50-1717), college head, was the son of William Lancaster of Sockbridge in Barton parish, Westmorland. He was born in Barton and for some time taught at the parish school there. The school was near Lowther Castle, and when Sir John Lowther's son, afterwards Lord Lonsdale, went to Queen's College, Oxford, Lancaster went with him as his servitor. Lancaster was entered as a batteler at the college on 23 June 1670, and matriculated on 1 July that same year, aged twenty. He graduated BA on 6 February 1675, proceeded MA on 1 July 1678 (although the degree was initially stopped for some words Lancaster had said against the proctor, John Clerke of All Souls), BD on 12 April 1690, and DD on 8 July 1692. His career at Oxford was interrupted for a while by a stay in Paris on a state grant to which he had been recommended by Sir Joseph Williamson. On his return to England Lancaster continued to spend most of his time in college, though he was appointed domestic chaplain to the earl of Denbigh and was collated to the vicarage of Oakley, Buckinghamshire, on 1 September 1682. On 15 March 1679 he was made a fellow of Queen's, a post that he retained until his marriage in 1696; from 1686 to 1690 he was first junior and then senior bursar of his college. 
From 1690 onwards Lancaster appears to have spent more time in London than in Oxford. He became domestic chaplain to Henry Compton, bishop of London, who nominated him on 22 July 1692 to the vicarage of St Martin-in-the-Fields (vacated by Thomas Tenison when he became bishop of Lincoln), but the rights of presentation were claimed by the queen, who installed Nicholas Gouge instead. Lancaster was finally instituted into the living on 31 October 1694, following Gouge's death. He continued to work closely with Compton, supervising a fund for dispossessed Scottish episcopalian clergy on the bishop's behalf. His wife, the daughter of Mr Wilmer of Sywell in Northamptonshire, was a relative of Compton. Through Compton's favour he was later collated (29 March 1705) to the archdeaconry of Middlesex, a post that he held until his death. Lancaster was also a part of the circle of his fellow Cumbrian and student contemporary, William Nicolson, in London, along with John Waugh, White Kennett, Edward Gee, and Dean Grahme. Nicolson's son, Joseph, studied at Queen's College, and was shown much favour by Lancaster. In return Nicolson appears occasionally to have performed Lancaster's duties at St Martin-in-the-Fields when he was away in Oxford. Lancaster was a popular preacher and on 30 January 1697 he delivered a sermon before the Commons commemorating the death of Charles I. He used the occasion to decry the evil of rebellion, claiming that the greatest danger to William III, who had recently survived an assassination plot, came from the continued belief in a lawful right of resistance. A whig reply to this sermon was belatedly published in 1710, probably to coincide with the trial of Henry Sacheverell. 
On 15 October 1704 Lancaster was elected as provost of Queen's College, but the election was disputed as contravening the college statutes. Lancaster's opponents claimed that only present, and not past, fellows of the college could hold the office. In response, Lancaster appealed successfully to the visitor, the archbishop of York, who confirmed the election on 18 November 1704. It was under Lancaster that the rebuilding of the college in the Palladian style was begun, with the provost sinking an estimated $4000 of his own money into the work. His efforts for the corporation of Oxford were repaid with a 1000-year lease to the college of a plot of land on the High Street. 
From 1705 to 1709 Lancaster acted as vice-chancellor of Oxford. In administrative terms he rescued the university from the financial chicanery of his predecessor, William Delaune, who had embezzled the profits from the publishing of Clarendon's 'History'. Academically, he tried to curb the influence of Lockean ideas in Oxford, blocking the appointment of John Wynne, a popularizer of Locke's 'Essay Concerning Human Understanding', as Lady Margaret professor of divinity in 1705. However, his intellectual influence was not solely negative. He was a keen promoter of literary talents and promoted the writings of Joseph Addison and Thomas Tickell. Lancaster was a tory, but the expectation that he would be another zealot like Delaune was disappointed. He generally appears to have acted to quell political controversy, taking the decision not to invite Sacheverell or his high-church supporters to preach again after May 1707. Lancaster attempted to co-operate with the government, helping to propose an address on the union of Scotland and England, despite opposition from many university members. His willingness to work with the Godolphin administration brought accusations of 'trimming', but also the possibility that he might be rewarded with a bishopric (St David's and Chichester were both rumoured). Such political pragmatism earned Lancaster the contempt of the arch-tory Thomas Hearne. Lancaster was 'smoothboots', the 'Northern bear' (a sneer at the lowly social origins of a man who had risen from village schoolmaster to vice-chancellor of the University of Oxford), and an 'old hypocritical, ambitious, drunken sot' ('DNB'). 
However, once Sacheverell's trial effectively became a verdict on the revolution of 1688, Lancaster was reluctantly forced to come to his defence. On 14 December 1709 Lancaster took Sacheverell to the House of Lords in his own coach and stood with him at the bar. On 13 January 1710 he put up $3000 bail for him. Clearly, though, there were limits to Lancaster's loyalty to the tory cause and he refused to give a personal testimony to Sacheverell's good character. Lancaster remained an important figure in Oxford after 1709, acting as pro-vice-chancellor, and with Bernard Gardiner of All Souls worked effectively to block the attempts of Francis Atterbury, dean of Christ Church, to reassert tory dominance within the university. In league with Gardiner and Arthur Charlett, Lancaster kept the university politically passive while the country waited to see what changes the death of the queen would bring. 
Lancaster died in Oxford on 4 February 1717 of a 'gout of the stomach' ('DNB') and was buried in the old church of St Martin-in-the-Fields on 8 February. He left $1000 in his will for the further rebuilding of Queen's. His portrait by T. Murray hangs in the college hall. 


@@@@@


doc= 15968


Lance, George (1802-1864), still-life painter, was born in the manor house of Little Easton, near Dunmow, Essex, on 24 March 1802. His father was the adjutant of the Essex yeomanry, while his mother was the daughter of Colonel Constable of Beverley, Yorkshire. His parents had eloped while his mother was still at boarding-school. The family moved to London during Lance's childhood, when his father became inspector of the Bow Street horse patrol. One contemporary biographer noted that Lance was 'born an artist' like 'most of those who have achieved distinguished eminence in art' (Bryan, 'Painters', 103). He favoured picture books over other toys. His family sent him as an adolescent to Leeds to work as a clerk in a factory, a position that is said to have damaged his health. The thirteen-year-old Lance soon returned to London, unhappy with his foray into commerce and determined to become an artist. While studying in the British Museum, he approached Charles Landseer, who was sketching there. During conversation Lance learned that Landseer was a pupil in the studio of Benjamin Robert Haydon and soon after Lance went to Haydon's studio and offered himself as a pupil. He remained there for seven years, studying at the Royal Academy Schools at the same time. 
It was in Haydon's studio that Lance fixed upon his artistic speciality: fruit painting. As part of his artistic training Lance produced cartoons of the Parthenon frieze in the British Museum, completed courses in dissection, and also executed studies of fruit and vegetables. A fruit study prepared for a scene from Homer's 'Iliad' attracted the attention of the collector Sir George Beaumont, who purchased the study. Soon after, both the duke of Bedford and the earl of Shaftesbury commissioned fruit pieces. Haydon himself noted the improbability that an artist trained in his studio would excel at fruit painting rather than history painting; he reportedly told Lance, 'it seems a pity to cast off the nobler walk of Art, but I am so convinced you will have no competitor in that you are now following' ('Art Journal', 1857, 306). 
On 15 May 1823 Lance married Sarah Rawles, with whom he had at least two daughters, Mary Elizabeth and Eliza, and a son, George Edmund, a cotton broker of Liverpool. The following year Lance began to exhibit works publicly, sending still-life paintings to the British Institution and to the Society of British Artists. In 1828 he contributed his first work to the Royal Academy exhibition, another still life. Lance continued to exhibit his work publicly throughout his career, with thirty-eight works shown at the Royal Academy, forty-eight at the Suffolk Street Gallery, and 135 at the British Institution. Lance completed more than 400 fruit and other still-life paintings during his career, judged by a contemporary as 'wonderful alike for the variety of interest displayed in them, and for the splendour and truthfulness of their execution' (Bryan, 'Painters', 103). During his lifetime his paintings were compared to those of the Dutch old masters and lavishly praised: 'his 'fruit-pieces', which are his speciality, have never been surpassed in luxuriance and richness of colour, in truth, and in effective and most harmonious grouping' ('Art Journal', 1857, 305). Works by Lance are currently held in the National Gallery, the Tate collection, and the Victoria and Albert Museum, London. 
Although known for his still-life works, Lance frequently produced paintings in other genres. In 1836 he won the prize for best historical picture of the season at the Liverpool Academy with 'Melancthon's First Misgiving of the Church of Rome' (Manchester City Galleries). In addition, he executed portraits, such as 'Dr. William Forbes' (NPG) and 'Rev. William Harness' (Tate collection). Self-portraits of Lance are in the collections of both the Victoria and Albert Museum and the National Portrait Gallery, London. However, after 1845 he painted exclusively still-life works, exhibiting publicly for the last time in 1862. Throughout his career Lance accepted pupils, including Sir John Gilbert and William Duffield -- reputedly his favourite pupil -- whose death at the age of thirty-one greatly affected Lance. 
Little is known of Lance's personal life. He lived for most of his life in London, retiring for health reasons to Cheshire in 1862. He died at Sunnyside, New Brighton, Wallasey, Cheshire, on 18 June 1864. Interestingly, a contemporary biographer notes: 'a daughter of Mr. Lance follows in her father's career, evincing considerable ability' (Bryan, 'Painters', 103). 


@@@@@


doc= 15969


Land, Edward (1815-1876), pianist and composer, was born in London. He began his career as one of the children of the Chapel Royal, and made his name as the accompanist to John Wilson, the celebrated Scottish singer. After Wilson's death he acted in a similar capacity to David Kennedy. On the formation of the Glee and Madrigal Union he was appointed as accompanist, and appeared on occasion as a second tenor. He was also secretary of the Noblemen and Gentlemen's Catch Club for several years. As a composer, his output included a number of songs which were popular in their day, such as 'Bird of Beauty' (1852), 'The Angel's Watch' (1853), and 'Birds of the Sea' (1858). In addition, he harmonized or arranged a good deal of miscellaneous vocal music, wrote many original pieces for the piano, and made piano arrangements of various Scottish melodies and other compositions. He died at his home, 4 Cambridge Place, Regent's Park, London, on 29 November 1876. He was unmarried. 


@@@@@


doc= 15970


Landel, William (d. 1385), bishop of St Andrews and diplomat, was probably a younger son of a baronial family originally established in Berwickshire. On the death of his brother John, William acquired the baronies of Hownam and Crailing in Roxburghshire, but surrendered these in 1367 to John Crichton. By then Landel's ecclesiastical and political career was well established, but his early years remain shrouded in obscurity. He may have studied in France in the 1330s, but he was only occasionally styled master thereafter, and it remains uncertain whether he graduated. A lengthy sojourn in France, whether as a student or perhaps in the entourage of the exiled King David II, would, however, explain why nothing is known of Landel's pre-episcopal career -- other than that he was rector of Kinkell, Aberdeenshire, immediately before his elevation. Residence in France would similarly account for the support which both King Philippe VI of France and David II extended to Landel's episcopal appointment in a supplication to Pope Benedict XII ('r'. 1334-42). 
Benedict appointed Landel as bishop of St Andrews on 18 February 1342; he was consecrated at Avignon on 17 March. Instructed by the pope the following day to return to his diocese, Landel was back in Scotland by the end of that year. He remained a close associate of David II, who had returned from exile in France the previous year. From 1357, after the king's release from English captivity, Landel frequently witnessed royal charters and presumably spent much of his time with the royal court, not just during its visits to the principal centres of government at Edinburgh, Perth, and Scone, but also on its occasional journeys to the west and the north-east of the kingdom. Thus he was with the king when David visited the north-east during the winter of 1362-3 in order to escape an outbreak of plague further south. Although holding no official governmental position, Landel was often entrusted with diplomatic business. Between 1348 and 1370 he was nominated to serve on almost every Scottish embassy to England, including that which conducted the negotiations leading to the treaty of Berwick and David II's subsequent release in 1357. Spiritual activities further prolonged Landel's probably lengthy absences from his diocesan seat. He received safe conducts to undertake pilgrimages to Santiago de Compostela in 1361 and Canterbury in 1362, and to visit the papal court in 1363, and an unspecified destination overseas in 1365. 
Although he crowned Robert II during the inauguration ceremony at Scone on 16 March 1371, Landel's political prominence declined after the accession of the new king, doubtless mainly due to the effects of advancing years. Although he continued to witness royal charters regularly in the early years of the new reign, his diplomatic role diminished and he probably began to spend more time in St Andrews, where he supervised the beginning of reconstruction work on his cathedral after its destruction by fire in 1378. Although by 1381 Landel was reported to be feeble and broken with age, from at least 1383 until his death he was entrusted with the custody of the king's illegitimate son, James. Landel bequeathed jewels, vestments, books, and 'other more pleasing playthings' (Wyntoun, 3.27) to his cathedral church. He was one of the first Scottish bishops able to dispose of his personal property by testament, having been instrumental in persuading the crown to grant this concession to the episcopate. Landel died on 23 September 1385 and was buried in his cathedral church. 


@@@@@


doc= 15971


Landells, Ebenezer (1808-1860), wood-engraver, illustrator, and magazine proprietor, was born at Newcastle upon Tyne on 13 April 1808 and was baptized there on 15 May, the third son of Ebenezer Landells, a merchant, and his wife, Jane Graham. His paternal grandfather ran a wholesale drapery business and his maternal grandfather was the Revd William Graham (1737-1801), minister of the Close Presbyterian Meeting-House. Landells attended Mr Bruce's academy in Newcastle and at fourteen was apprenticed to Thomas Bewick, the celebrated wood-engraver. After payment to Bewick of 5's'. for indentures at the end of 1822 there is no further mention of Landells in Bewick's records. Landells served out his remaining apprenticeship with Isaac Nicholson, wood-engraver and himself a former pupil of Thomas Bewick. Nicholson's workshop was in St Nicholas's Churchyard, Newcastle. While an apprentice in 1826 and 1827 Landells exhibited paintings at the Northumberland Institution for the Promotion of the Fine Arts, Newcastle, and at the Northern Academy, Newcastle, in 1828. 
On arriving in London in 1829, through the influence of fellow Northumbrian engravers John Jackson and William Harvey, Landells secured a position overseeing the fine art engraving department of Branston and Vizetelly. Landells engraved Harvey's drawings and initial letters for the second series of Northcote's 'Fables' (1833) and also drawings by H. K. Browne and Cattermole for Dickens's 'Master Humphrey's Clock', which were engraved in partnership with Charles Gray. He was married on 9 January 1832 at St Pancras New Church, London, to Anne, eldest daughter of Robert McLagan of London. 
Landells earned a place at the heart of the burgeoning wood-engraving business in London as a result of his Newcastle connections, all talented pupils of Bewick. This skill was vital for providing illustrations for books and magazines for the mass market. Landells possessed great energy and enthusiasm and he had the vision to realize the potential of wood-engraving in this field. Unfortunately his lack of business acumen meant that his schemes were not always profitable. 
Landells soon established his own engraving workshop and employed some of the most outstanding engravers and illustrators of the next generation, including Edward and George Dalziel, Birket Foster, and Edmund Evans. His first engraving business was run from his home in Thornhill Road, Barnsbury, in north London, where he was assisted by his brother Alexander. This was followed by a bigger workshop at 22 Bidborough Street, New Road, St Pancras, where he undertook the engravings for his own venture: a journal of fashion entitled 'Cosmorama'. This was short-lived, as Landells soon became involved with journalists including Henry Mayhew, Douglas Jerrold, and Thackeray, all of whom had failed satirical magazines behind them. Landells devised a new model based upon the French magazine 'Le Charivari' and provided the technical expertise and capital to produce a magazine with many small illustrations and two full-page wood-engravings. The cover was designed by Landells and executed by Archibald Henning and the political 'cut' would change every week. The first issue of 'Punch, or, the London Charivari' appeared on 17 July 1841. This involved a prodigious amount of work and organization by Landells, in particular liaison between illustrators, engravers, and printers. He was so successful in this respect that Herbert Ingram consulted him about launching his new paper, the 'Illustrated London News', in 1842. Landells had a one-third share in 'Punch', but the magazine's initial fortunes were rocky, despite spectacular sales from almanack and holiday numbers. The printers and publishers Bradbury and Evans bought out the existing shareholders on 24 December 1842 and in spite of their promising to honour Landells's position as engraving chief he was soon replaced by Joseph Swain. Landells was able to vent some spleen against Bradbury and Evans in a pamphlet, 'A Word with Punch' (1847), produced by Alfred Bunn, a theatrical impresario who had been lampooned mercilessly by the magazine; Landells provided the engravings for the diatribe in the 'Punch' style. 
Landells did not remain disaffected for long. His association with Herbert Ingram bore fruit and propelled Landells forward as an illustrator as well as an engraver. He was commissioned to make sketches of Queen Victoria's first visit to Scotland in 1842 for the 'Illustrated London News'. These were so successful that the queen bought the sketches and commissioned some additional watercolours while on her tour. Landells was the paper's first artist correspondent and later accompanied the queen on her visit to the Rhine. His workshop was also responsible for a large number of stock engravings for the 'Illustrated London News'. 
Landells was involved with many other magazines as proprietor or engraver: the 'Illuminated Magazine' (1843), the 'Lady's Newspaper' (1847) ('the earliest paper devoted to female interests', according to the 'Dictionary of National Biography'), the 'Great Gun' (1844), 'Diogenes' (1853), and the 'Illustrated Inventor'. He had a knack of identifying trends in publishing: seeing the growth in the children's book market, he illustrated his own -- 'Boy's Own Toy-Maker' (1858), 'Girl's Own Toy-Maker' (1859), and the 'Illustrated Paper Model Maker' (1860). Landells undertook an enormous number of engraving projects with variable financial returns. Some of his early engraving work is quite fine, in the Bewick style, but his later work is undistinguished and merely competent. He was an exceptional teacher and encouraged his apprentices to develop their own particular strengths in drawing or engraving: Foster, Evans, and the Dalziel brothers were among those who loyally testified to this. His apprentices bestowed on him the affectionate nickname Tooch-it-oop, in imitation of his north-eastern accent, which he never lost ('DNB'). 
Landells made a unique contribution to the development of the illustrated magazine in the nineteenth century. He provided the link between Bewick's inspirational use of wood-engraving for artistic purposes and the use of the same technology for the mass market. He exhibited engravings at the Society (later Royal Society) of British Artists in 1833 and 1837. Over 1000 of his wood-engraving proofs are held in the prints and drawings department of the British Museum. He died on 1 October 1860 at his lodgings in Victoria Grove, West Brompton, and was survived by his wife, two sons, and four daughters. 
Landells's eldest son, 
Robert Landells was married, on 19 March 1857, at St Pancras New Church, London, to Elizabeth Ann, youngest daughter of George Herbert Rodwell, musician and composer, and granddaughter of Liston, the comic actor. They had two sons and two daughters. Landells died on 6 January 1877 at his home, 49 Winchester Terrace, Chelsea, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 15972


Robert Thomas Landells (1833-1877), illustrator and journalist, was born in London on 1 August 1833. He was educated in France but studied drawing and painting in London. He began his career as special artist at the 'Illustrated London News' in 1855, following his father, and in 1856 was sent to the theatre of war in the Crimea. Some of his sketches appeared in the 'Illustrated London News' towards the end of the war. After the peace with Russia he went to Moscow to record the coronation of Tsar Alexander II for the 'Illustrated London News'. In winter 1863 he made drawings of the war between Prussia and Denmark and was decorated by both sides. He showed great skill in depicting battle scenes and troop configurations. In the war between Austria and Prussia in 1866 he accompanied the 1st Prussian army corps as part of the staff of the Prussian crown prince on the march to Vienna. He received the Prussian Iron Cross for bravery during the Franco-Prussian War in recognition of his exertions in aid of the sick and wounded soldiers in the winter campaign on the Loire. After this he did not undertake further foreign assignments, but concentrated on painting studies of the Thames and the Dutch coast. He was commissioned by Queen Victoria to sketch and paint state ceremonies and visits between 1857 and 1874; specimens of his work are preserved in the Royal Collection. 


@@@@@


doc= 15973


Landen, John (1719-1790), mathematician, was born on 23 January 1719, at Peakirk, near Peterborough, Northamptonshire, the son of Matthew Landen and Elizabeth Cole (died 1750). He was brought up to the business of a surveyor, and he practised at Peterborough from 1740 to 1762. From 1762 to 1788 he acted as land agent to William Fitzwilliam, Earl Fitzwilliam (1748-1833). Cultivating mathematics during his leisure hours, he was a contributor to the 'Ladies' Diary' from 1744 to 1772. He published eight papers in the 'Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society' between 1754 and 1785, which particularly concerned series, areas of curvilinear figures, rectification, and rotatory motion. In 1755 he published 'Mathematical Lucubrations', and in 1764 'The Residual Analysis', book 1 (book 2 never appeared), which followed 'A Short Discourse Concerning the Residual Analysis' (1758). In these last two works he attempted to replace the fluxional calculus with an analytic method 'founded entirely on the 'anciently received' principles of algebra' ('Short Discourse', 5). According to Lacroix this was the first attempt to reduce the infinitesimal calculus to 'purely algebraic notions' (S. F. Lacroix, 'Traite Du calcul differentiel', 2nd edn, 1810-19, 1.237). Lagrange evoked Landen's theory at the very beginning of his 'Theorie des fonctions analytiques' (1797) but judged it jejune and embarrassing. 
The remarkable theorem, known by Landen's name, for expressing a hyperbolic arc in terms of two elliptic arcs was inserted in the 'Philosophical Transactions' for 1775, and formed a worthy conclusion to researches opened in the 'Transactions' of 1771. This theorem forms one of the foundation stones of the theory of elliptic functions and was generally cited in eighteenth-century literature on the subject. Specimens of its use were given in the first volume of Landen's 'Mathematical Memoirs' (1780). In a paper on rotatory motion laid before the Royal Society on 17 March 1785 Landen obtained results differing from those of Euler and D'Alembert, and he defended them in the second volume of 'Mathematical Memoirs', prepared for the press during the intervals of a painful disease, and placed in his hands, printed, the day before his death. In the same work he solved the problem of the spinning of a top, and explained Newton's error in calculating the effects of precession. 
Landen was elected a member of the Spalding Society in 1761 and a fellow of the Royal Society on 16 January 1766. Although continental mathematicians gave him a high rank among English analysts, he failed to develop and combine his discoveries. Humane and honourable as an individual, he was dogmatic in society. He led a retired life, chiefly at Walton in Northamptonshire. With his wife, Elizabeth (died 1789), he had two daughters. He died at Milton (the seat of the Fitzwilliam family), near Peterborough, on 15 January 1790, and was buried at Castor church, Northamptonshire. 


@@@@@


doc= 15974


Lander, John (1806-1839), traveller in Africa, was born in Truro, Cornwall, the fourth son of John Lander, innkeeper, and his wife, Mary Penrose. He was the younger brother of Richard Lemon Lander. He was apprenticed to a printer and later became compositor to the 'Cornwall Gazette', a job which he evidently enjoyed. He was also a keen student of languages and poetry, and had published several essays and poems. He helped his brother Richard prepare the journal of his first voyage for publication. He volunteered to accompany Richard without any recompense in his expedition which left England in January 1830 to explore the course and outlet of the River Niger. The journey (described in Richard Lander's memoir) established that the river flowed into the Gulf of Guinea on the Atlantic coast, disproving theories, held notably by John Barrow, that it flowed into Lake Chad. John's journal was incorporated with that of Richard in the narrative of the expedition published in 1832. 
John Lander returned to Truro and married Mary Livett, sister of his brother James's wife. His share of the money paid by John Murray to publish his journal dwindled and he secured through the patronage of Lord Goderich, president of the Royal Geographical Society, a place in the customs house, first in Liverpool and, after 1835, in London, where the three of his four children who survived infancy were born. Allibone's report, that Lander 'sank under the unwholesome effects of the climate and... found a grave in a land of strangers' was one of several which suggest a more exotic place of death than his home, 23 Wyndham Street, Bryanston Square, London, where he died on 16 November 1839, allegedly of an illness first contracted in Africa but in fact of inflammation of the lungs. His widow was given a civil pension of $75 a year. 
The discovery made by Lander and his brother was a significant step in geographical discovery in Africa and also opened up the Niger, seen as the highway into central Africa, to trade, settlement, and ultimately to Nigeria's becoming a British protectorate. 


@@@@@


doc= 15975


Lander, Richard Lemon (1804-1834), traveller in Africa, was born on 8 February 1804 at Truro, Cornwall, the third son of John Lander, innkeeper, and his wife, Mary Penrose. The fourth of six children, he was educated under a Mr Pascoe in Coombe Lane, Truro, until at thirteen he went out with a merchant to the West Indies. Here he had an attack of malaria in San Domingo which was said to have helped him resist the disease later in Africa. He returned home in 1818 and was servant to several wealthy families in London with whom he travelled in Europe. In 1823 he went to Cape Colony as servant to Major W. M. G. Colebrooke. After travelling through the colony with Colebrooke, Lander returned home in 1824. 
Public interest in the African discoveries of Clapperton and Denham led Lander to offer his services to Clapperton, refusing better paid employment in South America. With Clapperton he went to west Africa and was his devoted servant during this, his last expedition. They sailed in the 'Brazen' in August 1825, reaching Badagri and thence heading inland, experiencing much sickness and privation 'en route'. They crossed the Niger and went on as far as Sokoto where Clapperton died in 1827. Despite his own severe illness, Lander made his way back to the coast, reporting Clapperton's death to Denham who sent the news to England. Lander followed with Clapperton's papers, arriving at Portsmouth in April 1828. He made his way to Truro in poor health and was initially unable to edit Clapperton's 'Journal' which appeared in 1829 with Lander's own 'Journal' appended. In 1830 with the help of his brother John Lander, Richard produced an edited version in two volumes. While in England, on 24 August 1828 he married Anne Hughes, daughter of a London merchant, at St Margaret's, Westminster. They had a daughter and a son who died in infancy. 
Dissatisfied with the menial job he had obtained at the customs' house, and at the instance of Lord Bathurst, Lander undertook another expedition to trace the source and course of the Niger. He arranged that his wife receive $100 a year from the government during his absence and that he get $100 on his return. With his brother John he left Portsmouth on 9 January 1830 and reached Cape Coast (now in Ghana) on 22 February. Travelling via Accra and Badagri, they reached Bussa on 17 June, and thence went upstream for about 100 miles to Yelwa, the furthest point reached by the expedition. They returned to Bussa on 2 August 1830 and headed downstream in canoes with no idea where they would end up. At Kerre they were robbed and nearly killed by the locals and at Igbo Ora were imprisoned by the king who demanded a heavy ransom which was obtained only after long delay. Eventually they got through the forested delta to find that the Nun distributary flowed into the Gulf of Guinea on the Atlantic coast. This settled the vexed question of the course and outlet of the Niger which many had thought flowed inland to Lake Chad. On 1 December 1830 the brothers reached Fernando Po (Bioko) and thence arrived home in 1831. 
The Landers, particularly Richard, were greeted with much enthusiasm: Richard became the first gold medallist of the Royal Geographical Society and John Murray, the publisher, gave them $1000 for their journals. Lacking formal education, the brothers were not thought capable of editing the journals themselves, and they were instead (badly) edited by A. B. Becher and published as 'Journal of an Expedition to... the Niger' (3 vols., 1832); a good later edition is that by Hallet (1965). The work was immediately popular and editions appeared in Dutch, French, German, Italian, and Swedish. 
Lander took a position at the customs' office in Liverpool until, early in 1832, some merchants in the city led by Macgregor Laird formed a company to send an expedition under Lander to open up trade with the countries of central Africa by establishing the Niger as a trade route. The expedition was furnished with two finely built and fitted vessels, the 'Quorra' and the 'Alburkah', which were among the first ocean-going steamers. They were supported by the brig 'Columbine' which carried coals and goods. Lander started from Milford Haven on 25 July and reached Cape Coast after many delays on 7 October 1832. Illness and numerous other difficulties delayed progress, but the steamers managed to get some way up the Niger before returning to Fernando Po for fresh supplies. Leaving the steamers in charge of Surgeon Oldfield, Lander returned to the Nun mouth and began going upstream. At Angiama his party was fired on and pursued by local middlemen who wanted to see European traders remain on the coast, rather than establish bases inland and thus cut out the middlemen. Lander, who normally got on well with Africans, received a shot which entered his body near the anus and lodged deep in his thigh. He was taken as quickly as possible to Fernando Po, where, the shot being lodged too deeply to be removed, the wound went gangrenous and he died on 6 February 1834 at the house of the commandant. He was buried in the Clarence cemetery, Fernando Po. The story of the expedition was told in 'Narrative of an Expedition into the Interior of Africa' by Macgregor Laird and R. A. K. Oldfield (1835). Lander's fate was shared by most of the Europeans on the expedition who succumbed mainly to malaria, although contemporaries attributed their deaths to the unhealthy climate. Macgregor Laird lost his entire fortune although not his life. The failure of the expedition considerably dampened the enthusiasm for trade with west Africa which Lander's first expedition had helped to raise. 
The various monuments raised to Lander had unhappy fates. That erected by his wife and daughter in the Savoy chapel was destroyed by fire on 7 July 1864. The stained-glass window erected to replace it by the Royal Geographical Society was destroyed by bombing in the Second World War. A memorial erected in Lemon Street, Truro, in 1835 fell down in 1836 -- its replacement was still standing in the 1990s. His grave in Fernando Po fell into disrepair until an outcry in 1910 ensured a new monument was erected in the Roman Catholic cemetery there. 
A government pension of $70 a year was given to Lander's wife and a gratuity of $80 to his daughter. In person he was very short and fair. His journals show him to have been intelligent and perceptive, despite his lack of formal education, and devoutly religious. Strong and healthy, his bravery and resoluteness fitted him ideally for African travel, although he lacked the middle-class background and officer training of the stereotypical African explorer. His discovery that the Niger flowed into the Atlantic was hailed by contemporaries as an event of cardinal importance since it opened up the whole of central Africa to commerce and ultimately to settlement. 


@@@@@


doc= 15976


Landmann, George Thomas (1780-1854), army officer and military engineer, was born on 11 April 1780 at Woolwich, Kent, the son of Isaac Landmann (1741-1826), professor of artillery and fortification at the Royal Military Academy at Woolwich, and his wife, Helene. Nothing is known of his school education. He became a cadet at the Royal Military Academy on 16 April 1793 and was commissioned second lieutenant in the Royal Engineers on 1 May 1795. Stationed at Plymouth, he was employed in the fortification of St Nicholas's Island, and, while at Falmouth, similarly Pendennis Castle and St Mawes. Promoted first lieutenant on 3 June 1797, later that year he went to Canada. He was involved in the construction of fortifications at St Joseph on Lake Huron, Upper Canada, and at Quebec in 1799 distinguished himself by dousing with snow a dangerous fire on the roof of a magazine. During 1801 and 1802 he was employed in cutting a new canal at the Cascades on the St Lawrence River. He advanced to captain-lieutenant on 13 July 1802 and at the end of the year returned to England. In 1803-4 he was at Winchester and then moved to Portsmouth, where he helped to strengthen its defences and those of neighbouring Gosport. 
On 13 July 1804 Landmann became second captain, and on 23 February 1806 he joined the garrison at Gibraltar. His amusing and lively journal, written there, included numerous anecdotes about social and military events, as well as acute observations on the character and demeanour of a wide range of individuals. He had several personal mishaps and adventures, which included falling off a ladder, so that 'the tip bone of my left elbow was split' (Landmann, 1.36), in July 1807 having pieces of flannel soaked in boiling water pressed liberally on his stomach to combat cholera, and, the following year, chasing a whale in a ship's boat. He showed a deep interest in, and knowledge of, botany, cultivating his own exotic garden. However, he failed to rise above 'the humblest mediocrity' when seeking to play the Spanish guitar, though he 'made some progress' in learning to paint miniatures (ibid., 1.229). His house displayed a library of more than 1000 volumes and sixteen pictures. Promoted captain on 1 July 1806, he sailed on 14 May 1808 as commanding royal engineer with Major-General Brent Spencer's force, which took part in the blockade of six French warships anchored in Cadiz under the guns of hostile Spanish batteries. Fluent in Spanish, he went ashore to liaise with the garrison, and he witnessed at first hand the bombardment, which preceded the enemy's surrender. On 8 August Spencer's force landed at Mondego Bay to join Lieutenant-General Sir Arthur Wellesley (later duke of Wellington). Landmann was then attached to the light brigade under Brigadier-General the Hon. Henry Fane, and was present at the battle of Rolica on 17 August, when he succeeded Captain Howard Elphinstone, who was wounded, as commanding royal engineer. On 18 August he sketched a panoramic view of the battlefield, which Wellesley sent home with dispatches. During a lone reconnaissance two days before the battle of Vimeiro, Landmann was almost captured by French dragoons. In the fighting, on 21 August, for a short period he acted as aide-de-camp to Brigadier-General Robert Anstruther, then joined Fane's brigade to take part in the capture of a French field gun. After the battle, for which he received a gold medal, he delivered a sketch of the engagement to Lieutenant-General Sir Harry Burrard, who had succeeded Wellesley in command of the army. After commanding the Royal Engineers for ten days, during which he displayed his 'great repugnance to the flogging system' (ibid., 2.277) by reducing a sentence of 300 lashes to 25, he was superseded by Major Richard Fletcher on 26 August. The following month, he was sent to report on the fortress of Peniche, and when Fletcher went to Spain with Lieutenant-General Sir John Moore, he became commanding engineer in Portugal. In December he was ordered to construct a bridge of boats at Abrantes, on the River Tagus, another at Punhete, on the Zezere, and a flying bridge at Vila Velha, all of which were completed in five days. 
On his return to Lisbon, Landmann was, in February 1809, sent overland with dispatches to Bartholomew Frere, the British minister at Seville, and from there, as commanding engineer, to join Major-General Alexander Mackenzie's force at Cadiz. Soon after his arrival, rioters threatened to kill the governor, the marques de Villel, suspecting his loyalty. Mackenzie sent Landmann to restore order, and, as he spoke Spanish so well, he was eventually able to calm the situation. For his services on this occasion he received the thanks of Ferdinand VII, the king of Spain. He was granted a commission as lieutenant-colonel in the Spanish engineers on 22 February 1809, and when Mackenzie and his troops left for Lisbon, he remained at Cadiz on Frere's request. He went back to Gibraltar in July and sent home plans of the fortifications of Cadiz, with a report which led to vigorous efforts being made to defend the port. 
Following the French capture of Seville, an attack on Gibraltar was expected from the landward side. So, in January 1810, plans were drawn up to demolish forts San Felipe and Santa Barbara in the Spanish lines, for which, after difficult negotiations, Landmann secured the Spanish governor's agreement. When the French marched on Cadiz in February, he volunteered to accompany reinforcements embarked at Gibraltar, but with that force detained by a contrary wind, he hired a rowing boat, reached Cadiz on the second day, and found himself for a time commanding engineer of the British forces. 
On 25 March 1810 Landmann was appointed colonel of infantry in the Spanish army, and in April he served at the siege of Matagorda. During August he returned to England through ill health, but four months later had recovered sufficiently to sail for Lisbon as one of the military agents in the Peninsula. After delivering dispatches to Wellington at Cartaxo he proceeded towards Cadiz, and on the way joined the Spanish division of Major-General Francisco Ballasteros, being present at the action at Castillejos, near the River Guadiana, on 7 January 1811, where his horse fell under him and he sustained an injury to his left eye. From Cadiz, he returned in June to Ayamonte and rode round the seacoast to Corunna. After a short stay in Galicia, he went back to Cadiz by another route. 
In March 1812 Landmann sailed for England with the Spanish ambassador. His health was now so impaired that he was unable to resume active duty until July 1813, when he was sent to Ireland to command the engineers in the Lough Swilly district in co. Donegal. On 4 June 1813 he had been promoted brevet major, and he became lieutenant-colonel on 16 May 1814. In March 1815 he was appointed commanding royal engineer of the Thames district, and in May 1817 was transferred to Hull in a similar capacity for the Yorkshire district. Landmann was granted leave of absence in 1819 and appears to have continued on leave until he retired from the corps on 29 December 1824. In the 1830s he was a promoter and the chief engineer of the London and Greenwich Railway. He also revised his father's 'Principles of Fortifications' in 1831. He died at Shacklewell, near Hackney, London, on 27 August 1854. 


@@@@@


doc= 15977


Landmann, Isaac (1741-1826), military educationist, was born on 17 March 1741 in Alsace. He taught projectiles and fortification at the Ecole Royale Militaire in Paris, and, following the school's reorganization, tutored young noblemen of the same city in the art of war. 
On 25 November 1777 Landmann was appointed professor of fortification and artillery at the Royal Military Academy, Woolwich. A letter from the Board of Ordnance to the lieutenant-governor of the academy introduced him as a gentleman who 'has seen a great deal of service, and acted as ADC to Marshal Broglie in the last war' ('Records of the Royal Military Academy', 24). He was given a house at the Warren (after 1805, the Royal Arsenal) and received a salary of $100 p.a., rising by steps to $494, together with 12 chaldrons of coal and 12 pounds of candles. He also taught gentlemen attendants, students who did not intend joining the army. In 1780 he and his wife, Helene, had a son, George Thomas Landmann, who was baptized at St Mary Magdalen, Woolwich, on 31 May. 
Landmann published a number of works on fortification, artillery, mathematics, and architecture, including textbooks for the cadets of the academy. Other unpublished writings by him are preserved in the Royal Artillery Institution. He was highly thought of and was a technical scholar who had great influence over the many young men he taught for a period of nearly thirty-eight years. He retired on 1 July 1815, aged seventy-four, on an annual pension of $500 granted him by the prince regent, and died on 28 June 1826. His wife survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 15978


Landon, Letitia Elizabeth (1802-1838), poet and writer, was born on 14 August 1802 at 25 Hans Place, Chelsea, the eldest child of John Landon (1756-1824) and Catherine Jane, 'nee' Bishop (died 1854). John Landon, the son of a country rector, had begun his career as a midshipman in the navy before joining -- and later becoming a partner in -- the army agency of Adair & Co. in Pall Mall. Little is known about Catherine Bishop, Landon's mother, save that she was of Welsh extraction, the daughter of Mrs Bishop (died 1826), a woman of independent means and a friend of Sarah Siddons, to whom Landon was to dedicate her first published collection of poetry. The Landons had two other children: Whittington Henry (1804-1883), who went into the church, and Elizabeth (1812-1825), who died aged thirteen. 
At the age of five Landon began attending Miss Rowden's school at 22 Hans Place, where Mary Mitford and Lady Caroline Lamb were also educated. In 1809 the family moved to a large, if somewhat run down, country house called Trevor Park in East Barnet and John Landon carried out experiments in model farming at the nearby Coventry Farm. From this point on Landon was educated by her cousin Elizabeth and she soon showed a great interest in books and an exceptional talent for writing. With the end of the Napoleonic wars came a drop in the demand for military supplies and an agricultural depression. John Landon was seriously affected by both, and, in straitened circumstances, the family returned to London in 1815, moving first to Fulham and then, in 1816, to Old Brompton. One of their neighbours here was William Jerdan, editor of the 'Literary Gazette'. Jerdan responded with enthusiasm when he saw Landon's poems, and her first published work, 'Rome', appeared in the 'Literary Gazette' on 11 March 1820, signed simply with the initial 'L'. Other poems followed, and in August 1821, with the financial aid of her grandmother, Landon published 'The Fate of Adelaide: a Swiss Tale of Romance; and other Poems' under the full name of Letitia Elizabeth Landon. Although noted by a number of the major reviews, this collection did not generate a great deal of public interest, partly, perhaps, because the publisher went out of business one month later. That same month, however, two more of Landon's poems appeared in the 'Literary Gazette', this time signed 'L. E. L.' Her 'Poetic Sketches' accompanied by these initials then began to appear regularly, and the identity of the unknown romantic poetess aroused much speculation; the tantalizing initials, as Laman Blanchard notes in his 'Life and Literary Remains of L. E. L.', 'speedily became a signature of magical interest and curiosity' (1.30). In addition to producing poetry for the 'Gazette' Landon also became Jerdan's chief reviewer. As the 'Gazette' was one of the most influential journals of the time and had a notable influence on the sales of the books reviewed in its pages, Landon wielded a significant amount of power in this role, contributing to the decline of a number of literary reputations. Unfortunately these reviews were published anonymously and most have not been identified. Landon's next collection, 'The Improvisatrice, and other Poems', was published by Hurst and Robinson in 1824. The main reviews were split in their assessments of this collection, but the mysterious L. E. L. had captured the imagination of the general public and the book went through six editions in the first year. 
In 1824 Landon's father died, leaving his family relatively impoverished. An unexplained rift with her mother led Landon to move in with her maternal grandmother in Sloane Street, but she continued to support her mother financially and contributed to putting her brother Whittington through Oxford. Although Landon earned a substantial amount through her writing (according to William Jerdan more than $2585 over the course of her career), most of this went towards the support of her family. Landon's next collection of poems, 'The Troubadour: Poetical Sketches of Modern Pictures, and Historical Sketches', appeared in 1825; Landon reached the height of her popularity and soon discovered the price of such fame for an independent woman of her time. Exaggerated stories about her began to be circulated. Since she wrote primarily about love, it was perhaps inevitable that many of these stories concerned her supposed conquests. As she reported with amusement: 'One young lady heard at Scarborough last summer, that I had had two hundred offers; and a gentleman at Leeds brought an account of three hundred and fifty straight from London. It is really very unfortunate that my conquests should so much resemble the passage to the North Pole and Wordsworth's Cuckoo, 'talked of but never seen'. (Blanchard, 1.50-51)' Not all the gossip was quite as harmless as this. In 1826 Landon began to be slandered in the gutter press, primarily by 'The Wasp', a short-lived satirical magazine devoted to scandalous exposes of popular personalities. One extended absence from London while visiting an uncle led to malicious reports that she had become pregnant by Jerdan and that, as the anonymous writer in 'The Wasp' sniggered, 'she was ordered into the country to gather 'fruit', and to 'deliver' an account thereof on her return' ('The Wasp', 1826, 36). Landon was understandably distressed by such attacks, and accurately assessed her position in a letter to her friend Katherine Thomson: 'I think of the treatment I have received until my very soul writhes under the powerlessness of its anger. It is only because I am poor, unprotected, and dependent on popularity, that I am a mark for all the gratuitous insolence and malice of idleness and ill-nature. (Blanchard, 1.54)' Following the death of her grandmother in 1826, Landon moved into an attic room in her old school at Hans Place, now run by the Misses Lance. More independent than ever, Landon also became even more productive. Over the next few years she produced two more collections of poetry, 'The Golden Violet' (1827) and 'The Venetian Bracelet' (1829); she contributed to many of the periodicals of the time, and to the annuals, the expensive illustrated gift books that were published at the end of each year. Landon edited many of these annuals and frequently, in the case of such works as 'Fisher's Drawing Book Scrap Book', also composed the entire contents, writing poems to illustrate the engravings with which she was provided. As Landon grew ever more successful, so she also was increasingly imitated, and much of the popular verse of the time reveals the marks of her style. Testimony to the extent of her influence is given, if somewhat grudgingly, by 'The Athenaeum''s comment that 'as she has undoubtedly founded a poetic school, we have unfeignedly wished that she would whip some dozen of her scholars' ('The Athenaeum', 10 Dec 1831, 793). 
Landon's poetry is marked by a sense of spontaneity, no doubt the combined result of her desire to suggest she was an 'improvisatrice', and the need, given both her financial requirements and her great popularity, to produce a prolific amount of verse in a short period of time. Considering the demands placed on her by her work, it is hardly surprising that, for much of her life, Landon was plagued by illness; her letters repeatedly refer to being confined to the house by a cold, and her friends and acquaintances often comment on her tendency to suffer from headaches and nervous disorders. 
Landon's first novel, 'Romance and Reality' (1831), revealed a completely different writing style from that which she affected in her role as the sentimental poetess L. E. L. The reviewers praised the witty commentary on modern life and remarked with approval on the new Landon that was revealed: where, asked the reviewer of 'The Athenaeum', 'till now, dwelt the brave good sense -- the sarcasm bitter with medicine, not poison?' But for 'Romance and Reality', he added, 'half our island might never have awoke from the dream that L. E. L. was an avatar of blue eyes, flaxen ringlets, and a susceptible heart' ('The Athenaeum', 10 Dec 1831, 793). In fact, Landon had dark eyes and dark hair. The reviewer's assessment that this witty satire revealed the 'true' Landon was echoed by Henry Chorley when he later observed that all three of her novels reflected: 'the conversation of their authoress -- which sparkled always brightly with quick fancy, and a 'badinage' astonishing to those matter of fact persons who expected to find, in the manners and discourse of the poetess, traces of the weary heart, the broken lute, and the disconsolate willow tree. (H. Chorley, 'Mrs Maclean', 'The Athenaeum', 5 Jan 1839, 14)' Now an integral part of the London literary scene, Landon became a key figure at many literary gatherings. She managed to charm most, but not all. Disraeli, describing one such gathering at the Bulwer-Lyttons' in 1832, reveals a certain class-laden disdain when he writes, 'I avoided L. E. L., who looked the very personification of Brompton -- pink satin dress and white satin shoes, red cheeks, snub nose, and her hair 'a la Sappho'' (R. Disraeli, ed., 'Lord Beaconsfield's Letters', 1887, 71). The suggestion that Landon had a taste for vulgar finery is not borne out by the numerous portraits made of her, although she did appear to be interested in fashion, and was particularly fond of the more exotic styles of the time -- she was often depicted wearing voluminous leg-of-mutton sleeves and enormous hats. While Landon's family background was certainly respectable, as a woman living alone and making a living as a professional writer she herself was often seen as less than respectable. In response, she tended to swing between a desire to maintain an appearance of respectability and a healthy contempt for all the artificial distinctions that class would impose. Blanchard notes the difficulty of inducing her 'to condescend to be on her guard, to put the slightest restraint upon her speech, correspondence, or actions, simply because self-interest demanded it to save her conduct from misrepresentation' (Blanchard, 1.52). 
In June 1834 Landon visited France; although she had the opportunity to meet such figures as Heine and Chateaubriand, she was less than pleased by her travels, complaining bitterly about sightseeing, 'the most tiresome thing in the world' (Jerdan, 202), and about the deficiencies of Parisian society -- it was not the season and there were few social events of any importance to attend: 'God never sent me into the world to use my hands, or my feet, or my eyes,' she declared; 'he put all my activity into my tongue and ears' (ibid.). If Paris bored her, French literature both shocked and enchanted her; here she found 'extraordinary talent -- every page full of new ideas and thoughts -- they want nothing but a little religion and a little decency', and these, she added, were 'two trifling wants, to be sure' (Blanchard, 1.110). 
Before this trip to France, Landon had begun seeing John Forster (1812-1876), then editor of 'The Examiner', and they eventually became engaged. The old scandals unfortunately soon erupted: Landon was again accused of improper behaviour, now not only with Jerdan, but also with William Maginn, Daniel Maclise, and Edward Bulwer-Lytton. This time, Landon does not seem to have been aware of the rumours. Forster, however, was; he went to Landon suggesting the stories should be refuted; she sent him to speak with her friends; he did and pronounced himself satisfied of her innocence, asking her to accept his protection by marrying him immediately. Landon responded by breaking the engagement. The ostensible reason she gave was that she could not allow Forster to marry someone who had been accused of improper behaviour, and Blanchard, in his 'Life', consequently speaks of 'the self-sacrifice she deemed herself called upon by duty to make' (Blanchard, 1.129). To her good friend Bulwer-Lytton, however, she told a different story, suggesting she was unable to marry someone who had behaved with such a lack of sensitivity: 'If his future protection is to harass and humiliate me as much as his present -- God keep me from it... I cannot get over the entire want of delicacy to me which could repeat such slander to myself. The whole of his late conduct to me personally has left behind almost dislike -- certainly fear of his imperious and overbearing temper. (M. Sadleir, 'Bulwer: a Panorama', 1931, 426)' In October 1836, Landon was invited to a dinner party at the home of Matthew Forster, who was involved in the administration of the Gold Coast; here she met George Maclean (1801-1847), governor of the British post at Cape Coast, west Africa. Maclean and Landon soon appear to have reached an understanding, although they do not seem to have been, officially, engaged. At the beginning of 1837, however, Maclean had second thoughts about the relationship; he went to Scotland, remaining there for more than six months. Landon was distraught, and her friends rallied round, putting pressure on Maclean to marry her. Reluctantly, he returned to London, and on 7 June 1838 they were married in a private ceremony at St Mary's, Bryanston Square, London. The marriage was not made public and Landon stayed with friends until 5 July, when the Macleans sailed from Portsmouth for Cape Coast, arriving on 16 August. Just two months later, on 15 October 1838, Landon, at the age of thirty-six, was found dead in her room, apparently slumped against the door with an empty bottle of prussic acid in her hand. Such a mysterious and melodramatic death ensured that Landon was not soon forgotten, and even if the taste for her particular kind of poetry did not last long into the Victorian age, she had a notable influence on the Victorian women poets who followed her. Elizabeth Barrett Browning, for example, comments on the sadness of Landon's life and her isolation in 'L. E. L.'s Last Question' (1839), a reference to the words Landon supposedly spoke when she left England: 'Do you think of me as I think of you?' Christina Rossetti then takes up a line from 'L. E. L.'s Last Question' -- 'Whose heart was breaking for a little love' -- as the epigraph to her 'L. E. L.'. Perhaps more importantly, the women poets who followed Landon reacted against the limitations that had been imposed on her, against the emphasis on women writing only from the heart. This is particularly notable in 'Aurora Leigh', where Barrett Browning not only draws on the details of Landon's life, but also shows Aurora rejecting the notion of woman as 'improvisatrice', and gradually moving from poetess to woman poet. 
Numerous memoirs written by friends and acquaintances emerged soon after the announcement of her death, all attempting to interpret the woman known as L. E. L. and offer their particular explanations of her death; the interest in Landon continued well into the twentieth century, with such fictional reconstructions as D. E. Enfield's 'L. E. L.: a Mystery of the Thirties' (1928) and Clyde Chantler's 'Eight Weeks: a Novel' (1965). In spite of all the attempts to solve the mystery, the circumstances of Landon's death have never been satisfactorily explained and it is unlikely any new information will come to light. An inquest was held on the afternoon of her death, and the doctor in attendance was so convinced that death was caused by the prussic acid he did not think an autopsy necessary. The depositions given by the witnesses at the inquest, including Maclean and Mrs Bailey, the woman who found Landon, are full of contradictions, discrepancies, and omissions. The conclusion of the inquest was death by accidental overdose of prussic acid, and Landon was buried early that same evening in the rectangular drill ground of the castle. 


@@@@@


doc= 15979


Landor, Robert Eyres (1781-1869), writer, the youngest brother of Walter Savage Landor, was born on 10 May 1781 in Warwick, near the east gate, the sixth of seven children of Walter Landor (1733-1805), a physician and country gentleman, and his second wife, Elizabeth (1743-1829), daughter of Charles Savage, a Warwickshire landowner. He attended Bromsgrove School, Worcestershire, until 1797 and, from that year, Worcester College, Oxford, where he graduated BA in 1801 and MA in 1802, and also held a fellowship. 
Ordained in 1804, Landor was a curate at Wyke Regis in Dorset for the first part of 1805, but for the next decade his occupation and residence are unknown, except that he spent some time as a curate at Stockton in Warwickshire in 1813. In 1815 and 1816 he travelled with his brother Walter in France and Italy. From 1817 until 1824 or 1825, he was vicar of St Michael's at Hughenden in Buckinghamshire, and he was also briefly chaplain to the prince regent. He may have lived in Tenby in Wales for a few years after leaving Hughenden. He then moved to Birlingham in south Worcestershire, where he was rector of St James's Church in Nafford parish from 1829 until his death forty years later. 
Originally close to his brother Walter -- he helped him edit the second edition of his poem 'Gebir' in 1803 -- he quarrelled with him in 1820 over money matters, and the two did not speak for twenty years. 
Landor wrote in several genres, producing four closet dramas, two novels, one long poem, and a series of political letters on the trial of Queen Caroline. In 1824 his verse play 'The Count Arezzi' won praise for its poetical language and its originality, and it sold well until Landor announced that, contrary to rumour, Lord Byron was not the author. In 1828 Landor published the narrative poem 'The Impious Feast', which was criticized for mixing romance with a biblical subject. The poem is also notable for combining rhyme with blank verse. His novel 'The Fountain of Arethusa' (1848), in which two modern-day explorers engage in a series of dialogues with the ghosts of ancient Greeks and Romans, in some way resembles his brother's 'Imaginary Conversations', and in general, critics have noted a 'remarkable family likeness' in the writing styles of the two Landors (Saintsbury, 229). 
Robert Landor was not well known even in his own day, and afterwards was almost totally forgotten -- unjustly so, according to one of his biographers, who praises his originality, his 'moral nobility', and his elegant prose style (Partridge, 104, 103, 81-4). 
Landor's personality has been variously described as ebullient and crusty (Super, 133; Elwin, 363). Although reclusive, he was, according to John Forster, 'a really brilliant talker' (Forster, 2.502). He had the same quick grey eyes as his brother Walter and resembled him in voice, but at 6 feet 2 inches was much taller. Landor died at Birlingham, Worcestershire, on 26 January 1869, leaving behind a collection of art works and a large library. He never married. 


@@@@@


doc= 15980


Landor, Walter Savage (1775-1864), poet and author, was born on 30 January 1775 at Eastgate House in Smith Street, just outside the east gate of Warwick, the eldest son of Walter Landor (1733-1805), medical practitioner, and his second wife, Elizabeth Savage (1743-1829). Both parents inherited considerable wealth, the father in 1781 coming into possession of family estates in Staffordshire, while in 1786 the mother's second cousin John Norris bequeathed to her estates at Bishops Tachbrooke, near Leamington, and at Ipsley Court, near Redditch. These properties were entailed upon the eldest son, who was thus early impressed with the idea that his future prospects were assured. That his assurance needed no reinforcement is evident from a story told by Mrs Sherwood, 'nee' Mary Martha Butt, a prolific writer for children. In 1782, when both she and Landor were seven, she accompanied her mother to the Landor household, and was startled by the boy's insolence to his mother. 'From that day this youth became the prototype, in my mind, of all that was vulgar and disobedient' (Darton, 40). She evidently had no idea that the insolent boy had, by the time of her death in 1851, become one of the most admired literary patriarchs in Britain. He never became a model of good behaviour, though in later years his courtesy, when he chose to exercise it, was elaborate and engaging. 
Landor's precocity was probably fostered by his early departure from home. He was only four and a half when his parents dispatched him to Thomas Treherne's school, some 10 miles from Warwick, and barely eight when, in 1783, he went on to Rugby School. There he gained a formidable reputation as a boxer, as well as proficiency in the other school sports. He was particularly renowned for his skill in fishing by casting a net, on one occasion using his net to trap and intimidate a farmer who had found him poaching. He also showed a considerable talent for the Latin verse composition so highly prized in an educational system devoted almost exclusively to the study of the classics. It was a talent that led him into serious trouble with school authority. When required to copy some of his verses into the school's 'play-book', he claimed that some of his worst composition had been chosen, and in revenge added some emphatically coarse lines by way of disavowal. Defiance of this kind, coupled with his adoption of the egalitarian principles current in the early days of the French Revolution, made his presence in the school intolerable to the headmaster, Dr Thomas James, who did not exactly expel him, but requested his departure. 
Landor left Rugby at the end of 1791, spent a short time with a tutor in London, and then was settled with the Revd William Langley, rector of a parish in the neighbourhood of Ashbourne in Derbyshire. Here he spent a year apparently reading as he wished, acquiring a greater knowledge of Greek and a still greater facility in the writing of Latin. He had already become acquainted with the celebrated whig scholar Dr Samuel Parr, perpetual curate of Hatton, a village just outside Warwick. Parr greatly admired Landor's classical attainments, an admiration which was to encourage the young poet to publish rather more of his work in Latin than was commercially prudent. In January 1793 Landor entered Trinity College, Oxford. With the execution of Louis XVI and the outbreak of war between Britain and France, radical convictions were hardly acceptable in a university so dominated by the established church, but Landor was quite undaunted by this challenge and soon gained the reputation of being a mad jacobin. Although he was on good terms with his tutor, William Benwell, his contempt for most of the college fellows was notorious, and it is little wonder that his undergraduate career came to a premature end. His contemporary Robert Southey thought he had been rusticated after shooting at a fellow, but his offence was not in fact quite so gross. At a party in his rooms, in June 1794, his guests became involved in an altercation through the windows with the guests at another party. The latter eventually closed their shutters, and Landor took a shotgun with which he had been shooting rabbits and fired a volley at the closed window. Complaints followed, and Landor had to leave, although he would have been at liberty to return after two terms. 
Landor spent the remainder of the summer of 1794 in Tenby in south Wales. There he made love to a young woman called Nancy Jones, celebrated in his verse as 'Ione'. In due course he took a step that looked like a determination never to return to Oxford: he removed his name from the college books. On his return to Warwick in December there was an angry exchange with his father, who had no patience with his son's rejection of a settled occupation, and Landor left home to make his literary fortune in London. Sadly, his first volume of poems found only thirty-six purchasers, and for a time he had to subsist mainly on his prospects as the heir to his father's property. He had friends who offered their assistance, including Dr Parr, who would have been happy to have Landor stay with him. Dorothy Lyttelton, heir to a considerable fortune, knew Landor's sister Elizabeth well, and encouraged him to make his peace with his father. She would have been a suitable match for Landor, but the likelihood is that Nancy Jones had a child by Landor in 1795, and he very properly rallied to her support. Eventually his father made him an allowance of $150 a year. 
An elegy included in Landor's 'Simonidea' (1806) indicates that Nancy Jones died while still young, and it is a natural inference that the child did not survive either (Landor, 'Poetical Works', 3.2-3). Whatever the circumstances, the relationship ended, and Landor found consolation in the family of Howell Price, who lived near Swansea and whose wife was the widow of Lord Aylmer. Her daughter by this marriage, Rose Aylmer, came to know Landor well, and it was she who lent him Clara Reeve's 'Progress of Romance', in which he found the story that formed the basis of his first major poem, 'Gebir', published in 1798. Shortly after this she went to Calcutta with her aunt, whose husband, Sir Henry Russell, was a judge in the supreme court there. She died of cholera in 1800. Her death prompted Landor to write the brief and poignant poem by which he is best remembered, 'Ah what avails the sceptred race!' (ibid., 3.77). 

'Gebir', mainly written in 1797, is a remarkable poem, an idiosyncratic example of modern epic, a genre which enjoyed a considerable vogue at the turn of the century. The story is one of invasion: the Spanish prince Gebir reasserts his ancestors' rights to rule in Egypt and is received with love by its queen Charoba, but is killed by a poisonous cloak presented by the queen's counsellor Dalica. The narrative is elaborate and obscure, but there are many individual passages of a haunting beauty that led Robert Southey to write a warmly appreciative notice in the 'Critical Review'. Years later Shelley found the poem totally absorbing, and it had an indirect influence as well. Landor's schoolfellow Henry Francis Cary seems to have profited from 'Gebir' when he came to undertake his translation of Dante's 'Divina commedia', and Cary's blank verse was an element in the revision of Keats's 'Hyperion'. At the time most of the reviews were hostile, mainly because of the occasional indications in the poem of Landor's radical politics. 
Landor's political interests were not confined to his poetry. In 1797 he published the first of his many political statements, 'To the Burgesses of Warwick', an attack on one of Pitt's tax-raising measures. Its language has all the violence natural to Landor's temperament, though its substance is the stuff of mainstream controversy. Dr Parr hoped that this eloquent young writer might be drawn into the constitutional opposition campaigning associated with Charles James Fox, though this would have meant keeping back some of his 'favourite and perhaps erroneous opinions' (Forster, 1.155). Landor recalled many years later that Parr took him to hear his celebrated Spital sermon, preached in April 1800 (Landor, 'Letters and other Unpublished Writings', 57). The sermon, when printed, was expanded into what amounted to a manifesto of moderate whiggism, reproving the giddy rashness of youth and commending ingenuous docility. This was counsel to which Landor paid no attention, but Parr none the less remained a warm admirer of his protege. 
For some years Landor led the life of an idle young man, enjoying the fashionable society of Bath and London and always in debt. He published a few slender volumes: 'Poems from the Arabic and Persian' and 'Poetry by the Author of 'Gebir'' (both in 1800) and, in Latin, 'Iambi' (1800) and a translation of 'Gebir' (1803). In the summer of 1802, during the brief peace of Amiens, he visited France, and was struck, as Wordsworth was, by the lack of popular fervour for the revolution or for Bonaparte himself. Landor, for his part, was intensely gratified by an opportunity that came his way to see the first consul at close quarters, and if his political sentiments were altered by his visit, it was mainly because of the dislike he conceived for the French people -- a dislike that remained with him for the rest of his life. 
It was on one of his visits to Bath, early in 1803, that Landor first met Sophia Jane Swift, the most enduring love of his life. She appears in his poetry as Ianthe, and was evidently a vivacious and light-hearted young woman who found Landor's choleric outbursts entertaining rather than intimidating. When she wanted to be particularly persuasive she took hold of his ears to reinforce her point, a liberty which seems to have gratified him. Unfortunately for Landor she was engaged to be married to a distant cousin in Ireland, Godwin Swifte, and marry him she did in the autumn of 1803. After her marriage she paid a number of extended visits to fashionable resorts in England, and Landor followed and flirted with her in a rather scandalous way. 
On 3 November 1805 Dr Landor died, and his son entered into his inheritance. He had no desire to maintain the family's estate in Staffordshire, and was ready to sell it in order to buy property in a more romantic location. A search in the Lake District proved unsuccessful, but he found what he wanted in the Black Mountains in south Wales. The picturesque countryside around the ruins of Llanthony Abbey seemed an appropriate setting for Landor's ambition to be an enlightened landlord. He had plans to improve the roads, restore the abbey, and plant thousands of trees. Unfortunately it soon became clear that managing an estate required more tact and experience than he possessed. He placed his affairs in the hands of a local solicitor, Charles Gabell, who showed little disposition to take care of his client's interests, allowing rents to be left unpaid and trees to be felled. But at first Landor had concerns more pressing than the care of his estate. When in 1808 popular enthusiasm for the long war with France was rekindled by the Spanish insurrection against their French invaders, Landor responded vigorously, and decided to join the insurgents in person. He persuaded two Irishmen to join him, and in August set off for Corunna, where he raised a company of volunteers and contributed a substantial sum to the relief of the war-stricken town of Venturada. His troop advanced eastwards along the north coast of Spain as far as Bilbao, but took no part in actual fighting. When, under the terms of the convention of Cintra, British generals allowed French forces to withdraw unscathed, he returned home in disgust. Although his expedition had lasted only three months, the Spanish authorities were grateful, and gave him the honorary rank of colonel in the king's army. 
Earlier in 1808 in Bristol, Landor had met Robert Southey for the first time. He had always been grateful for Southey's favourable review of 'Gebir', and now, different in temperament though they were, the two men found in each other a source of appreciation and reassurance. Landor learned something of Southey's plans for a series of mythological poems, and of the economic obstacles in the way of his carrying them out. His impulsive response was to offer to pay any publishing costs, and Southey, although he refused to take advantage of Landor's generosity, felt encouraged to go on with 'The Curse of Kehama', sending drafts of the poem to Landor for comment and dedicating it to him when it was eventually published in 1810. This warm relationship continued until Southey's death in 1843. They met only a few times, but corresponded steadily. Although Southey suffered from dementia in his last years, he could remember Landor's name when everything else was forgotten. The durability of their mutual regard is the more surprising because of the growing contrast in their political convictions. At their first meeting they could have united in congenial denunciations of the baseness of almost all public men, but Southey soon came to fear the effects of such subversive sentiments, and by 1812 was a confirmed supporter of the tory administration. When in 1811 Landor wrote a radical commentary on a biography of Charles James Fox and dedicated it to the president of the United States, John Murray the publisher asked Southey to persuade Landor to soften the more objectionable parts. Southey's persuasions were tactful and friendly, but in the end the pamphlet had to be suppressed. He performed a similar service in 1823, when the publisher of the first series of 'Imaginary Conversations' took fright at some of Landor's audacities, and Southey acted as a kind of mediator. 
One result of Landor's Spanish adventure was a kindling of his interest in the earlier invasion of the peninsula by the Moors, and in 1810 he began work on his tragedy depicting the predicament of the nobleman who collaborated with the invaders: 'Count Julian'. As with 'Gebir', the narrative develops obscurely, but the sublime passions of the hero are eloquently, sometimes turgidly, articulated: '
the agony 

Of an opprest and of a bursting heart. 
('Count Julian', V.iv, ll. 231-2)' Landor told Southey that he had laboured on it during the day, 'and at night unburdened my mind, shedding many tears' (Forster, 1.293). Southey himself was more attracted by the intimations of invulnerable endurance which were an important element in Landor's self-image, like the eagle who stands solitary: '
Upon some highest cliff, and rolls his eye, 

Clear, constant, unobservant, unabased, 

In the cold light, above the dews of morn. 
('Count Julian', V.ii, ll. 21-4)' Landor had some hopes of persuading John Philip Kemble to play the part of Julian, but he settled for having the play published as a closet drama. To his annoyance it was rejected by Southey's publisher, Longman, but eventually John Murray agreed to produce a small edition, provided that Landor paid for it. This appeared in 1812. 
The agonies of Count Julian were in part an oblique expression of the frustration Landor was experiencing in the development of his Llanthony estate. He hoped to improve matters by settling there. This needed the presence of a wife, and in 1811, after what seems to have been a rather perfunctory courtship, he married Julia Thuillier (1794-1879), the seventeen-year-old daughter of an unsuccessful banker: 'a girl without a sixpence, and with very few accomplishments', but 'pretty, graceful, and good-tempered' (Forster, 1.323). The marriage took place on 24 May, and shortly afterwards they moved to Llanthony. The house he was having built there was unfinished, and they lived 'among ruins and rubbish' (ibid., 1.326). There were other sources of discontent: in particular he found the local people sullen and dishonest. Hoping to find a congenial English tenant, he let one of his largest farms to Charles Betham, a brother of a friend of Southey's, Matilda Betham. But Betham proved to be no more satisfactory than the scoundrelly Welshmen, and he and Landor were soon at odds over payment of rent and use of the land, with meadows that Landor wished to preserve ploughed up, and hedges neglected, allowing sheep to graze destructively in his much prized plantations. When a younger brother of Betham dug up trees that Landor had planted, he denounced him in a handbill that he personally posted up in Monmouth at the time of the assizes. A libel suit followed, and Landor had to pay $100 damages. 
After Charles Gabell had shown his unwillingness to act against a refractory tenant actually recommended by himself, Landor lost all patience and found another lawyer, Baker Gabb. But he was no more successful in handling his affairs, and by 1813 the loss of income and the accumulation of debts had made it impossible for Landor to remain in Llanthony. The estate was placed in the hands of a trust managed by his brothers, and a modest income secured to him and his wife out of his mother's rents from her Ipsley estate. The long war with France had ended in April 1814, and at the end of May Landor sailed from Weymouth with a view to settling in that country. He went at first to Jersey, where his wife joined him. She had no liking for the idea of living abroad, and a bitter marital quarrel ensued: 'every kind and tender sentiment was rooted up from my heart for ever' (Forster, 1.413). He left her, sailed to Granville in an oyster boat, and then travelled on to Tours, where he spent the best part of a year. His wife sought a reconciliation, and Landor relented, meeting her at Dieppe towards the end of February 1815 and bringing her to Tours. This coincided with the return of Napoleon from his exile in Elba, and the consequent brief renewal of the war. Landor did not allow this to change his plans, scorning any anxiety about his being declared an enemy alien. He later had the satisfaction of seeing (as he claimed) the defeated Napoleon passing through Tours on his way to La Rochelle after the battle of Waterloo. 
In order to secure Landor's formal consent to the financial arrangements devised by his brothers, the youngest brother, Robert Eyres Landor, came to Tours with the necessary documents in October 1815. Robert found Julia patient and submissive, and Walter as tempestuous as ever, though surprisingly popular with the local market-women. In the aftermath of defeat the country was in a disturbed state, and Walter and Julia were anxious to leave Tours. As Robert wanted to visit Italy they travelled together as far as Milan, where they separated, Robert going on to Rome and his brother and sister-in-law to Como. There Landor engaged a house, which was his home until the autumn of 1818. 
Here, in the summer of 1817, Landor once again met Southey, who was touring the continent after the death of his son. Here, too, Landor's eldest son was born, in March 1818. He named him Arnold after Sir Arnold Savage, an early fifteenth-century speaker of the House of Commons who had insisted that grievances should be redressed before supplies were granted. Landor speculated that this congenially audacious figure might have been an ancestor, and devoted one of his first imaginary conversations to him. Landor's own audacity ensured a dramatic departure from Como. He had composed a series of Latin epigrams, one of which was a reply to a local poet's sonnet attacking England. The censor declared this a libel, and Landor was summoned to appear before the governor of Lombardy, who, after an angry altercation, ordered him to leave Como in a few days. Landor defiantly stayed beyond the date decreed in September 1818, but then left anyway. He spent much of the next three years in Pisa, where his daughter Julia was born. He devoted his energies mainly to the writing of Latin poetry, published in 1820 as 'Idyllia heroica decem'. This volume contained his wide-ranging essay 'De cultu atque usu Latini sermonis', which included assessments of modern English poets, invoked by Southey in his denunciation of the 'Satanic School' in the preface to his 'Vision of Judgement'. 
In 1821 Landor moved to Florence, and it was here that he began to produce his 'Imaginary Conversations'. Dialogue was a form peculiarly congenial to him, allowing him to express his opinions and prejudices in an unsystematic and wide-ranging way, sometimes with that epigrammatic sharpness which is so striking in his best-remembered verse, rather often with a grandiloquence that for his contemporaries suggested the dignity of classical literature. Julius Hare thought of it as a model of what prose composition should be: 'at its best, where the air of classic antiquity breathed about the speakers, the style seemed to him what Apollo's talk might have been, as radiant, piercing, and pure' (Forster, 2.87). Julius was a younger brother of Francis Hare, one of Landor's most sympathetic friends in Italy, and it was he who had succeeded in having the book published at all. Five publishers turned it down, and eventually Hare used his personal acquaintance with John Taylor, who owned the 'London Magazine', to persuade him to accept it. Taylor himself felt considerable anxiety about some things that Landor wrote, in particular his doubts about the efficacy of prayer. But Hare suggested that the proofs should be sent to Southey for consideration, and both Landor and Taylor agreed to accept his judgement of what was allowable. The book appeared in March 1824, and was widely reviewed, though opinions were not always favourable. Landor had already achieved some notoriety as one of Byron's targets in the feud with Southey. 'Savage Landor (for such is his grim cognomen)' features in the preface to 'The Vision of Judgement' (1822) as a reviler of George III (in 'Gebir'). Such publicity enhanced the initial interest in 'Imaginary Conversations', and its ambitious scope and accomplished technique established Landor's position as an important writer. The work's reputation was steadily enhanced as time went on by its association with two Victorian phenomena. The first was the cult of the hero, of the great man who shapes history. In 'The Pentameron' something said by his Petrarch clearly applies to Landor himself: 'Among the chief pleasures of my life, and among the commonest of my occupations, was the bringing before me such heroes and heroines of antiquity, such poets and sages, such of the prosperous and unfortunate, as most interested me by their courage, their wisdom, their eloquence, or their adventures.' Landor created conversation suited to their characters: 'I knew perfectly their manners, their steps, their voices'; he knew them so well that he felt able to make them speak 'on subjects far remote from the beaten track of their career' (Landor, 'Complete Works', 9.273-4). Landor's impersonation of noble characters reinforced that other Victorian predilection, the ideal of Hellenism, associating the classical ethos with a tranquillity that he so evidently lacked in his personal life, but that he sought to create in his writings. The most admired of the subsequent additions to the original set of dialogues (and he published some 150 in all) were those in which classical Greek and Roman characters figured. The same ethos pervades the imagined correspondence of 'Pericles and Aspasia' (1836), and, with little modification, the conversations between Boccaccio and Petrarch in the 'Pentameron' (1837). 
One of the more favourable assessments of 'Imaginary Conversations' had been William Hazlitt's in the 'Edinburgh Review'. He visited Florence with his second wife in February 1825, and boldly introduced himself to Landor. Their vehement temperaments and fiercely held iconoclastic opinions proved mutually congenial, and according to Hazlitt it was he who introduced Landor to Leigh Hunt and thus to a number of younger writers and artists in Florence whose friendship he came to value. These included the painter Seymour Kirkup, and Charles Armitage Brown, the friend of John Keats. He was also friendly with an Irish peer, the thirteenth Viscount Dillon, a man as boisterous and unconventional as Landor himself. Later, in 1827, Landor made the acquaintance of Marguerite, countess of Blessington, who was in Italy gathering materials for her 'Conversations of Lord Byron'. She was deeply impressed by his 'high breeding and urbanity' (Blessington, 494), and Landor for his part thought that he had never talked with a woman more elegant or better informed (Forster, 2.139). In this sympathetic circle he found encouragement to continue with the composition of his conversations; Henry Colburn published a further volume in 1828, and James Duncan two more in 1829. Landor had quarrelled with John Taylor over delays in payment for the first volumes and the arrangements for the third, evidence that he was at last seeing himself as a professional writer who might gain an income from his pen. 
As his reputation grew, Landor received many visits from visitors to Florence, notably Wordsworth's friend Henry Crabb Robinson and the young Ralph Waldo Emerson. But there was constant friction in his relationships with local people. Slighting remarks about the Florentines in the first edition of 'Imaginary Conversations' were translated into Italian and hardly encouraged friendly feeling. He became known, too, as a troublesome and violent resident. The state archives contain records of a number of cases in which Landor is alleged to have committed a variety of assaults, kicking tradesmen, knocking them down, and thrashing them. He was said to have thrown scalding water at a maidservant. By his own account his relations with the authorities were stormy. He reacted to the failure of the courts to recover stolen goods by threatening to drag the president of the Buon Governo (the minister of police) before the grand duke 'by the throat': 'The next morning I had an order from the commissary to attend him. I went; and he read to me an order from the president to be out of Tuscany in three days. 'Tell the president I shall neither be out of Tuscany nor out of Florence in three days; and let him use force if he dares; I will repel it.'(letter to Southey, July 1829; Forster, 2.218-19)' Landor soon afterwards did indeed leave the city of Florence, but only for Fiesole, 3 miles to the west, where a wealthy admirer, Joseph Ablett, enabled him to buy the Villa Gherardesca. It was a beautiful situation in itself, but the association of the neighbourhood with Boccaccio and Milton enhanced Landor's satisfaction. There were extensive grounds attached to the villa, and he embarked on an ambitious programme of planting. This led him into yet another long-running dispute with a neighbour, who complained that Landor was depriving him of water: an affair of which he gives a lively account in 'High and Low Life in Italy' (1837). 
A second son, Walter, had been born in 1822, and a third, Charles, in 1825. Landor's children gave him boundless pleasure while they were young, but his family life was increasingly soured by tensions with his wife. A visit to Florence in 1829 by his 'Ianthe', now the comtesse de Molande, seems to have created an insurmountable jealousy. Mrs Landor took to insulting her husband before company, and after an embarrassing scene witnessed by Charles Armitage Brown in March 1835 Landor left the house, and in September he returned to England. He had already been there on a summer visit in 1832, when he had enjoyed the prestige due to the author of 'Imaginary Conversations', meeting again with Southey, and finding his way to Wordsworth, Coleridge, and Lamb. Now, settled first in Clifton, near Bristol, and then, from October 1837, in Bath, he found himself for the next twenty-three years established as a man of letters of acknowledged distinction. He widened his circle of friends through his visits to the countess of Blessington's house in London, coming to know Charles Dickens and Robert Browning, as well as John Forster, who was to be the biographer of both himself and Dickens. He found much pleasure in the attentions of younger women, as is shown particularly in his letters to Rose Paynter, a niece of Rose Aylmer whom she greatly resembled. His own children were a continuing disappointment to him. Arnold visited England in 1842, but gave his father little affection. Young Walter came over in both 1841 and 1843, on the second occasion accompanied by his sister Julia. Julia proved to be more responsive to her father's goodwill, but even she turned against him in later years when, in 1855, he was unable to raise money to enable her to marry a French count. 
In spite of these vexations, Landor was a steadily prolific writer, in the earlier part of this period producing work in the classical mode such as 'The Pentameron', and experimenting with verse drama in 'Andrea of Hungary' and 'Giovanna of Naples' (1839). Forster encouraged him to prepare a comprehensive edition of his writings. He spent nearly three years overseeing this project, and the 'Collected Works' appeared in two large volumes in 1846. They proved relatively successful, being reprinted three times. A collection of his writings in Latin, 'Poemata', followed in 1847. Landor also came to be something of a political figure: his 'Letters of a Conservative' (1836) was a call for radical reform of the Church of England. His conservative principles were, indeed, distinctly idiosyncratic, combining fierce support for anti-monarchical movements abroad with a detestation of the moneyed interest at home. His ideas are clearly expounded in his 'Reflections on Athens at the Decease of Pericles', an essay appended to the first edition of 'Pericles and Aspasia'. He contributed many letters to the newspaper 'The Examiner', where John Forster was a regular contributor and, between 1847 and 1855, the editor. Landor was exhilarated by the revolutionary upsurge in 1848, in particular championing the Hungarians and their leader Louis Kossuth. He shared the popular hostility in England to Russia, and eagerly supported the Crimean War. He was particularly notorious for his advocacy of tyrannicide (though in general he was opposed to capital punishment), and incurred much censure when in January 1858 Felice Orsini made an attempt on the life of Napoleon III. Napoleon escaped, but many bystanders were killed. Landor had indeed met Orsini, and was accused of inciting him, though there was no basis for such a charge. He was deeply shocked by the loss of innocent lives. 
The opprobrium attaching to the Orsini affair damaged Landor's standing in a libel case that drove him a second time into exile. In 1856 he had become acquainted with a clergyman and his wife, Morris and Mary Jane Yescombe. They had taken under their care a young woman called Geraldine Hooper, whom Landor found attractive. He addressed poems to her (as 'Erminine') and gave her many gifts: these found their way into Mrs Yescombe's keeping. Eventually, early in 1857, Landor began to suspect that Mrs Yescombe was exploiting Geraldine to enrich herself, and rashly published an attack on her in a pamphlet, 'Walter Savage Landor and the Honorable Mrs Yescombe'. A libel action was threatened, but John Forster persuaded Landor to sign a retractation. The offence was repeated in three poems included in Landor's next publication, 'Dry Sticks, Fagoted by Walter Savage Landor' (1858). Mrs Yescombe initiated an action for libel, and when it came to court in August 1858 she was awarded $1000 in damages. The newspapers reacted with eloquent denunciations of this libeller and advocate of tyrannicide. By then, though, Landor was no longer in England. He was in poor health in the winter of 1856-7, made something of a recovery in the course of 1857, and then suffered an apoplectic stroke in March 1858. He was not disabled by this, but was in no condition to enter upon an effective defence. Two nieces, Sophy and Kitty Landor, assisted him in his escape, and he returned to Fiesole and to the reluctant care of his estranged family. 
Landor came to find his position in his old home intolerable, and in June 1859 left it, walking into Florence with little money and no possessions. Robert and Elizabeth Barrett Browning were living in Florence at the time, and Robert met Landor in the street. He immediately gave him shelter, and wrote to Forster to see if Landor's family in England could support him in lodgings, which in due course they did. After a few months in Marcioni, near Siena, where he was cared for by the family of the American sculptor William Wetmore Story, he was established in rooms at 2671 via Nunziatina (subsequently called 93 via della Chiesa), Florence, not far from the Brownings' home. He was increasingly infirm, but contrived to publish one last political pamphlet, on the American civil war ('Letters of a Canadian', 1862), and one last volume of poetry, 'Heroic Idyls' (1863). He died in his rooms on 17 September 1864, and was buried in the protestant cemetery in Florence two days later. His estranged wife lived on until 17 April 1879. 
A few months before his death Landor had been visited by a greatly admiring young poet, A. C. Swinburne, whose homage is a fine symbol of Landor's role as one of the forerunners of late Victorian aestheticism. He was in advance of his own contemporaries, too, in his appreciation of early Italian painting. His friends were almost unanimous in deriding what seemed to them his indiscriminate purchases of old paintings -- 'not esteemed at that time', as his friend Seymour Kirkup put it (Forster, 2.205). The esteem was to come with the Pre-Raphaelites, with whom, indeed, Landor had some affinity. But Landor's place in the literary landscape has never been easy to determine. For many years after his death his reputation was high, Swinburne, for example, claiming that 'he had won for himself such a double crown of glory in verse and in prose as has been won by no other Englishman but Milton' (Swinburne, 14.278). But admirers always had to concede that he was little-read; Landor made a virtue of the fact, and was consciously exclusive: 'I shall dine late; but the dining-room will be well lighted, the guests few and select' (Landor, 'Complete Works', 6.37). He took pride in his Latin publications, and made no concessions to the ignorance of the readers of his English writings. Much of his prose and poetry is a deliberate attempt to recreate the tranquil atmosphere associated by his contemporaries with the literature of ancient Greece. He constantly sought perfection of expression: '
How many verses have I thrown 

Into the fire because the one 

Peculiar word, the wanted most, 

Was irrecoverably lost. 
(Landor, 'Poetical Works', 3.472)' He is remembered mainly for a few brief poems, some hauntingly tender, some fiercely scornful. The often quoted dismissal of the four Georges ('George the First was always reckoned / Vile, but viler George the Second...') has the same clear definition as a poem to Ianthe, 'Past ruin'd Ilion Helen lives...': '
Soon shall Oblivion's deepening veil 

Hide all the peopled hills you see, 

The gay, the proud, while lovers hail 

In distant ages you and me. 
(ibid., 2.331, 3.114)' It is in such brief moments that Landor's genius is most apparent. His more ambitious works tend to be diffuse and long-winded, a trait particularly apparent in his 'Citation and examination of William Shakspeare before the worshipful Sir Thomas Lucy Knight touching deer stealing' (1834), the one publication which he (mistakenly) expected to be popular. 
Although never widely read, Landor became well known as an eccentric character, in part because of the vivid portrayal of him as Lawrence Boythorn in Dickens's 'Bleak House' (1852-3). Dickens dexterously captures Landor's boisterous laugh, stentorian voice, extravagant language, and startling gentleness, and although he relishes the absurdity of his outbursts, they are a manifestation of a splendidly resilient vitality. It is strange that so little of this uninhibited vigour should find its way into the work by which Landor expected to be remembered. 


@@@@@


doc= 15981


Landsborough, David (1779-1854), Free Church of Scotland minister and naturalist, was born on 11 August 1779 in Dalry, Glenkens, Kirkcudbrightshire, the only son and eldest of four children of John McLandsborough and Isabel Hugan. He was educated at the parish school and Dumfries Academy, before entering Edinburgh University in 1798. Although reading divinity, he also attended lectures in botany, anatomy, chemistry, and surgery. At university, he dropped 'Mc' from his surname, proclaiming it 'long enough' without (Rutherford, 1980, 4). Through his musical skills he became known to metaphysician Thomas Brown and to the landscape-painter John Thompson (1778-1840), the latter of whom instilled in Landsborough a taste for painting. From Edinburgh Landsborough became tutor to Sir John Hay of King's Meadows, Tweedside, and then to the family of Lord Glenlee, of Barskimming, Ayrshire. He was licensed to the ministry of the Church of Scotland in 1808, and in September 1811 was ordained minister to the parish of Stevenston, Ayrshire. In addition to his clerical duties and his daily readings in Latin, Greek, Hebrew, French, or Italian, he soon began studies of the natural history of his parish and nearby Arran. It is possible that his field studies on the Ayrshire coast were encouraged by an Edinburgh meeting with John Fleming (author of 'A History of British Animals'), who had requested some 'new' crabs. In this period, Landsborough also began cultivating the Stevenston manse garden, which he walled higher for greater shelter. 
In 1817 Landsborough married Margaret (1797/8-1834), daughter of James McLeish of Port Glasgow; the couple later had four sons and three daughters, including the explorer William Landsborough (1825-1886). Over the years his wife's health deteriorated, and she died in November 1834, aged thirty-six. It was a blow 'he never fully overcame, he laid his flute aside till his seventies and remembered the day every year' (Rutherford, 1980). 
Landsborough's studies in Arran led to a first publication, 'Arran, a Poem in Six Cantos' (1828); it was republished in 1847 with field-work accounts. He made collections of flowering plants but these were soon extended to embrace algae, lichens, fungi, and mosses. He contributed much material and many botanical records to works such as W. H. Harvey's 'Phycologia Britannica'. His discovery of new or previously unreported marine animals (many since reassessed taxonomically) associated him with both John Fleming and George Johnston (1797-1855), although he may never have met the latter in person. For many years, Landsborough recorded the daily weather, migration movements, and flowering periods; he studied also land Mollusca and fossil plants of the Ayrshire coalfield. He published at least seven papers before 1843 in different journals, covering topics such as zoophyte phosphorescence, birds, dredging, the Mollusca of Whiting Bay, and geological deposits at Stevenston and Largs. His garden flourished with exotic plants rare for Scotland. In 1837 he produced the Stevenston parish account (48 pages), which was judged one of the best contributions to the 'New [Second] Statistical Account [of Scotland]' and led to his assisting other ministers with the natural history sections and acquiring the sobriquet 'the Ayrshire Naturalist' (Rutherford, 1980). 
In the Scottish church Disruption of spring 1843 Landsborough joined the Free Kirk, becoming minister at Saltcoats and losing his previous church, manse, and beloved garden. These changes reduced his income from $350 to $150 per year, and limited his natural history studies. Between about 1847 and 1853, under his direction, his daughters made and sold about 400 varying sets of algae, with varying content, labels, title-pages, and geographical origin. Entitled 'Treasures of the Deep, or, Specimens of Scottish Sea-Weeds', they are often referred to as the 'Ayrshire Albums'. Sold at bazaars and privately for discharge of the manse debts and unkeep and to support churches and schools, they retailed when bound at 15's'. per album; most were probably formed of between thirty-eight and sixty-three specimens. These funds were augmented by income from lectures which Landsborough gave throughout Britain, and by annual collections in church. Creation of albums and time spent lecturing represented considerable effort by the Landsborough family; both the Saltcoats Free Kirk and other churches benefited considerably. 
By the early 1840s, the Landsborough family was actively exploring Arran and its rich shores; Landsborough also dredged in the Firth of Clyde with James Smith of Jordanhill. His experiences led to a series of papers in the 'Christian Treasury' during 1845; these were included in his enlarged and revised 'Arran; a Poem; and Excursions to Arran' in 1847. This book sold well, resulting in a further (1851 [1852]) edition which suffered chaotic reorganization through removal of the 1828 poem and Landsborough's overprovision of replacement text. In his preface to the 1847 edition Landsborough described the late 1840s as 'the very busiest period of my professional life'. He was invited by Lovell Reeve to write a 'Popular History of British Seaweeds': the work was well received, achieving three editions (1849; 1851; 1857), and as a result Landsborough was commissioned to prepare a 'Popular History of British Zoophytes or Corallines' (1852). He was elected associate of the Linnean Society in 1849, and in the following year was instrumental in establishing the Ayrshire Naturalists' Club, of which he was the first president. 
Comparatively well-travelled, Landsborough visited most parts of Scotland and Ireland on religious duties, as well as spending four months on supply ministry in Gibraltar in 1842. In 1852, in his seventies, he visited Gibraltar and Tangier, returning via the Balearic Islands, Italy, and France. During a cholera epidemic in Ayrshire in 1854 Landsborough was involved in comforting the sick and dying and himself contracted the disease; he died after a very brief illness at Saltcoats, on 12 September 1854, and was buried in a plague pit in the churchyard of Stevenston High Kirk, Ardrossan. The Ayrshire Naturalists' Club effectively died with him. 


@@@@@


doc= 15982


Landsborough, William (1825-1886), explorer in Australia, the third son of the Revd David Landsborough (1779-1854) and his wife, Margaret (1797/8-1834), the daughter of James McLeish of Port Glasgow, was born on 21 February 1825 at Stevenston, near Saltcoats, Ayrshire. He was one of four sons and three daughters. He was educated at Irvine Academy, Irvine. In 1841 he joined his older brothers, John and James, in Australia on their New England pastoral run. After a stint on the Bathurst goldfields from 1849, he went to Queensland in 1852 and took up Westholm in the Wide Bay district. From 1854 he explored a vast area of the Rockhampton hinterland with several fellow entrepreneurs; they surveyed and sold new pastoral runs, meanwhile retaining the choicest country, so that Landsborough held extensive leases by 1861. 
That year Landsborough led an official party in an unsuccessful search for the lost explorers Robert O'Hara Burke and William Wills. After an initial foray to the south-west, Landsborough started in February 1862 from his depot on the lower Gulf of Carpentaria and crossed the continent from north to south. Some charged him with concentrating on pastoral discovery and neglecting his official duty, but Landsborough was honoured with vice-regal receptions in Melbourne, Sydney, and Brisbane. His journal ('Landsborough's Expedition from Carpentaria, in Search of Burke and Wills') was published in 1862, and in London in 1863 he received the Royal Geographical Society's presentation gold watch. 
Landsborough was appointed to the Queensland legislative council in 1862 and took his seat in 1864, but resigned the following year. He was now a senior partner in Bowen Downs, a large central Queensland property, which expanded northwards in 1864 to the newly occupied Burke district on the Gulf of Carpentaria; the next year Landsborough successfully applied for the position of police magistrate in the Burke district. Here he conducted further exploration and avidly championed the Burke region, but the initial settlement was beset by adversity; Landsborough's administrative task was inordinately difficult, while his critics decried his failure to provide strong leadership, the impropriety of his interests in local business, and his suppression of a charge against a Bowen Downs associate for the alleged lynching of a Chinese labourer. By the time he was removed from office in 1870 Landsborough was financially ruined through the failure of his Burke pastoral interests. 
The following year Landsborough was summarily dismissed when supervising road works near St George; thereafter he served as inspector of brands in the Moreton district. For services to exploration the government awarded him $2000 in 1881, with which he purchased Loch Lamerough near Caloundra. A devoted family man, he married Caroline Hollingsworth Raine on 30 December 1862; they had three daughters, Fanny, Janet, and Sweersena. Caroline died in 1869, and on 8 March 1873 Landsborough married a widow, Maria Theresa Carr ('nee' Carter), with whom he had three sons, Sydney, Leslie, and Lionel. Landsborough died on 17 March 1886, probably of cancer, and was buried with Anglican rites at Loch Lamerough; in 1913 his remains were reinterred in Toowong cemetery, Brisbane. 


@@@@@


doc= 15983


Landseer, Charles (1799/1800-1879), painter of historical and genre subjects, was born on 12 August 1799 or 1800 at 71 Queen Anne Street East, London, the second son to achieve adulthood among the fourteen children of John George Landseer (1762/3-1852), engraver and antiquary, and his wife, Jane, 'nee' Potts (1773/4-1840). Having received early instruction in art from his father, in 1816 Charles Landseer entered the Royal Academy Schools, where he remained for approximately three years. Together with his brothers Thomas Landseer and Edwin Landseer, he also became a pupil of Benjamin Robert Haydon. In the 1820s Landseer accompanied Lord Stuart de Rothesay to Portugal and Rio de Janeiro on his mission to negotiate a commercial treaty with Don Pedro I. He executed numerous sketches for the latter and on his return exhibited six paintings based on his travels at the British Institution (1827, 1828) and the Society of British Artists (1827). 
Charles Landseer was represented by 126 works at the British Institution (1822-46), the Society of British Artists (1824-35), the Royal Academy (1828-79), the Liverpool Academy (1830-65), and the Royal Manchester Institution (1840, 1843). Until the mid-1830s he exhibited landscapes, portraits (among unexhibited subjects were the radical journalist Thomas Jonathan Wooler, Sir Thomas Lawrence, president of the Royal Academy, and Harriet Grote), genre and literary scenes from Jonathan Richardson, Cervantes, and Laurence Sterne: his 'Clarissa Harlowe in the Prison Room of the Sheriff's Office' (exh. Society of British Artists, 1833-4; Tate collection) was bought by Robert Vernon, and 'Sterne's Maria' (exh. British Institution, 1836; V&A) by John Sheepshanks. The success of two ambitious paintings, 'The Plundering of Basing House, Hants; Taken and Destroyed by Cromwell, Oct. 14 1645' (exh. RA, and Liverpool Academy, 1836; Tate collection) and 'The Death of Douglas at the Battle of Langside' (exh. RA, 1837; ex Town and Country Estates Ltd, Ireland, 19 September 1956) led to his election as an associate of the Royal Academy in 1837 and determined the historical nature of the majority of his future exhibits. Other major paintings of this type include 'The Pillaging of a Jew's House in the Reign of Richard I' (exh. RA, and Liverpool Academy, 1839 and British Institution, 1840; Tate collection) measuring 6 feet 3 inches by 7 feet 9 inches; 'The Temptation of Andrew Marvell' (exh. RA, 1841; V&A); and 'Charles I on the Eve of the Battle of Edgehill' (exh. RA, 1845; Walker Art Gallery, Liverpool). In the 1840s and early 1850s Charles Landseer achieved considerable success: his works were engraved for the 'Art Union' and the 'Art Journal'; three paintings were chosen by Art Union prize-winners for $300, $400, and $300 respectively ('The Departure of Charles II from Bentley in Staffordshire' (exh. RA, 1842), 'The Monks of Melrose' (exh. RA, 1843, and lent for the Royal Jubilee Exhibition in Manchester, 1887), and 'The Return of the Dove to the Ark' (exh. RA, 1844; Forbes Magazine collection). 
In 1845 Landseer was elected Royal Academician and in 1851 keeper of the Royal Academy, a post which involved instructing pupils in the antique school. From the 1860s, however, Landseer's work met with increasing criticism and towards the end of his life he was renowned mainly for his puns and witticisms (he was responsible for the description of photography as a 'foe-to-graphic' art) and for his likeable nature. In May 1873 he retired from his post as keeper, with a pension equivalent to his former salary. Charles Landseer never married and always lived with members of his family. He died on 22 July 1879 at his home, 35 Grove End Road, St John's Wood, London, and was buried in Highgate cemetery, Middlesex, having bequeathed $10,000 of his considerable property (part of which he inherited from his brother Edwin) to the Royal Academy for the foundation of scholarships. A sale of the contents of his studio was held at Christies on 14 April 1880. An obituarist described his work as characterized by 'careful execution, appropriate accessories and costumes rather than by striking effects and grandeur of character' ('Art Journal', 18, 1879, 217). Examples of his work are in the Victoria and Albert Museum, the Tate collection, the British Museum, the National Portrait Gallery, the Walker Art Gallery, Liverpool, and the Ferens Art Gallery, Kingston upon Hull. 


@@@@@


doc= 15984


Landseer, Sir Edwin Henry (1802-1873), animal painter, was born in London on 7 March 1802 at 88 Queen Anne Street East, Marylebone, the youngest of the three sons, and the fourth of the seven surviving children of John George Landseer (1762/3-1852), engraver and author, and his wife, Jane, 'nee' Potts (1773/4-1840). His elder brothers Thomas Landseer (1793/4-1880), a printmaker, and Charles Landseer (1799/1800-1879), a genre and history painter, are noticed separately. The following year the family moved to 71 Queen Anne Street East (this became 33 Foley Street in 1810). 
Edwin Landseer appears to have been educated at home, where from a very early age his artistic gifts were recognized. Under the guidance of his father (who was extremely ambitious for his children), by the age of four or five he was drawing with extraordinary precocity and was making etchings at the age of seven. His subjects were animals, not only domestic and farmyard creatures, notably cows in the fields near Child's Hill, Hampstead, London, but also lions and tigers, which he studied at Mr Cross's menagerie at Exeter 'Change in the Strand (often in the company of his boyhood friend and neighbour, the painter John Frederick Lewis) or at the Tower of London. In 1813 Landseer was awarded the silver palette from the Society of Arts for his drawing of a spaniel (RSA). Two years later he made his Royal Academy debut, as an honorary exhibitor (on account of his age), with 'Portrait of a Mule' and 'Head of a Pointer Bitch and Puppy'. These were the property of W. W. Simpson of Maldon, Essex, his first patron. In that year the three Landseer brothers became pupils of Benjamin Robert Haydon, who encouraged Edwin's study of anatomy and of the Elgin marbles, and introduced him to some of the great literary figures of the age. Haydon took the credit for Sir George Beaumont's buying Landseer's 'Fighting Dogs Getting Wind' (Louvre, Paris), exhibited in 1818 at the Society of Painters in Oil and Water Colours. This was his first fully realized sporting picture, and its 'wonder producing vitality' was acclaimed by the critic of 'The Examiner', who dubbed the artist 'our English SCHNEIDERS' (26 April 1818, 269). The composition was influenced by the animal painter James Ward as well as the seventeenth-century Flemish artist Frans Snyders; Haydon was indeed schooling his pupil to be 'the Snyders of England' ('Paintings and Drawings by Sir Edwin Landseer', v). 'Fighting Dogs Getting Wind' is typical of Landseer's early attraction to themes of violence in the animal kingdom. This may, perhaps, represent a displacement of aggression in an adolescent whose formative years were subject to the strict discipline of artistic observation rather than to the free range of boyhood fancy. 
On 9 August 1816, at fourteen, Landseer entered the Royal Academy Schools. Earlier in that year he had sat to his friend Charles Robert Leslie as the model for Rutland in Leslie's 'The Murder of Rutland by Lord Clifford' (exh. RA, 1816; Pennsylvania Academy of the Fine Arts, Philadelphia). Leslie remembers him at this period as 'a pretty little curly-headed boy' (Leslie, 1.39). He was known affectionately by the keeper of the schools, Henry Fuseli, as 'my little 'dog boy'' (ibid.), suggesting that his reputation as an animal painter was already established. Indeed, Landseer's earliest drawing of a dog (V&A) was executed at the age of five. From a very early age he was using animals as metaphors for human situations and emotions in a way that differentiated much of his work from the tradition of British sporting art. For example, the 1814 oil paintings 'French Hog' (exh. RA, 1874) and 'British Boar' (exh. RA, 1874; priv. coll.), etched in 1818 by Landseer's eldest brother Thomas (BM), comment on the Napoleonic wars in contrasting the gaunt, half-starved French beast with the well-fed, contented British one. This type of humorous juxtaposition became one of Landseer's trademarks, immortalized, for example, in 'Dignity and Impudence' (exh. British Institution, 1839; Tate collection). In stark contrast is 'The Cat's Paw' (exh. British Institution, 1824; priv. coll.), one of Landseer's best-known but most shocking images, which shows a monkey forcing a cat to pick up chestnuts from the top of a burning stove. Its sadism is disturbing, but this aspect did not worry Landseer's contemporaries, who on its first exhibition hailed him as 'a pictorial Shakespeare of animal expression' ('The Examiner', 29 Jan 1824, 130). The artist, who had recently come of age, was assured of financial and critical success. 
In autumn 1824 Landseer travelled north to Scotland for the first time, and the impact of the country on his life and art was profound. The highlands became both a second home to him, visited in the summer and autumn months year after year, and the inspiration for many of his greatest works. On his first trip he stayed for ten days with Sir Walter Scott at Abbotsford. Scott wrote to a friend on 6 October: 'Mr. Landseer who has drawn every dog in the House but myself is now at work upon me under all the disadvantages which my employment puts him to' ('Letters', 8.392). Landseer made several spirited oil sketches of Scott, one of which is in the National Portrait Gallery, London. 
From Scott's home in the borders Landseer travelled on to the highlands to stay with the elderly John Murray, fourth duke of Atholl, at his ancestral castle, Blair Atholl. The duke commissioned Landseer to paint 'Death of the Stag in Glen Tilt' (priv. coll.), a hunting group of himself, his grandson and heir, and his keepers. This monumental work, finally completed and exhibited at the Royal Academy in 1830 under the title 'Portraits of his Grace the Duke of Atholl and George Murray attended by his Head Forester John Crerar and Keepers', is an eloquent tribute to a great highland chieftain and a famous sportsman. Another dynastic sporting group, exhibited at the Royal Academy two years earlier (priv. coll.), shows Alexander, fourth duke of Gordon, with his daughter Georgiana, duchess of Bedford, and his young grandson Lord Alexander Russell; the duke has been shooting, she and her son fishing. 
On his expeditions to Scotland Landseer stayed with a variety of aristocratic hosts, including the marquess of Breadalbane and the duke of Atholl, but he was most often a guest of the sixth duke of Bedford and his wife at The Doune, a hunting-lodge near Aviemore in the Cairngorms. The duchess had constructed a series of bothies in the remote valley of Glenfeshie where she lived a simple highland life with a small circle of intimate friends. Landseer recorded the valley in a sequence of wonderfully fresh and vibrant small 'plein air' studies that reveal his gifts as a landscapist. The sketches he painted in Scotland between 1825 and 1835 deserve to be better known, for they are of exceptional quality in their swift recording of highland topography and weather. (Most are in private collections, but there are examples in Manchester City Galleries, the Walker Art Gallery, Liverpool, the Tate collection, and the Yale Center for British Art, New Haven, Connecticut.) The duchess and her guests were the butt of Landseer's numerous witty pen-and-ink caricatures, which capture the spirit of camaraderie and fun typical of these parties; a large number of them are still owned by descendants of the duchess's daughter, Louisa, marchioness of Abercorn (priv. coll.). 
Scenes of deer-hunting became a regular feature in Landseer's repertory. In 'Highlanders Returning from Deerstalking' (1827; priv. coll.) we see a stag being brought down on an old shooting pony by two keepers, its antlers poignantly silhouetted against a stormy sky. In 'Deer and Deer Hounds in a Mountain Torrent' (exh. RA, 1833; Tate collection), a terrified stag is swept away downstream along with the attacking hounds. The line dividing Landseer's bloodlust from his compassion is narrow, and out of the tension between them was born his best sporting work. Stags are wild and noble beasts but also trophies of the hunting field, as Landseer made clear in a letter of 9 September 1837 to Lord Ellesmere: 'There is something in the toil and trouble, the wild weather and savage scenery that makes butchers of us all. Who does not glory in the death of a fine stag? on the spot -- when in truth he ought to be ashamed of the assassination.' Significantly perhaps, Landseer was a notoriously bad shot. 'Still', the artist continued: 'with all my respect for the animal's inoffensive character -- my love of him 'as a subject for the pencil' gets the better of such tenderness -- a creature always picturesque and 'never' ungraceful is too great a property to sacrifice to common feelings of humanity. ('Paintings and Drawings by Sir Edwin Landseer', 29-30)' Landseer's enthusiasm for the highlands extended to the highlanders themselves, whose simple lives and rugged characters he admired. Apart from Sir David Wilkie and J. F. Lewis, there were few other artists painting such pictures in the 1820s. Landseer's superbly detailed scenes capture the very essence and texture of highland life. Among many outstanding and deservedly popular paintings are 'An Illicit Whisky Still in the Highlands' (exh. RA, 1829; Apsley House, London), 'The Stone Breaker' (exh. British Institution, 1830; V&A), 'The Poacher's Bothy' (exh. RA, 1831; Hamburg Kunsthalle), 'Interior of a Highlander's House' (exh. RA, 1831; priv. coll.), and 'A Highland Breakfast' (exh. RA, 1834; V&A), a tender scene juxtaposing a mother feeding her baby with a bitch suckling two puppies. These works culminated in the large and crowded canvas 'A Scene in the Grampians: the Drover's Departure' (exh. RA, 1835; V&A), an elegy for a traditional way of life that was fast disappearing. 
In 1826, aged twenty-four, Landseer was elected an associate of the Royal Academy (at the time no one under that age was eligible). A year earlier he had taken the lease of a 2 acre property to the west of Regent's Park, at 1 (later 18) St John's Wood Road. Improved and enlarged over the years, this remained his home for the rest of his life. His maternal aunt Barbara Potts kept house for him, to be succeeded by his sister Jessica. By the time that Landseer was elected a full Royal Academician in 1831 he had established an enviable reputation as the foremost animal painter of the day, and he had also broken into high society. He numbered several dukes among his patrons, including those of Atholl, Beaufort, Bedford, Devonshire, Gordon, Northumberland, and Wellington. They not only bought his sporting pictures and highland subjects, but welcomed him into their houses as a friend. Lively and attractive, small and puckish, funny and witty, Landseer was a good addition to any drawing-room. He helped to design the theatricals at Woburn Abbey (seat of the duke of Bedford), kept parties amused by his trick of drawing different subjects with his left and right hands simultaneously, and produced endless and highly accomplished caricatures of his friends. 
Landseer was pre-eminent in his own day as a painter of dogs, even though the range of his art was much wider than that designation implies. He was the heir of George Stubbs in his profound understanding of canine anatomy and character; his early 'ecorche' (flayed) studies reveal the depth of his study and knowledge. What he added to his naturalistic depiction of dogs was a narrative content and an anthropomorphic interpretation that transformed them into works of the imagination. He told one patron that he simply could not paint an animal without a story; straightforward dog portraiture held no interest for him. So he invented situations for his dog subjects, giving them feelings and attitudes akin to those of human beings. In a pair of early works, 'High Life' and 'Low Life' (1829; Tate collection), he contrasts the common mastiff of a butcher with the elegant deer-hound of an antiquarian aristocrat. The difference in style, period, social class, and values is conveyed through the character of the two animals, who perfectly represent their absent masters, as well as in the settings of a butcher's shop and a medieval-style castle. The two works are painted with a feeling for texture and light and detail learned from a study of the seventeenth-century Flemish master David Teniers. 

'A Jack in Office' (exh. RA, 1833; V&A) takes this allegorizing vein a stage further. A sleek and confident terrier sits atop the barrow of a cat-and-dog-meat salesman, guarding his master's property from a group of mangy and beggarly dogs. The picture may have been inspired by La Fontaine's fable of the dog who carried his master's dinner, but it also symbolizes the hard-heartedness of those who have much towards those who have nothing. 
Among Landseer's dog subjects none struck such a chord with the public as those which demonstrated love and fidelity. The earliest of these, painted in 1820, is 'Alpine Mastiffs Reanimating a Distressed Traveller' (priv. coll.), set in the St Bernard Pass. 'Attachment' (1829; priv. coll.) records a real-life story of a terrier who stayed by the body of his dead master on Helvellyn for three months -- the subject also of a poem of 1805 by Sir Walter Scott. In 'Suspense' (exh. British Institution, 1834; V&A), a desperately anxious bloodhound waits at the door of a room into which his wounded master has been carried. Most moving of all is 'The Old Shepherd's Chief Mourner' (exh. RA, 1837; V&A), a collie crouching against the coffin of his master in an agony of grief. This picture, revealing the character of the old shepherd through the simple accessories and lonely atmosphere of his bothy, inspired a famous passage in the first volume of John Ruskin's 'Modern Painters' (1843). The great critic (not usually an admirer of Landseer's work) called it: 'one of the most perfect poems or pictures... which modern times have seen... a work of high art, [which] stamps its author, not as the near imitator of the texture of a skin, or the fold of a drapery, but as the Man of Mind. (Ruskin, 3.88-9)' What Ruskin approved of was the pathos and imaginative force with which Landseer invested the scene, raising it above mere realism to a higher plane of feeling. 
Landseer's industry during the 1830s was prodigious and it was matched by a fertile imagination and painterly finesse. As well as dog subjects and highland scenes, he painted a handful of history pictures, of which the most important is 'Scene in the Olden Time at Bolton Abbey' (exh. RA, 1834; priv. coll.). This was commissioned by William Cavendish, sixth duke of Devonshire, who owned the romantic ruined abbey on the banks of the Wharfe in the West Riding of Yorkshire. Ignoring his brief to portray the abbey itself, Landseer chose instead to evoke the spirit of monastic life in the Middle Ages. A forester, his son, and his daughter lay the trophies of the hunt, painted with the artist's usual virtuosity, at the feet of a rotund abbot standing in the doorway of the abbey. What lies at the root of Landseer's picture is nostalgia for an earlier age when society was at peace with itself, when people accepted and enjoyed their lot, when the paternalism of the monastery meant something, and when the rivers and forests teemed with game. 
Though he never found human likenesses easy, Landseer was frequently employed as a portraitist during the 1830s. As with his dog subjects, he liked to introduce narrative motifs into his pictures. The heir to the earl of Tankerville is seen beside a white bull of the Chillingham breed he has just shot, together with the deer-hound who saved his life, in 'Scene in Chillingham Park: Portrait of Lord Ossulton' ('The Death of the Wild Bull') (exh. RA, 1836; priv. coll.). The enormously wealthy earl of Ellesmere and his family are dressed in seventeenth-century style for the outdoor group entitled 'Return from Hawking' (exh. RA, 1837; priv. coll.). In 'Portraits of the Marquess of Stafford and the Lady Evelyn Gower: Dunrobin Castle in the Distance' (exh. RA, 1838; priv. coll.) Landseer depicts the two eldest children of George Levenson-Gower, second duke of Sutherland: Lady Evelyn is seen decorating her pet fawn with a chaplet of columbine, watched by her brother and their favourite dogs. 
Three of Landseer's greatest patrons in the 1830s were, however, representative of a new breed of capitalist collector. The artist enjoyed close relations with the cloth manufacturer John Sheepshanks, the army contractor Robert Vernon, and the shipbuilder William Wells of Redleaf, near Tunbridge Wells, Kent. It is fortunate for Landseer's reputation that the Sheepshanks collection in the Victoria and Albert Museum and the Tate's Vernon collection contain so many of his finest works from this early period. Landseer's patrons carefully monitored progress on their commissions, and kept the artist up to the mark -- none more so than Wells, whose superb collection is sadly dispersed. From accounts by those who stayed at Redleaf, Landseer -- represented by more than twenty works -- was its presiding genius. There are many anecdotes about him at Redleaf: the one most often repeated concerned a spaniel, Trim, which Landseer had promised to paint. In August 1831, when finally pressed on this much postponed commission, he waited until everyone had gone to church and painted the dog in a session of two and a half hours, to the astonishment of his host; an engraving by J. Webb, 1832, is in the British Museum, London. A later collector of a similar stamp was the chemist Jacob Bell, who became an intimate friend of the artist, and acted as his trusted adviser. He bequeathed his collection to the National Gallery in 1859, including an important group of Landseer paintings (now Tate collection). 
Landseer was especially attractive to women. He had many intimate female friends, including the duchess of Bedford and the famous beauty Mrs Caroline Norton, and he was forever falling in and out of love, but he never married. His name was scandalously linked at the time to the duchess of Bedford. He was said to have been her lover, and father of one of her children, but this is uncorroborated. There was a raffish side to Landseer's character. He enjoyed the bohemian atmosphere of Lady Blessington's circle, and was a close friend of her lover Count D'Orsay, with whom he exchanged racy gossip. He was certainly familiar with the 'demi-monde' and may have enjoyed its hedonistic pleasures as a relief from the constraints of formal society. 
In May 1840, at the height of his powers and reputation, Landseer suffered a severe nervous breakdown that cast a long shadow over his subsequent career. This was attributed to various causes at the time, including the death that January of his mother. His friend Lady Holland blamed the fatigue and anxiety of being a member of the hanging committee at the Royal Academy, 'where there are so many jealousies and bickerings, & then the shock of the murder [on 6 May] of poor Ld William [Russell, grandson of the fourth duke of Bedford], with whom he was very intimate & had seen frequently just at the time... He is full of terror and horror, expecting an assassin to destroy him. It is really very shocking. ('Elizabeth, Lady Holland', 184-5)' It was also said that his illness had been precipitated by the refusal of the duchess of Bedford (who had been widowed the previous autumn) to marry him ('Diary', ed. Pope, 5.452). Underneath the brilliant facade that Landseer presented to the world there were evident signs of stress. He was unreliable about finishing pictures, he broke engagements on the flimsiest of pretexts, and even before his breakdown he provoked numerous quarrels with old friends. For example, about 1838 he misconstrued a request from Caroline Norton, who wrote to him: 'It would take more to offend me than a huffy note, from you, as I have seen too much gentlemanlike and generous feeling in you, not to forgive you for being touchy, even when I did think it unjust' (Ormond, 'Sir Edwin Landseer', 9). 
Landseer's state of mind following the breakdown is vividly conveyed in a letter he wrote to Count D'Orsay on 13 July 1840: 'The only thing against me is 'self-torture'. My unfinished works haunt me -- visions of noble Dukes in 'armour' give me nightly scowls and pokings... My imagination is full of children in the shape of good pictorial subjects. Until I am safely 'delivered', fits of agitation will continue their attacks. (Ormond, 'Sir Edwin Landseer', 10)' After a recuperative tour of the continent, in the care of his friend Jacob Bell, Landseer returned to London to pick up the threads of his life. His friends rallied round. Bell took charge of his business affairs and acted as general factotum (Landseer's lengthy correspondence with Bell in the Royal Institution, London, is a primary biographical source). Landseer continued to be offered lucrative commissions, from Queen Victoria downwards; he went north to Scotland each summer as before to stay in aristocratic hunting-lodges; his popularity was undiminished. But something had changed. He would never recapture that self-confidence and blitheness of spirit which had characterized him as a young man. His later letters chart bouts of depression, nervous prostration, dyspepsia, and a host of psychosomatic ailments. By 1850, the year of his knighthood, Landseer was drinking heavily, a problem compounded by drug abuse; in the following decade there were times when he lost his mind. Though he continued to lead a busy social life, and to paint through all but the worst crises, he never recovered from the effects of his first breakdown or from the burden of mental suffering. 
The year 1840 marks not only a turning point in Landseer's personal life but also a distinct change of direction in his art. The transparency and tight detail of his early style -- inspired by Rubens, Teniers, and the Flemish school -- gave way to a broader style of painting. His themes became more weighty, his compositions more complex, his imagination in many ways stranger and less predictable. He was responding not only to impulses in himself but to wider trends in the field of art generally. The series of competitions for fresco decorations in the new Palace of Westminster, instituted in 1843, were symptomatic of a return to the principles of high art and moral seriousness that typified the high Victorian period. With his acute sensitivity to changes in taste, Landseer raised his game to meet this new challenge, and in doing so ensured that animal painting remained a mainstream art form. But something was also lost in the process. The surface brilliance and detail of his early works was never recaptured. 
In his later dog subjects Landseer pushed anthropomorphic art to new limits, drawing on the conventions of history painting, while at the same time poking fun at them. 'Laying Down the Law' ('Trial by Jury') (exh. RA, 1840; priv. coll.) shows a large white poodle as judge and a mixed group of other canine breeds as jury in a type of composition associated with figure painting. Landseer's target is the maladministration and pomposity of the law, and he uses the dumb but expressive faces of the dogs to drive it home. The picture of 'King Charles Spaniels' (exh. British Institution, 1845; Tate collection) is a skit on the vogue for popular scenes of cavaliers and roundheads; two mischievous-looking spaniels lie curled up beside a plumed hat and gilt spur. The classical subject of Alexander meeting the philosopher Diogenes is transformed by Landseer into a confrontation between a large white bull terrier, with a train of attendants, and a smaller, wily terrier in the role of the philosopher sitting in a barrel (exh. RA, 1848; Tate collection). Landseer was turning the ideals of academic art on their head, but this did not concern a contemporary audience, who read the picture as a parody of human manners and behaviour and a 'tour de force' of animal characterization. 
Landseer's ability to catch the mood of the moment is exemplified in his picture 'Shoeing' (exh. RA, 1884; Tate collection), an image of rural peace and harmony skilfully expressed in the gleaming hide of the bay mare, her close companionship with a donkey and a hound, and the homely figure and accessories of the blacksmith. This was one of the most popular of all Landseer's paintings, with a European reputation; it was one of the works that helped to secure him a gold medal at the Universal Exhibition in Paris in 1855. While Landseer's art was thought to be quintessentially English by foreign critics, there is no doubt that it had an influence abroad, especially through the print market. The deer paintings of Gustave Courbet and Rosa Bonheur, for example, show evidence of their debt. 
When the threat of war with France loomed in the later 1840s, and tensions rose on both sides of the channel, Landseer painted the companion pictures 'Time of Peace' (a scene of rural tranquillity on the cliffs at Dover) and 'Time of War' (a dead lancer with mangled cavalry horses; both exh. RA, 1846) to remind his fellow countrymen of the consequences of belligerent action. Both pictures were destroyed in the Tate flood of 1928. Landseer had visited the field of Waterloo when touring the continent in 1840, and this inspired one of his most extraordinary pictures, 'The Shepherd's Prayer' (exh. RA, 1845; priv. coll.). With outstretched arms, a shepherd kneels at a wayside crucifix on the field of battle as if interceding for the blood that has been spilt, while his vast flock, like a miniature army, stretches away into the far distance. Landseer later painted the aged duke of Wellington revisiting the site of Waterloo with his daughter-in-law, Lady Douro, in a work entitled 'A Dialogue at Waterloo: 'But 'twas a famous victory'' (exh. RA, 1850; Tate collection). The duke was a friend and admirer of the artist, commissioning a bizarre painting of the popular lion tamer Isaac van Ambrugh (exh. RA, 1847; Yale U. CBA) looking like a latter-day Daniel in the lions' den; an earlier picture of van Ambrugh by Landseer (exh. RA, 1839) is in the Royal Collection. 
Landseer's powers as an image maker and mythologist were put to good account in his service to the crown. In his pictures of Victoria and Albert he captured that spirit of idealism and role-playing which characterized the new monarchy. His full-length equestrian portrait (never finished) of the queen riding out alone in a romantic landscape (1838-72; priv. coll.) was inspired by Van Dyck's famous picture 'Charles I on Horseback with Monsieur de St Antoine' in the Royal Collection. In 'Windsor Castle in Modern Times' (1840-43; Royal Collection), the returning huntsman Albert is greeted by his loving wife and daughter. The royal couple present an image of domestic bliss that reflects the well-being of the state. In a painting of 1842-6 in the Royal Collection, the queen and prince consort, dressed as Edward III and Queen Philippa for a famous costume ball held at Buckingham Palace, embody the virtues of chivalry and nobility drawn from an earlier age. And it was Landseer who lent substance to their vision of themselves as romantic highlanders. 'Royal Sports on Hill and Loch', a large work begun in 1850 and still incomplete at the artist's death (it was later destroyed), is best described by Queen Victoria herself: 'The picture is intended to represent me as meeting Albert, who has been stalking, whilst I have been fishing, & the whole is quite consonant with the truth. The solitude, the sport, the Highlanders in the water, & c will be, as Landseer says, a beautiful historical exemplification of peaceful times, & of the independent life we lead in the dear Highlands. It is quite a new conception, & I think the manner in which he has composed it, will be singularly dignified, poetical & totally novel.(journal, 19 Sept 1850, Royal Archives, Windsor Castle; Ormond, 'Sir Edwin Landseer', 162)' By the mid-century Landseer was the best-known artist in Britain, as judged by the public's familiarity with his work. Over 350 of his pictures had been engraved, some of them two or three times, and the sale of prints ran into many thousands, earning Landseer large sums of money. From his surviving bank accounts it is possible to chart his rising income, from roughly $3000 per annum in the 1830s to double that figure in the following decade, and in his most lucrative year (1865) to a dizzy $17,352. The artist himself was acutely aware of the role which engraving played in popularizing his work, and went to great lengths to ensure the accuracy of the large steel plates employed in the process. Marked proofs in the British Museum reveal extensive reworkings in Landseer's own hand. He reduced engravers and publishers to despair by rejecting proofs and requesting expensive alterations; there were constant quarrels and disputes, several of them documented in the correspondence with Bell. Though his behaviour was often unreasonable, Landseer was passionate about preserving the integrity of his work from commercial pressures. 
Landseer continued to paint scenes of ordinary Scottish life, for example 'The Highland Shepherd's Home' (exh. RA, 1842; priv. coll.), 'The Free Church' (exh. RA, 1849; Royal Collection), and 'The Forester's Family' (exh. RA, 1849; priv. coll.), but it was in his later deer paintings that he forged his most enduring imagery of the highlands. His work became almost transcendental as he pictured stags in life-and-death struggles on a heroic stage. In 'The Sanctuary' (exh. RA, 1842; Royal Collection) an exhausted stag reaches a secluded lake at sunset. The tranquil beauty of the scene underlines the violent end from which the stag has recently escaped. By contrast 'Stag at Bay' (exh. RA, 1846; priv. coll.) is all blood and thunder; we experience the event through the rolling eyes of a defiant and terrified stag, the snapping jaws of the hounds, the broken crests of the lake in which they are immersed, and the stormy sky. 'Coming Events Cast their Shadow before them' ('The Challenge') (exh. RA, 1844; priv. coll.) represents the cruelty inherent in the natural world, rather than man's inhumanity to animals. On the shore of a lake a stag awaits his rival, who is swimming towards him in an eerie moonlit landscape that prefigures the epic battle to the death that will follow. In Landseer's largest highland painting of all, 'The Drive -- Shooting Deer on the Pass; Scene in the Black Mount, Glen Urchy Forest' (exh. RA, 1857; Royal Collection), two ghillies huddle under a plaid in the foreground, hoping to remain undetected as the herd of deer heads towards unseen guns. 
These pictures proved extremely popular, not only with the sporting community but with the public at large. Like his friend Charles Dickens, Landseer could combine extreme violence with highly charged emotion that made his pictures live in the imagination of his audience. There was bloodshed and horror and drama, but also compassion and a terrible beauty to his work. Landseer caught the spirit of what it was that attracted people to Scotland: the wildness and splendour of the landscape, the solitariness and remoteness from civilization, the wealth of wildlife, and the spectacle of nature red in tooth and claw. His pictures contributed a Romantic vision of highland life and landscape that is still with us today. His painting of 'The Monarch of the Glen' (exh. RA, 1851; priv. coll.) remains a defining image of the highlands: a majestic stag, seen in close-up, surveys the mountain tops and sniffs the morning air. The image has become a cliche through over-reproduction, but the original picture is a 'tour de force', so powerful is the rendering of the animal, so tactile its fur, so sublime its surroundings, so tragic its potential fate. 
As well as his oil paintings of deer, Landseer also executed several large and impressive pastels, and a wide range of chalk drawings recording in detail the sport he loved so much. 
Landseer's later years were clouded by episodes of dementia, inebriation, and even threats of physical violence. He was often in the hands of doctors, among them Sir Richard Quain and the eminent neurologist Dr Thomas Tuke, but drugs and rest-cures produced only temporary alleviation. To his unfailing friend and guardian Thomas Hyde Hills, Landseer confided in the later 1860s: 'My health (or rather condition) is a mystery quite beyond human intelligence. I sleep well seven hours, and awake tired and jaded, and do not rally till after luncheon' ('Cornhill Magazine', 29, 1874, 99). 
Landseer was a sick and lonely man, but he continued to inspire loyalty and affection among his friends, and in the right company he was his amusing self. The Abercorns, the William Russells, the Tankervilles, and others continued to invite him to stay. The two houses where he went most often were South Park near Penshurst, Kent, the seat of Lord Hardinge, and Stoke Park near Slough, the home of his patron E. J. Coleman. When things got too much for him Landseer instinctively turned to Stoke Park, often inviting himself for days at a time. Some of his most touching friendships were with artists younger than himself. Both William Powell Frith and John Everett Millais, whom he had championed in their early days, remained devoted to him, Millais completing four of his pictures after his death, including 'Nell Gwynne' (Tate collection). Landseer's protege, the German painter Frederick Keyl, has left detailed accounts of his evening conversations with the artist from 1866 to 1869 (Royal Archives, Windsor Castle). One can almost hear Landseer speaking, so full and graphic are Keyl's notes; the talk ranged over natural history, breeds of dog, sporting reminiscence, literature, politics, friendship, and scandal. 
Landseer could also make a great impact on young social acquaintances, one of whom recalled him as: 'a short, undistinguished-looking little man, with shy manners and a rough voice, and his grey beard and moustache gave him an unkempt appearance; but it was all redeemed by the fine forehead and high brow, under which his bright sparkling eyes looked out with an expression of wistful interest and keen appreciation of whatever appealed to him or whatever he might be painting. In some ways his face often reminded me of a shaggy Scotch terrier. (Lady St Helier, 'Memories of Fifty Years', 1909, 26)' Given Landseer's unstable mental state, it is astonishing that he was able to continue painting until the end of his life, producing some of his most ambitious compositions in his last years. His application and his imagination rarely faltered, and he found solace in the discipline of the studio. In 1860 he completed 'Flood in the Highlands' (Aberdeen Art Gallery), a work begun many years earlier, which conveys the psychology of fear in an acute form as animals and humans cling to the roof of a highland bothy beset by raging waters. Four years later came 'Man Proposes, God Disposes' (Royal Holloway College, Egham, Surrey), a chilling scene of Arctic disaster: two polar bears dismember the human remains of a failed polar expedition in a pitiless landscape of ice and snow. While the title comes from a fifteenth-century source, 'The Imitation of Christ' by Thomas a Kempis, the subject was inspired by the tragic loss of Sir John Franklin's entire expeditionary force in 1845, and shows how much the artist was in tune with contemporary events. 'Rent Day in the Wilderness' (exh. RA, 1868; NG Scot.) is a large, panoramic history picture recording highland resistance to the redcoats following the 1715 Jacobite rising. 'The Swannery Invaded by Sea Eagles' (exh. RA, 1869; priv. coll.) is one of those shocking scenes of extreme animal violence that had a lifelong attraction for the artist. One of the very last paintings Landseer completed is 'The Baptismal Font' (exh. RA, 1872; Royal Collection), a strange religious work showing sheep (symbolizing the Christian flock) huddled below the font while above three doves flutter in the incandescent light of a fire representing the holy spirit. 
What is remarkable in Landseer's late works is his willingness to experiment and push out the boundaries of his art. When asked to design the lions around the base of Nelson's Column in Trafalgar Square, London, in 1857, he cheerfully accepted the commission, although his knowledge of sculpture was extremely limited. Working in the studio of his friend Baron Carlo Marochetti, Landseer laboured on the four colossal clay models for a period of ten years, at times elated by the project, at others almost overwhelmed by its size and complexity. One of Landseer's letters to Marochetti tellingly reveals the fragile state of his nerves at this period: 'a Lion has been turned loose on me by the government. I must conquer or fall' (30 Nov 1862, priv. coll.). When in January 1867 the bronze lions were finally unveiled, Landseer was gratified by the praise of his friends and scornful of his critics. 
New forces in the world of art, in particular Pre-Raphaelitism and aestheticism, had by now begun to undermine Landseer's reputation and render his style of painting old-fashioned. He had wisely refused to allow his name to be put forward for the presidency of the Royal Academy on the death of Sir Charles Eastlake in 1866, and he increasingly withdrew into himself. By 1872 his conduct had become so erratic that his family had him certified with the concurrence of Gladstone and other prominent men. His death on 1 October 1873, at his home, 18 St John's Wood Road, London, was, in the words of his loyal patron Queen Victoria, a merciful release, 'as for the past three years he had been in a most distressing state, half out of his mind, yet not entirely so' (journal, 1 Oct 1873, Royal Archives, Windsor Castle; Ormond, 'Sir Edwin Landseer', 22). Landseer's funeral on 11 October in St Paul's Cathedral, where he was buried in the crypt, was a national event, and he was the subject of many tributes and eulogies, for he had been a major force in British art for more than fifty years. 
In May 1874 a major sale of Landseer's works was held by his executors at Christies, when 1410 lots raised $69,709 9's'. and swelled the value of the artist's estate, which had been assessed for probate the previous November at the then colossal sum of just under $160,000. Financial success was crowned by popular acclaim -- the Landseer memorial exhibition of 532 works, held at the Royal Academy in winter 1874, attracted 105,000 visitors and sold 30,000 catalogues. 
In 1961 the then president of the Royal Academy, Sir Charles Wheeler, remarked that 'In this century [Landseer's] fame has been entirely eclipsed and probably in the whole of British art there is no other figure who has suffered such extremes of approbation and neglect' ('Paintings and Drawings by Sir Edwin Landseer', iii). For the curators of the 1961 exhibition at the Royal Academy, Landseer's anthropomorphic dog subjects were deemed mawkishly sentimental; it was safer by far to concentrate on 'his portrait studies and landscapes among the oils and the brilliant figure drawings and caricatures in pen and ink' (ibid., iv). And as long as celebrations of hunting continue to offend liberal sensibilities, it is hard to envisage Landseer ever regaining widespread popularity. 
The extensive circulation of his works in the form of engravings has meant that Landseer's exceptional skill as a painter has been undervalued. This was one of the revelations of his major retrospective exhibition held at the Tate Gallery, London, in 1981. As Derek Hill (a fellow painter) observed twenty years earlier: 'even in his most banal and uninteresting works (and many such exist), Landseer seldom loses the remarkable ability of translating the texture of the natural surface he represents into the equivalent texture of paint' ('Paintings and Drawings by Sir Edwin Landseer', x). 
In 2001 'Inventing New Britain: the Victorian Vision', the Victoria and Albert Museum's exhibition celebrating the centenary of the death of Queen Victoria, justifiably included some of Landseer's most famous paintings. To his contemporaries their appeal transcended class boundaries. Well over a century after his death images such as 'The Old Shepherd's Chief Mourner' or 'The Monarch of the Glen' remain embedded in the national consciousness, while Landseer's lions in Trafalgar Square are one of the most famous features of the London scene. 


@@@@@


doc= 15985


Landseer, Jessica (1807-1880), painter and etcher, was born at 71 Queen Anne Street East (later 33 Foley Street), London, one of the fourteen children (of whom seven survived infancy) of John Landseer (1762/3-1852), painter, engraver, and author, and his wife, Jane Potts (1773/4-1840). Sir Edwin Henry Landseer (1802-1873), the famous animal painter, was her brother. She received an art education at home from her father and first exhibited at the Royal Academy in 1816, at the precocious age of nine. She was represented by a total of forty-seven works at the Royal Academy (1816-66), the British Institution (1817-23), the Old Watercolour Society (1817-20), the Society of British Artists (1832-7), and the Liverpool Academy (1838). The majority of her early contributions were landscapes, often of scenes in Essex and Suffolk. In the 1820s she also etched plates of her brother Edwin's work, including one of a Scottish terrier, 'Vixen', and another, 'Lady Louisa Russell Feeding a Donkey', in 1826. In the 1830s her subject matter broadened: she exhibited portraits at the Royal Academy, including 'Portrait of a Student of the Royal Academy' in 1835, while to the Society of British Artists she sent figure subjects and three watercolour copies of her brother's paintings of people and animals. 
A couple of years after the death of their mother in 1840, Jessica Landseer went to live with her brother Edwin, who had remained a bachelor, at 1 St John's Wood Road, London, where their aunt, Barbara Potts, kept house for him. Jessica gradually took over household responsibilities and by the 1850s her brother was paying her more than $200 a year. She cared for him through the years of his greatest acclaim and success, during which he was frequently subject to illness and depression, until his death in 1873. Algernon Graves described Jessica Landseer as 'a meek, amiable little body who looked after her brother's house in a very quiet and unostentatious way' (Lennie, 165). 
Jessica Landseer did not exhibit between 1839 and 1862, and it has been suggested that she was prevented from doing so by Edwin's disapproval of professional women artists, as well as by her considerable domestic duties. Evidence that she continued to work, however, is provided by three extant works: a miniature of 1844 (Victoria and Albert Museum, London) from a sketch of Mrs Bradshaw by Edwin Landseer; a watercolour copy in miniature, dated 1845 (Scottish National Portrait Gallery, Edinburgh), of her brother's portrait of Sir Walter Scott; and her own engraving of 1858 (British Museum, London) from her portrait of her brother Thomas Landseer (1793/4-1880). In 1863 she resumed exhibiting at the Royal Academy, showing that year a painting of Edwin Landseer's dog, Lassie, and a final contribution, 'A Recollection', in 1866. Otherwise, from 1865 until her death in 1880 she was represented exclusively at the Society of Female Artists, of which she was for the same period an honorary member; her exhibits included landscapes, animals, portraits, and two copies, in miniature, of paintings by Edwin Landseer, one of which, 'Beauty's Bath' (a portrait of Miss Eliza Peel with her dog, Fido), became the property of Queen Alexandra, consort of Edward VII. Edwin Landseer left his sister a substantial legacy and by 1877 she had moved to 6 Kensington Park Gardens, London, where she kept a carriage. She died, unmarried, at Folkestone, Kent, on 29 August 1880. 


@@@@@


doc= 15986


Landseer, John George (1762/3-1852), engraver and antiquary, was born in Lincoln. Little is known of his childhood or family except that his father was a jeweller and that, at some point during his youth, the family moved to London, where Landseer was apprenticed to William Byrne (1740-1805), a landscape engraver. His earliest single plates, published in Joseph Farington's 'Views in the Lake Country' (1784-8), were landscape views. Similarly, his first complete series of prints was after James Moore's topographical designs for his antiquarian account 'Twenty-Five Views in the Southern Part of Scotland' (1794). At the same time, along with numerous fellow engravers, he also worked on entrepreneurial publishing schemes such as Robert Bowyer's lavish illustrated edition of David Hume's 'History of England' (8 vols., 1792-3), and in 1794 he engraved vignettes after Philippe Jacques de Loutherbourg for an edition of the 'Bible' published by Thomas Macklin (8 vols., 1800). Indeed, Macklin can be said to have had a great influence on Landseer's life, as it was through this publisher that he met Jane Potts (1773/4-1840). The couple married in 1794 and moved to 71 Queen Anne Street (and later 33 Foley Street), where they had fourteen children, of whom seven survived to adulthood. These were Thomas Landseer (1793/4-1880), a printmaker; Jane ('b'. 1795); Charles Landseer (1799/1800-1879), a painter; Edwin Landseer (1802-1873), the acclaimed and knighted painter; Anna Maria (1805-1871); Jessica Landseer (1807-1880), a miniaturist; and Emma (1809-1895), who also painted miniatures. Although John Landseer remained a prolific printmaker and an occasional painter in oils who consistently exhibited work at the Royal Academy until his death, it is sometimes said that his most major contribution to the arts was the nurture and artistic training of his children, especially that of his most celebrated son, Sir Edwin Landseer. 
Often described as opinionated, domineering, and embittered, Landseer, 'being somewhat deaf' (Farington, 'Diary', 11.3847), carried an ear trumpet and was renowned for having a short temper and for muttering to himself under his breath. His pugnacious character did not help to ingratiate him with his peers; only his friend Joseph Farington recognized that, although 'Landseer is warm in His temper... He does not appear so out of doors to the world, and is not liked by those of His Profession' (Farington, 'Diary', 14.4884). Landseer's reputation for being difficult and cantankerous appears to have had little real effect upon the structure of his career. He frequently collaborated with artists: for example, he worked with the draughtsman and traveller William Alexander and the engraver J. Shirt in producing 'An Authentic Account of an Embassy to China' (1807). He also engraved designs for some of the major nineteenth-century artists, including both Turner and Constable; the latter of these, on seeing his plate of 'Stoke Mill' in 1814, described Landseer as 'a very superior landscape engraver' (Parris and Shields, 227). Moreover, Landseer's sense of community is nowhere better represented than in his self-appointed role as the most vociferous and constant spokesman for the liberal status of English engravers. 
On 27 December 1802 Landseer delivered an address to the Royal Academy in which he proposed that four engravers should be made full academicians and that a system of medals should be instituted to encourage engraving. In so doing, he championed the grievances of engravers, whom the academy did not consider worthy of the privileged status of full academicians. Landseer's proposals were not heeded. Nevertheless, in 1806 he accepted the post of associate engraver of the Royal Academy in the hope of improving conditions from within the institution. Additionally, in the same year he delivered a series of lectures at the Royal Institution which presented the history and benefits of engraving under the belief that 'No Art can flourish in any country unless honoured as an Art' (Fox, 8). The sixth of these caused controversy as it was deemed to be a direct attack on the publisher John Boydell, who, Landseer claimed, had exploited modern engravers for his own personal gain. Although this was not technically libellous, as Boydell had died in 1804, the latter's nephew Josiah Boydell complained to the committee of the Royal Institution, and Landseer was immediately dismissed from his professorship without even the privilege of a hearing. In order to vindicate his name and to continue his campaign on behalf of engravers, Landseer published his discourses with the addition of a preface which explained his motives. 
The success and perhaps the scandal of the 'Lectures on the Art of Engraving' (1807) 'whetted Landseer's appetite for authorship' (Herrmann, 1.26), though he turned his attentions to more general artistic and antiquarian topics. His next venture, in 1808, was the launch of the critical 'Review of Publications of Art'. Despite the fact that this journal survived for only four issues and lost him $400 in the process, Landseer attempted another similar project in 1837, with a periodical entitled 'The Probe'; this also quickly collapsed. Having been elected a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries in 1807, he published an erudite and polemical essay on ancient Babylonian relics in the society's journal, 'Archaeologia', in 1817; he then returned to this topic in an independent volume called 'Sabaean researches, in a series of essays on the engraved hieroglyphics of Chaldea, Egypt, and Canaan' (1823). During the later part of his career he combined his two interests and published several of his prints with pamphlets which provided additional contextual information on the subjects he engraved. This was the case with his engraving of Edwin Landseer's 'Alpine Mastiffs Reanimating a Distressed Traveller' (1831) which was accompanied by his father's essay 'Some Account of the Dogs and the Pass of the Great St Bernard' (1831). 
Although there were few tangible results, Landseer continued to campaign for the improved rights of engravers for the rest of his life. In 1810 he proposed a plan for a society and academy of engravers and in 1836 he joined in a petition to the House of Commons which once again attempted to influence the structure of the Royal Academy. This petition was received favourably by a select committee, but a subsequent appeal to the king was unsuccessful, and it was not until 1854 that an engraver was accepted as a full academician. Nevertheless, Landseer was personally honoured when, in 1837, he was appointed engraver to William IV. He died at his home, 8 Southampton Street, Fitzroy Square, London, on 29 February 1852, aged eighty-nine, and was buried at Highgate cemetery, Middlesex. 


@@@@@


doc= 15987


Landseer, Thomas (1793/4-1880), printmaker, was born at 71 Queen Anne Street, London, the eldest son of the engraver John George Landseer (1762/3-1852) and his wife, Jane Potts (1773/4-1840), and was baptized, along with the other Landseer children, in the parish of St Marylebone on 23 May 1821. He was the eldest brother of seven surviving children who all displayed artistic talents and received their earliest general training from their father. Edwin Landseer (1802-1873) was his youngest brother. With another brother, Charles Landseer (1799/1800-1879), he went on to study under the painter Benjamin Robert Haydon, when he was a fellow pupil of the young printmaker William Bewick (whose biography, 'Life and Letters of William Bewick (Artist)', he edited in 1871). 
Having been taught various engraving techniques by his father, Thomas Landseer produced his first published print, 'Study of the Head of a Sibyl' (1816), in a mixture of aquatint and etching after one of Haydon's drawings. He followed this in 1817 with a series of academic figure studies entitled 'Haydon's Drawing-Book', which he executed in soft-ground etching to emulate chalk drawing. Before this point he had etched a number of animal sketches, such as 'A Bull Marked T. W.' (1811), after sketches by his youngest brother Edwin. Throughout his career he reproduced more than 125 of Edwin's heroic animal paintings in a blend of etching and engraving, which can be seen in plates such as the 'Hunted Stag' (1848) or 'Monarch of the Glen' (1852). This characteristic style of engraving effectively captured the textures and tones of his brother's originals, and Sir Edwin's financial success and popular acclaim owed much to Tom's reproductions, which were usually sold for between 3 and 10 guineas, depending on whether they were artist's proofs or finished prints. Although he engraved a number of sporting subjects and satirical vignettes to illustrate respectively texts such as 'The Annals of Sporting and Fancy Gazette' (1822-8) or Coleridge's 'The Devil's Walk' (1831), Landseer always returned to animal subjects. Sometimes, as in the case of 'Twenty Engravings of Lions, Tigers, Panthers & Leopards' (1823), these were reproductions of ennobled prototypes by Rembrandt and Rubens; at other times he appealed to more scientific concerns with his 'Characteristic Sketches of Animals' (1832), which was dedicated to the Zoological Society. He also exploited graphic traditions in 'Monkeyana, or, Men in Miniature' (1827), where he depicted monkeys in fashionable dress, engaged in human activities, as a way of satirizing contemporary life. Landseer was also a painter, and between 1853 and 1877 he exhibited several landscape and genre paintings at both the British Institution and the Royal Academy. However, in 1867, when he was elected an associate of the Royal Academy, it was for his talents as an engraver. 
Surprisingly little is known of Thomas Landseer's private life or personality except that he was deaf, like his father, and was, according to his brother Edwin, rather dissolute and disorganized. He was the only one of his close family to marry, but the identity of his wife remains entirely unknown, probably as a result of her indiscretion. The nature of this was made clear in Haydon's diary when, in 1829, he mentioned that 'Tom Landseer... took back his wife after she had a child by another' ('Diary', ed. Pope, 3.398). Though this reference casts doubt on the paternity of George Landseer (1829-1878), Thomas brought him up as his own, and the boy followed in the family footsteps by becoming a portrait and a landscape painter. Towards the end of his life Landseer left his wife and moved in with his brother Charles and sister Jessie, at 11 Grove End Road, St John's Wood, where he died on 20 January 1880. He was buried at Highgate cemetery on 24 January, and his will, dated 28 April 1878, was read on 13 February. In it he left a fortune of around $45,000 to his executors Thomas Hyde Hills and Arnold William White, as well as a bequest of $5000 to the Artists' Orphan Fund and substantial legacies and annuities to various friends and family, including his sisters Jessie and Emma and the widow of his late son George. 


@@@@@


doc= 15988


Lane, Charles Richard William (1786-1872), army officer, son of John and Melissa Lane, was born on 29 October 1786, and baptized at St Martin-in-the-Fields, London, on 23 November 1786. He was nominated to a cadetship in 1806, and passed an examination in Persian and Hindustani, for which he was awarded a gratuity of 1200 rupees and a sword. His commissions in the Bengal infantry were: ensign (13 August 1807), lieutenant (14 July 1812), captain (30 January 1824; army 5 February 1822), major (30 April 1835), lieutenant-colonel (26 December 1841), and colonel (25 May 1852). He shared the Deccan prize as lieutenant 1st Bengal native infantry for 'general captures'. He sought permission in 1824 to change his name to Mattenby, but the request was refused as beyond the competence of the Indian government. He served with the 2nd native grenadier battalion in Arakan during the First Anglo-Burmese War in 1825, was timber agent at Naulpore in 1828, and was in charge of the commissariat at Dinapore in 1832. He married at Calcutta, on 18 March 1829, Miss Ursula Palma: she died in Kensington on 9 September 1847, aged thirty-nine. 
Lane commanded his regiment in Afghanistan under Sir William Nott in 1842, and commanded the garrison of Kandahar when the town was assaulted on 10 March 1842 by an Afghan force, which was repulsed with heavy loss. He was made CB on 27 December 1842. He married at Camberwell, on 23 March 1848, Maria, elder daughter of John Gibbs of Ballynora, co. Cork, captain in the Royal Cork city militia. He became major-general in 1854, lieutenant-general in 1866, and general in 1870. Lane died at his residence, Kandahar Villa, Jersey, on 18 February 1872, aged eighty-five. 


@@@@@


doc= 15989


Lane, Edward (1605-1685), Church of England clergyman, was elected a scholar at St Paul's School, London, where he was a pupil of Alexander Gill the elder. He was admitted on 4 July 1622 to St John's College, Cambridge, graduating BA in 1626 and proceeding MA in 1629. Ordained priest on 22 September 1628 he was presented in 1631 (admitted 24 March) to the vicarage of North Shoebury, Essex, by the crown, through the lord keeper, Thomas Coventry. He resigned on 28 January 1636, being presented by the same patron to the vicarage of Sparsholt, Hampshire. He was also rector of Lainston, Hampshire, a parish adjoining, probably from 1637. On 9 July 1639 he was incorporated MA at Oxford. In 1644, being a 'time of warre', Lane was absent from Sparsholt: he was recommended by the Westminster assembly on 27 February 1645 to fill the sequestrated benefice of Sholden, Kent. 
Lane's writings resulted from controversy. 'Look unto Jesus' (1663) expanded a sermon first preached before the Restoration, when it had stirred up controversy because it accepted the celebration of Christmas; it was published as a defence of the restored Church of England (bound with the British Library copy is an autograph manuscript entitled 'A taste of the everlasting ffeast... in Heaven'). 'Mercy Triumphant' (1680) and 'Du Moulin's Reflections Reverberated' (1681) attacked the assertion of Lewis Du Moulin's 'Moral Reflections on the Number of the Elect' (1680) that the elect might be fewer than one in a million as contrary to the gospel, harmful to godliness and troubled souls, and opposed to the riches of God's mercy. Postscripts to 'Du Moulin's Reflections' attacked transubstantiation (and in passing, Lutheran consubstantiation) and, against the Erastian Edmund Hickeringill, defended church courts. 'A discourse of the waters of Noah', left in manuscript at his death, was a reply to Thomas Burnet's 'The Sacred Theory of the Earth' (1684). 
Although Lane remained an incumbent throughout the interregnum, after the Restoration he wrote of Charles I as a saint and martyr. He also then defended divine right episcopacy, bowing at the name of Jesus, and the use of set forms of prayer, which he claimed to be the general practice of the Reformed churches. He argued that those who had taken the solemn league and covenant could conscientiously disavow it. Next to scripture he sought the guidance of 'my good Mother the Holy Church of England' ('Mercy Triumphant', 40). Roman Catholicism he considered a Babylon of error and novelty, and dissenting conventicles he scorned for blasphemy, narrowness, and sedition. Lane was convinced that the Jews would eventually be converted to Christianity. 
Lane's incumbency at Sparsholt lasted fifty years. He had collected and transcribed the parish registers from 1607, and was reputed to be an exemplary parish clergyman. He was also rector of Nursling, Hampshire, from 1667 until his death. He died on 2 September 1685 and was buried on 4 September in the chancel of Sparsholt church. His wife, Mary, had been buried on 27 October 1669. None of his children survived him: Edward, who had been in Ireland, was buried on 17 May 1660; Henry, baptized on 11 April 1639, who had been a scholar at New College, Oxford, was buried on 6 October 1659. 


@@@@@


doc= 15990


Lane, Edward William (1801-1876), orientalist, born on 17 September 1801 at Hereford, was a younger son of Theophilus Lane (1764-1814), prebendary of Hereford, and his wife, Sophia Gardiner, of Bath, a niece of the painter Thomas Gainsborough RA. His sister was Sophia Lane Poole, travel writer. Two of his nephews, (Reginald) Stuart Poole and (Edward) Stanley Poole ['see under 'Poole, Sophia Lane], as well as a great-nephew, Stanley Edward Lane-Poole, shared his interest in Egyptian matters. Another great-nephew, Reginald Lane Poole, was a historian. Lane attended grammar schools at Bath and Hereford, but much of his education was conducted by his mother, his father having died in 1814. Originally intending to study at Cambridge and enter the church, Lane instead followed his brother, Richard James Lane, into apprenticeship as an engraver under Charles Heath in London, but during the early 1820s his imagination was captured by Egypt, then a subject of popular fascination. He decided to make the Egyptian people and their language his life's work. 
Lane arrived in Egypt on 19 September 1825, likening his feelings to those of 'an Eastern bridegroom, about to lift up the veil of his bride' (manuscript draft of 'Description of Egypt', Bodl. Oxf., MS Eng. misc. d. 234, fol. 5). He lived exclusively in Muslim areas of Cairo, adopted local dress, and soon spoke Arabic fluently, moving freely in Egyptian society and recording the close observations that made his work so valuable. Although he primarily associated with the indigenous people, who knew him as Mansur Efendi, Lane also became acquainted with the small group of British Egyptologists and orientalists then assembling in Egypt: Henry Salt, John Gardner Wilkinson, Robert Hay, James Burton, Frederick Catherwood, Algernon Percy (Lord Prudhoe), Joseph Bonomi, and Major Orlando Felix. He worked extensively in Cairo and explored nearby archaeological sites such as Giza, Saqqara, and Dahshur, for he was intensely interested in ancient as well as modern Egypt during this stage of his career. Twice he ascended the Nile into Nubia as far as the second cataract. Before leaving Egypt he purchased Nefeeseh 
(Anastasoula Georgiou; 1820-1895)
, a Greek child who had been captured during the Greek War of Independence and sold as a slave in Cairo. 
After returning to London in June 1828 Lane composed 'Description of Egypt', a remarkable manuscript of some 300,000 words and almost 200 illustrations. Besides recording his travels through Egypt, it included geographical studies, essays on modern and ancient Egyptian history, and a description of the Nubians. The eminent London firm of John Murray agreed to publish the work, but postponed sending it to press, initially because of the crisis over the 'Reform Bill' of 1832. Frustrated by continuing publication delays and eager to return to Egypt, Lane took some chapters about modern Egyptian society that Murray had insisted on removing from 'Description' and proposed to develop them into a separate book. With the support of Lord Brougham, the Society for the Diffusion of Useful Knowledge contracted to publish the book and provided an advance payment which financed Lane's second trip to Egypt. When he returned to Cairo in December 1833, Lane quickly gathered his data and a year after his arrival began the fair copy of the book manuscript. A fierce outbreak of plague forced him in early 1835 to flee into Upper Egypt where he spent several months living in a tomb at Thebes before returning to England later that year. 'An Account of the Manners and Customs of the Modern Egyptians' (2 vols.) became an instant success after its publication in 1836 and is still used as a basic text by both Eastern and Western students of the Arab world. 
Soon after the appearance of 'Modern Egyptians', Murray cancelled plans to publish 'Description of Egypt', which was not published until almost 125 years after Lane's death. Greatly disappointed, Lane turned to other projects. One was his translation of the Arabic classic, the 'Thousand and one Nights' (3 vols., 1839-41); another was 'Selections from the Kur-an' (1843). Though 'Selections from the Kur-an' is the least substantial of Lane's major published works, it nevertheless contains valuable material and demonstrates his conviction that essential Middle Eastern literary works should be communicated to the English reading public. This was even more the case with the 'Thousand and one Nights', which Lane believed presented 'most admirable pictures of the manners and customs of the Arabs, and particularly of those of the Egyptians' (Lane, 'Modern Egyptians', 1.vi n.). It reigned as the leading English translation of the 'Nights' for decades, and its copious notes are stimulating micro-essays of enduring value. 
The course of Lane's later life was set in 1841 when he accepted an offer from his friend Algernon Percy (known as Lord Prudhoe, later the duke of Northumberland) to support the compilation of a definitive Arabic-English lexicon. The first step was to travel to Egypt and gather the Arabic lexicographical texts on which such a work had to be based. Lane sailed from England in July 1842, accompanied by Nefeeseh, whom he had married on 8 July 1840, and by his sister Sophia Poole and her two sons, Stanley and Stuart. For the next seven years they lived in Cairo, always in those parts of the city inhabited by local people, as Lane collated the material for the lexicon, assisted by an Egyptian language master, Sheykh Ibrahim al-Desuqi. Lane threw himself into the daunting task so thoroughly as to become a near recluse, often not leaving his house for months at a time. With his permission Sophia took selected passages from his 'Description of Egypt' manuscript and added her own experiences to form a series of letters to an imaginary correspondent in England. Prepared under Lane's general supervision, Sophia's 'The Englishwoman in Egypt' (3 vols., 1844-6) became a classic, especially prized for its observations of Egyptian women. 
The Lanes and Pooles returned to England in October 1849. After briefly living in Hastings, they moved to Worthing where they eventually settled at 1 Union Place. Sophia remained there until the household was dissolved after Lane's death; Stanley and Stuart soon departed for London to begin careers at the British Museum. At Worthing, Lane intensified his dedication to the lexicon project, working on it every day from early morning until late at night, except on Sundays, which were reserved for 'Bible' study in Hebrew, and on Friday afternoons when he received friends. Otherwise visitors were generally denied. Algernon Percy (by now duke of Northumberland) and later his widow continued their support, which the government supplemented by a civil-list pension. The first volume of the 'Arabic-English Lexicon' appeared in 1863, followed by succeeding volumes at fairly regular intervals. Lane was working on the sixth volume at the time of his death. His great-nephew Stanley Lane-Poole supervised publication of the remaining volumes, the eighth and final one appearing in 1893. The 'Lexicon', a monumental work of nineteenth-century scholarship, remained an indispensable resource for scholars throughout the twentieth century. A second series of volumes that Lane had originally projected for rarer Arabic words was never composed. 
Besides the works listed above, Lane published two essays in German -- one on Arabic lexicography and the other on Arabic pronunciation -- and he is considered to have been the anonymous author of a book about science and scripture. He also published a notable lithograph of the great pyramid in 1830, one of the few illustrations from his 'Description of Egypt' manuscript to appear during his lifetime. After Lane's death Stanley Lane-Poole selected notes from the 'Thousand and one Nights' and published them under Lane's name as 'Arabian Society in the Middle Ages' (1883). Another posthumous publication was 'Cairo Fifty Years Ago' (1896) which consisted of revised chapters about Cairo from 'Description of Egypt'. Not until 2000 was a complete edition of 'Description of Egypt' published. Lane was generally reluctant to accept honours -- family tradition strongly hints that he refused a knighthood -- but he received an honorary doctorate of literature from the University of Leiden and was a member of the German Oriental Society, the Royal Asiatic Society, the Royal Society of Literature, the Institut de France, and other learned institutions. He died on 10 August 1876 at his home in Worthing, survived by his wife, and was buried on 15 August in Norwood cemetery, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 15991


Lane, James Hunter (1806/7-1853), physician and medical journalist, was admitted a licentiate of the Royal College of Surgeons of Edinburgh in 1829, and graduated MD at Edinburgh University in 1830. 
Lane was honorary physician to the Cholera Hospital, Liverpool, during the epidemic of 1831-2, for which he received the thanks of the board of health, and he was physician to the Lock Hospital of the infirmary there in 1833. In 1834 he collaborated with James Manby Gully in a translation, 'A Systematic Treatise on Comparative Physiology', from the German of Frederick Tiedemann of Heidelberg. Lane contributed many articles to the medical papers, and for some time edited the 'Liverpool Gazette', which later became the 'Monthly Archives of the Medical Sciences'. In so doing he became well known for his 'outspoken and fearless criticism' on health questions. In 1840 he was appointed senior physician of the Lancaster Infirmary, and in the same year he brought out his 'Compendium of materia medica and pharmacy, adapted to the London pharmacopoeia, embodying all the new French, American, and Indian medicines, and also comprising a summary of practical toxicology'. This was a work of considerable worth in its day. Lane was shortly afterwards elected president of the Royal Medical Society of Edinburgh. He was also a fellow of the Linnean Society. 
For the last few years of his life Lane lived in London at 58 Brook Street, Grosvenor Square, and had an excellent practice. His death at Chain Pier Lodge, Brighton, on 23 June 1853, was caused by ascites. 


@@@@@


doc= 15992


Lane, Jane, Lady Fisher (d. 1689), royalist heroine, was the third daughter of Thomas Lane (1585-1660) and Anne Bagot ('b'. 1589, died in or after 1651), who married at Blithfield, Staffordshire, on 10 February 1610. Her father, 'a person of excellent reputation', resided at Bentley Hall, near Wolverhampton, and had 'a fair estate' (Clarendon, 'Hist. rebellion', 5.199) worth $700 a year, while her mother was the sister of Sir Hervey Bagot (1591-1660) ['see under 'Bagot family (per. c.1490-1705)], a wealthy baronet and MP for Staffordshire in the Long Parliament. Both families were royalists during the civil war. Thomas Lane served as a commissioner of array in 1642-3, while Jane's eldest brother, John, fought in the king's army as the colonel of a cavalry regiment and in 1643-4 was successively governor of Charles I's garrisons in Stafford and Rushall Hall. In May 1644 Bentley Hall was extensively looted by parliamentary forces. 
Following his defeat at the battle of Worcester on 3 September 1651, Charles II went into hiding, and by 8 September was at Moseley Hall, a few miles from Bentley. Having availed himself of a pass which Jane had recently obtained from the parliamentary governor of Stafford to visit a pregnant kinswoman, Ellen Norton, at Abbots Leigh near Bristol, he accompanied her as a manservant, under the assumed name of William Jackson. After spending the night at Bentley, Charles set off on the morning of 10 September, mounted on horseback before 'Mistress Lane'. According to an account published at the Restoration, over the next week the king's protectress 'comported herself with extraordinary prudence and fidelity' (Eglesfield, 212), particularly in the streets of Stratford upon Avon, where she and her royal companion collided with a troop of parliamentarian cavalry, a moment of extreme danger which she surmounted by a cool composure. As one contemporary ballad had it: '
In vain ye search, Bloodthirsty Men, to find 

Vailed Majesty; her Virtue makes you blind; 

Her faith out-acts your Malice; and your swords 
(Broadley, 219)' As they were accommodated at various inns on their southward progress, 'the loyal lady' (Eglesfield, 212) was always extremely solicitous about Charles's welfare, making sure that 'a good bed' was 'provided for him' and that he received the best food, 'which she often carried herself' to his chamber (Clarendon, 'Hist. rebellion', 5.202). Her solicitude was equally on display during his four-day sojourn at Abbots Leigh, and her quick thinking provided an excuse for Charles to move on to Trent, Somerset, despite the distraction of Mistress Norton's serious illness following a miscarriage. She counterfeited a letter to the effect that her father's serious illness required her immediate departure for Bentley, a ploy which worked admirably. After accompanying Charles to Trent, on 18 September she returned to Staffordshire, only to be forced to take flight herself when on 14 October information about her involvement in his escape was presented to the council of state. While troops fruitlessly searched Bentley Hall, she trudged on foot, disguised as 'a country wench' (Dauncey, 146), to Yarmouth, from where she took ship to France. 
When Jane arrived in Paris in mid-December 1651, she was welcomed by the English court in exile. Charles, who had landed in France two months before, greeted her with the salutation 'Welcome my life' (Eglesfield, 233) and conveyed her in his own coach to the Louvre to meet Henrietta Maria, with whom she developed a particularly close relationship. She was reputed a woman of 'an acute wit' and 'an excellent disputant', though no beauty, and all the emigre royalists were said to 'extremely adore her' ('French Intelligencer', 5, 16-23 Dec 1651, 36), including John Evelyn and his wife, whom she visited on 21 December. Although 'Mercurius Politicus' reported on 16 December that as 'a firm Presbyterian' (p. 1283) she refused to attend prayer book services with the king, he still held her 'in great esteem', and such was the 'merry discourse' ('French Intelligencer', 5, 16-23 Dec 1651, 36) between them that in March 1652 Sir John Finch reported a rumour that she had become Charles's mistress. This was probably false, though in several letters of May and June 1655 Charles's sister Mary, princess of Orange, referred to her in jest as his 'wife', while in March 1656 his aunt Elizabeth of Bohemia informed him of 'a wittie' but 'foolish' and 'malicious' libel circulating in The Hague that his former preserver 'lay with your Majestie' (Thurloe, 'State papers', 1.674). Jane herself was alleged to have brushed aside 'this ogley bisness', convinced of her own 'good carettor' and hoping that her detractors would not diminish her standing with the king 'which shall be the study of my wholl [life] to preserve' (Broadley, 34). 
By autumn 1652 Jane had entered the service of the princess of Orange, probably at the instigation of Charles, who wrote to her from Paris of his great debt to her. The princess proved a 'most obliging' employer, for which she was thanked by Charles ('Clarendon State Papers', 1786, 3.153); Jane was one of her attendants when she visited Frankfurt with Charles in October 1655. By this time, however, Jane claimed he was neglecting her, an accusation he denied. Having returned to The Hague, in July 1656 she was courted by Lord Newburgh, but this came to nothing. 
At the Restoration the king granted Jane an annual pension of $1000 and gave her many gifts, including portraits and a lock of his hair. On 19 December 1660 parliament, in gratitude for her service to the monarchy, gave her $1000 to purchase a jewel. Two years later, on 8 December 1662, Gilbert Sheldon, bishop of London, conducted her marriage to Sir Clement Fisher ('bap'. 1613, died 1683), baronet, of Packington, Warwickshire, MP for Coventry. Fisher had served as a captain in her brother John's regiment during the first civil war and had played host to him and Lord Wilmot as they shadowed Charles during his journey to Abbots Leigh in 1651. The Fishers had no children. After Sir Clement's death on 15 April 1683 Lady Fisher remained at Packington. By Lady day that year her state pension had fallen $6500 in arrears; this and her own extravagance placed her considerably in debt. She died on 9 September 1689, allegedly leaving 'but $10 behind' and observing that 'her hands should be her executors' (Burrows); she was buried at Packington three days later. The most famous of several surviving portraits of Jane depicts her allegorically with the crown of England in her right hand, over which she has partially drawn her lace veil to conceal it from the danger posed by a hydra (the Rump Parliament?) looming up on her left side. 


@@@@@


doc= 15993


Lane, John (fl. 1600-1630), poet, is of unknown parentage, though he may have been born in Somerset as this is the residence of at least three of his friends: Matthew Jefferies, master of choristers at Wells Cathedral, George Hancocke, and Sir Thomas Wyndham of Kentsford. Further, in 'Tritons Trumpet' (1621) Lane contrasts his 'western 'Poetrie'' to 'eastern 'Tussers' husbandry... as drewe fro 'Somerset', us to his queere'. In the dedication to his 1616 continuation of Chaucer's 'Squire's Tale' he relates that he has had no university education. 
The earliest date for Lane is given in an aside by Anthony Wood in his note on a John Lane who died in 1578, where Wood adds that 'there was one John Lane, a poet, about this time' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 2.189). This would seem to place Lane as early as the 1570s, if Wood's secondhand recollection can be trusted. William Riley Parker discusses a number of John Lanes living during the first half of the seventeenth century (Parker, 2.716), but there is no way to determine which is the subject of this article. In an entry in the Stationers' register, dated 23 June 1591, the title 'Tom Tell Trothe' is included among a list of some ninety works granted to Thomas Orwyn which formerly belonged to Thomas Marshe, deceased. This could be Lane's book although the plain-speaking figure of Tom Tell-Truth appears throughout the Renaissance and the 1600 edition does not mention Orwyn. The first definite record of Lane is the book in question: 'Tom Tell-Troths message and his pens complaint: a worke not unpleasant to be read, nor unprofitable to be followed' (1600). This work, which Lane calls 'the first fruites of my barren braine', is dedicated to George Dowse and consists of 120 six-line stanzas which enumerate the vices of England and lament the sorry state of the two universities. 
The only other poem Lane published during his lifetime was 'An Elegie upon the Death of the High and Renowned Princesse, our Late Soveraigne Elizabeth', published in 1603. This work is listed in an April 1603 entry in the Stationers' register, with the provision that the bookseller John Deane 'gett Aucthoritie for yt' before printing (Arber, 'Regs. Stationers', 3.36). No further record of Lane appears until 2 March 1615, which is the date of an imprimatur by John Taverner in Lane's continuation of Chaucer's 'Squire's Tale' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Douce 170), one of three works Lane left in manuscript. The manuscript is dated 1616 in the title and includes a short poem by John Milton sen., a close friend of Lane, among its dedicatory poems; interestingly, it is mistitled 'Spencers Squiers Tale', an error Lane corrects in his 1630 revised continuation (Bodl. Oxf., MS Ashmole 53). 
Lane's next work, 'Tritons Trumpet to the Twelve Monethes Husbanded and Moralized by John Lane... 1621', is a long pastoral modelled after the calendar structure of Spenser's 'Shepheardes Calender'. It exists in two manuscripts, both in Lane's hand (BL, Royal MS 17 B.xv and Trinity College, Cambridge, MS O.2.68). Lane begins each month with a husbandry section, modelled on Thomas Tusser, and then follows with a moral tale. In the November section Lane celebrates the elder Milton's musical ability. His 'Corrected historie of Sir Gwy, earle of Warwick... begun by Dan Lidgate... but now diligentlie exquired from all antiquitie' (BL, Harley MS 5243) is prefaced with a commendatory sonnet by the elder Milton. Although it bears an imprimatur by John Taverner, dated 13 July 1617, the 'Guy of Warwick' manuscript is dated 1621 in its title. The prose introduction to this work is printed in 'Bishop Percy's Folio Manuscript' (Hales and Furnivall, 2.521-5). 
On 25 May 1621 Lane and John Milton sen. bought some property at the north end of Gray's Inn Lane from a Dr Leonard Poe, which they sold on 22 April 1622 to James Kent. On 9 February 1622 Milton lent $50 to Edwarde Raymonde, who listed James Ayloffe as the surety for his debt, which was to be paid with interest in six months' time. A bond for $100 was made out to John Lane -- the extra being to cover potential costs if Lane were forced to go to court to collect the debt -- and throughout future legal writs on the loan Milton and Lane were usually named together. The whole matter ended in a series of lawsuits, during which time Raymonde died and Milton and Lane were forced to take Ayloffe to court to collect what remained of the debt. Ayloffe, of course, accused Milton and Lane of acting in collusion with Raymonde, and sued the two himself in a 1 May 1624 chancery bill, which Milton answered on 10 May of that year. What finally came of all of this is unknown, but it appears that throughout the course of legal wrangling Lane was a subsidiary figure. 
The next record of Lane is the 1630 revision of his earlier continuation of Chaucer's 'Squire's Tale': 'Chaucers piller, beinge his master-peece, called the squiers tale; wch hath binn given lost, for allmost thease three hundred yeares: but now fownd out, and brought to light by John Lane'. This revised manuscript, dedicated to 'the virtuous Queene Marie', omits most of the commendatory poems from the 1616 manuscript but adds a short poem, titled 'The Muse to the Fowre Windes', wherein Lane lists his works. He mentions 'more 'Poetick Visions'', alluding to a two-part work which Edward Phillips lists in his 1675 'Theatrum poetarum' but of which nothing is known, and his 'Alarum to Poets', which was finally printed in quarto in 1648. The 'Alarum to Poets' is Lane's final publication and is dedicated 'to the most ingenious classis laureat wheresoever'. Although the 'Alarum' was probably printed posthumously Lane must have lived for some time beyond 1630, the year in which Edward Phillips was born, since Phillips claims that Lane 'was living within my remembrance' (Phillips, 111). 
In his 'Theatrum poetarum' Phillips writes a glowing tribute to Lane, describing him as 'a fine old Queen 'Elizabeth' Gentleman' and asserting that, had his longer works been published, they 'might possibly have gain'd him a name not much inferiour, if not equal to 'Drayton', and others of the next rank to 'Spencer'' (Phillips, 111-12). Lane in fact self-consciously modelled his career on Spenser's; when listing his works at the end of the 'Alarum' (and elsewhere) he arranges them to suggest a move from pastoral to epic. His career, however, never blossomed, and he has had little if any influence on subsequent generations. 


@@@@@


doc= 15994


Lane, John Bryant (1788-1868), painter, was born at Helston in Cornwall, the son of Samuel Lane, chemist and exciseman, and Margaret Baldwin, his wife. Lane was educated at Truro until he was fourteen, when his interest in art was noticed by Francis Basset, baron de Dunstanville of Tehidy, whose patronage enabled him to enter the Royal Academy Schools in 1805. Lane was awarded a gold medal from the Society of Arts for a historical cartoon, 'The Angels Unbound', and soon started exhibiting works at the Royal Academy and the British Institution, including an altarpiece for a church built by Lord de Dunstanville in Cornwall (exh. RA, 1808); 'Christ Mocked by the Soldiers of Pilate after Flagellation', for the guildhall at Helston (exh. RA, 1811, British Institution, 1812); and 'Eutychus Restored to Life by St Paul' (exh. RA, 1813, British Institution, 1814), for a church in London. At Lord de Dunstanville's, Lane met the landscape painter and diarist Joseph Farington, who gave him encouragement and advised him 'to turn his thoughts to Portrait Painting as a means of getting money which he might do without prejudice to his main pursuit, History Painting' (Farington, 'Diary', 12.4340, 4 May 1813). In 1817 his patron sent him to Rome, where he remained for ten years, engaged on a gigantic picture, 'The Vision of Joseph', which he refused to show during progress. In 1827 he finally exhibited it at Rome, but details in it were found offensive by the papal authorities, who expelled both the artist and his picture from the papal dominions. Redgrave states that Lane then went to Dresden to study Correggio, sending the picture to London, where in 1828 he exhibited it in a room at the royal mews, Charing Cross. Its huge size and the surrounding controversy attracted attention, but from an artistic point of view it was a complete failure, and was left to decay in the Pantechnicon in Belgrave Square. The 'Gentleman's Magazine' declared that nevertheless 'with all his faults, Mr. Lane is a great painter' ('GM', 61). 
Lane settled once again in London and subsequently concentrated primarily on portrait painting. He had previously drawn and engraved a few portraits for 'The British Gallery of Contemporary Portraits' (1815 and 1822, Cadell and Davies, London), and from 1831 to 1834 he sent mostly portraits to the Royal Academy, as well as a few to the Society of British Artists. Among his sitters were Sir Hussey Vivian, Davies Gilbert MP (exh. RA, 1831), and Lord de Dunstanville (exh. RA, 1831; a second portrait, 'c'.1831, exh. RA, 1832, painted for the Royal Institution, Truro; Royal Cornwall Museum, Truro). Lane died, unmarried, at his home, 45 Clarendon Square, Somers Town, London, on 4 April 1868. 


@@@@@


doc= 15995


Lane, Sir Ralph (d. 1603), soldier and colonist, was of unknown parentage and education. He ranked in that restless corps of Tudor wanderers who schemed the advance of English interests in Ireland and America even as they chased fortunes for themselves. Nineteenth-century scholars presumed that he came from Horton, Northamptonshire, but those presumptions lack the sanction of unimpeachable evidence. However, it is certain that he acquired a taste for adventure through his experiences of the sea and soldiering. From the 1570s his name appears with some regularity in the correspondence of William Cecil and other crown officers, whom he relentlessly importuned for royal preferment. His persistence paid off, for by the mid-1580s he had received several Irish appointments, including the shrievalty of Kerry; he was also equerry of the queen's great stables. He then caught the attention of Sir Walter Ralegh, who recruited him in 1585 to lead a colonizing enterprise in North America. 
A year earlier Ralegh had sent an expedition to seek a site more suitable for settlement than Labrador or Newfoundland, inhospitable places that his predecessors had failed to settle. He planned a second foray to America even before his scouts returned to report their discoveries to him. To that purpose he amassed seven vessels, supplies, and upwards of 300 men, whose company included the mathematician Thomas Harriot and the artist and cartographer John White. Command of the fleet went to Sir Richard Grenville, but once the convoy reached their destination it was Lane who would govern the colony. 
The voyagers cast off from Plymouth on 9 April 1585. Their navigator, Simao Fernandes, a Portuguese seafarer and long-time employee of English explorers, steered towards their destination -- the coast of modern North Carolina, the place Ralegh styled Virginia in honour of Elizabeth I. Stops in the West Indies gave respite from a storm-tossed crossing and allowed Lane to adapt his skill at fortification to American conditions before the flotilla sailed northwards. In June it reached Wococon, one of the barrier islands that formed the outer ring of Pimlico Sound, and Fernandes carelessly ran his flagship aground. Damage proved minor, though the accident cost dearly because the vessel sprang leaks that spoiled a major part of the colony's provisions. Undaunted by their misfortune, Lane and Grenville explored Pimlico Sound, seeking a suitable place to settle. After many disagreements they chose Roanoke Island, where Lane laid out a fort and supervised the construction of housing even as he wrangled fiercely with Grenville. By the time Grenville sailed homewards in August for more supplies the breach between the two men was unbridgeable, and each attacked the other in letters to their superiors in England. Their quarrels foreshadowed troubles that were to dog the colony to the end of its days. 
Part of the difficulty lay with Lane. Vain, boastful, and fiery-tempered, he brooked little opposition. Then, too, being of a military background, he relied more upon arms than diplomacy, and that approach soured his dealings with the natives from the start. Moreover, Lane's men were suited more to fighting than to settling. They were mainly soldiers who had been recruited for wages and plunder instead of being picked for their talents as colonizers. In essence, they were a garrison in occupied territory. Everyone's survival therefore depended upon whatever forage the land and its indigenous people might yield. It was not the native way to stockpile surpluses of foodstuffs as trade goods, and so local tribes had little to spare, even though they eagerly bartered with the English until the supply of beads, bells, and other trinkets played out -- as it did by December 1585. Ralegh's provisioners had also neglected to include nets and other fishing equipment, which limited the settlers' chances of partaking of abundant fish stocks. Soldierly skill at shooting did not readily translate into marksmanship that successfully brought down game. 
Despite these hardships, Lane kept his men safely through the winter of 1585-6. The experience convinced him that time and diligent work might sustain a colony, but a more permanent settlement needed two things not readily found at Roanoke Island, a snug harbour and vendible commodities of high demand on English markets. In spring 1586 Lane set off to locate both. He discovered the one -- extant accounts indicate how he trekked northwards to the mouth of Chesapeake Bay -- but he never found the other. Instead, he had to battle the natives for survival. 
With Lane gone from Roanoke, the natives plotted the destruction of the governor and the colony. The local chieftain, whose name was Pemisapan, put it about that Lane intended to attack the natives above Roanoke, which stirred them to harass the governor and his foragers. In turn, the chief tried to undermine the guardians of the fort with tales of Lane's death and attempts to coax his own tribe to forsake Roanoke Island and so cause the soldiers to die of starvation. However, Lane fought his way back to the fort and eventually defeated his enemy. 
Shortly thereafter a fleet of English ships under Sir Francis Drake appeared. Drake volunteered some much needed supplies and one of his vessels to tide the settlers over until the expected arrival of Ralegh's relief convoy. A great storm blew up amid the transfer of the stores, which drove Drake's fleet out to sea and evidently broke the colonists' resolve to tarry longer. News that England and Spain neared war intensified doubts that Grenville might return any time soon, and Lane was hardly eager to confront him again. All things considered, Lane and his men opted to return to England with Drake. 
Barely two days after they all left, a relief ship, which sailed ahead of Grenville's main column, appeared off Roanoke. Finding none of their countrymen, the ship's company turned round and sailed for home. Grenville arrived a few weeks later only to discover a deserted fort and huts that bore signs of hasty abandonment. He scouted the area for a time before leaving a small holding party and enough provisions to keep them for upwards of two years and making for England. 
As for Lane, he landed at Portsmouth in July 1586. Thereafter he participated in preparing English coastal defences against a possible Spanish invasion. By the 1590s he was back in Ireland, where he became muster-master-general of the English garrisons and fought rebel Irishmen. Knighted for his services by the lord deputy of Ireland, Sir William Fitzwilliam, Lane lived out his remaining days in Dublin. He died there and was buried in St Patrick's Church on 28 October 1603. 
The most notable achievements of the Roanoke expedition were not Lane's. They belonged instead to Thomas Harriot and John White. Harriot's 'A Briefe and True Report of the New Found Land of Virginia' described Virginia as a real land of plants and animals and people to be exploited by the English. White supplied beautifully accurate drawings of the Carolina flora and fauna, and in the hands of the Dutch engraver Theodor de Bry these became illustrations for multilingual editions of Harriot's volume that de Bry marketed all across Europe. Harriot and White's work also informed the writings of the greatest of all sixteenth-century promoters of English colonization, Richard Hakluyt the younger, whose tireless efforts led to the founding of Jamestown in 1607. 


@@@@@


doc= 15996


Lane, Sir Richard (bap. 1584, d. 1650), barrister, was the first son of Richard Lane, yeoman of Courteenhall, Northamptonshire, and his wife, Elizabeth, daughter of Clement Vincent of Harpole, Northamptonshire, and was baptized at Harpole on 12 November 1584. He attended Westminster School and matriculated at Trinity College, Cambridge, as a scholar in 1602. From Cambridge he proceeded to the Middle Temple where he was admitted on 8 February 1605 and was called to the bar on 22 November 1611. Lane appears to have practised primarily in the court of exchequer -- a court on whose bench he would later serve. He also served as deputy recorder of Northampton in 1615 and as recorder in 1628. He was possibly a patron or relation of the poet Thomas Randolph who dedicated to Lane his 'The Jealous Lovers' of 1632. On 30 October 1629 the Middle Temple chose him as Lent reader for 1630 and in 1634 he became attorney-general to the prince of Wales. In 1635 he served as counsel to the University of Cambridge and on 12 June that year he became a bencher of his inn. He became treasurer of the Middle Temple in 1637 and in May 1638 Henry, earl of Holland, nominated him as his deputy in forest courts. 
Early in 1641 Lane served as legal counsel to Thomas Wentworth, first earl of Strafford, during his impeachment and attainder on a charge of high treason in the Long Parliament. On 17 April 1641 during the debate on the bill of attainder Lane argued that the statute 1 Hen. IV c. 10 had effectively repealed the declaratory power invested in parliament by the great 'Statute of Treasons' (25 Ed. III). As a result the Long Parliament had neither the law nor the authority to proceed against Wentworth by bill of attainder. Parliament, however, rejected this argument and Charles I reluctantly gave his assent to the bill of attainder on 10 May 1641. The unfortunate Wentworth was duly beheaded on Tower Hill on 12 May 1641. 
Lane also served as counsel to the impeached ship money judge Sir Robert Berkeley from October 1641 and the imprisoned twelve bishops in January 1642. Like most of the judiciary and crown law officers he remained loyal to the king at the outbreak of general hostilities with the Long Parliament in the summer of 1642. Upon joining Charles I at Oxford the king quickly rewarded Lane and he received the degree of MA from the University of Oxford on 1 November 1642. In 1643 the Long Parliament ordered that his 'chambers, goods, chattels and books' at the Middle Temple be seized and his estate sequestered for his adherence to the king (Hopwood, 1005). From the king, however, there were only further rewards. On 4 January 1644 Charles knighted Lane at Oxford and on 23 January raised him to the degree of serjeant-at-law in a ceremony held at the philosophy school. Two days later he was made chief baron of the exchequer and on 31 January he received the degree of DCL from the University of Oxford. In January 1645 he was one of the king's commissioners at the failed Uxbridge negotiations where he resisted parliamentarian demands that parliament have sole control of the militia. 
Upon the death of Sir Edward Littleton the king appointed Lane on 30 August 1645 as lord keeper of the great seal. When Oxford surrendered to Sir Thomas Fairfax on 24 June 1646 Lane acted on the king's behalf. In negotiating the articles of capitulation he struggled unsuccessfully to retain control of the great seal, the seals of the other courts, and the sword of state. Fairfax sent the items to parliament and on 3 July 1646 the Long Parliament resolved to have the king's seal destroyed. This was accomplished on 11 August 1646, the seal being ceremonially broken up by a smith and its remnants distributed between the speakers of both houses. Charles II renewed his patent and Lane remained the Stuarts' nominal lord keeper until his death. He followed the newly disinherited king into exile, landing at St Malo in March 1650 in poor health. About this time he wrote to the king asking him to make his eldest son, Richard ('b'. 1616), a groom of the bedchamber -- a request that the king fulfilled. Lane subsequently moved to Jersey where he died on 12 May 1650 and was buried at St Helier. James, duke of York, attended the funeral. Lane's wife, Margaret, died on 22 April 1669. Although Lane had entrusted his chambers, library, and goods to his friend Bulstrode Whitelocke, the latter would later deny all knowledge when Lane's son applied for them. 
Lane's lasting significance lay in his legal reporting activities, notably as the posthumous author of 'Reports in the court of exchequer beginning in the third, and ending in the ninth year of the raign of the late King James' (1657), which contained an important report of Chief Baron Sir Thomas Fleming's opinion in 'Bate's case' (1606). Charles Francis Morrell reprinted this set of reports in a new edition of 1884 and they were incorporated into 'The English Reports' in 1914. 


@@@@@


doc= 15997


Lane, Richard James (1800-1872), lithographer and sculptor, was born on 16 February 1800 at Berkeley Castle, Gloucestershire, the second son of the Revd Theophilus Lane (1764-1814), prebendary of Hereford Cathedral, and his wife, Sophia, 'nee' Gardiner, the niece of the painter Thomas Gainsborough. He was the elder brother of the Arabic scholar Edward William Lane. He married, on 10 November 1825, Sophia Hodges, with whom he had two sons and three daughters. 
From childhood Lane showed an interest in practical and artistic things, and at the age of sixteen he was apprenticed to the line engraver Charles Heath. After completing his apprenticeship he worked as an engraver for some years, and in 1827 produced a fine print after Sir Thomas Lawrence's 'Red Riding Hood'. By this time he had become dissatisfied with the commercialization of engraving and had abandoned it for lithography, a process Heath had been one of the first to practise in Britain. Lane's earliest lithographs date from 1824, and in this year his skills were recognized by the leading lithographic printer Charles Hullmandel, who employed him to produce a title vignette for his 'Art of Drawing on Stone' (1824) and referred to him briefly in his text as though he was already one of the most accomplished lithographers in Britain. Lane maintained a close association with Hullmandel, who printed nearly all his early lithographs and also called on him for his 'On Some Important Improvements in Lithographic Printing' (1827) to illustrate a method of making changes to a drawing on stone once printing had begun. Lane soon established a reputation for the quality of his craftsmanship in lithography and thereby helped to raise the status of this fledgeling process by achieving something of the 'finish' of engraving that was so sought after at the time. He was particularly praised for his delicate crayon work, which, especially in small-scale prints, was unsurpassed in Britain. He first exhibited at the Royal Academy in 1824 and continued exhibiting there regularly until his death, and also occasionally at the Suffolk Street Gallery. He was elected an ARA in 1827. Not long before this he had dedicated his 'Studies of Figures by Gainsborough' (1825) to the president of the Royal Academy, Sir Thomas Lawrence. Lane produced most of the plates of this work in tinted lithography in imitation of Gainsborough's crayon originals, many of which were drawn on tinted paper and touched up with white. The outcome was one of the most remarkable applications of tinted lithography in the 1820s. 
Lane worked mainly as a reproductive lithographer and produced several sets of lithographs which were much praised at the time, including 'Illustrations of the Late John Philip Kemble' (1826) and 'Lithographic Imitations of Sketches by Modern Artists' (1827). However, his specialism was portraiture, and he produced hundreds of lithographs of this kind, including portraits of Queen Victoria and members of the royal family, leading artists and actors, and other notable figures, among them Lord Byron. The quality of his portrait lithography was reflected in the fees he charged, which in 1849 were sometimes as high as $100. He also took on other kinds of reproductive work, notably some of the tinted lithographs for J. F. Lewis's 'Lewis's Sketches and Drawings of the Alhambra' (1835). His total number of prints is recorded as 1046. Victoria sat for him in 1829 when she was a ten-year-old princess, and he made other portraits of her when she was queen, some of which he lithographed. In 1837 he was appointed lithographer to the queen, and three years later to the prince consort. He also made statuettes, and in 1835 he executed a life-size seated statue of his brother Edward in Egyptian dress. His bust of this brother ('c'.1833) is in the Bodleian Library, Oxford. Lane had acted as assistant to the sculptor J. E. Carew and gave evidence for his master in a lawsuit of 1840. 
Towards the end of his life Lane taught at the government School of Design (later the Royal College of Art). In 1864 he took over the etching class, which had been established by J. M. Delatre not long before; he also taught lithography there. In 1865 he was largely instrumental in securing the right of engravers to be admitted as full academicians. Perversely, he has attracted most attention since his death in connection with a set of four portraits of the North family, drawn by Ingres in Rome in 1815 and printed by Hullmandel in London in the early 1820s, which -- it has been suggested -- he may have put on stone. He was noted for his fine tenor voice and remarkable memory, which included the ability to recite. In addition to his circle of artist friends, he was at home with leading figures from the opera and theatre; among his closest friends were Charles Kemble (whose 'Readings from Shakespeare' he edited in 1870), W. C. Macready, C. A. Fechter, and Maria Felicia Malibran. He wrote three works, including 'Life at the Water Cure, or, A Month at Malvern' (1846). He died at his home, 19 Gloucester Terrace, Campden Hill, Kensington, on 21 November 1872. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 15998


Lane, Samuel (1780-1859), portrait painter, was born on 26 July 1780 at King's Lynn, Norfolk, the oldest of the five children of Samuel Lane (1749-1835), collector of taxes, and his wife, Elizabeth (1753-1832), daughter of the Revd Anthony Mayhew. At the age of seven he became deaf following an accident, said to be a fall into the river mud near his home in Purfleet Street. As a result he was never able to speak distinctly. He later went to London, where he studied under Joseph Farington for three years, and on 21 June 1800 at the age of twenty he was admitted to the Royal Academy Schools and became a pupil of Thomas Lawrence. From about 1802 he was employed by Lawrence as a studio assistant, although the arrangement was not without problems: 'I go on badly with Mr Lawrence. He does not employ me in a regular way, & I lose much time in consequence of his being undetermined how to employ me' (Farington, 'Diary', 7.2751, 7 May 1806). Despite this, he remained with Lawrence for several years and at his death in 1830 Lane completed portraits left unfinished in his studio. 
For most of his career Lane remained in London, living at 60 Greek Street, Soho. He contributed over 200 portraits to the Royal Academy, exhibiting almost every year between 1804 and 1857. In 1805 he received the freedom of King's Lynn after presenting to the corporation a portrait of George III, copied from the original portrait by Sir Joshua Reynolds. He exhibited with the Norwich Society of Artists between 1819 and 1829 and in London with the British Institution in 1819 and the Society (later Royal Society) of British Artists in 1832. Lane's honest, if somewhat prosaic, likenesses attracted numerous commissions. He had a wide range of sitters. They ranged from the distinguished, such as Robert Southey (1824; Balliol College, Oxford), and the exotic, Raden Rana Dipura, a Javanese chief who accompanied Sir R. S. Raffles to England (exh. RA, 1818), to the infant son of Mr and Mrs Bartley of the Theatre Royal, Drury Lane (exh. RA, 1826). Several of the portraits were for presentation, for example a portrait of Luke Hansard (Palace of Westminster, London) painted in 1828 for the Stationers' Company and another of Thomas William Coke MP (priv. coll.) painted in 1832 for the Norwich Corn Exchange. Many were engraved by other artists. Lane retained his links with his native Norfolk, and carried out commissions for several wealthy families in the area. One of his sitters, the Revd Thomas Hankinson of King's Lynn, wrote in 1838 that he communicated with Lane in 'finger-talk'. He continued: 'I like Lane very much, and were it not for his unfortunate infirmity should hold a good deal of interesting talk with him' ('Samuel Lane Centenary'). Lane married three times. His first wife was Eliza (1802-1831), daughter of Samuel Lillistone, merchant, of Beccles, Suffolk; they married at Barsham, Suffolk, on 3 September 1829. She died following the birth of their son in London in June 1831. Lane married, second, at St Pancras, on 3 March 1835, Catherine Jane (1803-1839), daughter of Thomas Powys. Their son Horatio Powys Lane (1836-1884) was later commissioned in the Madras Infantry and was the subject of a portrait by Lane (exh. RA, 1856). They also had two daughters. He married, third, at Petworth, Sussex, on 4 February 1840, Elizabeth ('b'. 1800/01), daughter of Charles Murray. In 1853 he moved to Ipswich, where he died on 29 July 1859 at his home at 2 Paragon's Buildings, Lower Brook Street. He was buried in Ipswich cemetery, and was survived by his third wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 15999


Lane, Theodore (c.1800-1828), painter and etcher, is said to have been born at Isleworth, Middlesex, in 1800, but the statement is not confirmed by the parish register. His father, who came from Worcester, was a struggling drawing-master, and as a result Lane received little formal education. At the age of fourteen he was apprenticed to the miniature painter John Barrow of Weston Place, St Pancras. 
Lane first came to notice as a painter of watercolour portraits and miniatures, and he exhibited four works of that class at the Royal Academy in 1819, 1820, and 1826. However, his talent was for humorous subjects, and a series of thirty-six subjects designed and etched by him, entitled 'The Life of an Actor', with a letterpress by Pierce Egan, was published in 1825. Lane also etched a number of sets of satirical and comic prints of sporting and social life, such as 'The Masquerade at the Argyle Rooms', 'Scientific Pursuits, or, Hobby Horse Races to the Temple of Fame', and 'A Trip to Ascot Races', a series of scenes on the road from Hyde Park Corner to Ascot Heath, which he dedicated to George IV in 1827. He also illustrated with etchings and woodcuts 'A Complete Panorama of the Sporting World' and Egan's 'Anecdotes of the Turf, the Chase, the Ring, and the Stage' (1827). 
About 1825 Lane took up oil painting, and, with the help of Alexander Fraser, rapidly attained proficiency in the medium. In 1827 he exhibited 'The Christmas Present, or, Disappointment', at the Royal Academy, and 'An Hour before the Duel' at the British Institution. The following year he showed 'Disturbed by the Nightmare' at the Royal Academy, 'Reading the Fifth Act of the Manuscript' at the British Institution, and 'The Enthusiast' at the Society of British Artists. The humorous treatment of the subjects and their delicate finish attracted much attention. 
Lane's promise was not to be fulfilled, however; his life was terminated by a freak accident. While waiting for a friend at the horse repository in Gray's Inn Road, he struck his head on a skylight and suffered a fatal fall. He died at his home, 79 Judd Street, Brunswick Square, London, on 21 May 1828 and was buried at St Pancras Old Church on 28 May. He left a widow and two children, for whose benefit his best-known work, 'The Enthusiast' (Tate collection), representing a gouty angler fishing in a tub of water, was engraved by Robert Graves. The work was later purchased by Robert Vernon and engraved by Henry Beckwith for the 'Art Journal' (1850). A work in oils, entitled 'The Mathematician's Abstraction', which was unfinished at his death, was completed by Fraser and purchased by Lord Northwick; it was engraved by H. Graves. In 1831 Egan published 'The Show Folks', illustrated with nine woodcuts designed by Lane. The text was accompanied by a detailed and humorous memoir of the artist, emphasizing a 'mild and peaceable' character unaffected by the foibles of the theatrical and sporting worlds he depicted (Egan, 50). Examples of his work are in the British Museum and the Victoria and Albert Museum, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 16000


Lane, Thomas (b. c.1660, d. in or after 1704), civil lawyer, was born at Glendon, Northamptonshire, the son of Francis Lane, landowner, of Glendon Hall, and his wife, Mary Bernard. Educated at a school in Higham Ferrers, Northamptonshire, he matriculated from St John's College, Cambridge, in 1673 and graduated BA in 1678. He then moved to Oxford, where he was admitted a commoner of Christ Church, and on 10 October 1678 was incorporated BA. In 1679 he was elected a probationer fellow of Merton College. His election was only one of the continuous subjects of dispute between the warden, Sir Thomas Clayton, and the fellows of Merton, but it was notable for its acrimony and for the warden's decisive defeat. Lane's champion was William Bernard (later DD), vicar of Overton, Wiltshire, and of the Merton living of Malden, Surrey. Bernard was a longstanding opponent of Clayton, and Lane was probably his kinsman. 
Lane graduated MA in December 1683, read civil law, and proceeded to the DCL in July 1686. He was admitted to practice in Doctors' Commons later that year and established a strong reputation as an advocate. He was then reputed to have turned papist, and he accompanied Francis Taafe, later earl of Carlingford, on a mission to Vienna, but he was also active in the affairs of his college, where Wood believed that he had sought to build a Northamptonshire faction. Early in 1688, when Lane was serving as bursar, he left Oxford with an account undischarged and a sum of college money in his possession which the sub-warden followed him to retrieve, apparently without rancour or other consequences. 
In 1689 Lane took a more dramatic course. In 1685 Merton had celebrated James II's succession with bonfires and toasts in claret, and contributed volunteers to the troop raised in the university to resist Monmouth's rebellion. Now Lane went to Ireland and accepted a command in James II's army there. He was wounded and taken prisoner at the battle of the Boyne, and spent a year in captivity in Dublin. Before the end of 1691, however, he returned to Merton, and soon afterwards was in practice again in the court of arches. Wood observed, with something less than his customary sharpness, that Lane's taste for adventure had been satisfied and that he had come to value the college as a haven. In 1704 Lane was a candidate for the wardenship, which would have been a piquant climax to his career in Merton. There is no later notice of him, and he probably died soon afterwards. 
Lane was evidently persuasive, and he had other qualities. His learning was not confined to the civil law. Wood says that he contributed to Moses Pitt's 'English Atlas' (Oxford, 1680-84), probably collaborating directly with its literary director, William Nicolson, later bishop of Carlisle and of Derry, with whom he shared philological interests. He translated Cornelius Nepos's life of Epaminondas (1684) and took part in a scheme to reorganize the Ashmolean Museum. His enthusiasms seem never to have outrun his energies, nor yet his resourcefulness. 


@@@@@


doc= 16001


Lane, William (1746-1819), portrait draughtsman and engraver, of whose parents nothing is known, began his career as an engraver of gems, exhibiting such works at the Royal Academy from 1778 to 1789. In 1785 Lane exhibited a crayon portrait of Mrs Siddons among others. He later became an established and successful artist in this medium, his drawings being delicate and accurately drawn. Between 1798 and 1815 he exhibited a further forty-four portraits at the Royal Academy. Lane also engraved a few small copperplates after works by Richard Cosway and Sir Joshua Reynolds. His portraits were admired for their accuracy as likenesses. He was patronized by the prince regent and many of the nobility. A portrait of Francis Russell, fifth duke of Bedford, and a composite group, 'Whig Statesmen and their Friends', also in chalk, are in the National Portrait Gallery, London. A copy by Lane of Reynolds's portrait of Charles James Fox is in the Royal Collection. A few of Lane's works were engraved, by F. C. Lewis among others. He died at his home in the Hammersmith Road, London, on 4 January 1819. 
Miss Anna Louisa Lane, who was related to Lane, exhibited at the Society of Artists and the Royal Academy from Lane's address, 130 Pall Mall, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 16002


Langham, Robert (c.1535-1579/80), mercer, was reputedly the author of a description of the entertainment given by Robert Dudley, earl of Leicester, for Elizabeth I at Kenilworth Castle in the summer of 1575. All that is known for certain about him is that he was apprenticed to William Leonard and admitted to the freedom of the Mercers' Company in 1557, so that he was probably born in the mid-1530s. He received payments of $10 each April from 1573 to 1579 as keeper of the council chamber: on 13 April 1580 the sum was paid to his widow for his pains during the last year, and on 29 November of the same year letters of administration were granted to his widow, Mary, of the parish of St Mildred in Bread Street ward. 
The description of the entertainment has the title 'A letter: whearin, part of the entertainment vntoo the Queenz Maiesty, at Killingwoorth Castl, in Warwik Sheer in this soomerz progress 1575. iz signified: from a freend officer attendant in the coourt, vntoo hiz freend a citizen, and merchaunt of London'. It usefully complements the description given of 'The princelie pleasures at Kenelworth Castle' by George Gascoigne, one of their devisers, in an account of 1576, which survives in his 'Whole Works' of 1587. The 'Letter' also supplies a list of books owned by Captain Cox, a Coventry mason and leader of the Hock-Tuesday play; it is an important source for the ballads, romances, plays, and popular literature of the time. The account has been well known since it was reprinted at Warwick in 1784; it was included in John Nichols's editions of 'The Progresses and Public Processions of Queen Elizabeth' (1788 and 1823). Scott drew on it in his novel 'Kenilworth' (1821), in which Langham makes an appearance as a minor character. 
The 'Letter' survives in two editions; neither supplies any information about who printed them, when or where, but they may have been printed about 1578 and after 1580. An earlier edition, published shortly after 'this soomerz progress' in 1575, may have been suppressed. The 'Letter', dated from Worcester on 20 August 1575, is addressed to Humfrey Martyn, the son of Sir Roger Martyn, a master of the Mercers' Company: Humfrey Martyn, younger and richer than Langham, was admitted to the company by patrimony in 1570 and to the livery on 23 July 1572. The two were evidently only recently acquainted, which allows Langham to tell Martyn a certain amount about himself. In the course of the 'Letter' the writer refers to himself as 'Lanham' or 'Laneham', 'Langham', 'Ro. La.', and 'R. L. Gent. Mercer', as well as 'the blak Prins' or 'El prencipe negro' (Langham, 58, 78, 36, 80). 
Making use of a distinctive orthography, the writer of the 'Letter' is portrayed as an egocentric and amiable buffoon, with antiquarian tastes and a love for old stories, for music and dancing, and for food and drink. The 'Letter' supplies further biographical details. Langham was educated at St Anthony's and St Paul's schools in London, was apprenticed to 'Master Bomsted', travelled in France and Flanders with Bomsted and on his own, and learned foreign languages, including Spanish, through his business. He is described as a 'Merchauntaventurer, and Clark of the Councell chamber doore': an account of his day in this last office is supplied. Leicester is referred to as his patron who got him the post with the privy council as well as a 'licenz of Beanz' which, he adds, he needs to use much (Langham, 36, 76, 80); his father is said to be a servant of the earl in his stables. In London after work he frequents the establishments of Sir George Howard and Lady Sidney. His friends are stated to include Thomas Pullison, a merchant and future lord mayor of London, Thomas Smith, customer of the port of London, a 'Master thorogood' (perhaps William Thoroughgood of St Antholin, Budge Row), and another mercer, Thomas Denman. 
Some of these details have a circumstantial plausibility. An Edward Langham, gentleman, was granted livery by the earl of Leicester in 1559, received payments for supplying food for his hawks, and served him in Ireland. A John Laneham was an actor and member of Leicester's theatrical company in 1572-4; later he joined the Queen's Men, of which he became a leading member, and was involved in the Marprelate controversy. 'Master Bomsted' can be identified with Christopher Bompsted, who had been freed as an apprentice mercer in 1541. No independent record, however, can be found of Robert Langham as a pupil at either of the two schools, the post of clerk of the council chamber door is otherwise unknown, and no licence for beans has been found. 
The question of the authorship of the 'Letter' has been much debated. Its editor, R. J. P. Kuin, has argued that it is an authentic account by Langham, but others (David Scott and Brian O'Kill) believe that it is the work of William Patten, who published it as a joke at Langham's expense: this second view has been accepted by some authorities, including the 'Short-Title Catalogue' and the revisers of Halkett and Laing's 'Dictionary of Anonymous and Pseudonymous Publications' (1980). The argument for Patten's authorship is based on several elements. These include similarities of form, style, subject matter, and phraseology shared between the 'Letter' and Patten's acknowledged work; Patten's practice of annotating his own publications and the resemblance between his hand and the hand which appears in the two annotated copies of the 'Letter'; the fact that Patten himself played a part in the Kenilworth festivities, contributing some Latin verses, which Gascoigne records as by 'M. Paten', to welcome the queen; and the distinctive orthography and language of the 'Letter', which shares forms and a fondness for archaisms and coinages used by Patten in his works. Finally, a letter from Patten to William Cecil, Lord Burghley, dated from London on 10 September 1575, among the Hatfield House papers, relates how he has heard from his 'good freend' the master of requests, Thomas Wilson, 'hoow the book waz too be supprest for that Langham had complaynd vpon it, and ootherwize for that the honorabl enterteinment be not turned intoo a iest'. Patten reports that he has sent out six copies of the book (to Burghley, to Wilson, and to the lord keeper, Sir Nicholas Bacon), and has 'not let three more pass me, but haue & suppress them all'. Langham has seen a copy and Patten professes himself 'sory... that he takez it so noow' (Hatfield House, MS 8/52). 
These strong arguments in favour of Patten's authorship leave a number of questions unanswered about his possible motivation in wishing to mock Langham, the dangers he ran of causing offence to those powerful people and institutions satirized by association in the 'Letter', and about Burghley's part in the events. Furthermore, Patten was not the only writer of the time to make use of distinctive phonetic forms (John Cornet and Leonard Staveley favoured a similar style) and archaic vocabulary, and, if he did annotate copies of the 'Letter', it does not necessarily follow that he wrote it. The circumstances in which the account was reprinted before and after Langham's death are unexplained. If the suppressed edition to which Patten refers was identical with the surviving text of the 'Letter', then it must have been printed and called in between 20 August and 10 September 1575. It is possible, however, either that the text of the 'Letter' published and suppressed in 1575 was different from the one that survives in the later prints, or that Patten wrote a work, now lost, mocking Langham's account of Kenilworth which had to be withdrawn. Finally, although the 'Letter' presents Langham in a comic light, it does so mainly in the last two or three out of just under ninety pages, and some of the mockery can be read as self-mockery. 


@@@@@


doc= 16003


Lany, Benjamin (1591-1675), bishop of Ely, was born in Ipswich, Suffolk, the fourth of at least five sons, and one of twelve children of John Lany ('bap'. 1547, died 1633), barrister and recorder of the town, and his wife, Mary (1551?-1633), daughter of John Poolie, esquire, of Badley in the same county. He matriculated as a pensioner from Christ's College, Cambridge, in July 1608, graduating BA in 1612 and proceeding MA in 1615. Elected a fellow of Pembroke College in 1616, he was ordained deacon and priest in February 1619, and became first curate of Harston, Cambridgeshire, and then, from 1619 to 1624, vicar of Madingley, also in Cambridgeshire. Meanwhile in 1622 he proceeded BD. 
In 1625, at the king's request, Lany was given two years' leave of absence from Pembroke to be chaplain to Sir Edward Barrett, then appointed ambassador to France. Not only did he retain his fellowship and emoluments, but he was also elected college praelector in philosophy for a year. Bishop Richard Neile of Durham recognized Lany as an impressive scholar and preacher, and perhaps assisted his preferment in 1626 to Hambledon, Hampshire. From 1627 to 1629 he was absent from Pembroke and gained other Hampshire preferments. Following Neile's translation to Winchester in 1628 the bishop presented him to Waltham Bishops and made him his chaplain in 1629, and presented him to Buriton with Petersfield; he made him a prebendary of Winchester in 1631. In the metropolitan visitation of 1635 he was active as a commissary investigating migration of English families to the Huguenot congregation in Southampton. 
Meanwhile, in 1630 Lany proceeded DD. On Christmas day that year, through the considerable influence of Neile and of Bishop William Laud of London, he was elected master of Pembroke College. He did not prove a good administrator, so records from his mastership are deficient or non-existent. However, he was probably responsible for building the north side of the second court and extending the master's lodge, and was certainly responsible for the college hall. He also ensured that the chapel was repaired. Richard Crashaw, a devoted pupil, suggests that it lost its austerity in worship, and perhaps that vestments were introduced. Lany beautified the altar with tapers and many-coloured draperies and hangings, and possibly raised it at the east end. Perhaps he was responsible for the cherubim and eighty 'superstitious' pictures destroyed by the parliamentary commissioners in 1642. Much of the Sunday service was sung by a small choir, with anthems, accompanied by an organ, replacing psalms. Bowing towards the altar and facing east were stressed. The number of Arminian fellows was notable; some, like Mr Randall, insisted that students should subscribe to Whitgift's three articles before graduating. Seven were complained of in 1641. These included Eleazor Duncon, who had argued that good works were necessary to salvation and had been favoured by Lany as moderator in 1633. Another fellow, John Turnay, preached in 1634 against Roman Catholic charges of antinomianism, arguing that faith worked with love in good works, increasing justification. He was brought before the vice-chancellor's court, and was later denied his BD for repeating this. Lany successfully resisted his condemnation, and perhaps secured Charles I's intervention in Turnay's favour. 
In 1632-3 Lany was vice-chancellor of the university. In this capacity he took a lead in prosecuting puritans and Calvinists, as in the cases of Richard Spinke of St John's College, who made a commonplace against clerical absenteeism, ceremonies, and chapel ornamentation, and Lionel Gatford, fellow of Jesus College, who preached against Arminianism. Later Lany was one of the group who defended it in the vice-chancellor's court. In 1634 he supported Peter Hausted of Queens' College in abusively advocating ceremonies, and attacking lectures and chaplaincies. In 1636, when John Normanton of Gonville and Caius College attacked justification by faith alone, and praised fasting and penance, Lany supported him in refusing to give a copy of his sermon to the vice-chancellor unless articles were brought against him. When in 1637 Sylvester Adams preached in Great St Mary's that confession to a priest was necessary to salvation, the non-Laudian heads of house regarded this as popish, and urged recantation. Lany was one of those dissenting because he did not wish to discourage auricular confession. In 1640 he was among the doctors who acquitted William Norwich of Peterhouse when accused of preaching that people were justified by works as well as faith. With other Arminian heads of house he repeatedly helped secure similar acquittals. 
Lany's stance led to his being appointed a royal chaplain in 1634, and he served annually thereafter. In June 1639 he was made prebendary of Westminster Abbey. However, his actions and attitudes made him an object of opprobium and suspicion to puritans, especially when proteges like John Normanton became Roman Catholics; in 'Canterburies Doome' William Prynne described Lany as one of Laud's creatures. On the outbreak of the civil war Pembroke College sent all its plate, except the foundress's and anathema cups, to the king. When, with other heads of houses, Lany refused a contribution to parliament and the imposition of an oath which would have forced him to betray his colleagues, he became a prime target for sequestration. In March 1644 the earl of Manchester had him ejected from the mastership 'for opposing the proceedings of Parliament and other scandalous acts' ('DNB'). 
Lany then joined Charles I at Oxford as his chaplain, and became nominally dean of Rochester, though instituted only in 1660. In 1644, with Gilbert Sheldon and others, he was selected to debate on church government with ministers seeking further reformation before the Scots commissioners, but was refused a hearing. He also attended the unsuccessful negotiations with the presbyterians at Uxbridge in February 1645. By May he had been sequestrated from Buriton. 
After the parliamentary victory in the first civil war Lany, in danger of imprisonment, fled to France, and became one of the close-knit group of Arminian clergy there. They regarded themselves as a faithful remnant of the Church of England whose function was to preserve it against presbyterianism, and worked in hardship to nurture the faith and preserve the worship of the scattered royalist refugees. They also battled to prevent conversions to Roman Catholicism. As chaplain to the prince of Wales from his arrival in 1646 Lany played a vital role, especially when faced with pressure from Queen Henrietta Maria, and arguments from both Roman Catholics and presbyterians for the prince's conversion from Anglicanism. Probably the resulting theological debate, including that between Bishop John Bramhall and Thomas Hobbes on free will which prompted the latter's 'A Letter on Liberty and Necessity', also led to Lany's 'Observations', eventually published with it in 1676. In it he argues against Hobbes's psychological and theological determinism, and in favour of free will as essential to the nature of virtue and vice, religion, and society itself. 
By 1659 Lany's stature was sufficient for secretary Edward Hyde to consider him as a candidate for a bishopric, though doubting his willingness. He was wrong. On 2 December 1660 Lany was consecrated as bishop of Peterborough, and he was one of the twelve episcopal commissioners nominated by Charles II to review the prayer book at the Savoy conference in 1661, though he took little part. His six published court sermons, delivered between 1661 and 1666 and in 1675, elucidate his views. He emphasizes godly living and liturgical worship in the tradition of the early church, especially the eucharist, an offering of praise to honour Christ's redemptive sacrifice. Sacraments are divinely instituted; sermons are less important, and liable to be affected by man's fallibility. They should be measured against scripture, easily comprehended, and applied to the hearers' lives. He upholds episcopal ordination and emphasizes the importance of retaining creeds and confessions of faith as yardsticks of orthodoxy. The church's guidance, and skills of 'shepherds', although not infallible, are more reliable than individual interpretations. He argues that the king has a certain jurisdictional, administrative, and even authorizing power over ministry, because, presumably, he nominates bishops. Politically, he is supreme, and the only legitimate source of authority. 'The Sword is the Kings, and 'He that takes it' from any hand but His, where God hath placed it, shall perish with the Sword' ('A sermon preached... at White hall, March 18th 1665', B. Lany, 'Five Sermons', 1669, 133-4). He deeply deplores schism as a sin, referring to some nonconformists as wolves in sheep's clothing who misuse phrases such as 'God's glory' and 'Christian liberty' to justify religious and political anarchy in place of constructive order and discipline. Lany deplores the Levellers' and others' preaching against minority land ownership, and the Quakers' refusal to honour their social betters, and argues that those organizing congregations, giving laws on worship and doctrine, and setting up teachers and leaders are acting outside their sphere. He regards claims to be led by the Holy Spirit as almost certainly deceptive, and is deeply distrustful of action on grounds of conscience. Such views mean that he deplores the idea of a comprehensive church. 'I think it might better have been called a Drag-net, that will fetch in all kinds of Fish, good or bad, great or small' ('The Last Sermon Preached at Court by B. L.', 1675, 26). 
Thus, as bishop of Peterborough, Lany's attitude to nonconformists was unlikely to be tolerant. At his 1662 visitation before the 'Act of Uniformity' came into force, he told his clergy, 'Not I but the law', giving the impression that he washed his hands of dissenters (B. Lany, 'Articles of Visitation and Enquiry', 1662). Forty-one ministers in the diocese either resigned just before the St Bartholomew's day deadline and became nonconformists or were subsequently deprived and did the same, like Daniel Cawdrey of Great Billing. As the judicial affairs of the diocese were handled by the civilian lawyer Dr George Wake, vicar-general in spirituals and principal official, a very legal approach was likely. One glimmer of latitude appears in the case of Richard Gascoyne, minister of Warmington, who continued to reside, though not episcopally ordained until June 1663, presumably because he was persuaded to conform. Careful enquiries were made in Lany's primary visitation as to whether the churches had returned to all practices enjoined by law or canon, with a special admonition to forward names of confirmation candidates. Investigation of the names of heretics or schismatics took prime place in questions on parishioners' conduct. 
Inheriting a ruined palace, and with his first year's revenues due to the king as first fruits, Lany continued as a prebendary of Westminster and master of Pembroke College, to both of which he had been restored in 1660. He lived mostly at his Westminster house, making excursions to the diocese for spiritual duties. He was generous in repairing civil war damage to the cathedral, and, with John Cosin's aid as dean, the nave and choir were reordered. 
In 1662 Lany resigned his mastership and the following year his prebend, and in April 1663 he was translated to Lincoln diocese. His visitation articles, published in 1664, show that he followed the same policies as at Peterborough, although he admitted tolerating a few nonconformists like Samuel Ainsworth, who preached at Brampton, adjoining Lany's palace at Buckden. In 1667 he was translated to the wealthy see of Ely, and statutorily became a governor of Charterhouse, London. His generosity was notable. He rescued his nephew from ruin by a gift of $3600, helped many other poor relatives, left $500 each for the rebuilding of St Paul's Cathedral and the establishment of a grammar school in Cambridge, or the increase of Pembroke fellowships, as well as establishing a trust for apprenticing poor children at Soham, Cambridgeshire. His monument describes him as being of terrifying acuteness. Perhaps there is truth in the anecdote that he told the new provost of Eton, who was seeking favours, that his head was too little to have anything in it. Lany was an active member of the House of Lords until 1672, taking increased responsibility on committees with greater seniority. He died unmarried at Ely House, London, on 24 January 1675, and was buried in Ely Cathedral. 


@@@@@


doc= 16004


Lanfranc (c.1010-1089), archbishop of Canterbury, was a Lombard by birth, who became a monk in Normandy before he was made archbishop four years after the Norman conquest of England in 1066. 
Lanfranc was born in Pavia, the capital of Lombard Italy, at an unknown date, probably 'c'.1010 or soon after. A late and unconfirmed Canterbury tradition gave his parents' names as Haribaldus and Roza ('Works of Gervase of Canterbury', 2.364). His father was known as a prominent and respected citizen who belonged to 'the order of those who oversaw the rights and laws of the city' (Gibson, 'Vita Lanfranci', 668). About Lanfranc's early years, his twelfth-century life contains divergent accounts. According to one, he was educated from childhood both in the liberal arts and in Lombard law; he exhibited precocious skill in pleading causes and in passing judgments; he thereby won lasting fame at Pavia; only after leaving Italy did his thoughts turn to the true wisdom of the religious life. According to the other, he lost his father at a tender age; rather than succeeding to his father's honour and dignity, he left Pavia to study the liberal arts elsewhere; he returned only when he was well grounded in them, before leaving for France. This account makes no mention of legal study or practice. Since Lanfranc's later writings and activities give scant evidence of special knowledge of or skill in Lombard law, it is best to leave open the question of how familiar with it he became. 
Not before 1031 (and perhaps several years later), Lanfranc, like many Italian scholars of his time, left Italy for France, where he travelled the country with a considerable following of pupils. Probably after visiting Tours and Chartres, he eventually reached Normandy, where he taught for some time at Avranches, a city still suffering after the viking ravagings. He is likely to have taught widely in the seven liberal arts, but with some specialization in dialectic. At Avranches his vocation to the religious life developed and deepened; he decided to search for a place where there would be no 'litterati' to honour and reverence him. 
Lanfranc set out alone towards Rouen. According to a perhaps apocryphal story, as he passed through a wood near the River Risle, he fell among thieves, who robbed, blindfolded, and abducted him. Upon asking passers-by to direct him to the most lowly and poor monastery of the neighbourhood, he was sent to Bec, where he found the abbot working with his own hands to build an oven. After reflecting upon the rule of St Benedict, Lanfranc asked to be, and was permitted to become, a monk there. 
Lanfranc probably came to Bec in 1042. The monastery had been founded in 1034 by Herluin, a knight from the nearby castle of Brionne, who became its first abbot. The keynote of its early years as described in Gilbert Crispin's life of Herluin (itself a major source for the life of Lanfranc) was austerity and simplicity. According to these lives, Herluin and Lanfranc from the start of their association complemented each other as models of the active and the contemplative life: Herluin attended to the external business of Bec, including its legal affairs, while Lanfranc devoted himself to silence, meditation, and the observance of the monastic office. Before long, however, Lanfranc became troubled by laxity among his monastic brethren; his secret preparations to leave Bec and become a hermit were frustrated by being revealed to Herluin in a dream. Lanfranc humbled himself before his abbot and professed full obedience. About 1045 Herluin appointed him prior (or second-in-command) of the monastery, with responsibility for both internal and external affairs. During Lanfranc's eighteen years or so as prior, Bec grew in numbers and acquired churches and endowments; it became a thriving Benedictine house alongside the older monasteries of Normandy. In 1063 Duke William chose Lanfranc, despite his reluctance to leave Bec, to be the first abbot of St Etienne at Caen. Lanfranc embarked upon the construction of the abbey church and buildings. In 1068 he secured from Pope Alexander II the exemption of his abbey from the authority of the diocesan, the bishop of Bayeux. 
During his years in Norman monasteries, Lanfranc's concerns were far from being limited to monastic affairs in the strict sense. He continued and greatly developed his work as a teacher. As prior of Bec, he was responsible for the claustral school in which boys were educated for life in the community; the fame of his teaching quickly and increasingly attracted young men from near and far, not least from Germany, to be equipped for employment outside the cloister. His teaching was at first mainly in the liberal arts and in 1059 Pope Nicholas II sent imperial and papal chaplains to be taught the dialectic and rhetoric that were useful in curial service, though he also referred to reports that Lanfranc had become concerned with biblical studies. Probably while Lanfranc was at Caen, Pope Alexander II wished to send him a kinsman for further education, possibly theological. Lanfranc opened his teaching to outsiders in part from a wish to raise money for the buildings and other monastic necessities at Bec which he urged upon Abbot Herluin, and especially for the removal of the monastery, 'c'.1060, to a more suitable site. Lanfranc's pupils at Bec included the canon lawyer Ivo, bishop of Chartres ('r'. 1090-1115), and the anti-Berengarian writer Guitmund, later bishop of Aversa ('r'. 1088- 'c'.1090x95). Anselm of Aosta, who entered Bec in 1060 (and who succeeded Lanfranc as prior there and later as archbishop of Canterbury), acknowledged a major debt to Lanfranc's instruction in learning as well as in the monastic life. Evidence that Pope Alexander II had been Lanfranc's pupil is late and inconclusive. 
In Normandy, Lanfranc became Duke William's ecclesiastical adviser. There seem at first to have been stresses between them, perhaps arising from Lanfranc's criticism of the duke's marriage to Matilda of Flanders on grounds of relationship within the prohibited degrees. A story has it that William banished Lanfranc from Normandy. He set off on a lame horse, but asked the duke to give him a sound one so that he could obey his sentence of exile. The jest served permanently to restore Lanfranc to the duke's favour. In 1059, Pope Nicholas II observed with satisfaction that 'his friend' Duke William habitually followed Lanfranc's advice (Southern, 20-21); Norman sources referred to his special and beneficial place as William's spiritual director and political counsellor. As they stand, twelfth-century accounts of Lanfranc's success at Rome in 1059 as an intermediary between William and the papacy over the problem of his marriage and of his securing a papal dispensation for William in return for the foundation of the abbeys of St Etienne and La Trinite at Caen are of questionable historicity; however, they testify to his reputation for diplomatic skill and success. In 1067, after he had himself refused the archiepiscopal see of Rouen, Lanfranc secured, at Rome, Pope Alexander II's permission for the translation to it of Bishop Jean of Avranches. 
Lanfranc had a series of contacts with the reforming popes of his monastic years, especially Leo IX (1049-54), Nicholas II (1059-61), and Alexander II (1061-73). In view of his duties as prior of Bec, his possibly year-long association with Leo IX (which later Bec tradition obscured) was remarkably protracted. It began at, or more probably soon after, Leo's great reforming council at Rheims in October 1049. Lanfranc was certainly with him at Remiremont on 14 November, as one of his letters shows, and he accompanied him back to Rome before a council at the Lateran beginning on 29 April 1050. Leo asked Lanfranc to stay in the papal entourage until the Council of Vercelli in September. Lanfranc thus witnessed at first hand an energetic year's work by the first significant reforming pope of the eleventh century. His return to Rome for Pope Nicholas II's council of April 1059 cannot be proved but, on balance, is probable (Southern, 22-4; Gibson, 'Lanfranc', 109-11 gives a different view); Lanfranc preserved on pages of his canon-law collection a dossier of documents relating to the council. An outcome of his contacts with the papacy was his high regard for the energetic reformer Cardinal Humbert of Silva Candida, in respect not only of his eucharistic theology but also of his general impact on church affairs. In 1067 ducal business again brought Lanfranc to Rome; his standing with Pope Alexander II was such that he later called him 'our most cherished member and one of the leading sons of the Roman church' ('Letters of Lanfranc', 60-61). 
While he was a monk at Bec, Lanfranc's work as a teacher was reinforced by academic and theological study. So far as the arts are concerned, he wrote a lost treatise, 'De dialectica'. He devoted much attention to correcting the texts of the 'Old' and 'New' testaments in their Latin version and of the Christian fathers of the early church. His main purpose was simply to establish the best readings. His emendations passed into manuscripts which, at Bec and elsewhere, remained in use well into the twelfth century. His annotations on patristic texts included brief comments upon St Augustine of Hippo's 'De civitate Dei' and Pope Gregory the Great's 'Moralia in Job'. He was concerned to use such texts as a vehicle for grammatical instruction, thus seeking in a novel way to use Christian texts for this purpose. From 'c'.1055 Lanfranc increasingly devoted himself to biblical study. His principal commentaries were one on the 'Psalms', which survives only in two fragments, and another on the 'Pauline epistles', fourteen in number since he accepted 'Hebrews' as Pauline ('Patrologia Latina', 150.105-406). He again provided much analysis of language and of rhetorical structure, but he increasingly also added excerpts from the ancient fathers, which he took from Carolingian florilegia of selected passages. He expressed his mistrust of secular learning as a means to the exploration of Christian truth. In his biblical commentaries, Lanfranc was less of an innovator than in his annotations of Augustine and Gregory. However, his commentary on the 'Pauline epistles' circulated and was widely copied. His work was used and built upon in the schools of Laon and Paris. As a scholar, Lanfranc cannot be deemed original or creative, but his skills developed in ways that prepared for major twelfth-century advances. 
Lanfranc's controversy with Berengar of Tours affected every stage of his life after leaving Italy. Their principal difference concerned the presence of Christ in the eucharistic elements. According to Lanfranc, this presence was substantial in a sense akin to Aristotle's understanding of substance, so that, at the eucharistic consecration, bread and wine were in themselves changed into the body and blood of Christ; for Berengar, it was a matter of signification not of change: the material bread and wine persisted while becoming also the spiritual body and blood of Christ. Lanfranc and Berengar represented different methods of thought and looked back to different patristic and Carolingian traditions: Lanfranc to St Ambrose and Paschasius Radbertus, but Berengar to St Augustine of Hippo and Ratramnus. Berengar fuelled opposition to his position by the obscurity of his Latin and by the contentiousness of his demeanour. 
Lanfranc heard Berengar lecture on logic during his early wanderings in France and formed a poor opinion. In 1049, at about the time of the Council of Rheims, Lanfranc nevertheless came under suspicion of complicity in Berengar's supposed aberrations; but at Leo IX's Easter synod of 1050, he successfully defended himself. In the following autumn, Lanfranc was present, though not in a prominent capacity, at Brionne when Berengar debated his opinions with other scholars. If Lanfranc was at Rome for Nicholas II's Easter synod of 1059, he was not present at the session when Berengar appeared before it. However, he approved of the extremely realist profession of faith, drafted by Cardinal Humbert, to which Berengar was made to swear an oath of acceptance; it is among the documents of the time that are copied into Lanfranc's canonical collection. 
On returning to France, Berengar recanted his oath and returned to his former teaching. After Nicholas II and Humbert died in 1061, Lanfranc came to the fore as Berengar's leading opponent. Probably early in his years as abbot at Caen, he wrote his 'De corpore et sanguine domini', in which he began with the Easter synod of 1059 and deployed philosophical arguments and patristic citations against Berengar and in advocacy of his own position. At Pope Alexander II's request, Lanfranc in 1072 dispatched a copy to Rome; the treatise also circulated widely in northern Europe. Berengar's own principal surviving work, his 'Rescriptum contra Lanfrannum', was written in indignant reply. As archbishop of Canterbury, Lanfranc was still at pains to refute 'that schismatic Berengar', especially when he challenged the orthodoxy of St Hilary of Poitiers's 'De trinitate'; Lanfranc later gave a hint that he was less than satisfied by Pope Gregory VII's eventual condemnation in 1079 of Berengar's eucharistic teaching ('Letters of Lanfranc', 142-9, 158-9). 
At Eastertide 1070 papal legates deposed Stigand, archbishop of Canterbury since 1052. King William I summoned a reluctant Lanfranc, who was already some sixty years old, to succeed him. Lanfranc accepted only when Pope Alexander II added his own command through legates, Bishop Ermenfrid of Sion and the Roman subdeacon Hubert, who convened for the purpose a general assembly of Norman clergy and laity. Lanfranc was appointed on 15 August and consecrated at Canterbury on 29 August by Bishop Maurice of London and seven or eight other suffragans of Canterbury. 
Until Alexander's sudden death on 21 April 1073, Lanfranc enjoyed and reciprocated his favour and trust to a striking degree. When Lanfranc visited Rome in autumn 1071 and received his pallium (the stole of white wool which signified a metropolitan's participation in the apostolic pastoral office), Alexander added the rare, personal grant of a second pallium which he had himself worn liturgically. After Lanfranc returned to England, Alexander told the king of major matters that he had delegated for Lanfranc to settle in England; he had so far committed his authority to Lanfranc that whatever he rightly decided should be as binding as a decision taken in the pope's presence. Lanfranc, for his part, looked to Alexander for favour and for advice in a number of particular cases including those of bishops. He commended himself to Alexander as 'a loyal follower and servant of St Peter and of yourself, and of the holy Roman church' ('Letters of Lanfranc', 54-5; see also 32-9, 42-3, 60-63). 
Lanfranc quickly claimed a primatial status for Canterbury which he deemed to be both historically justified and practically necessary for the well-being of the church in England and throughout the British Isles. At Pentecost 1070, the Norman, Thomas of Bayeux, had been nominated for the vacant see of York. Lanfranc quickly entered into a dispute about the relation of the two metropolises; a memorandum of it was included in Lanfranc's letter-collection ('Letters of Lanfranc', 38-57). Thomas's consecration was delayed until after Lanfranc's, and when Thomas came to Canterbury, Lanfranc claimed the custom of his predecessors for requiring from him a written profession of obedience, fortified by an oath. Thomas expressed dissatisfaction with the evidence that Lanfranc adduced and departed without consecration. The king was angry because he thought Lanfranc to be claiming more than his due. But during a subsequent encounter, at which Lanfranc said that the English testified in his favour, he persuaded the king and the Normans of the justice of his claim. By royal edict Thomas had to return 'to the mother church of the whole kingdom' and to make a profession of absolute and unconditional obedience to Lanfranc in all matters of the Christian religion; as regards obedience to Lanfranc's successors, the issue was left open. Thomas made a profession of obedience, the text of which has not survived, and Lanfranc consecrated him late in 1070 or early in 1071. 
According to the Canterbury account, it was Thomas (who accompanied Lanfranc to Rome in autumn 1071) by whom the question of the primacy of Canterbury over York was raised before the pope. Thomas cited the authority of Pope Gregory the Great for pleading the equal status of the two metropolises; he also claimed the obedience to himself of the bishops of Dorchester (later Lincoln), Worcester, and Lichfield. After long debate, Pope Alexander ruled that both matters should be decided in England. At Eastertide 1072 they were considered during the royal court at Winchester. Lanfranc afterwards rehearsed in a letter to the pope the arguments by which he had claimed Canterbury's primacy not only over York but of the whole British Isles including Ireland. A number were historical and derived from Bede and other sources; to the modern critic they appear somewhat weak. As 'the final core and foundation of our whole case', he named eight popes from Gregory the Great to Leo IX whose privileges and letters he asserted to bear out his claim. Most of the popes named appear among the alleged authors of forged privileges which were produced at Rome in 1123 when Canterbury's case was presented there. Scholars have long debated whether, in 1072, Lanfranc used forgeries which had already been prepared (with or without his knowledge), or whether they were subsequently drawn up on the basis of Lanfranc's list of popes. While the question remains open, there are substantial reasons for doubting that Lanfranc knowingly used forged material. Lanfranc's arguments prevailed over those of Thomas of York, who therefore made an absolute profession of canonical obedience to Lanfranc and his successors. The king's court drew up a constitution, finally reissued at the Council of Windsor at Pentecost, which established that the church of York should be subject to that of Canterbury and should obey its archbishop as primate of the whole of Britain in all matters relating to the Christian religion; Thomas of York's claim to the obedience of the three bishops south of the Humber was disallowed. 
The large measure of success which Lanfranc thus achieved in establishing the primacy of Canterbury should not obscure his difficulties and insecurity during his early years as archbishop. He was unable to secure the primacy beyond Archbishop Thomas's lifetime and could not know that Thomas would long outlive him. At Rome the powerful Archdeacon Hildebrand curtly disallowed the granting of a papal privilege to strengthen Canterbury's position unless Lanfranc again came to Rome. Moreover, 'for love of the king' (that is, probably, because the king would not allow it), Lanfranc had to abandon his claim that Thomas's profession of obedience should be reinforced by an oath of loyalty to himself ('Letters of Lanfranc', 40-41, 46-7). There was a further difference with the king over the status of the former Archbishop Stigand: Lanfranc followed Pope Alexander in regarding his archiepiscopate as utterly vitiated and null, whereas the king had found it expedient to give him greater recognition than he had enjoyed before 1066, to the extent of allowing him to consecrate Bishop Remigius of Dorchester. Such points of difference cannot have made Lanfranc's relations with the king easy. They help to explain why, in the winter of 1072-3, Lanfranc complained to Pope Alexander of his 'calamitates', and of his sense of unprofitableness in the past and hopelessness for the future; he made a transparently sincere plea to be released from his archbishopric and to return to the cloister. 
Lanfranc would not have expected his plea to be accepted. Moreover, circumstances changed in April 1073 with Archdeacon Hildebrand's succession to the papacy as Gregory VII (1073-85). The difficulties that he had made about a papal privilege for Canterbury and Lanfranc's probable disquiet about his long suspension of judgement upon the opinions of Berengar of Tours go far to account for Lanfranc's studied coolness towards Gregory. Gregory quickly bid to resume the familiarity that Alexander had enjoyed with Lanfranc by sending a letter which tacitly accepted his primacy over the Irish. But Lanfranc consistently disregarded Gregory's summonses to pay duty, 'ad limina' visits to Rome, and in 1082 Gregory threatened him with suspension from his office. From 1073 Lanfranc settled down to loyal and fruitful collaboration with King William in the spirit of the constitution of the royal court in 1072. He seldom left the province of Canterbury, although in 1077 he made a brief visit to Normandy and his old monasteries of St Etienne at Caen and Bec, where, after an emotional reunion with the aged Abbot Herluin, he consecrated the high altar of the new abbey church. However, he kept in touch by letter with leading persons in Normandy and elsewhere, notably Anselm as prior and abbot of Bec, and Archbishop Jean of Rouen. 
For Lanfranc, the roles of bishop and abbot were compatible: 'If bishops bestow fatherly care upon their subjects in Christ's stead, they may not inappropriately be called abbots, that is, fathers; for the name suits what they do' (Knowles, 4). Accordingly, as archbishop, Lanfranc continued, so far as he could, to live the monastic life. At Canterbury, this was facilitated because, since the time of Archbishop Dunstan (959-88), the Christ Church Cathedral chapter comprised Benedictine monks of whom the archbishop was 'ex officio' abbot. In 1067 the cathedral and monastic buildings had been devastated by fire; the monks were demoralized and few in number. Lanfranc quickly determined to perpetuate the monastic regime. He made temporary repairs to the monks' quarters and proceeded to the reconstruction of the cathedral, which by 'c'.1077 was restored to use. By 1089 it was completed and sumptuously equipped with vestments and sacred vessels. Lanfranc also rebuilt the monastic offices, especially the cloister, cellar, refectory, and dormitory. Near the cathedral he erected a palace for the official use of the archbishop, and he surrounded the ensemble of buildings by a wall. He envisaged a monastic community of some 150 monks; at his death it probably comprised almost 100. After 1079 he compiled from various sources a body of monastic constitutions for the liturgical ordering and for the administration and discipline of the Canterbury community. They were practical in character; but liturgically, interest attaches to the Palm Sunday procession, when the consecrated host was carried in procession to the city gate, in commemoration of Christ's coming to Jerusalem. Although the day-to-day running of the community devolved upon the prior (Lanfranc summoned from Bec a monk named Henry to fill this office), Lanfranc performed so far as he could the abbot's role, both in the daily monastic round and in the pastoral oversight of the monks and their families, for which the Canterbury monk Eadmer praised him. 
Lanfranc was much concerned with the administration and defence of the property of the see of Canterbury. His years as archbishop witnessed an increasingly clear division between the property of the archbishop and that of the monks. He was remembered for the many fine buildings, including churches, which he had built upon his manors, most of which were in Kent and Sussex. He was much concerned to recover the lands and other resources of his see, which had suffered severe losses both before and after 1066. He came into dispute with the king's half-brother Odo, bishop of Bayeux and earl of Kent. Their most fully recorded litigation occurred, perhaps in 1072, at a meeting of the shire on Penenden Heath. On the king's behalf, Bishop Geoffroi of Coutances judged in Lanfranc's favour about his judicial rights in Kent and about six Christ Church estates. The process of recovery which was thus started continued until the Domesday Survey. 
On account of his necessarily frequent absences from Canterbury and sheer pressure of work, Lanfranc came to use the bishop of Rochester as a kind of vicar-general. He thereby abandoned the pre-conquest usage whereby a 'chorepiscopus' (assistant bishop) was based at St Martin's Church at Canterbury. He made an excellent choice in Gundulf, a monk of Bec who was his prior at Caen and then his right-hand man at Canterbury from 1070. In 1077 Lanfranc himself invested Gundulf as bishop of Rochester and Gundulf thereafter relieved Lanfranc in the tasks of diocesan ordinary, such as ordaining clerks, consecrating chrism, and dedicating churches. Lanfranc devoted generous resources to building and equipping a new cathedral at Rochester, where a monastic chapter on the Christ Church model was introduced. 
Lanfranc was frequently absent on royal and ecclesiastical business. He attended crown-wearings held at the three main Christian festivals when the king was in England. He was known then to admonish as well as to honour the king: when both sat at a coronation banquet and a jester, pointing to the bejewelled king, flatteringly said, 'Behold! I see God', Lanfranc insisted on the king's having the jester severely beaten; for Lanfranc recalled the fate of King Herod Agrippa, who listened to flatterers hailing him as a god and was smitten by God and eaten by worms (Gibson, 'Vita Lanfranci', 708-9; see 'Acts' 12: 21-3). 
Lanfranc, as primate, held councils, often at the seasons of crown-wearings, for the English church in which, after 1072, Thomas of York collaborated. In many respects, they were similar to the reforming councils held in 1070, before Lanfranc's arrival, by Alexander II's legates; but they also followed the tradition of church councils as held in Normandy, though not in England, since the 1040s. Like Norman councils, Lanfranc's were subject to William's authority and direction. After the councils of Winchester and Windsor in 1072 when the issue of the primacy was settled, Lanfranc held councils at London (1074 or 1075), Winchester (1076), London (1077 or 1078), and Gloucester (1080, 1085). Until 1076 these councils issued canons which, though fragmentary and unsystematic, illustrate several of Lanfranc's main concerns. The earliest legislation sought to buttress the Norman regime by prescribing public loyalty to the king and prayer and alms on his behalf. Lanfranc required a structured and orderly church life which would complement his stringent requirement that bishops make professions of obedience to himself; in many ways he sought to ensure the bishop's authority in his diocese, and three bishoprics were moved from villages to major centres at Sarum (Old Salisbury), Chichester, and Chester. Attention was given to clerical morality: Lanfranc proscribed simoniacal practices and promoted celibacy, demanding it at once of canons but (less strictly than the papal legates in 1070) allowing the generality of priests with wives to keep them, while those who were unmarried must remain so; bishops were to require promises of celibacy from those in future ordained priest or deacon. There was some regulation of the lives of the laity, especially as regards marriage and spiritual jurisdiction over them. 
The canons of the Council of London, in particular, were widely circulated; and their preamble spoke of renovation of things laid down in ancient law. Lanfranc was concerned to complement the revival in England of church councils by facilitating the study of canon law. He summoned from Bec and presented to Christ Church, Canterbury, a collection of canons and decrees called by modern scholars the 'Collectio Lanfranci', based upon the Pseudo-Isidorian decrees (the 'false decretals') as compiled in mid-ninth-century France. It is in two parts: an abridged version of the papal decretals from Clement I to Gregory II (715-31) with certain additions, and a full, if in some ways distinctive, version of the councils from Nicaea (325) to Seville II (618). It is by no means certain that the collection was made by Lanfranc or under his supervision; more likely it came to Bec from elsewhere. In England, copies of the collection were made and circulated to cathedral libraries; until the mid-twelfth century it was a main source in England of canon law. Marginal markings seem to testify to Lanfranc's own study of the Christ Church manuscript and to correspond to references to canon law in his letters. He enjoined its study upon bishops, urging Herfast of Thetford to: 'give up the dice, to mention nothing worse, and the worldly amusements in which you are said to spend the whole day. Read sacred authors, and devote particular study to the decrees of the Roman pontiffs and to the sacred canons. Then you will find out what you do not know; having read them, you will deem worthless the devices in which you trust to evade church discipline. ('Letters of Lanfranc', 152-3)' If, after 1073, Lanfranc paid little heed to the presently reigning pope, he ascribed high authority to the decrees of popes long dead. Steadfast himself in spiritual reading, he was also concerned to provide and circulate in England emended texts of the 'Vulgate' and other sacred writings upon which he himself continued to work. 
Lanfranc gave comparable attention to the veneration of English saints, about some of whom he had doubts, particularly AElfheah (Alphege), the archbishop of Canterbury whom the Danes killed in 1012; but Anselm of Bec persuaded him that AElfheah deserved commemoration as a martyr. Lanfranc employed Osbern, a monk of Canterbury, to write lives of AElfheah and of St Dunstan, to whom Lanfranc seems to have had a particular devotion. He made no purge of English saints; his attitude towards them seems to have been shaped by judiciousness and a strict concern for authenticity. He showed no insensitivity to English feelings; when assured of the sanctity of English saints, he duly provided for their veneration. 
Lanfranc's letter collection yields glimpses of his routine business. In his terse way, he answered enquiries from several bishops -- Thomas of York and Walcher of Durham as well as suffragans of Canterbury. Penance and marriage discipline were recurrent topics; Lanfranc displayed a range of attitudes from rigorous insistence upon canonical rules to pastoral leniency towards the proven penitent. 
The canons of Lanfranc's councils, especially the London Council, testify to his vigilance over the monastic order; as in non-monastic matters, he showed deference to the king. Lanfranc had a basic concern that monks should establish their way of life according to the best ancient models and that stability, obedience, oversight, and poverty should be rigorously ensured. Having found and quickly learnt to value a monastic chapter at Canterbury, he defended such a chapter at Winchester against the initial attempt of the first Norman bishop, Walchelin, to abolish it. Partly owing to his advocacy, within fifty years of the conquest nine of the sixteen English sees had cathedral monasteries -- a situation unique in Latin Christendom. Although his monastic constitutions were compiled only for Canterbury, their workmanlike qualities led to their being adopted in other cathedral monasteries and elsewhere; early copies existed in some twelve houses. Lanfranc's predilection for cathedral monasteries may have indirectly retarded the constitutional development of the secular (that is, non-monastic) chapters, and have set back the spread in England, already attested before the conquest, of canons regular. 
Lanfranc's letters again suggest the depth and range of his abiding concern with monastic affairs, over and above his involvement at Canterbury and Rochester. He protected individual houses: Bury St Edmunds, the abbey of his friend and physician Abbot Baldwin, against the jurisdictional claims of Bishop Herfast of Thetford; and Coventry, where Bishop Peter was to desist from harassing the monks and to make restitution. When the abbess and prioress of Barking were at loggerheads, Lanfranc insisted that Bishop Maurice of London should intervene. Many letters concerned individual monks: Lanfranc was exercised about the noviciate of his nephew, another Lanfranc, at Bec; he sent spiritual advice and a medical remedy ('marrubium': horehound) to one seriously ill; he interceded, in terms reminiscent of St Paul's epistle to 'Philemon', with Abbot Adelelm of Abingdon to receive back fugitive but penitent monks; he censured both a fugitive monk of Chertsey and his lax abbot, Odo, who had permitted him to wander; but he encouraged a monk who wished to transfer to a more observant regime under Abbot Serlo of Gloucester. When Lanfranc wrongly assessed a postulant at the New Minster, Winchester, he admitted his error and asked for the case to be decided by the Winchester authorities. He humanely sanctioned the departure from the cloister of nuns who had entered religion only from fear of the Norman invaders. 
Lanfranc's dealings with two non-cathedral monasteries are particularly recorded. He brought another nephew, Paul, a monk of Caen, to be abbot of St Albans ('r'. 1077-93), where he ruled with distinction. Lanfranc assisted him with 1000 marks towards a thoroughgoing rebuilding and equipped the church with precious ornaments; he also provided books to be copied in the scriptorium. Lanfranc's monastic constitutions were followed at St Albans which, although in the diocese of Lincoln, remained under Lanfranc's close supervision. With St Augustine's, Canterbury, Lanfranc came into severe difficulty near the end of his life. In 1087 or 1088 he consecrated as abbot, and (apparently supported by Odo of Bayeux) attempted to install, a monk of St Augustine's with the Norman name of Guy. Most of the monks (who were largely English and who resented Lanfranc's nearby foundation of St Gregory's) refused to admit Guy and fled into the city. Lanfranc coerced or persuaded many to return, but there was soon a plot against Abbot Guy. Lanfranc interrogated the ringleader, Columbanus, who declared that he would have killed his abbot if he could; Lanfranc had him stripped naked and flogged at the abbey gate before being driven from the city. He thereby terrorized the monks into submission until his death, when trouble again erupted. Against dissident monks Lanfranc could act harshly; but, on balance, the 'Anglo-Saxon Chronicle' declared justly upon his death that he was 'the reverend father and consoler of monks' ('ASC', s.a. 1089, text E). 
Lanfranc's conception of his primacy led him to claim authority over the whole British Isles. Beyond the two English provinces, his attention was most directed to Ireland. In 1074, at the request of King Gofraid (Guthric) of Dublin, he consecrated at London an Irish monk, Patrick, who was trained and professed at Worcester, to the see of Dublin. Patrick made a profession of obedience to Lanfranc as 'bishop-elect of Dublin, the metropolis of Ireland', a phrase which may express Lanfranc's hope at this time of establishing a dependent Irish metropolis. But when, a year after Patrick's death in 1084, Lanfranc consecrated his successor Donatus (Donggus) at Canterbury where he had been a monk, his profession of obedience contained no such phrase (Richter, 29, 31; 'Letters of Lanfranc', 66-9). In truth, the centres of ecclesiastical and political power in Ireland lay elsewhere. In 1074 Lanfranc commended Patrick not only to the king of Dublin but also to the increasingly dominant high-king, Toirdelbhach O Briain of Munster, whom he urged to convene a council of bishops and religious men to remedy the country's many ills. In 1080 or 1081 he answered in fatherly terms an enquiry from Domnall, chief bishop of Munster, and others about baptism and the eucharist. As for Scotland, the concord of 1072 provided that Thomas of York should have jurisdiction 'to its farthest limits'. Lanfranc respected this provision by enabling Thomas in 1073 to consecrate, at York, Ralph, bishop of the Orkneys. His only recorded direct dealings with Scotland were with Queen Margaret, daughter of Edward AEtheling and wife of King Malcolm III Canmore. He acceded to her request that he should become her spiritual adviser and he referred to the part that Christ Church monks were taking in setting up the monastery of Holy Trinity, Dunfermline, which became the first regular Benedictine house in Scotland. Lanfranc took no authenticated action with regard to Wales -- surprisingly, in view of the inflated claims to jurisdiction that Welsh bishops were advancing; it was left for Anselm to assert Canterbury's authority. 
In English government, Lanfranc enjoyed the king's confidence and on occasion took a leading part. Later Bec tradition stated that, during William I's absences in Normandy, Lanfranc was the chief and keeper ('princeps et custos') of England in defence, government, and peace (Gibson, 'Vita Lanfranci', 711). This takes no account of others, like bishops Odo of Bayeux and Geoffroi of Coutances, who acted as royal deputies. But it fairly epitomizes Lanfranc's part in the troubles of 1075 when, with the king in Normandy, he directed resistance to the revolt (from motives that remain obscure) of Ralph, earl of East Anglia, and Roger, earl of Hereford, who found support from the Englishman Waltheof, earl of Huntingdon. French and English forces under Bishop Wulfstan of Worcester and Abbot AEthelwig of Evesham opposed Roger, while bishops Odo of Bayeux and Geoffroi of Coutances, with William (I) de Warenne, dealt with Ralph's supporters in Cambridgeshire and Norfolk. Lanfranc's part is primarily apparent from his letters. At the outset he took a lead in implementing the king's orders that all his loyal magnates should see to the security of royal castles. After the defeat of Earl Ralph near Cambridge, he reported to the king, urging him not to return to England since such perjurers and brigands could be sufficiently dealt with by his subjects there; Lanfranc clearly felt that peace could better be restored without the wrath that William would surely apply. After the rebels' surrender of Norwich Castle, he again wrote to say that the realm had been purged of the pollution of the Bretons and that the noise of warfare was silent in the land. But he also wrote to Bishop Walcher of Durham and with good reason warned him that the Danes whom Ralph had summoned were on their way; he should fortify and victual his castle. 
Lanfranc's dealings with Earl Roger are particularly interesting. His guiding purpose was to restore the earl to his proper loyalty to the king. He at first appealed to Roger on grounds of their own bond of affection, of the example of service to the king set by his father, William fitz Osbern, and of the duty that a vassal owed to his king, especially since William had been restrained and had shown willingness to hear Roger's grievances against his sheriffs. Lanfranc repeatedly offered to travel anywhere to meet Roger and to promote concord with the king. When such measures failed, Lanfranc sought to coerce Roger into loyalty by invoking his primatial authority to excommunicate him and his followers, with effect throughout England. This was in addition to Lanfranc's military dispositions. When Roger showed signs of repentance and offered to meet Lanfranc, however, Lanfranc now dared not meet him from fear of the king; but he undertook to inform the king of Roger's plea for mercy. Meanwhile, Roger should lie low and do nothing further to provoke the king. In the event, Lanfranc was unable to save Roger: when William returned to England, he condemned him to the Norman penalty for treason -- life imprisonment and forfeiture of all lands. Chronicle sources show that Lanfranc was even less successful in obtaining mercy and reconciliation for Waltheof, who had at an early stage withdrawn from the revolt. On the advice of Lanfranc, he did penance and crossed to Normandy where he placed himself in the king's mercy. After his return to England, William, however, exacted the death penalty that English law prescribed. The fates of Roger, and still more of Waltheof, show the limits of Lanfranc's influence with the king and their contrasting methods of dealing with rebellion. 
Lanfranc sometimes acted as a royal justice, particularly in East Anglia. Thus, in 1081, the king instructed him to settle the dispute between Bishop Herfast of Thetford and the abbey of Bury St Edmunds about episcopal rights over the abbey. After hearing witnesses from nine shires, Lanfranc gave a judgment in the abbey's favour which was confirmed by a royal writ. Thereafter, he became involved, with Bishop Geoffroi of Coutances and Count Robert of Mortain, in the latter stages of the abbey of Ely's attempts to clarify its rights and holdings of land, especially as against Bishop Remigius of Lincoln. In these, as other, cases, Lanfranc behaved as a leading tenant-in-chief of the crown rather than in any distinctive way. He took no known part in planning or executing the Domesday Survey, although in a letter he duly answered an enquiry about Canterbury lands in East Anglia. For all his personal standing with the king, he was never a courtier, nor did he make an abiding contribution to Norman administration or political institutions. 
When William I died at Rouen in 1087, he is said to have sent Lanfranc instructions to crown his second son, William Rufus, king of England, which, according to Eadmer, he did with some reluctance; but Lanfranc's acceptance of William was the critical step in the new king's succession. If William of Malmesbury was right in his statement that Lanfranc had a part in William's education and dubbing as a knight, there may have already been a personal bond between them. Lanfranc is said later to have reproved the king gently for disregarding his coronation promises to his people and to the church, and to have received the answer, 'What man alive can fulfil everything that he promises?' However, Lanfranc was loyal to William during the widespread revolt of 1088, led by Bishop Odo of Bayeux (Ordericus Vitalis, 'Eccl. hist.', 4.97-8, 110-111; 'Historia novorum', 25; Malmesbury, 'De gestis pontificum', 73, and 'Gest. reg.', 2.359-60). 
Lanfranc's loyalty and forensic skill were apparent in the trial before the king's court of William of St Calais, bishop of Durham, which took place at Salisbury in November 1088, and of which an almost certainly authentic eye-witness account survives (van Caenegem, 90-106). The bishop was on trial for his part in the revolt. He claimed that, as a bishop, he should be tried by an ecclesiastical court; Lanfranc argued that he was on trial in his capacity as a tenant-in-chief, not an ecclesiastic, and he claimed similarly to have judged Bishop Odo of Bayeux in 1082. Bishop William took his stand upon canon law, producing a book which appears to have been the Durham copy of the 'Collectio Lanfranci'. But Lanfranc countered by turning against the bishop the canonical principle that he had extracted from it, that of the 'exceptio spolii' -- that a defendant who has been despoiled of his possessions must be reinstated in them before proceedings can begin. He frustrated William's appeal to it on the grounds that, before his trial, the king had by no means completely despoiled him of his possessions; when the king's court did this, Lanfranc knew that William could not effectually appeal to the pope because the pope had no means of enforcing repossession and could not, therefore, hear him. Lanfranc won lay as well as clerical plaudits in the king's court as the 'vetulus ligaminarius' (probably: 'the old master of the hunting pack'), who spoke well when he challenged the bishop. Under William II, as under his father, Lanfranc was, when needed, the staunch and effective upholder of the Norman order and of the king's cause within it. 
If Lanfranc's loyalty to the English crown remained unshakeable, his loyalty in his last years to the papacy of Gregory VII and his followers may be questioned. In 1080 Henry IV of Germany chose Archbishop Guibert of Ravenna to be an anti-pope; at Eastertide 1084, having entered Rome, he established him as Pope Clement III. A letter of Lanfranc shows that, in 1084 or 1085, he initiated an exchange with a partisan of Clement whose name was abbreviated as 'Hu.'. He was probably Hugh Candidus, Gregory VII's long-standing and virulent opponent among the Roman cardinals. Lanfranc sent a masterly and noncommittal reply, deprecating both Hu.'s maligning of Gregory and his eulogy of Clement. He conceded that the success of Henry IV, now emperor, indicated divine favour. Yet Hu. might not himself come to England without its king's leave, and the English kingdom would take no decision until the situation was further clarified. Clement in due course sent Lanfranc three letters, highly commending him, inviting him to visit Rome, and requesting Peter's Pence. They were copied into Lanfranc's canon-law collection, but he is not known to have replied. Lanfranc thus undoubtedly made prudent contacts with the Guibertine party and kept his options open. But letters to him from Pope Urban II and Anselm of Bec, as well as contacts with others of Gregorian sympathies, make it clear that he was not known to have in any way identified himself with the opposing party. 
Lanfranc's contemporaries looked to a monk-archbishop for generous almsgiving; he amply fulfilled their expectations. Almsgiving was a keynote of his activity: at his episcopal consecration, the customary 'sortes bibliae' (fortune-telling through the random selection of biblical verses) produced the text, 'Give alms, and behold! all things are clean to you' ('Luke' 11: 41). He was believed to have disbursed in alms $500 a year. He provided for the poor on all his manors, but his three principal charitable foundations were at Canterbury itself. In his latter years, when his main expenditure upon Christ Church was completed, he founded outside the north gate of the city the church of St Gregory, the dedication of which reflected his devotion to the pope who had sent St Augustine of Canterbury to Britain. He established there a community of clerks whom he intended to make good the pastoral ministrations in Canterbury, especially burials, which had been curtailed by reason of the expansion of the cathedral monastery, and which were to be provided for the poor without payment. Lanfranc brought to St Gregory's a rich endowment of relics of early archbishops and other saints of the Anglo-Saxon, and especially Kentish, past. Near to it, he built the hospital of St John the Baptist to relieve the sick and aged, and at Harbledown, a short distance to the west of the city, he built a leper hospital of St Nicholas. From his estates he endowed these twin hospitals with $140 yearly. Lanfranc's foundations were far from complete by his death, but they form a prominent part of the munificence which was remembered in his obit. His humane side was also evident in his concern to abolish the slave trade from England to Ireland. 
Lanfranc died of fever on 28 May 1089, suddenly but after receiving the last rites; he had wished so to die, with memory unclouded and speech unimpaired. He was buried in the nave of his new cathedral to the west of the choir screen; but when Anselm built a new choir his body was moved. Nothing of his tomb remains. No cultus developed but at Canterbury he was held in high honour. A man of tireless and well-directed energy, to the end of his life he adapted himself surely to the needs of each change in his circumstances. The rapport which, after 1072, he achieved with William I, a master of commanding ability whom he understood and respected, enabled him to leave English church and society far stronger than he found them after the traumas of the conquest. The effect of his archiepiscopate was to equip the church in England for its place in the mainstream of Christian life during the rest of the middle ages. 


@@@@@


doc= 16005


Lang, John Dunmore (1799-1878), Presbyterian minister and politician in Australia, was born on 25 August 1799 at Greenock, Renfrewshire, the eldest of the four children of William Lang (1768?-1830), a small landowner, and Mary Dunmore (1770-1844). He was educated for the ministry at the Largs parish school (1807/8-1811) and the University of Glasgow (MA 1820, DD 1825), and was licensed to preach in 1820. In 1823 he emigrated to be the first Presbyterian minister in Sydney. 
The following year Lang made the first of nine visits to Britain, seeking government support for colonial education, recruiting clergy and schoolmasters, and promoting migration to Australia. On his second visit he married a cousin, Wilhelmina Mackie (1812-1891), on 25 August 1831. The marriage was happy and in all his controversies Lang was comforted by a warmly harmonious family life, though this was marred by tragedies involving his children; of ten five died in infancy. 
In 1833-4 Lang again returned to Britain. As always on voyages, he wrote -- this time 'An Historical and Statistical Account of New South Wales' (1834). Revised editions appeared in 1837, 1852, and 1875. In 1835 he commenced a weekly, 'The Colonist', which ran until 1840. The 'Colonial Observer' (1841-4) and 'The Press' (1851) were also Lang papers. Lang next visited Britain in 1836-7. In 1832 he had formed the presbytery of New South Wales with other ministers, all of whom he had recruited. Too many were over-fond of the bottle and most of the others were unwilling to prosecute their fellows. Lang determined to enrol sufficient new clergy to outvote the backsliders and their abetters. He obtained twelve Presbyterian clergymen and, in Germany, three Lutheran missionaries and ten lay assistants. 
Back in Sydney, Lang imprudently and schismatically established a new church court instead of relying on the increased numbers in the presbytery of New South Wales to discipline the delinquent ministers. On his next visit to Britain the rival courts combined to form the synod of Australia, which Lang joined on his return in 1841. But he was quickly affronted when it criticized his ministry, and he abandoned it, denouncing it as 'a mere synagogue of Satan'. He also renounced his government stipend, convinced that state support of religion produced a multitude of evils. He could do so because his congregation at the Scots Church was perhaps as large and wealthy as all other Presbyterian congregations combined. 
In June 1843 Lang was elected to the legislative council, beginning a parliamentary career that lasted until 1869. He was elected to the legislature seven times, three times topping the poll, and defeated only once. 
In 1846 Lang again sailed for Britain to promote emigration. His continual theme for the next three years in books, pamphlets, lectures, and newspaper articles was that the grinding poverty of Britain could be relieved by the boundless opportunities in Australia. He proposed that reputable migrants who paid their own fares receive a grant of crown land. Prolonged correspondence and interviews at the Colonial Office failed to secure this concession, which was in fact illegal. Lang nevertheless recklessly arranged for about 270 migrants to sail in the 'Fortitude' in September 1848, promising them they would receive free land in proportion to their passage money. By a dishonest manoeuvre he then vainly tried to trick the colonial governor into granting the migrants land on their arrival. He thus destroyed his reputation with the Colonial Office and saved it with the Australian public at large only by blustering falsehoods. Despite this fiasco, Lang dispatched six vessels with more than 1200 migrants before he returned to Australia in 1850. 
In lectures in Sydney in April 1850 Lang declared that Australia should at once become a republic. He believed strongly in local self-government and abhorred the aristocratic influences in English society and politics. He set out his arguments in pamphlets and two large, learned books, 'Freedom and Independence for the Golden Lands of Australia' (1852, 1857) and 'The Coming Event! or, Freedom and Independence for the Seven United Provinces of Australia' (1870). 
In 1851 Lang falsely accused a political opponent of dishonesty and, though he apologized for his error, was convicted of malicious libel and sentenced to four months' gaol. In 1855, when greatly provoked, in a pamphlet entitled 'The Convicts' Bank', he charged a prominent banker with 'malice prepense of the foulest character imaginable... and a degree of low-bred brutal malignity worthy only of an incarnate demon'. That was criminal libel and it earned Lang six months in gaol, which he spent comfortably in the residence of the gaol's governor. 
In 1850 Lang had established the synod of New South Wales with ministers he had enlisted on his recent visit to Britain. He then settled them throughout the colony. In 1865 this synod joined in the general Presbyterian union, which combined the Free Churchmen with those supporting the established Church of Scotland. 
From 1874 Lang suffered several small strokes, but they did little to hinder his activities, and he made a strenuous round-the-world journey in 1874-5. He died, after a massive stroke, on 8 August 1878 at the Australian College, Jamison Street, Sydney. He was accorded a state funeral on 10 August, and was buried at the Devonshire Street cemetery. 
Above all, Lang was a Presbyterian minister. Yet he cooperated willingly with other protestant clergymen, especially Baptists and Congregationalists, often more cordially than with fellow Presbyterians. Always parading as an upright man, he frequently condemned the sins of those in public life, including the fornication of Governor FitzRoy. Many hundreds of the poor, the homeless, and the bereaved remained deeply grateful to him as benefactor and friend. His achievements in promoting education and immigration bear comparison with those of any of his contemporaries but would have been much greater had his intense inner drive not been compounded with an equal impulse to castigate opponents or even those merely lukewarm towards his designs. His long parliamentary career included many electoral triumphs and he witnessed the achievement of almost all his political aims: the end of transportation, the separation of Victoria and Queensland, the introduction of responsible and democratic government, radical land reform, national education, and the abolition of state aid to religion. 
In addition to his larger books, Lang published more than a hundred polemical, religious, or political pamphlets, and almost every day, it seems, he wrote an article for the press or at least a letter to the editor. His writings, though repetitious and egotistical, are nevertheless always vigorous and informative and often tinged with powerful sarcasm. These, together with innumerable lectures given in Sydney or in the bush on his never-ending colonial journeyings, must have had a large influence in inculcating the liberal and secular values which were dominant in Australia by the end of the nineteenth century. 


@@@@@


doc= 16006


Langbaine, Gerard (1608/9-1658), college head, the son of William Langbaine, was born at Barton Kirk, Westmorland. After education at Blencow School, Cumberland, on 17 April 1625 he entered Queen's College, Oxford, from which he matriculated on 21 November 1628, aged nineteen. On 6 October 1627 he received a non-residential Dudley exhibition of Oriel College, and on 10 June 1630 a scholarship at Queen's. Having graduated BA the following 24 July, he became a tutor and grammar reader. He proceeded MA on 27 June 1633, when he had to sell his patrimony to pay debts, and was elected fellow the following 30 October. Ordained deacon in 1634 and priest in 1635, he held no ecclesiastical preferment other than the vicarage of Crosthwaite, near Kendal, Westmorland, obtained in early 1643. 
The diarist Thomas Crosfield suggests that Langbaine was a lively presence at Queen's. In 1638 he and another fellow stocked the garden with lapwings and with a hare which died after two days from rough handling. Crosfield also noted, in 1633, Langbaine's books. These included Xenophon in Greek, dictionaries and religious, literary, political, and historical works in Italian and French, volumes on Hebrew antiquities, Sir Thomas Ridley's 'A View of the Civile and Ecclesiastical Law', and a work on the Council of Trent. 
From early on Langbaine delved in Oxford libraries and their manuscript collections, and exhibited catholic interests in print. From 1625 he regularly contributed verses to celebratory academic volumes. He compiled a detailed index for John Gregory's second edition of Ridley's 'View' in 1634, and two years later published a student edition of Dionysius Longinus's Greek study of the sublime including his own detailed commentary. In 1638, inspired by the dedicatee, Christopher Potter, provost of Queen's, his 'A Review of the Councell of Trent' translated the work of the Gallican Guillaume Ranchin while disclaiming Catholic doctrinal content. Probably dating from his years as a tutor was a basic guide for students, 'Philosophiae moralis compendium', printed posthumously in 1698 with additional material by Thomas Barlow. According to Thomas Hearne, Langbaine was already in touch with continental scholars, sending in 1641 a transcript of Bodleian manuscripts of Ailred of Rievaulx's 'De vinculo perfectionis' and 'De vita inclusarum' to Jacobus Merlon Horstius of Cologne for an edition of St Bernard. 
In 1641 Langbaine entered the political arena with his 'Episcopall Inheritance', defending the right of bishops to vote in the House of Lords (which provoked a response by Cornelius Burges), and a new edition, pointedly relevant, of Sir John Cheke's 'Hurt of Sedition', entitled 'The True Subiect to the Rebell', with a preface on Edward VI's reign and a life of the author. Registered as absent from college in the protestation returns of 1642, later that year Langbaine was prominent in a delegation dealing with Sir John Byron's royal troopers and was sent by the university to Nottingham, probably in connection with providing money for the king. In 1644 his antiquarian and legal skills made him the obvious successor to Brian Twyne as the university's keeper of the archives and defender of academic privileges. It was probably he who published in that year 'A Review of the Covenant', arguing that the solemn league and covenant was unlawful. 
Langbaine was chosen Camden lecturer in ancient history in 1646 but did not take up the post. He succeeded Potter as provost of Queen's on 11 March and was created DD on 22 June. Soon afterwards he married his predecessor's widow, Elizabeth (1613-1692), daughter of Charles Sunnybanke, canon of Windsor. Two sons, William and Gerard Langbaine (1656-1692), and at least one other child, were born to the couple. 
As the university's custodian of its privileges Langbaine participated in negotiations for Oxford's surrender in 1646, and his successive drafts of articles to safeguard academic freedoms survive. Later he visited London to lobby parliament through the university's MP, John Selden, for payment of rents withheld, and strove, unsuccessfully, to have the Stationers' Company pay contracted dues. Langbaine was probably largely responsible for 'The Privileges of the University of Oxford, in Point of Visitation', issued in 1647. He contributed to 'Reasons for the present judgment of the University of Oxford concerning the solemn league and covenant', printed the same year, and then translated it into Latin for publication in 1648 with a view to reaching learned men abroad. Madan conjectures that amid such employments he also edited the autobiographical 'Life of Sir Thomas Bodley' (1647). 
It was almost certainly Langbaine who wrote 'The answer of the chancellor, masters and scholars of the University of Oxford, to the petition, articles of grievance, and reasons of the city of Oxon.', printed in 1649 and presented to the parliamentary committee for Oxford in response to an assault by the city on academic privileges. With unrivalled antiquarian knowledge and the assistance of the learned civil lawyer Richard Zouche, Langbaine easily saw off parliamentary projects to reform the university's Laudian statutes after 1649. He was involved in the reconstitution of the chancellor's court in July 1650. In 1651 he published 'The Foundation of the Universitie of Oxford' and 'The Foundation of the Universitie of Cambridge', both, as Wood noted, drawing heavily on John Scot's work decades earlier. He produced, possibly for manuscript circulation, verses on three political questions aired at the formal vespers disputations of 1651, which were published in 1658 with Sir Henry Savile's 'Oratio, coram Regina Elizabetha Oxoniae habita'. His concern at the decline of the civil law led him to collaborate on Arthur Duck's 'De usu et authoritate juris civilis' (1653), and in late 1654 he organized a spirited defence of the languishing faculty in Oxford. The following year, with several intruded heads of house, he sought revision of dangerous new terms of parliamentary visitation, an effort resulting in tacit forbearance. 
Langbaine also adroitly defended the interests of his college against parliamentary interference. He did not take the engagement, but still survived. Writing to his scholarly friend Selden, who smoothed his path, he accepted the earl of Pembroke as chancellor. On 9 October 1648 he wrote shrewdly enlisting the aid of another friend, Francis Mills MP, active with the parliamentary committee, on behalf of the fellows of Queen's: few were lost and few intruded. Diplomacy and outward moderation were rewarded when Queen's was allowed to elect its own officers again in April 1652. From 1651 Langbaine could count on the former Queen's man John Owen, now dean of Christ Church after a period as Cromwell's chaplain. The provost seems to have been no stickler for Church of England liturgy and formulas. His second son, Gerard, born on 15 July 1656, was 'baptized by Dr. Wallis after the new cutt, without godfathers' (TNA: PRO, SP 18/129, fol. 140'v'). 
Langbaine maintained a prudent freedom of thought and expression within Queen's, reputed in the 1650s as royalist as circumstances permitted and so attracting loyalists and young men of rank to a degree exceptional in Oxford. In 1654 Langbaine and others there contributed to support distressed bishops in exile. Remembering his own struggles with poverty Langbaine not only endowed a grammar school at Barton, his birthplace, and funded apprenticeships for two poor boys, but also sought unsuccessfully to convince selfish fellows to improve remuneration for poor scholars. On a recommendation from Richard Busby of Westminster School, he admitted in 1650 the talented young Joseph Williamson, whom he helped from his own pocket. Despite his best efforts, however, during his last years there were factional disputes, centred on Thomas Barlow, in the fellowship. 
Langbaine continued his own scholarly and antiquarian work. In 1643 he began cataloguing Greek manuscripts in the Bodleian and in college libraries, becoming the indispensable expert. In 1652 he initiated the creation of a subject catalogue of the Bodleian and college libraries. This was never finished, although part of his own assignment survives. He produced a bibliographical survey of Platonic writers in Greek and Latin and the whereabouts of their work in Oxford, eventually printed by John Fell in his 'Alcinoi in Platonicam philosophiam introductio' (1667). Between 1650 and 1652, at Selden's suggestion, Langbaine produced with the aid of young scholars transcriptions of musical manuscripts for Marcus Meibom of Holstein to include in his 'Antiquae auctores septem, Graece et Latine' (Amsterdam, 1652). A letter of 1656 from Franciscus Junius to William Dugdale suggests that Langbaine was then working on Anglo-Saxon texts. Thomas Fuller believed he was preparing an expanded edition of Twyne's work on the antiquity of Oxford, although this was denied by Wood. Hearne says he was also working on a new edition of Francis Godwin's 'De praesulibus Angliae' (1616) and that he contributed to William Dugdale's 'A Short View of the Late Troubles in England', printed only in 1681. When Archbishop Ussher died in 1656 he left his unfinished 'Chronologia sacra' to Langbaine as the only man he could trust to prepare it for publication, and Wood says the provost 'drudged much' (Wood, 3.447) in this task. 
Langbaine also laboured incessantly for the learned press in Oxford. Particularly active in this field from 1647, he formally became a delegate for the press in 1653. As keeper of the archives he looked after matrices and founts of type at his lodgings and bought Hebrew founts between 1655 and 1657 and a large fount of Anglo-Saxon in 1656. 
Langbaine was a vital prop to numerous scholars: 'as his Brain was the Mother of some, so was it the Midwife to other, good Books which he procured to be published' (Fuller, 1.239). It was he who encouraged Selden to obtain the restoration of Edward Pococke's stipend as Laudian professor of Arabic, drawing up the university's protest at his treatment, and he encouraged Pococke to publish his 'Specimen historiae Arabum' (1650), his 1655 edition of the 'Porta Mosis' of Maimonides, and his 1654-6 edition of Eutychius' 'Annales'; Pococke acknowledged Langbaine as the spur to publication of his 'Historia compendiosa dynastiarum, authore Gregorio Abul-Pharajio' (1663). Langbaine also supported John Greaves and Samuel Clarke in their Arabic and Hebrew scholarship, and Sir Henry Spelman and William Dugdale in their work on 'The History and Fate of Sacrilege' and 'Monasticon Anglicanum' respectively. His friendship and correspondence with men like Ussher, Selden, Spelman, Dugdale, and Pococke attest to his pivotal position in English scholarship in these decades. He had also been a friend of the learned Ben Jonson. 
Langbaine died on 10 February 1658 'of an extream cold taken by sitting in the University-Library whole Winter days, and thence after his return home, continuing in his study whole Winter nights, without any food or fire' (Lloyd, 518), apparently working over-hard on the project left him by Ussher. He was buried in the college chapel on 13 February alongside his two predecessors. By his will, among modest bequests to his stepchildren and others, virtually everyone at Queen's, including servants, was given a small sum; the residue of his estate went to his wife. A portion of his books, his 'greatest earthly treasure', was bequeathed to the college, and another to the Bodleian Library, the curator of which was to have choice of others at fair price. In April and May 1658 Anthony Wood, who respected Langbaine highly, acquired some of his books and manuscripts. 


@@@@@


doc= 16007


Langbaine, Gerard (1656-1692), dramatic cataloguer and writer, was born on 15 July 1656 in the parish of St Peter-in-the-East, Oxford, the second of two sons of Gerard Langbaine (1608/9-1658), provost of Queen's College, Oxford, and his wife, Elizabeth (1613-1692), daughter of Charles Sunnybanke, canon of Windsor. From about 1666 to about 1670 he attended a school in Denton, in the parish of Cuddesdon, Oxfordshire, where he was taught by William Wildgoose. When in 1670 his mother's plan to secure his admission to Magdalen College, Oxford, failed, Langbaine was sent to London and apprenticed to Neville Simmons, a bookseller in St Paul's Churchyard. He was bound to Simmons for eight years, starting from 1 February 1672, but he never took up his freedom, for within months of his arrival in London he was recalled to Oxford on the death of his elder brother, William, on 3 June 1672. He matriculated from University College, Oxford, on 25 October 1672, but he never took his degree. His studies were interrupted when, not yet nineteen, he married Mary Greenwood (died 1724), on 18 May 1675 at Headington, and promptly left for London. After a spell in the capital he seems to have settled in Holywell parish, Oxford. The young couple's conjugal felicity did not last long. Their daughter Elizabeth died shortly after being baptized at St Cross, Holywell, in August 1681, and was buried at St Peter's-in-the-East on 23 August. Wood tells us that Langbaine 'left his wife and hous in Holywell in the beginning of June 1683 and went away with a whoreish woman named... daughter of Warnford who lived in Halywell' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 4.364). 
The young heir's hasty marriage, his frequent visits to London in the late 1670s, which involved extravagant playgoing and book-buying sprees, his adulterous escapade, and his costly passion for horses -- Wood refers to him as a 'great jockey' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 4.364) -- meant that he soon ran out of the estate he had inherited. Apparently reconciled to his wife, Langbaine was by 1685 back in Oxfordshire, where he lived a retired life at Wick in Headington. His sons Gerard and William were born in 1688 and 1692 respectively. 
The retirement afforded Langbaine the leisure to pursue his 'inclination to [Dramatick] Poetry', which, he recalls, 'has led me not only to the view of most of our Modern Representations on the Stage, but also to the purchase of all the Plays I could meet with, in the 'English' Tongue' (G. Langbaine, 'Momus triumphans', 1688, sig. A2'r'). Langbaine's interest in the drama goes back to his brief period of apprenticeship in London where he had the opportunity to see plays, and where he is likely to have become acquainted with Francis Kirkman, a bookseller with a strong line in playbooks which he advertised in successive catalogues of 1661 and 1671. Having begun to build his own collection of plays while in college, by 1688 Langbaine owned no fewer than 980 titles (part of his collection survives in the library of Worcester College, Oxford). His 'natural and gay geny... to dramatic poetry' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 4.364) led him to produce a series of increasingly sophisticated catalogues of plays, the earliest of which was 'An exact catalogue of all the comedies, tragedies, tragi-comedies, opera's, masks, pastorals and interludes' (1680). Published anonymously, this catalogue was merely a continuation of Kirkman's latest playlist. By contrast, Langbaine's later compilations proved a landmark in the history of dramatic authorship, bibliography, source study, and criticism. 'A New Catalogue of English Plays' (1688), better known under its spurious title 'Momus triumphans, or, The Plagiaries of the English Stage', was the first ever to arrange entries alphabetically by authors' surnames, thus indicating the growing status of playwriting towards the end of the seventeenth century, the first to identify the sources of individual plays, Shakespeare's prominent among them, and the first to list the most readily available editions. Langbaine was scrupulous in distinguishing between plays which could confidently be attributed and those which could not. His catalogue moves from the category of incontrovertible ascription ('Declared Authors'), through that of conjecture ('Supposed Authors'), to that of 'Anonemous Plays'. The alphabetical index of plays makes each item easy to locate in one of the three classes. The preface to 'Momus', moreover, contains the first theoretical discussion of plagiarism in the English language. Langbaine sharply distinguishes between classical imitation and modern literary theft. Imitation, he argues, involves acknowledged adoption of ancient masterpieces as models; modern playwrights, however, recycle worthless French materials or debase native dramas. He makes a further distinction between overt borrowing from canonical authors (especially Shakespeare and Fletcher) and covert adaptation of plays by less prominent writers. The latter form of appropriation is particularly rife, he claims, because there is less likelihood of its discovery. 
Langbaine expanded his views of the proprieties of appropriation in his magnum opus, 'An Account of the English Dramatick Poets' (1691). Arranged alphabetically by author and -- in contrast to its predecessor -- written in continuous prose, the 'Account' supplied basic biographical information about English playwrights, listed their works, and assessed, in however rudimentary a manner, their literary merit and authorial probity in the use of sources. In contrast to 'Momus', which did not determine conclusively what the dramatist is at liberty to take from a romance, a novel, or a play, the 'Account' locates the author's property in the linguistic form of a literary work. Stories, plots, and ideas can legitimately be borrowed, but the actual words of the original are barred from appropriation. 
Langbaine tapped into a rich vein of public interest. Though the book was scathingly reviewed in one of the short-lived literary periodicals, 'The Moderator', on 23 June 1692, the 'Account' had a lasting impact upon later dramatic bibliographers, biographers, and critics from Charles Gildon (who within eight years wrote a sequel entitled 'Lives and Characters of the English Dramatick Poets', 1699), Giles Jacob, and Theophilus Cibber to Samuel Johnson and beyond. Not only was Langbaine's work continued, but annotated copies of his playlists, 'Momus' and 'Account', circulated among critics, literary scholars, and editors well into the eighteenth century. In his condemnation of literary theft and his concern about literary property, authors' rights, and the integrity of the dramatic text Langbaine anticipates eighteenth-century legal and conceptual developments, notably the official recognition of authors as owners initiated by the 'Copyright Act' of 1710, and the emergence of ideals of originality and individual genius which are central to the Romantic conception of literary creation. 
Langbaine's other works include 'The Hunter: a Discourse of Horsemanship' (1685) and 'The Gallant Hermaphrodite' (1688), a translation of Francois de Chavigny de la Bretonniere's 'La galante hermaphrodite nouvelle amoureuse' (1683). He was elected inferior bedel of arts at Oxford on 14 August 1690, and on 19 January of the following year superior bedel of law. Langbaine died in Oxford on 23 June 1692 and was buried on 27 June in St Peter's-in-the-East. 


@@@@@


doc= 16008


Langdale, Alban (fl. 1532-1580), Roman Catholic priest and writer, was born in Yorkshire, possibly at Houghton, but nothing is known of his parentage. He was educated at St John's College, Cambridge, graduating BA in 1532, becoming a fellow of St John's in March 1534, and commencing MA in 1535. In 1539 he was one of the proctors of the university. His clerical career began in 1541 when he was ordained deacon; in the same year he was ordained priest and became university chaplain, a position he held until 1554. In 1544 he proceeded BTh. In June 1549 he was one of the Roman Catholic speakers in the debates held before the royal commissioners for the visitation of the university about transubstantiation and whether, in the communion service, there was 'none other oblation or sacrifice' than 'remembrance of Christ's death, and of thanksgiving' ('Acts and Monuments', 6.308). In November 1551 Roger Ascham confessed to being 'sorry Mr Langdale is gone from college, although he did dissent from us in religion' (Ascham, 393), but Langdale returned to the university early in Mary's reign, commencing DTh in 1554, and being incorporated in that degree at Oxford in the same year. Adding to his rectorship of Buxted, Sussex, he was made prebendary of Ampleforth in York diocese on 26 May 1554, archdeacon of Chichester on 16 April 1555, prebendary of Alrewas in the church of Lichfield on 19 January 1559, and chancellor of Lichfield in the following month. Mary's reign also saw him disputing with Cranmer, Latimer, and Ridley at Oxford in 1554, taking part in the third and sixth examinations of Richard Woodman in 1557, and being dispatched by Anthony Browne, first Viscount Montague, whose chaplain he had become, to 'preach in places not well affected in religion' ('CSP dom.', '1547-80', 162) in 1558. It was also in Mary's reign that his 'Catholica confutatio impiae cuiusdam determinationis D. Nicolai Ridlei' (Paris, 1556) was published. 
Early in Elizabeth I's reign Langdale was one of the eight Roman Catholics appointed to take part in the abortive Westminster disputation begun on 31 March 1559. By 7 October 1559 he had been deprived of the archdeaconry of Chichester, having refused to take the supremacy oath, and, having failed to attend the visitation at York in the same year, he had lost his prebendal stall there by 7 November. After deprivation he took up residence at Lord Montague's residence at Cowdray, Sussex. In 1561 he was described as 'learned and very earnest in papistry' on a list of recusants, and ordered to remain within Lord Montague's household, or somewhere else appointed by his lordship, and to be ready to appear before the authorities on twelve days' notice ('CSP dom.', '1547-65', 'addenda', 523). Richard Smith blamed Langdale for Montague's occasional conformity, describing the priest as 'a learned and pious man indeed, but fearful' (Smith, 19). In 1580 a manuscript treatise entitled 'A discourse delivered to Mr Sheldon to persuade him to conform. Arguments to prove it lawful for a Roman Catholic to attend the Protestant service' (TNA: PRO, SP 12/144/69) began to circulate among incarcerated Roman Catholics. Robert Parsons, eager to track down its author, discovered tell-tale annotations on theological works in Langdale's library at Montague's Southwark residence. Since then the work, copied and disseminated by William Clithero, and instrumental in persuading Ralph Sheldon and Thomas, third Lord Paget, to conformity, has usually, and very convincingly, been attributed to Langdale, though his authorship cannot be proved. 
Crucially, the tract was not a general dispensation for conformity, but a casuistical treatment of the specific dilemma faced by people from the upper echelons of society who had been imprisoned. It also helped the cause of partial conformity, suggesting that by combining presence at services with a refusal to participate on particular occasions the risks of undermining the loyalty of one's fellow religionists could be minimized. Its main contemporary importance was the extent to which it provoked the advocates of nonconformity, and Parsons and George Blackwell collaborated on a riposte ('Against going to churche', 1580, BL, Add. MS 39830). A chief concern was the timing of Langdale's tract: its tempting advice was dispensed only a few months ahead of the harsh 1581 anti-recusancy legislation. The tract's main historical significance is the rare glimpse it offers of a theologically grounded alternative to recusancy. The 'Tetrastichon' and 'Carmina diversa' appended to J. Seton's 'Dialectica' (1574), are also by Langdale. His movements after 1580 are unclear, but he may have died between 1587 and 1589. Suggestions that he moved to the continent cannot be substantiated. He should not be confused with Thomas Langdale, regarded as his nephew, who was another defender of Roman Catholic conformity. 


@@@@@


doc= 16009


Langdale, Charles (1787-1868), politician and biographer, was born on 19 September 1787, the fourth son of the six sons and six daughters of Charles Philip, seventeenth Baron Stourton (1752-1816), and his wife, Mary (died 1841), second surviving daughter and coheir of Marmaduke Langdale, fifth and last Baron Langdale. In January 1799 he was sent to Oscott College, which he left in August 1804. In October of the same year he entered Stonyhurst College, where he finished his studies. On 24 December 1814 he assumed his mother's maiden name by royal licence, in order to comply with the conditions of the will of Philip Langdale of Houghton, Yorkshire. On 27 January 1817 he married Charlotte Mary, fifth daughter of the sixth Baron Clifford. She died on 31 March 1819, leaving him two daughters. On 1 May 1821 he married again; his second wife was May (died 1857), eldest daughter of Marmaduke Constable of Everingham Park. They had a large family of at least five sons and six daughters. 
Langdale soon became active and prominent in politics and public life. He appeared on platforms in London with other leading Catholic laymen to campaign for the emancipation of Roman Catholics in England from the legal restraints which had been imposed upon them since the Reformation. After the 'Catholic Emancipation Act' was passed in 1829 he became one of the first Roman Catholics in the Commons, sitting for Beverley in 1832-5 and for Knaresborough in 1837-41. On the return of the 'Poor Law Amendment Act' to the Commons in 1834 he moved and carried a resolution that the clause securing religious freedom in the workhouses, which had been struck out by the Lords, should be reinstated. He voted for the ballot, the repeal of the 'Septennial Act', and for an inquiry into the pensions list; he was also involved in negotiations for the repeal of the remaining enactments against Catholics in the 1840s. 
Langdale's most significant efforts, however, were in the field of Roman Catholic education, where he became 'the most important Catholic educationalist of the century' (Norman, 167). In 1838 he chaired the first meeting of the Catholic Institute, a society intended to circulate pro-Catholic tracts and to improve Roman Catholic education by promoting lectures and libraries. In 1847 he suggested and supported the foundation of the Catholic Poor Schools Committee, of which he was chairman (and the only recusant member) until his death. The activities of this effective and influential body included supporting the growth of the teaching orders and organizing training for lay teachers. Langdale's most important contribution to its work was made in the mid-1840s, when he was the leading figure in negotiations with the government to secure a share in public grants and other educational amenities for Roman Catholic schools. 
During the 1850 'papal aggression' crisis Langdale publicly testified to his belief in the patronage and protection of the Virgin and the saints at a large public meeting in York. In the mid-1850s he became involved in another controversy. Lord Holland's 'Memoirs of the Whig Party', which were published posthumously in 1852, contained an assertion that Maria Fitzherbert, the reputed wife of George IV, had never believed her marriage vows to be in any way binding. Langdale, who had been a close friend of Mrs Fitzherbert in his youth, determined to write a defence. He applied for permission to see Mrs Fitzherbert's remaining papers, including her marriage certificate, which were held in Coutts's Bank and of which his brother, Lord Stourton (died 1846), had been a trustee. The representative of the longest surviving trustee, however, refused him access, and Langdale was obliged to base his vindication solely on Mrs Fitzherbert's personal recollections, dictated to Lord Stourton. The 'Memoirs of Mrs Fitzherbert' were published in 1856; only fifty copies were produced, but Langdale's narrative served to establish the religious validity of the marriage in the eyes of the Roman Catholic church, and to show that Mrs Fitzherbert firmly believed herself to be the wife of the prince regent. 
Langdale died on 1 December 1868 at 5 Queen Street, Mayfair, London, having been admitted shortly before as a lay brother of the Society of Jesus. He was buried at Houghton, the family seat, and was succeeded by his eldest son, Charles Joseph Langdale (1822-1895). Father Peter Gallwey, who preached at the funeral, dwelt on his personal spiritual life, which was one of regular devotion and relative poverty, describing him as 'a father to us all' (Gallwey, 21). Langdale was a significant figure in liberal Catholic politics until his death. Bernard Ward, describing him as 'a leader in all catholic good works' ('Eve of Catholic Emancipation', 3.282), identified Langdale and John Talbot, sixteenth earl of Shrewsbury, as the outstanding Roman Catholic figures in post-1829 politics. Langdale has been unduly neglected in modern scholarship on Roman Catholic politics and religion in the first half of the nineteenth century. 


@@@@@


doc= 16010


Langdale, Marmaduke, first Baron Langdale (bap. 1598, d. 1661), royalist army officer, was the only son of Peter Langdale, esquire (died 1617), and his wife, Anne Wharton ('bap'. 1576/7, died 1646), daughter of Michael Wharton, esquire, of Beverley and his wife, Joane. He matriculated at St John's College, Cambridge, in 1613 and succeeded his father in 1617, inheriting from him estates at Molescroft, Pighill, Sancton, and Bainton. He then pursued a military career in Europe in the service of the queen of Bohemia. Among his comrades was his neighbour, the future parliamentarian Sir John Hotham. In 1620, under the command of Sir Horace Vere, he participated in the defence of the Palatinate against the Spanish. 
On 12 September 1626, at St Michael-le-Belfry in York, Langdale married Lenox (died 1639), daughter of Sir John Rodes of Barlborough, Derbyshire, and his third wife, Catherine, daughter of Marmaduke Constable of Holderness. Lenox was also the sister of Sir John Hotham's first wife, Katherine Rodes. Despite his refusal to pay the forced loan in 1627 Langdale was knighted by Charles I at Whitehall on 5 February 1628. He resided at North Dalton until his purchase of Holme-on-Spalding-Moor from Sir William Constable in 1633. He spent over $12,000 on land purchases and increased his rents, bringing his family into the ranks of the county's upper gentry. They had four sons and three daughters, but on 22 July 1639 Lenox died in childbed at Holme. 
Langdale became a predictable and leading opponent of Charles I's and Wentworth's policy of 'thorough'; in 1638 Wentworth referred to him as a 'Person of ill Affections I am sure, to the Provinciall Power, if not to the Regall Power' (Cliffe, 311). His rent book contains notes detailing Yorkshire's grievances during the bishops' wars, and in 1639 he led the East Riding's opposition to ship money. Wentworth reflected on 26 March 1639: 'I hear my old friend Sir Marmaduke Langdale appears in the head of this business, that gentleman I fear carries an itch about him, that will never let him take rest, till at one time or other he happen to be thoroughly clawed indeed. (Cliffe, 313)' He was appointed high sheriff of Yorkshire on 12 November 1639, and his health may have been poor as he made his will six days later. The king had rejected Wentworth's suggestions for the shrievalty, intent on punishing Langdale with the appointment, reasoning that his attitude would soon change when faced with making up tax shortfalls himself. However, Langdale still took no action for months, and the king remarked that he had 'neglected to perform that service in manifest contempt of our crown and dignity, and thereby have incurred our high displeasure and indignation' ('CSP dom.', '1640', 223). He finally agreed to collect the tax on 16 June 1640, after having been threatened with Star Chamber proceedings. Despite his opposition he remained on the commission of the peace, and on 28 July 1640 many Yorkshire gentlemen gathered at his house, where a petition of the county's grievances was framed by Sir John Hotham and Sir Hugh Cholmley. 
Despite maintaining close links with key future parliamentarians until early 1642, Langdale was named a commissioner of array for Yorkshire on 18 June 1642. In July he mustered Sir Henry Griffith's trained bands regiment of foot in the East Riding, and was commissioned a colonel. In November, with parliamentarian forces blockading York, he was sent to persuade the earl of Newcastle's royalist army, north of the River Tees, to march to York's relief and accept command in the county in place of the earl of Cumberland. Langdale had seen the devastation wrought by the Thirty Years' War, and his letter to Sir William Savile dated from Newcastle on 9 November reveals his foreboding and reluctance for war: 'We in Yorkshire should have some happiness if we could make an end of the troubles and distractions of our county and so divert the war southward, that whatsoever foreign nations come they may be employed in the South where the wellspring of our miseries began, and where there is pillage enough to satisfy many armies. ('Portland MSS', 1.70)' Langdale waited upon Queen Henrietta Maria shortly after she landed with her convoy at Bridlington on 25 February 1643, and, making a very favourable impression, equipped his regiment with some of her arms and supplies. He was also involved in important attempts to persuade his kinsmen, the Hothams, to forsake their parliamentarian allegiance. On 11 September 1643 he was commissioned colonel of a brigade of horse returned from Ireland. A mark of his military reputation, he was even authorized to summon his own council of war. 
When the Scots covenanter army invaded England, Langdale defeated its cavalry at Corbridge on 19 February 1644. Despite the royalists' defeat at Marston Moor on 2 July he enjoyed success against Sir Thomas Fairfax in his part of the battle. He retreated with Rupert through Lancashire, fighting in engagements at Ormskirk and Malpas, where he was wounded on 26 August 1644. During these weeks he forged a new brigade composed of the remnants of the earl of Newcastle's old cavalry regiments, 1600 veterans known as 'the Northern horse'. After joining the king's main field army he fought at Donnington Castle in November and in Rupert's raid on Abingdon. 
In the following year Langdale was given permission to return northwards to endeavour to relieve Pontefract Castle. On 25 February 1645 he defeated a parliamentarian force under Colonel Rossiter that intercepted him at Melton Mowbray. On 1 March 1645 he relieved Pontefract, scattering the besiegers. His report claimed to have captured 20 colours and 500 prisoners, representing one of the royalists' last major field victories in England. Returning south, he was wounded again at Lydney in Gloucestershire on 15 April. He commanded the Northern horse on the royalist left wing at Naseby on 14 June, but was outnumbered and overpowered by Oliver Cromwell, sustaining heavy losses. He was present at Rowton Heath on 24 September as a major-general, and won the royalists initial advantage before the battle was lost. 
The Northern horse contributed to the king's subsequent decision to move northwards, but Charles's elevation of Lord Digby to the position of lieutenant-general in England north of the Trent eclipsed Langdale from command. Digby's poor generalship contributed to the devastation of the remnants of the Northern horse at Sherburn in Elmet, in Yorkshire, on 15 October 1645. Digby and Langdale fled through Skipton into Cumberland but were further defeated at Burgh by the Sands. On 24 October they embarked at Ravenglass for the Isle of Man, whence they took ship for Ireland. Langdale finally reached France, and on 15 May 1646 a parliamentarian agent reported his presence in Paris. 
At the outbreak of the second civil war Langdale landed in Scotland in early 1648, where he angered his Scottish allies by refusing to wait for them to complete their preparations. On 28 April 1648 he captured Berwick by surprise with only 100 men. Raising the northern royalists, he invaded England with a commission from the prince of Wales as commander of five northern counties. He rallied considerable support and his forces of English royalists grew to 3000 foot and 600 horse. His army then joined the larger Scottish engager army under the duke of Hamilton as it marched down the western side of the Pennines. Langdale's forces suffered heavy losses when Hamilton ignored his warnings and the engager army was defeated by Cromwell at the battle of Preston on 17 August 1648. Langdale was captured six days later while resting in a small alehouse near Nottingham. He wrote an account of the failed expedition (printed in Sunderland, 133-6). He was confined in Nottingham Castle and might have been sentenced to death, for on 21 November 1648 he was among the seven royalists exempted from pardon by parliament. However, Lady Savile (Sir William's widow) aided his escape and, employing a variety of disguises including that of a milkmaid, he eventually made his way to London. Sir Thomas Fairfax offered a reward of $1000 for his capture, his estates were confiscated, and he was perpetually banished as an enemy and traitor on 13 March 1649. He had reached the continent safely by April, and in June he was sent for a short time to assist the earl of Derby in the defence of the Isle of Man. He was reportedly 'a very lean and much mortified man so that the enemy called him ghost (and deservedly, they were so haunted by him)' (Sunderland, 231). 
Langdale engaged in the Venetian service in 1652, defending Candia (Crete) against the Turks from 5 to 12 May. After war broke out between England and the United Provinces, Langdale offered to seize Newcastle and Tynemouth with the aid of the Dutch, but he was not encouraged. Now Langdale was openly Roman Catholic; Sir Edward Nicholas wrote to Sir Edward Hyde in January 1653: 'I pray by whom was the K. moved to send for Sir M. Langdale and to make him of his Council? Sir M. [is] as eager in pursuing the Papists' interest as any new Popish proselyte ever was' ('Nicholas Papers', 2.3). Langdale was reported in the royal council as 'driving on with much fierceness the Catholics design and extolling excessively those worst of Papists in Ireland' (Newman, 'Royalist Officers', 223). He confidently expected Catholic priests to carry royalist messages for him in Yorkshire, but by favouring a Spanish alliance he distanced himself from his fellow English Catholics around the queen. Sir Edward Hyde clashed with him also, describing him as 'a man hard to please, and of a very weak understanding, yet proud, and much in love with his own judgement' (Scrope and Monkhouse, 3.135, 181). He resided in Brussels for much of 1655 where he resented his exclusion from plans for the 1655 uprisings and complained of having to deal with Richard Overton's and Edward Sexby's Leveller involvement in royalist conspiracy: 'I am so weary of discoursinge with them that I can noe longer endure it with patience... they are not wourth the taking notice of' ('Nicholas Papers', 3.128). He was involved in the royalist plot uncovered in the spring of 1658, but by the later 1650s he had become extremely poor and took refuge at the English Benedictine abbey of Lambspring, in Westphalia. On 4 February 1658 at Bruges the future Charles II created him Baron Langdale of Holme-on-Spalding-Moor. 
Langdale returned to Holme in 1660 and was the only pre-war JP to return to the bench in the East Riding. He was also appointed lord lieutenant of the West Riding in 1661. His estates were comparatively easy for him to recover because his confiscated manors of Holme, Pighill, Molescroft, and Gatenby had been granted to leading republicans and regicides. Nevertheless he had reportedly lost $160,000 in the royal service. On 7 April 1661 he wrote to excuse himself from attending Charles II's coronation; he pleaded that he was too poor to attend with the requisite dignity, but he was also in poor health. He died in his house at Holme on 5 August 1661, and did so without a priest, as his son reportedly could not bring himself to warn him of Langdale's impending death. He was buried on 10 August among his ancestors in the sanctuary on the right side of the altar at All Saints' parish church, Sancton, where a monumental inscription commemorated him. He was succeeded as second baron by his son and namesake. 


@@@@@


doc= 16011


Langdon, John (d. 1434), bishop of Rochester, was a native of Kent and had at least two brothers, Thomas and Richard, both laymen; others of the surname, derived from a local village, were either in his circle, or employees of Canterbury Cathedral and diocese, or both. He was a close friend of Bishop John Cliderow of Bangor, who was a native of Romney. Admitted as a monk of Christ Church, Canterbury, in 1398, Langdon was ordained to minor orders in April and May 1401, and as priest on 24 May 1404. He graduated BTh of Oxford by 1400, and DTh by August 1411. Although he served as sub-prior of his house some time before 1411, and as its almoner by 1 December that year, he was often at Oxford; he was a scholar of Canterbury College (which was connected with his house) in 1407-8, warden there from September 1410 to after August 1411, and again a scholar in 1414-15. By then he had become widely known. He gave the opening sermon in the convocation of Canterbury on both 17 February 1410 and 1 December 1411, evidently as a preacher of reputation and perhaps engaged in opposing Wycliffite heresy. He acted as commissary for the chancellor of Oxford in 1410 or 1411, and was one of twelve Oxford scholars appointed by Archbishop Arundel in 1411 to examine the writings of Wyclif (Wilkins, 3.339-49), and also one of Arundel's five commissaries instructed on 23 June 1411 to take oaths from Oxford scholars to renounce Wyclif's errors. 
On 12 March 1414 Langdon announced the election of Henry Chichele as archbishop, having played a prominent part in its process. He attended the Council of Constance, quite possibly throughout its duration and probably on behalf of his house, which on 1 November 1417 appointed him as its proctor in the curia of the new pope, Martin V. In fact he did not go to Rome, being used instead, by his own estimation, for nearly three years in France and Normandy by Henry V and Archbishop Chichele, mainly to report back to the council in England. The king and archbishop tried to have him provided as bishop of Lisieux in 1419, but the pope preferred to favour an Italian cardinal, Branda da Castiglione. Langdon was in England in March 1419, and again in October 1419 and April 1421, when twice more he gave the opening sermon in convocation, while in February 1420, May 1421, and February 1423 he took part as an examiner in the trial of the heretic William Taylor. On 17 November 1421 he was provided to the see of Rochester and consecrated on 7 June 1422 at Canterbury. Modest though the see was, undoubtedly its location was ideal for Langdon, as was its particular connection with Canterbury; Langdon had continued to be used as a proctor by his house whenever and wherever possible. 
After Henry V's death Langdon was named to the regency council, on about 5 November 1422, although he rarely attended during the first seven and a half years. He attended the Council of Pavia-Siena from early summer to late 1424, defending the religious orders against reformist critics. He presided over the convocation of Canterbury on 27 April 1426, preached the opening sermon yet again (when heresy was the principal item on the agenda) on 5 July 1428, and presided on 10, 12, and 14 July. On 15 November 1428 he was appointed to a committee of convocation to develop more effective measures against heresy. In these years he worked almost entirely from Trottiscliffe in his diocese, and evidently in good harmony with his archbishop. From April 1430 Langdon attended regularly at the king's council, and accompanied Henry VI to France for his coronation. In February 1432 he was appointed to an embassy to Charles VII of France, and thereafter he hardly saw his diocese. On 17 July following he was appointed to the first English delegation to the Council of Basel, but, instead, was in France on a mission to Charles VII from late December 1432 to February 1433, and then in England for the rest of the year. On 18 February 1434 he was appointed to the second delegation to Basel, but was still in England on 5 June, when he was appointed to speak once more with Charles VII. He left England a week later, inevitably with an extra commission to represent Christ Church, Canterbury, at the council. This time he did reach Basel. He died there on 30 September. He had made his will on 2 March 1434, supposing (like Bishop Polton two years earlier) that he might never return from such a complacently indefinite assembly; both were right. In his will he concentrated on his family and upon the cathedrals of Rochester and Canterbury, his lifelong environment, and asked for burial in the lady chapel of Rochester. He was in fact buried in the choir of the Carthusian monastery at Basel. His will was proved only on 27 June 1437, which may explain why his wish to be brought home was not met. Thomas Rodeburne in the preface to his 'Historia minor', says that he used a collection by Langdon of historical material; there is no trace of this or of Langdon's evidently influential sermons. 


@@@@@


doc= 16012


Langdon, Richard (1729/30-1803), organist and composer, was born in Exeter, the son of Charles Langdon of Exeter, and possibly the grandson of Tobias Langdon (died 1712), priest vicar-choral of Exeter. He was appointed lay vicar-choral and organist of Exeter Cathedral on 23 June 1753, and became additionally master of the choristers in 1762. He matriculated at Exeter College, Oxford, and took the degree of BMus on 18 July 1761, aged thirty-one. He resigned from Exeter Cathedral in October 1777 and in November was elected organist of Ely, moving from there to Bristol in 1778. In 1782 he was appointed organist of Armagh Cathedral. He resigned in 1794 and retired to Exeter, where he died on 8 September 1803. Langdon published songs, anthems, harpsichord sonatas, two collections of songs and cantatas ('c'.1754 and 'c'.1770), one of glees ('c'.1780), and 'Divine Harmony, being a Collection in Score of Psalms and Anthems' (1774). 


@@@@@


doc= 16013


Langford, Abraham (1711-1774), auctioneer, was born in the parish of St Paul, Covent Garden, London, of unknown parentage. As a young man he began to write for the stage, his first published piece being an 'entertainment' called 'The Judgment of Paris', produced in 1730. His ballad opera entitled 'The Lover his Own Rival, as Performed at the New Theatre at Goodman's Fields', though received with little acclaim, was reprinted at London in 1753 and at Dublin in 1759. 
Langford had probably been employed for some time with Christopher Cock, the eminent auctioneer, for when Cock died in 1748 he continued to occupy Cock's auction rooms in the north-eastern corner of the Piazza, Covent Garden, trading for a short time as Cock and Langford. Richard Gough, the historical topographer and antiquary, discoursing on the historical progress of selling books by catalogue, said of Cock and Langford that 'none had been better assisted' ('GM', 1066-9), and John Nichols, in his 'Literary Anecdotes of the Eighteenth Century' (1812-16), frequently mentions Langford as the cataloguer of various notable libraries put up for sale. 
Langford and his wife, Mary, had numerous children including Robert (1744-1785), who entered Westminster School in 1752, and Abraham ('b'. 1751), who was in business with his father as Abraham Langford & Son from 1766 until 1773, when the name changed to Messrs Langford. At the time of his death Langford owned shares in the 'Daily Advertiser', and houses in Bath and Highgate. Langford died on 17 September 1774 in London and was buried in St Pancras old churchyard in a tomb whose sides were covered by a lengthy and grandiloquent epitaph. He was survived by his wife, three sons, and a daughter, Mary. In 1776-7 the younger Abraham Langford sold George Vertu's plates and prints; he was followed in business by Barford at some time before 1783. In 1811 he was a governor of Highgate Chapel and school. The auction rooms were later occupied by George Robins, another well-known auctioneer. 


@@@@@


doc= 16014


Langford, Thomas (fl. c.1320), Dominican friar and historian, is recorded by the Italian Dominican Leandro Alberti, in his 'De viris illustribus ordinis Praedicatorum' (1517), as an English Dominican who at an unspecified date wrote a history of the world from the creation to his own times. John Bale, writing some forty years later, acknowledges Alberti as a source, but supplies considerably more detail, stating that Langford was an Essex man, born not far from Maldon, who became a Dominican friar -- at Chelmsford, according to Thomas Tanner. Proceeding to Cambridge University, Langford became learned in scholastic theology, obtaining the degree of DTh (again according to Tanner). Active in the years around 1320, he wrote one volume of sermons and another of disputations, as well as his universal chronicle. John Pits, who in this follows another Italian Dominican, Antonio of Siena, also attributes to Langford a commentary on 'Job'. None of these works is known to have survived. 


@@@@@


doc= 16015


Langham, Simon (d. 1376), administrator, archbishop of Canterbury, and cardinal, was born at Langham in Rutland, the son of Thomas Langham -- his spectacular career as an ecclesiastic and royal minister contrasts markedly with his modest beginnings. He became a monk of St Peter's, Westminster, some time before 1339, and in 1346 was his abbey's proctor at the Benedictine triennial chapter in Northampton. That same year he began his studies at Oxford, but returned to Westminster in 1348, possibly with the coming of the black death, without completing his degree. If he studied theology in his years at Oxford, he was one of only four abbots of Westminster to have done so. On 10 April 1349, at the height of the plague epidemic in England, he was appointed prior and, several weeks later, on 27 May, was elected abbot of Westminster. The ravages of the plague were challenge enough for the new abbot, but Langham also had to face a crushing debt left by his predecessor and a monastic community grown slack in discipline. As abbot from 1349 to 1362 Langham worked hard to correct both defects. He managed the abbey's estates shrewdly, reviving and expanding a previous policy of leasing lands and purchasing new properties. He succeeded not only in paying off the debts, but also in bringing the abbey into a period of renewed prosperity. He oversaw new building projects, completed the cloister in the new perpendicular style, and was himself a generous benefactor to the abbey, establishing chantries and giving from his own accumulated wealth as abbot and, later, as archbishop. He is deservedly called Westminster's second founder. 
Langham improved monastic discipline in his community much as he managed its estates, with sound judgement and pragmatism. The mid-fifteenth-century Westminster chronicler John Flete called him a reformer of the first rank, a wise counsellor, and an eloquent preacher. But John Reading (died 1368/9), who lived under Langham, held a different opinion of the man, and thought him overbearing and ambitious. However much such opinions differ, there is little doubt that Langham was an excellent administrator. Edward III knew as much when he appointed him treasurer on 23 November 1360, the first religious to occupy such a high post in the royal administration in nearly a century. Meanwhile, Langham continued his duties as abbot while struggling to reduce his master's sizeable war debt. His successes were rewarded with rapid advancement. In 1361 the cathedral chapters at both London and Ely elected him bishop, but Langham chose the latter on account of its ties with the Benedictine community. The pope provided him to Ely on 22 January 1362, and Bishop William Edington (died 1366) consecrated him bishop on 20 March at St Paul's. On 21 February 1363, Edward made him chancellor, an office Langham held until September 1367. As chancellor he promoted royal policy to legislation, including tighter restrictions on appeals to the papal court in the revised 'Statute of 'Praemunire'' (1365). He opened parliament regularly, and in 1363 broke with tradition by delivering the chancellor's formal address in English. 
Langham was not only an experienced and able administrator, he cultivated like talents in other men. He was a mentor to William Wykeham (died 1404) and appointed him keeper of the privy seal in 1363. Adam Easton (died 1397) was to be a member of his household in later years. Pleased with Langham's achievements, Edward nominated him as archbishop of Canterbury in 1366 and the pope provided him to the see on 24 July. He was the last monk to hold this office and might have made a lasting impression on the province had his reign been longer. Still, Langham's register shows a man busy with administration and pastoral care in challenging times. He enforced new papal restrictions on pluralism, and corrected abuses in his visitations of deaneries and religious houses. He attempted to curb religious dissent by ordering John Ball (died 1381) to cease preaching in 1367, and, in the following year, intervened in a bitter dispute between the Oxford theologians Uthred Boldon (died 1396) and William Jordon, issuing thirty articles of his own on matters of justification, grace, and the salvation of non-believers. His own spirituality emerges in the pages of his register with three hymns written in honour of St Catherine. But Langham was archbishop for only two years; on 22 September 1368 Urban V created him cardinal-priest of St Sixtus, and Langham indicated his willingness to accept the promotion before consulting the king. While Langham may have thought himself more useful to the king as a potentially influential member of the papal court, Edward regarded the move as one of divided loyalty and compromised service to the crown. Langham's situation changed quickly: Edward seized the Canterbury temporalities before the archbishop could resign them (which he did on 28 November), leaving Langham in relative poverty, and delaying his departure for Avignon until 28 February 1369. 
Langham's desire to serve church and kingdom as a peacemaker was given real opportunity in 1370 with the election of Gregory XI. For several years thereafter the 'cardinal of Canterbury', as Langham was styled at Avignon, was engaged in several diplomatic missions. Though he was frustrated by the intransigence of the French and English kings, he managed to arrange a peace between Edward and the count of Flanders in 1372. But what diplomatic successes he enjoyed went unrecognized both in England, where many of his friends regarded him as too pro-papal, and in Avignon, where the French majority of cardinals questioned his loyalty. The latter's mistrust was confirmed on one famous occasion when Langham, in the presence of the English king, removed his hat in deference. The pope was less concerned by the incident, and promoted him to cardinal-bishop of Palestrina in 1373, but the elevation did little to improve Langham's real status either at the papal court or in England. His diplomatic services were no longer required and, in spite of his benefices which included archdeaconries in Wells and York and the prebends of Brompton in Lincoln and Wistow in York, Langham was less wealthy as a cardinal than he had been as an archbishop. 
Nevertheless, Langham managed to remember his brethren at Westminster in the form of generous endowments. Between 1368 and his death in 1376 Langham had a chantry established in the abbey for his own soul and the souls of his family worth 1000 marks, earning 40 marks annually in rents; he also left his community a residuary estate worth nearly $1000, along with a valuable, indeed notable, library, vestments, and plate, and donated a further $400 to the fabric fund. In 1374, with Canterbury vacant and the chapter sympathetic toward Langham's candidacy, the cardinal entertained hopes of returning to England in his former capacity. But the chapter looked elsewhere, as neither king nor pope would have approved the election. In 1376, when it was certain that Gregory would go back to Rome, Langham sought and obtained papal permission to retire to England, but he died at Avignon on 22 July, possibly from a paralysing stroke. He was buried at the Carthusian church near Avignon. In 1379 his remains were transferred to the splendid tomb built by Henry Yevele and Stephen Lote in St Benedict's Chapel, Westminster Abbey. He is the only archbishop buried in the abbey. 


@@@@@


doc= 16016


Langhorne, Daniel (c.1635-1681), antiquary, was born in London, and matriculated from Trinity College, Cambridge, in October 1649. His parentage is unknown, but his family was probably collateral to the Langhornes of Westmorland, from whom Isabella, the mother of Benjamin Jowett, master of Balliol College, Oxford, was descended. He became a scholar of Trinity, and graduated BA in 1654 and MA in 1657. He was appointed curate of the parish church of Holy Trinity, Ely, then newly constituted from the lady chapel of the cathedral, and after the Restoration was licensed by Bishop Wren in 1662 to preach there and throughout the diocese. In 1663 he was elected a fellow of Corpus Christi College, Cambridge, and having graduated BD in the following year became one of the university preachers. He vacated his fellowship in 1671 after his institution as vicar of Layston with the chapelry of Alswick, Buntingford, Hertfordshire, which he held until his death. 
In accord with the quickening interest in early English history in both universities, Langhorne devoted his studies to early British history and the settlement and eventual unification of the English kingdoms. He was well versed in the evidence of the chronicles, but he wrote at a time when the wilder extravagances of the legendary British history had generally been rejected, and before archaeology, philology, and critical documentary techniques had been able to put anything else in their place. Like his contemporaries he was aware of that gap, and he said of Geoffrey of Monmouth's history, sensibly enough, that although much of it was palpably ridiculous, there might be a substratum of truth, at least in the sense of distorted recollection, remaining in it. His first study was 'Elenchus antiquitatum Albionensium, Britannorum, Scotorum, Danorum, Anglosaxonum et ceterorum: origines et gesta usque ad annum 449, quo Angli in Britanniam immigrarunt, explicans' (London, 1673). It was dedicated to Sir William Montagu, attorney-general to Queen Caroline and later chief baron of the exchequer, and was followed by 'Appendix ad elenchum antiquitatum Albionensium: res Saxonum et Suevorum vetustissimas exhibens' (London, 1673). An English version of the two volumes, 'An introduction to the history of England, comprising the principal affairs of this land from its first planting to the coming of the English Saxons, together with a catalogue of British and Pictish kings', appeared in 1676. In 1679, and on rather firmer ground, he published 'Chronicon regum Anglorum, insignia omnia eorum gesta ab Hengisto rege primo usque ad Heptarchiae finem', dedicated to Sir Joseph Williamson, secretary of state. There is no obvious connection between Langhorne and his dedicatees, neither of whom was an outstandingly edifying member of the political community, though Williamson, a busy man, was known sometimes to temper his customary parsimony with charitable acts. 
The quest for patronage was, however, a convention as well as a resource, and Langhorne derived other satisfactions from his work. He died on 10 August 1681, with his history incomplete, as he apparently intended to carry it at least to the Norman conquest. Forty years later Thomas Hearne asked Thomas Baker, the Cambridge antiquary, for information about Langhorne, and was told, beside the facts of his career, that Baker had seen a manuscript version of the second part of the history. This was probably the handsome text later prized by the antiquary Dawson Turner. It may be that, like Dugdale, Langhorne habitually wrote an exquisite hand, but he seems also to have enjoyed matching the best of his exemplars. 


@@@@@


doc= 16017


Langhorne, John (1735-1779), poet and translator, was born in March 1735 at Winton in the parish of Kirkby Stephen, Westmorland, the younger son of the Revd Joseph Langhorne of Winton and Isabel, his wife. He was educated at a school in his native village and afterwards at Appleby. At eighteen he became a private tutor in a family near Ripon, and during his residence there began writing verses. He was afterwards an usher in the free school at Wakefield, and there took deacon's orders and eked out his scanty income by taking Edmund Cartwright, reputed inventor of the power-loom, as a pupil during vacations. About this time he wrote for Ralph Griffiths's 'Grand Magazine', which had a three-year existence from 1758 to 1760. In 1759 Langhorne went to Hackthorn, near Lincoln, as tutor to the sons of Robert Cracroft. In the following year he matriculated at Clare College, Cambridge, intending to take the degree of bachelor of divinity as a ten-year man. He left the university, however, without taking any degree. He left Hackthorn in 1761 and took up a curacy in Dagenham, Essex. 
That same year (1761) Langhorne wrote his first review for Ralph Griffiths's 'Monthly Review', and by November 1768, when he wrote the last review for Griffiths, he had been responsible for some 300. In 1764 he was appointed curate and lecturer at St John's, Clerkenwell, and in December 1765 was appointed assistant preacher at Lincoln's Inn by the then preacher Dr Richard Hurd, afterwards bishop of Worcester. Also in 1766 he became rector of Blagdon, Somerset, and was said to have been granted the honorary degree of DD by the University of Edinburgh in return for his 'Genius and Valour: a Scotch Pastoral' (1763) in defence of the Scots against the aspersions of Charles Churchill in his 'Prophecy of Famine' (1763). There is no record of such a grant. In January 1767, after a courtship of five years and an initial rejection of his proposal of marriage, he married Ann Cracroft (1735/6-1768), the sister of his old pupils, whom he had taught Italian, a language in which he was proficient. Ann died in giving birth to a son on 4 May 1768, aged thirty-two, and was buried in the chancel of Blagdon church. At her desire he published after her death their premarital correspondence under the title of 'Letters to Eleonora' (1770-71). 
Langhorne left Blagdon shortly after Ann's death and went to live with his elder brother William ['see below'] at Folkestone where they translated 'Plutarch's Lives... from the original Greek, with notes critical and historical, and a new life of Plutarch' (6 vols., 1770), dedicated to Lord Folkestone. The translation went through a number of editions. 
On 12 February 1772 Langhorne married the daughter of a Mr Thompson, a magistrate near Brough, Westmorland. After a tour through France and Flanders they returned to Blagdon, where he was made a justice of the peace. His second wife died giving birth to an only daughter in February 1776. Langhorne was installed a prebendary of Wells Cathedral in October 1777, and according to a writer in the 'European Magazine', almost surely Isaac Reed, 'his death was imputed to his usual substitute for the Castalian fountain, rather too frequent draughts of Burton ale, at the Peacock Inn, Gray's-Inn-Lane' ('European Magazine', 17, 1790, 102). He died at Blagdon House on 1 April 1779 and was buried at Blagdon. 
Reed, in the same article in the 'European Magazine', listed thirty-three works by Langhorne. Although enjoying some contemporary popularity for his poetry, in a number of forms and on a variety of subjects, he is largely remembered for his translation of Plutarch's 'Lives'. Mention may be made of his 'Solyman and Almena: an Oriental Tale' (1762); 'The Viceroy: a Poem Addressed to the Earl of Halifax' (1762); and the very popular 'The Letters that Passed between Theodosius and Constantia after she had Taken the Veil' (1763, followed by a second edition in 1764 and a number of subsequent editions). Langhorne published a number of sermons in 1764 with a second edition in 1773. His 'Country Justice: a Poem, by one of Her Majesty's Justices of the Peace for the County of Somerset' (1774-7) was greatly praised by Wordsworth in a letter of 15 January 1837, who wrote that it 'is not without many faults in style... but these are to me trifles in a work so original and touching' (Davie, 122). Langhorne edited 'The Poetical Works of William Collins' in 1765, and translated Milton's Italian poems in 1776. Both in his own writings and in his reviews in the 'Monthly Review' he exerted influence on some of his contemporaries, notably on John Scott of Amwell, in the life of whom, prefatory to his posthumously published 'Critical Essays' (1785), their friendship is mentioned. 




@@@@@


doc= 16018


Langhorne, Richard (c.1624-1679), barrister and victim of the Popish Plot, was probably born in London, the son of Richard Langhorne (died 1635), an apothecary in London, and Dorothy Legate ('b'. 1606), daughter of Thomas Legate of Havering atte Bower, Essex. He had two brothers, Thomas and Edmund, and a sister, Elizabeth. Little is known about him before his admission to the Inner Temple on 31 May 1647 and his being called to the bar on 27 November 1654. Despite the occasional suggestion that he attended a Jesuit college on the continent there is no evidence. At an unknown date he married Elizabeth ('fl'. 'c'.1659- 'c'.1679). They had four children: Charles, the youngest son (1660-1723); his two older brothers, Richard (died 1719) and Francis ('c'.1659-1709); and a sister, Laetitia (died 1729). Charles and Francis were priests, Richard and Laetitia Catholic nonjurors. The three sons attended the English College at St Omer. In 1676 the oldest son disappeared, apparently joining the French army, and lost contact with his family. He later returned to St Omer, contacted English Jesuits there, and through their intercession re-established contact with his father, who paid for his return home. In 1677 Charles Langhorne, then a student in Valladolid, entrusted to Titus Oates a letter to his father. Oates had been expelled from the college on 30 October for serious moral lapses and returned to London. After a brief sojourn Oates travelled to St Omer with a letter of gratitude from Langhorne to the Jesuits for all they had done for his sons. 
Langhorne built a successful legal practice from his quarters in the Inner Temple. Gilbert Burnet claimed that he 'passed as Protestant' ('Burnet's History', 155) without further explanation. At least from 1664 he lived in Shire (or Sheer) Lane, Holborn. Among his clients -- or at least his acquaintances -- were the recusant William Blundell of Crosby; the Hatton family; William Penn; and the Society of Jesus. To the first, on 3 November 1666, he confided his disappointment that Charles II had capitulated to parliament and agreed to execute the penal laws against Catholics. Langhorne's 'Consideration touching the great question of the king's right in dispensing with the penal laws' (London, 1687), written in defence of Charles II's declaration of indulgence in 1672, was edited by his son Richard and published to support James II's proclamations in 1687. For the Jesuits, Langhorne provided legal and financial advice to the Jesuit provincial and procurator, and served as their trustee. 
Titus Oates and Israel Tonge unleashed the Popish Plot on 28 September 1678 with the arrest of three Jesuits and a Benedictine. Langhorne was arrested a week later. As he explained, 'I must be a perfect Mad-man to appear publickly, and not to flie or conceal my self, if I were conscious of any the least imaginable Guilt' (Langhorne, 'Memoires', 2), since he continued to work after their arrest. Charged with high treason Langhorne remained in close confinement in Newgate: Oates claimed -- and William Bedloe corroborated -- that the correspondence he delivered between Langhorne and the Jesuits dealt with treason and treachery. Found guilty of high treason on 13 June and sentenced to be executed on the 20th, Langhorne received a reprieve for a month on the 19th as a result of a petition by his wife (a 'true Protestant' (McCoog, 'Richard Langhorne', 499)) so that he could tidy up the financial affairs of his clients. Moreover she promised to persuade him to reveal all he knew about the plot and about Jesuit finances. Langhorne produced a potentially damaging disclosure of some Jesuit assets. On 15 July 1679 Charles Hatton told Lord Hatton that Langhorne had received the approval of the imprisoned Jesuit provincial Thomas Whitbread (alias Harcott or Harcourt) to do so, but how two close prisoners could communicate remains unexplained especially since the provincial was executed the day after the offer was made. Langhorne's disclosure about Jesuit finances was in the hands of Charles II and the privy council by 3 July. The council was not satisfied; the king ordered that no copy of it be made and, mysteriously, returned the original to the author. A copy, however, was made and can now be found in the Royal Archives in Brussels. 
Langhorne was executed at Tyburn, London, on 14 July 1679. In his speech from the gibbet he made an extraordinary declaration for a man on such familiar terms with the Jesuits: he professed Charles II his 'True and Lawful Sovereign' as understood by the oath of allegiance, and denied that the pope had any right to depose monarchs (Langhorne, 'Memoires', 18). Pope Pius XI beatified him on 15 December 1929. 


@@@@@


doc= 16019


Langhorne, Sir William, baronet (c.1634-1715), administrator in India, was born in the City of London, the only son of the four children of William Langhorne, an East India merchant, of the parish of St Gabriel Fenchurch, and Hitchin, Hertfordshire, and his wife, Mary, daughter of Dr Daniel Oxenbridge, a London physician. Langhorne entered Trinity College, Cambridge, on 23 October 1649. He was admitted to Gray's Inn on 7 July 1652, and to the Inner Temple on 6 August 1664, but does not appear to have practised at the bar. He inherited his father's holding of East India Company stock, made money, and was in 1668 created a baronet. 
In 1669 Langhorne was appointed by the court of committees to investigate a charge of fiscal malpractice which had been brought against Sir Edward Winter, East India Company agent and governor of Madras, with the result that Langhorne himself was made governor in Winter's stead in the course of the year. His arrival at Fort St George, Madras, on 14 June 1670 coincided with a critical period in the history of the settlement. Colbert had in 1664 projected the French Compagnie Royale des Indes Orientales, and in 1672 the French admiral La Haye seized San Thome, just south of Madras, on the Coromandel coast. Langhorne maintained a discreetly neutral position between the French, who were at that moment the nominal allies of England, the Dutch, with whom England was at war, and the king of Golconda, who was attempting to regain San Thome. It has been claimed that as 'a former Cromwellian who disliked Charles II's pro-French policy' Langhorne 'connived after September 1673 at a suspension of hostilities against the Dutch' (Furber, 111). However, a contemporary observer accused him of 'actively espousing the French cause to the detriment of Anglo-Indian relations' (Watson, 295). In fact, Langhorne adopted a broadly neutral pragmatic policy designed to safeguard the interests of the East India Company and of his own private trade. When in 1674 the Dutch finally took possession of San Thome, he contented himself with expressing sympathy with the French, at the same time strengthening the defences of Fort St George. In the same year the English settlement was visited by Dr John Fryer, the English traveller, who spoke highly of Langhorne as: 'a gentleman of indefatigable industry and worth... His personal guard consists of 3 or 400 blacks; besides a band of 1500 men ready on summons; he never goes abroad without fifes, drums, trumpets, and a flag with two balls in a red field; accompanied with his Council and Factors on horseback, with their ladies in palenkeens. (Fryer, 38)' In 1675 Langhorne successfully resisted an attempt at extortion by Podela Lingappa, the naik (deputy governor) of the Poonamallee district, but only at the unlooked-for expense of what might have proved a perilous misunderstanding with the king of Golconda. In 1676 he showed his tolerant spirit by firing a salute upon the consecration of a Roman Catholic church in Madras, and thereby drew upon himself a rebuke from the directors at home. The code of by-laws that he drew up as governor helps to depict the contemporary social life of the settlement. Among his regulations it was enacted that no person was to drink above half a pint of arrack or brandy or a quart of wine at a time; to such practices as blaspheming, duelling, being absent from prayers, or being outside the walls after eight o'clock, strict penalties were allotted. 
An over-shrewd man of business, Langhorne fell a victim, like his predecessor, to charges of private trading, by which he was said to have realized the too obviously large sum of $7000 per annum, in addition to the $300 allowed him by the company. He left Madras for England in early 1678, having been succeeded by Streynsham Master, who, antagonistic to Langhorne's 'suave' and 'easy-going' style, dispatched a 'scathing indictment of Langhorne and all his works' ('Diaries', 1.64, 66). 
In England, in 1680, Langhorne purchased from the executors of William Ducie, Viscount Downe, the estate and manor house of Charlton, in Kent, where he settled. In 1707 he also acquired Hampstead Manor. His first wife was Grace Chaworth, dowager Viscountess Chaworth of Armagh (1632-1700), second daughter of John Manners, eighth earl of Rutland. However, she died within a year of their marriage, on 15 February 1700. He married, second, on 16 October 1714, Mary Aston (died 1730), who, after his death, married George (or John) Jones of Twickenham. At Charlton, Langhorne became a JP, and commissioner of the court of requests for the hundred of Blackheath (1689), endowed a school and some almshouses, and died with the reputation of a rich and beneficent 'nabob' on 26 February 1715. He was buried in the north aisle adjoining the chancel of Charlton parish church. By his will, proved on 8 March 1715, he left at least $1600 to be applied, after the manner of Queen Anne's Bounty, in augmenting poor benefices. Leaving no issue by either marriage, Langhorne was succeeded in his estate by his sister's son Sir John Conyers, bt, of Horden, co. Durham, and Langhorne's baronetcy became extinct. He was the author of two works arguing the case of the old East India Company against the 'interloping' new company. The first was a broadsheet, 'Considerations Humbly Tendred, Concerning the East-India Company' (1688). The second was a pamphlet, 'Some Considerations Relating to the East-India Trade' (1694). 


@@@@@


doc= 16020


William Langhorne (1721-1772), John's elder brother, was presented by the archbishop of Canterbury on 23 March 1753 ('GM', 23, 1753, 149) to the rectory of Hawkinge and the perpetual curacy of Folkestone, Kent, and on 19 May 1756 received the Lambeth degree of MA ('GM', 16, 1864, 637). He died on 17 February 1772 and was buried in the chancel of Folkestone church, where a monument was erected to his memory. Besides collaborating in the translation of Plutarch's 'Lives', he wrote 'Job: a Poem, in Three Books [a paraphrase]' (1760), 'A Poetical Paraphrase on Part of the Book of Isaiah' (1761), and 'Sermons on Practical Subjects and the most Useful Points of Divinity' (1773). These last were posthumously published and seen through the press by his brother, by whom the 'advertisement' is signed, 'J. L.', 1778. 


@@@@@


doc= 16021


Langland, William (c.1325-c.1390), poet, is known from only three sources. These are a Latin memorandum of about 1400 on the last leaf of an unfinished copy of his poem 'The Vision of Piers Plowman' made about the same time (TCD, MS D.4.1 (212)), a cluster of sixteenth-century ascriptions by the antiquary John Bale (died 1563), and the poem itself. 
Even the memorandum seems primarily about Langland's parentage, as if this were the object of interest: 'It was Stacy de Rokayle who was William de Langlond's father; this Stacy was of gentle birth and lived in Shipton-under-Wychwood in Oxfordshire, holding land from Lord le Spenser; the aforesaid William wrote the book called 'Piers Plowman'. (Dublin, Trinity College, MS D.4.1 (212))' The memorandum is authenticated by knowledgeable local annals dated from 1294 to 1348 in the same hand above it on the page, with clear interest in the Despensers. Extension of that interest to include the poet's family is indicated by a recent discovery (Matheson) that his grandfather Peter de Rokele had been in the service of Hugh le Despenser the younger, indeed had several times been violently and unlawfully active in his interest, and that, having in April 1327 been pardoned for 'adhering' to Despenser, he was within months implicated in a conspiracy to release the captive Edward II. This Peter held land in and about Wooton Underwood in Buckinghamshire. His son Eustace (Stacy) appears in local records as a man of standing in Oxfordshire. Bale's ascriptions call the poet Robert Langland, and have him born at Cleobury Mortimer in Shropshire. The baptismal name, Robert, was a mistaken inference from a scribal error which survives in two unrelated copies of the poem; even without the memorandum Langland's given name would be established as William by an unmistakable cryptogrammatic signature in the convention of the genre, in one version of 'Piers Plowman': 'I have lived in land, my name is Long Will.' But his identification of the birthplace, which has been questioned on mistaken grounds, seems confirmed by records of deeds of gift and grants of land made by various Langlands between 1399 and 1581 not actually in Cleobury Mortimer but a bare 5 miles away in the manor of Kinlet and in adjoining Highley. This seems to have been the poet's mother's family. That he took her name need imply no more than that he was not in line to inherit through primogeniture. As to proximity, there are clear indications of Rokayle interest in Shropshire. The surname Rokele may come from the hamlet Ruckley (earlier Rucklee, Rokeley, Rokele) about 25 miles north-west of Kinlet, part of the manor of Acton Burnel where the Despensers had connections by marriage. Continued association is implied by record of a grant, in 1577, of lands named in the earlier deeds to Thomas Longland son of William Longland, by a Richard Longland of Cuddington, Buckinghamshire, 4 miles from Wooton and half a day's ride from Shipton under Wychwood. The span of dates implies a family of substance. 
When the poet was born and died, and the circumstances of his life, have been the subject of much inference from his poem. This survives in three forms, each preserved in a substantial number of copies. The first, evidently unfinished, but already bespeaking an accomplished poet, has for coda in three copies a skilful pastiche in Langland's style by a man who names himself John But. The second, developing and extending the first and almost three times as long, has an unmistakable closure. The third is an uncompleted revision of the second. Walter Skeat, who identified these forms, called them the A, B, and C texts. Each contains unmistakable contemporary references. The mature excellence of the writing in the A text, and allusions in it to Edward III's French campaigns, and to a great storm in 1362, between them have suggested that the poet was born about 1330. Recent discovery (Matheson) that a William Rokele, who might conceivably be the poet, received the first tonsure from Bishop Wolstan of Worcester not long before 1341, suggests a somewhat earlier date, say 1325. Langland's death has long been taken, almost as a matter of convenience, to have occurred before 1387, on the basis of an early identification of the John But who signed the A coda, where the poet's death is reported, as a king's messenger who died that year. The name But, initially thought to be unusual, has proved fairly common, and about a dozen John Buts have come to light in the records. Meanwhile the date 'by 1387' has been put in serious question by the reflection of some features of the 1388 'Statute of Labourers' in a passage new to the C version (5.1-103). Moreover, having Langland alive after 1388 enables understanding of veiled, but unmistakably political, allusions in C. A better date for his death, taking account of fourteenth-century life expectation, would be 'c'.1390. 
By its character Langland's poem encourages speculation about him. It belongs to a genre called the dream-vision, which takes the form of a report by a first-person narrator who claims to have experienced the vision he recounts. He figures as participant, encountering personages ranging from the allegorical or fantastic to the possible, even the historical. The dreamer, if he is named, is called after the poet and, where this can be checked, has some of his attributes. He is to an indeterminable extent fashioned in the image of that poet who, for his part, comes to live imaginatively in the personage of his creation. The poet uses him as a means of engagement, obviously powerful in a time when poetry was written as if to be read aloud. 
In the unfinished A text of 'Piers Plowman' the Dreamer, three times involved in the action by the name Will, gradually acquires character and a temperament. In the completed B text, where the poet encloses his own name in the cryptogram, Will takes shape as a sharply defined personality. In the uncompleted C revision he is even further implicated. Here in a new passage between visions (5.1-103) Langland has set an episode from which a way of life and its circumstances have been inferred for him. The Dreamer reports how in the prime of life, given to indolence, living with his wife in a mean house in Cornhill in the city of London, he is confronted by Conscience and Reason, two personifications who in the course of the first two versions have acquired implicated significance, the former, to simplify, the unthinking impulse to good, the latter an absolute principle of right which informs creation and should govern human conduct. Reason reproaches him for being an idle wastrel, no better than a sponging beggar. From his defence he reveals that he had a clerical education, but his father and those who maintained him and paid for that education in his youth, 'many years ago', are dead now, and he supports himself (as presumably also his wife) by pious service of prayer and psalmody in the oratories of big houses, now here, now there, welcome in periodic visits during which he prays for the souls of his hosts. The tone of his defence is bitter, tinged with disappointed expectation. 
This episode has seemed too particular to be an elaborate fiction. On its basis the poet who created the Dreamer has been identified as a clerk in minor orders, necessarily because of his marriage no higher than acolyte, preserving his clerical status by tonsure and habit, a kind of itinerant 'beadsman-for-the-living'. That sketch fits the concept of a younger son in a family of standing, cherished by father and 'frendes' (that is, in Middle English, 'patrons' or 'kinsfolk'), who ended a promising career in the church by an impulsive marriage and could not fit into any of the various secretarial, administrative, or legal jobs open to a minor cleric. Each detail is plausible. But the assemblage is unverifiable and based on arbitrary selection of such detail as seemed appropriate to the biographer. 
Other self-revelations by the Dreamer are interpreted figuratively. Once he tells how, in a dream set within a vision, he is carried off by Fortune and three lovely girls, Concupiscence of the Flesh, Concupiscence of the Eyes, and Pride of Life, to the Land of Longing and Love. Of course Fortune deserts him, and on awakening he reproaches himself for the 'wilde wantownesse', headlong lack of restraint, of his youth. Then from the next vision he awakens almost out of his mind, like a man whose luck is out, and lives a roving beggar's life for many years. Still later, again on awakening, he describes how he is subject to periodic dementia, spells of disturbed mental balance. Near the end of the poem he tells how Old Age first tramples on and then beats him, leaving him bald, deaf, toothless, gouty, and, to the distress of his wife, impotent. 
Each of these four carefully located disclosures leads up to a literally represented episode of moral insight and reorientation, of spiritual reassurance for the Dreamer. The first three have been sensitively read as the poet confronting Will with 'a momentary vision of his own life' at its middle point, with biographical implication. But the biographers ignore the fourth: it is, of course, without dignity. Yet it must seem gratuitous unless similarly read, and indeed directly upon its goliardic self-disparagement follows the ultimate spiritual reorientation of the Dreamer. 
The Dreamer's confrontation with Conscience and Reason responds to similar reading. It is exquisitely staged: two personifications and a fiction named after the poet, the plot intellectually conceived, the interrogation calling to mind the 'Statute of Labourers' of 1388. Without doubt there is underlying autobiography here, to do with acquiring insight into oneself, and in the design of the C version the episode compresses the poet through his self-projection into the perspective of the most extended set piece of the poem, the confessions of the personified capital sins, which follows directly. 
But further biographical inference from this episode can seem hazardous. That Langland was a cleric would be otherwise apparent. Whether he was married is another matter: the names he gives to the wife and daughter of the Dreamer who bears his name are terms of disparagement, and the two may be no more historical than the Dreamer's three companions in the Land of Longing and Love. Above all the poem exhibits resources of mind and attitudes that would be remarkable in the self-confessed failure drifting from one kindly household to another. To write it Langland must have read extensively in French religious and secular literature. He was fluent in legal terminology. He made easy use of the techniques of sermon-building taught in the 'artes praedicandi'. His hamartiology is professionally sophisticated, reflecting penitential literature, particularly the manuals for confessors, even to their pastoral tone. He was familiar with such contemporary aids to biblical study as 'distinctiones' and concordances. His theology, while not that of Oxford, is embracing and judicious. 
The record of a William Rokele tonsured in the diocese of Worcester some time before 1341 redirects attention to disregarded records of an ordained cleric of that name who in 1353 was by papal letter to the bishop of Norwich preferred from a living in Easthorpe, Essex, which he was required to resign, to one in the gift of the abbot of Peterborough. The prominence of Rokeles in Easthorpe, as also in Norwich, suggests that this could be the same man. The circumstances that seven copies of the earliest form of the poem, among them the three with the But coda, are of eastern county provenance, and that Rokeles and Buts appear in long and close association in Norfolk, would support a suggestion that this William Rokele was the poet who called himself Langland. The extent and degree to which already the earliest form of 'Piers Plowman' is critical of the ecclesiastical establishment from parson to pope, and particularly of the consistory courts, suggests why it might have seemed to such a man advisable to sign the poem in its second form by another name, and, in the convention of the genre, to give the critic who is his speaking voice a markedly different external personality from his own. Whether or not such identification is accepted, the breadth of his knowledge, and that he had leisure to write, imply either patronage or a relatively secure place, and, moreover, access to books. 
The three texts, in effect versions, of 'Piers Plowman' cannot be dated in the modern sense. Langland evidently worked at the poem over many years, and the dates of the three occasions in its developing history when the ancestor of each was copied are not recoverable. At best each must have been copied after the latest identifiable topical reference it contains. For the A version that would appear to be after 1370. For B the date is furnished by the actual rising of 1381: the form of the letter of the radical priest John Ball in Walsingham's 'Historia Anglicana' echoes this at two points (B 11.195 and 19.355-7). The latest topicality in C appears to be reference to the king's implacable hatred of Gloucester and the Arundels after the dissolution of the Merciless Parliament (C 5.194-6). 
Dissemination of the poem was evidently rapid. Seventeen of the fifty-seven known copies and three fragments could, on palaeographic indication, have been made by 1400. The A version, which may not have gone into circulation during Langland's lifetime, survives in ten copies, at its longest a prologue and eleven sections which the rubrics call 'passus' ('steps'); three have all or part of John But's coda. B survives in thirteen copies and a black-letter edition of 1550 printed from a lost manuscript, C in eighteen copies. Another ten copies are composites reflecting availability of exemplars; six of these complete an A version with text from C. 
Before 1381 the B version was talked about enough for the name of its eponymous hero Piers Plowman to be taken up by the insurgents as a rallying cry. The author of John Ball's letters seems to have read the poem. In the early fifteenth century it was seen as a dangerous document associated with the spreading Lollard heresy: there is one copy of C from which the name 'Piers Plowman' has been systematically erased. Nevertheless it continued to be read. Seven copies can be associated with monasteries, one with a convent of friars. Among mid-fifteenth-century owners were a bencher of Lincoln's Inn and a speaker of the House of Commons. The poem is mentioned in the wills of a cathedral canon (1396), two rectors of parishes (1400 and 1431), the vicar-choral of York Minster (1409), and a member of the Mercers' Company (1434). 
Chaucer knew 'Piers Plowman': the 'Canterbury' 'Prologue' shows unmistakable influence. Soon after 1383 someone with Lollard sympathies wrote an 850 line anti-fraternal 'Pierce the Ploughman's Crede', creditably imitating Langland's metre and style. Not long after 1400 two political poems -- one retrospectively justifying Richard's deposition, the other counselling his successor -- were composed, enough like 'Piers Plowman' for Skeat to think them by Langland. A third, written soon after 1415 commending Henry V's French campaign, is also in Langland's manner. Later verse with 'Plowman' in the title has nothing to do with Langland's poem. 
For a couple of decades after Henry VIII's breach with Rome 'Piers Plowman' was of immediate topical interest. Within the single year 1550 Robert Crowley issued three impressions of a B copy since lost. Following Bale he called Langland 'Roberte'; but his perception of the poet's double concern, 'he doth most christianlye enstruct the weake and sharply rebuke the obstinate blynde', and his knowledge of the poem were accurate. Like Bale and Leland a few years later, recalling the dissolution of the monasteries he was struck by what seemed fulfilment of its prophecies. A generation later it was crudely labelled a satire by Puttenham (1589) and Meres (1598). Like Webbe, who in 1586 wrote of Piers Plowman as its poet, they may not have been able to read it. In 1622 Henry Peacham attributed it to Lydgate. 
Antiquaries of the eighteenth century accepted Bale's attribution and read the poem with more insight. Elizabeth Cooper, in the first volume of the 'Muses' Library' (1737), while deploring the difficulty of its language, and, as she perceived it, the imperfect metre, observed that 'several Passages in it deserve to be immortal'. Thomas Hearne in 1725 believed it had been 'much altered at different times'; Joseph Ritson in 1782 thought it 'highly probable that the author had revised his original work'. 
The first modern edition of 'Piers Plowman' was Thomas Whitaker's in 1813, from a copy of the C text. He dismissed Crowley's copy as a bad, late manuscript reflecting revision by the poet. In 1824 Richard Price identified a new form of the poem in the first component of a conjoint AC copy, which he thought might be a 'first draught'. In 1832 Thomas Wright published an edition of a B copy. Reviewing Whitaker in 1834, and in his second edition, he challenged him: his own text was based on the best and oldest manuscript; the differences that characterized Whitaker's copy were made by some other person, who was perhaps induced by his own political sentiments to modify certain passages, and was gradually led on to publish a revision of the whole. In 1866 Walter Skeat, having examined twenty-nine copies of 'Piers Plowman', identified five forms of the poem of which he judged three, each preserved in a distinctive manuscript tradition, to be authorial. In 1867, 1869, and 1873 he published successive editions of these from good copies, and followed in 1886 with a hugely erudite parallel-text edition of the three. He postulated that the shortest form was the earliest, the others successive revisions. It was forty years before his conclusions were questioned. 
The first issue to be raised was authorship. In 1906 and at greater length in 1908 J. M. Manly argued that what he read as faults of structure, incoherencies of sense within versions, and discrepancies of sense between versions, reflected a succession of revisers, indeed as many as five. Two years later R. W. Chambers and J. H. G. Grattan launched a defence of the single authorship of the three versions in the course of which they invoked the quality of the texts from which Manly had argued. Soon, in adversarial posture, each party had committed itself to producing texts more authorial than Skeat's. Chambers's successors in his textual project saw this as involving re-examination of Manly's case for multiple authorship, and their judgement that this was not compelling has been fairly generally accepted. But in editing the C version they found that the archetype of the C manuscript tradition must have been made from copy prepared by a 'literary executor' confronted with the poet's uncompleted revision materials. 
Skeat's sequence of versions has been twice questioned in a proposition that his A text, the short form of the poem, is an abridgement of B for lay persons, by a redactor (H. Meroney), possibly by Langland (J. Mann); it remains to be seen whether the latter proposition, in its newly argued form, comes to be widely accepted. In 1983 A. G. Rigg and his student Charlotte Brewer published, as the earliest form of the poem, antecedent to A, the first component of a conjoint AC copy (Bodl. Oxf., MS Bodley 851). Another view is that, as Skeat believed, this text is a copy of A written down from imperfect memory and eked out with some 200 lines mainly of pastiche, by someone who had seen the B and C versions. Skeat's view is supported by the evident perplexity of this writer about the breakdown of Conscience at the end of the poem in B and C. 
The study of 'Piers Plowman', where nothing seems to admit of absolute proof, depending accordingly on assessments of likelihood and relative plausibility of argument, is clouded by the bearing upon it of late twentieth-century literary theory and the politicization of literature. Nevertheless interest in the poem is actually growing. A vogue of scepticism about received opinions fails to diminish its power of engagement, and disagreements reflect possessive attitudes to its text, and indeed to its poet, who has been anything but marginalized, quite simply because of the quality of his poem as a memorable archive of human experience by which it has the power to engage notwithstanding the passage of six centuries. 
Langland's subject, a culture restive in the beginnings of radical change, is of huge moment. 'Piers Plowman' records a 'prise de la conscience' affecting an entire society of which at least theoretically the social and economic fabric was subject to elaborately formulated religious directive. The poem is charged with deep spiritual unease, loss of confidence in the order of things, a condition for which no durable and intelligent explanation was possible because the available forms of thinking were inadequate to this. It particularized itself in a sense of discrepancy, a consciousness of oppositions that should not exist, between material and spiritual values, between moral excellence as a philosophically conceived value and the visibly prevalent imperfection of actuality, between knowledge of right conduct and failure in the possessors of that knowledge to realize it, between divine and worldly wisdom, between the 'imago dei' in Adam newly created and its distortion by the fall, and, in the deepest theological sense, between the God of justice and the God of love. At the centre of this anxiety was the evident failure of the church's ministers in pastoral care. 
Langland's reformist thinking about the shortcomings of the clergy was not innovative. The grand living and avarice of the prelacy, the ignorance, sloth, and vicious living of parish clergy, the diversion of educated clerics to lay office, the decay of monasticism into self-indulgent worldliness, the cynicism of the friars, particularly their venal exploitation of the sacrament of penance, the moral poisoning of the institutional church by ownership of property, the political papacy, were notorious. In many details Langland's anti-clericalism chimes with Wycliffite criticisms, but in fact 'Piers Plowman' anticipates these, and many Lollard texts echo its language. Moreover, where the Wycliffites lapsed into heterodoxy, as in respect of the dogmas of penance, purgatory, and prayers to saints for intercession, 'Piers Plowman' is orthodox: Langland saw himself within a different church from Wyclif's, not a convocation of the 'presciti', the elect, but one of all Christendom restored by grace to the excellence of the pristine apostolic foundation, 'a state of charity, life in love and righteousness in a single faith and doctrine, a love-knot of righteous conduct and of faith expressed in works, Christians of every kind in firm accord' (C 17.125-9). 
The nature and intensity of his concern and his dream of a regenerate church afford a perception of Langland the man, a reformer but no rebel, who identified the source of moral -- or, nowadays, social -- evil in the extreme fallibility of individuals rather than in defective institutions. Langland appears the poet in the typification of his ideal of regeneration, his eponymous hero the ploughman Piers, who in the course of the poem grows from a peasant of upright life to an embodiment of divine grace. Similarly the discrepant actuality which made regeneration seem remote, even unlikely, Langland represents in the bearer of the burden of original sin, his hopeless everyman Hawkyn, who regrets not having died immediately after his baptism while still in the state of grace. 
His poem discloses a great deal about Langland the poet. Already the first version, which he was working on in the 1360s, shows him an independent and radical innovator while Chaucer, some time after 1368, was still occupied with imitating French court poetry in 'The Book of the Duchess'. 
Langland's critical insight was remarkable; in the first place he perceived or sensed that a minor, often trivialized genre could bear a subject of the greatest moment. He had no literary tradition in English to draw upon, and the critical theory of his time, in Latin of course, had not developed concepts and terms for the kind of undertaking evidently in his mind. He had a sense of scale, which showed him that the moral crises of his world had the proportions of what nowadays would be called cosmic drama, and he discerned in them a shape in which to arrange his poem. Above all, whether he knew about the statutory assertion of the primacy of English over French in 1362, he was actively conscious of its serviceability as a poetic medium. And his educated choice of metre, preferring a provincial, unrhymed alliterative measure with an archaic flavour over the only practical alternative, the four-beat rhyming couplet adapted from the French octosyllabic, was inspired. 
The defining features of the dream-vision are few and simple: a poet falls asleep, commonly in an idyllic setting; he experiences a dream in which he himself figures; he awakens and puts, or resolves to put, this into verse. Langland perceived that the speaking voice constantly implying identity of poet and dreamer could be used for intensely personal statement. He developed the intrinsic irony of implied identity and its practical denial into a powerful means of engagement: an authorial presence, elusive but inescapable, inhabits 'Piers Plowman'. In a very real sense his poem is Langland; he is a factor in its meaning. 
Langland also perceived that the genre, in not prescribing internal form, afforded almost entire liberty of organization. He could arrange discourse as appropriate to the immediate topic, on patterned criticisms of estates satire, or manuals for confessors, or biblical exegesis, or structures of theological argument, or explications of dogma, or rhetorical shapes recommended in the manuals for composing sermons. His manner of proceeding was radically unconventional. He moved his Dreamer through not one vision but a career of eight, within two of which he experiences an 'inner' dream. The time-scale and pace vary arbitrarily; progression is only formally serial, governed by contingency of topics of discourse but given the appearance of successions of events. The topics determine the settings. Langland shifts these with smooth plausibility: the road to Westminster and the king's court in judicial session there, a city of London alehouse, the way past Piers's smallholding, vast wildernesses, Piers's walled garden enclosing the Tree of Charity, Jerusalem under Pilate, Calvary, Limbo before the gates of Hell, the battlefield of Christendom ravaged by the renegade Christians of Antichrist's armies, the beleaguered citadel of Unity Holychurch. 
Langland based the near surrealist narrative on a system of dominant themes marking the stages of progress, and the actual concept of such progress, in the development of perfected Christian spirituality: the subjection of material to spiritual values; return by confession and contrition to a state of grace; the ascending degrees of moral excellence; submission to God's will as the first means of attaining this; Pauline charity as its highest degree; the redemption as the supreme act of love; the church through its divine foundation the instrument of redeeming grace; its catastrophic state in the actual world. 
Langland moves the Dreamer from one theme to the next by way of intricate networks of related doctrinal and moral concern. He uses their complexity to develop in each stage of the journey a sense of intensifying crisis, so that identification of the theme appears as discovery and spiritual reassurance. The reassurance mounts to a climax of comfort in the representation of the redemption as a judicial combat between Christ the knight bachelor in the cognizance of Piers Plowman and the death Satan brought into the world. At its peak, having broken the gates of Hell, Christ proclaims that in the fullness of time he will come as king and 'have the souls of all mankind out of hell' (B 18.371-2). But that is said in a dream; thereafter reassurance seems to fail when Antichrist's forces penetrate Unity Holychurch. Then the best comfort is cold: grace must be forthcoming because that God should withhold it is inconceivable. 
Langland developed these crises out of oppositions inherent in the complexities of late medieval moral and eschatological thinking. His paradoxical achievement, one source of his poem's continuing power to engage when the issues it raises have lost their moment, is that his mind, devoutly orthodox, nevertheless identified the drama of such oppositions, between powerful instincts and controls dogmatically imposed by those equally subject to them; between a sense of achievement (the sin of pride) and the theologically conceived virtue of humility; between the free operation of intelligence and the anti-intellectualism of dogmatically based authority. 
The style in which Langland realized these insights shows exceptional understanding and command of language. Its first appearance of artless colloquialism belies it. Close scrutiny shows him commanding interest by exploiting the rhetorical potential of syntax, the 'poetry of grammar', in figures of speech, and enforcing meaning with the principal figures of thought, personification of course, and every kind of paronomasia or pun, and a very distinctive ironic incongruous metonymy. His ear for the registers of English in a vocabulary of more than 5000 words appears flawless: he commands effects ranging from the homeliest to the sublime, moving easily from one to another. His personifications come to life from the tones of their representation. He made the alliterative long line, used with little distinction by most of his contemporaries, into a component of style, counterpointing the several stresses, of word and phrase and larger statement, with the recurrent phonemes of the formal alliteration, all to a chime of vowels, in music that conferred engagement on prosaic homilizing and, even, today, on issues long dead. 
His poem shows Langland driven by two compulsions. One, externally generated, was to communicate his heightened sense of anxiety by bringing together salient instances of the moral deterioration of his age and his sense of imminent change. This seems to have amounted to a mission: 'Anima', 'Reason', a wholly authoritative personification, says to the Dreamer of the delinquency of pastoral clergy, 'I have a duty to publish this because of the moral issues involved' (B 15.28, 91). The other compulsion was that of the artist whose medium is language, for whom the act of composition is necessary to self-fulfilment. Langland undoubtedly sensed this: another of his personifications, Wit, 'Intelligence', describes 'speche', that is, words in meaningful patterns, as 'the grace of the pentecostal tongues of fire', of 'Acts' 2: 3, 'and God's music-maker, and a celestial diversion' (B 9.103-4). 
The two compulsions were both conflicting and inseparable. In Langland's rewriting of the B version it is seldom confidently discernible whether the first impulse to any change had to do with substance or with form and style. Even when this seems possible the effects cannot be separated. Thus a main difference in the last version, greatly augmented criticism of clerical corruption, affords occasion for much stylistic bravura; and the one large structural change, apparently designed to eliminate repetitious treatment of the same topic, is accompanied by substantial additions of differentiating matter. 
At least once the poem seems to register Langland's awareness that his writing was a self-gratifying activity because it displaced penitential exercises and prayers for benefactors (B 12.10-27). Nevertheless he continued to write. And however deeply he may have been concerned about salvation, his own or that of fellow Christians, there is no sign in his work of modesty about his poetic gift. 
There was, indeed, no ground for any. Langland was by at least a decade the first of the poets who in the second half of the fourteenth century established the standing of English as a poetic medium, and, by their works, initiated the English poetic tradition. In particular his instinctive craftsman's understanding of the quality of English, its communicative and evocative capacity, singles him out. Langland had, it seems, no models; but his example may have fired Chaucer, who first appears restive against the ascendancy of French culture about 1380 in 'The House of Fame'. The ploughman hero whom Langland created and celebrated played a role in great events, as an emotional focus for the English rising of 1381 which failed, and for the Hussite movement of religion in fifteenth-century Bohemia which changed the course of history. But even without such considerations Langland stands, for the quality of his art, with Dante and Chaucer among the supreme poets of the European middle ages. 
Langland's use of Middle English is difficult even for scholars of the subject. For others his poem is accessible in two translations which do not disgrace it. One, J. F. Goodridge's 'Piers Plowman: William Langland Translated into Modern English' (repr. 1975), reproduces the literal sense of Skeat's B text with respect and, by and large, accurately; the other, E. T. Donaldson's 'Will's Vision of Piers Plowman: an Alliterative Verse Translation' (1990), based on the Athlone edition of B, communicates something of the effect of Langland's metre, albeit occasionally at the cost of intelligibility. To best effect the two should be read side by side. 


@@@@@


doc= 16022


Langley, Batty (bap. 1696, d. 1751), writer on architecture, was baptized at the parish church of Twickenham, Middlesex, on 14 September 1696, the son of Daniel and Elizabeth Langley. Having been trained in his father's profession as a gardener, he moved into surveying and landscape gardening and was one of the earliest popularizers of the new irregular style advocated by Stephen Switzer in his 'Ichnographia rustica' (1718). Langley published a few designs for irregular gardens in his 'Practical Geometry' (1726), but his most important work on the subject was 'New Principles of Gardening' (1728). This contained a variety of garden plans in what he called the 'arti-natural' style, replete with twisted serpentine paths or meanders that prefigure Hogarth's 'line of beauty' and signalled the emergence of the rococo style in England. Instead of pursuing the subject he knew best, however, he turned to architecture, which was more in demand but in which he had no practical experience and very limited ability. 
In 1729 Langley left Twickenham for London; there he had temporary premises at Palladio's Head near Exeter Change in the Strand, from which he published 'A Sure Guide to Builders' (1729). He and his second wife were residing in the parish of St John's, Smith Square, in 1732; by 1734 they had moved to Parliament Stairs, Westminster, and in 1738 they joined his younger brother Thomas ['see below'] and other members of the family at Meard's Court, Dean Street, Soho. While at Parliament Stairs, Batty started a school offering lessons in drawing, geometry, architecture, mensuration, mechanics, and garden design, advertised in 'Ancient Masonry' (1736); the school continued on firmer footing at Meard's Court, where Batty Langley was assisted by Thomas. He also manufactured and sold a great variety of artificial stone ornaments for buildings, interiors, and gardens at his warehouse, the Hercules' Head, opposite St Paul's Wharf, adjoining the Falcon Stairs on the Bankside in Southwark (advertised in the 'Daily Journal', 10 March 1731). One of these, a medallion of Sir Isaac Newton, was presented by Langley to Sir Hans Sloane and is now in the British Museum. 
Although Langley published advertisements (the first, dated 10 September 1736, in his 'Ancient Masonry') offering to make 'Designs for Buildings, Gardens, Parks, etc. in the most grand Taste' and to design and build 'Grottos, Cascades, Caves, Temples, Pavilions, and other Rural Buildings of Pleasure' (B. Langley, 'Ancient Masonry', 1736), he had very little success as a practising architect. His only recorded buildings were 'a curious grotesque temple 'in a taste entirely new', finely decorated within with busts of King William II, George I, and five gentlemen of the Club of Liberty' (J. P. Malcolm, 'Londinium redivicum', 4, 1807, 172), built in 1734 or 1735 for Nathaniel Blackerby, deputy grand master of the grand lodge of freemasons, whose house adjoined his in Parliament Stairs, and a brewhouse for the duke of Kent at Wrest, Bedfordshire, in 1735. He competed unsuccessfully for the Mansion House in 1735 and the new bridge across the Thames at Westminster in 1736-7. Both schemes were engraved and the latter was published with a descriptive text: it aroused a heated public controversy to which Langley contributed three more pamphlets, 'A Reply to Mr John James's Review of the Several Pamphlets and Schemes' (1737), 'A Survey of Westminster Bridge, as 'tis now Sinking into Ruin' (1748), and 'Observations on a Pamphlet Lately Published... by Charles Marquand' (1749). 
Langley's ineffectual entry into the arena of new public building in London was a direct outcome of his examination of James Ralph's 'Critical Review of the Publick Buildings... in and about London and Westminster' (1734), which he published in the 'Grub Street Journal' from July 1734 to March 1735. Shielded by the pseudonym Hiram, Langley viciously attacked the foreign, Palladian taste imposed by Lord Burlington, praising Gothic architecture (or native Saxon, as he preferred to call it) and the works of Hawksmoor, who was married to the daughter of his patron, Nathaniel Blackerby. 
These xenophobic views are clearly related to Langley's freemasonic determination (and obligation) to improve the status of British craftsmen, and ultimately the country's architecture, by providing them with the information they needed on geometry and the classical orders -- the fundamentals of architecture -- in an easily understandable and affordable form. His output was prodigious, ranging from the largest architectural book of the period, 'Ancient Masonry', an unwieldy folio compendium containing over 450 plates, and issued in parts from 1733 to 1736, to the condensed vicesimo-quarto 'The Workman's Golden Rule' (1750). 
Langley's best-known work, 'Ancient Architecture, Restored, and Improved', was first published in 1741-2 and reprinted in 1747 under the more explicit title 'Gothic architecture, improved by rules and proportions, in many grand designs of columns, doors, windows, chimney-pieces... umbrellos, temples, pavilions &c'. It was a significant departure from the mass of instructive builders' manuals which Langley churned out. An exceptional and original work, it was a pioneering attempt to give Gothic architecture the classical respectability of orders, motivated, as usual, by his interest in English freemasonry and handsomely engraved by his brother Thomas. Its novelty and light-hearted inventiveness, although scoffed at by amateur gothicists such as Horace Walpole and Thomas Gray, were just what many country squires wanted, prompting other architectural writers -- William Halfpenny, T. C. Overton, and William Pain in particular -- to follow Langley's lead. Among the several works executed from his published designs are doorways at Great Fulford, Devon, and the Ludlow police station; fireplaces at Shobdon church, Herefordshire, and Tissington Hall, Derbyshire; the Gothic temple at Bramham Park, Yorkshire; and the 'show' front of the gate at Castletown, co. Kildare. 
Langley was married twice: first, on 5 February 1719, to a Twickenham girl, Anne Smith, at St Anne's Church, Soho. They had four children before her death in June 1726. With his second wife, Catherine, he had ten more children: the first, John, was born in October 1732 and was followed by four sons, to whom he gave the masonic names Euclid, Vitruvius, Archimedes, and Hiram. He died at his house in Meard's Court, Soho on 3 March 1751. 
His brother 


@@@@@


doc= 16023


Edmund, first duke of York (1341-1402), prince, was the fifth (but fourth surviving) son of Edward III, king of England, and Philippa of Hainault, daughter of William, count of Hainault and Holland. 
Edmund was born on 5 June 1341 at his father's manor of Kings Langley in Hertfordshire. According to Walsingham he was baptized by the abbot of St Albans. The abbot and the earls of Arundel and Surrey were his godfathers. John de Warenne, earl of Surrey, died in 1347 and bequeathed his young godson a glass goblet decorated with gilded silver and standing on a tripod. The earl died without an heir male and the king granted Edmund his lands north of the Trent. These lay predominantly in Yorkshire, and included the castle and lordship of Conisbrough; the bulk of the inheritance, however, went to Edmund's other godfather, the earl of Arundel. Edmund's first experience of war came in 1359, when he accompanied his father on the unsuccessful Rheims campaign. Edward III had intended to take Rheims and have himself crowned king of France, but he was compelled to abandon his siege of the city and in the following year he concluded the treaty of Bretigny with France: Edmund was one of the witnesses to the treaty. In 1361 (probably on 23 April) he became a knight of the Garter. In the Michaelmas parliament of 1362 Edward, wishing to honour his three younger sons who were now all of age, created Lionel of Antwerp, duke of Clarence, John of Gaunt duke of Lancaster, and Edmund earl of Cambridge. He was granted an annuity of 1000 marks to maintain his estate as earl, but only gradually over the following years was this annuity converted into grants of land. He received the lordship of Tynedale in 1375 (though at his death in 1402 the lordship was said to be worth nothing because of damage inflicted by the Scots) and in 1377 he was granted the castle and manor of Fotheringhay in Northamptonshire. He also received the castles and manors of Stamford and Grantham in Lincolnshire, but despite these grants he remained poorly endowed by comparison with his peers who were not of royal blood. 
A more substantial endowment at home might have come from a marriage to an English heiress, but Edward III had other plans for his son. In the early 1360s Edward hoped to negotiate a marriage between Edmund and Margaret, daughter and heir of Louis de Male, count of Flanders. Edward III stood to gain substantially from such a marriage. Not only would Flanders move firmly into the English political and diplomatic orbit, but Edmund would become, by marriage, lord of a large appanage on France's northern and eastern borders that would include not just Flanders but the counties of Artois, Burgundy, Nevers, and Rethel, to which Margaret was also heir. A 'northern Aquitaine' would thus be created, in which English influence would be dominant. It is not surprising, therefore, that Charles V of France vigorously opposed the marriage, putting forward as his own candidate his brother Philip, duke of Burgundy. 
Negotiations between England and Flanders opened in February 1362, and with the co-operation of Margaret's father they moved forward to a successful conclusion. On 19 October 1364 a marriage treaty was agreed between the two rulers. However, Edmund and Margaret were related within the forbidden degrees, and a papal dispensation was therefore necessary if the marriage was to proceed. This gave Charles V an opportunity to put pressure on the papal curia at Avignon to refuse the dispensation; the pope, Urban V, himself a Frenchman, gave way; the dispensation was refused, and the marriage negotiations were finally abandoned in 1369. 
Even before the Flemish marriage proposal collapsed Edward III had begun to look elsewhere for a marriage for Edmund. In 1366 he opened negotiations for a marriage between either Lionel, duke of Clarence, or Edmund, and Violante, daughter of Gian Galeazzo Visconti, the ruler of Milan. Lionel was Edward's preferred candidate for this marriage, which was celebrated in Milan in May 1368. By 1370, however, the focus of Edward's dynastic and diplomatic ambitions had turned to the Iberian peninsula. In 1371 John of Gaunt had married, as his second wife, Constanza, elder daughter of Pedro the Cruel, king of Castile, and his mistress Maria de Padilla. Pedro regarded Constanza and her younger sister Isabella as his heirs, and, by his marriage to Constanza, Gaunt acquired a claim to the throne of Castile, which was to preoccupy him particularly between 1385 and 1389. 
There is little doubt that, in marrying Isabella, Edmund was simply carrying out his father's instructions. His apparent willingness to do so (in contrast, it seems, to his eldest brother Edward, the Black Prince) has contributed powerfully to the impression of feebleness of character and idleness of disposition which modern historians have identified in Edmund. There is some contemporary warrant for such opinions. Froissart described Edmund as 'mol et simple et paisible' ('indolent, guileless, and peaceable'), and Sir Richard Stury apparently told Froissart during his visit to England in 1395 that Edmund preferred a life of ease, spending his time with his new wife, Joan of Kent, whom Stury described as 'a beautiful young lady' ('OEuvres', 15.163). The later chronicler John Hardyng struck a similar note, saying that: '
When all the lords to councell and parlyament 

Went, he wolde to hunte and also to hawekyng. 
('Chronicle', ed. Ellis, 340)' Edmund's conduct of the only military expedition for which he was responsible, to Portugal in 1381, suggests a lack of capacity for military command, and although Richard II (not necessarily a good judge of character) twice appointed him keeper of the realm (in 1394-5 and in 1399), his defection to Henry Bolingbroke in July 1399 suggests a lack of firmness of purpose. Perhaps contemporary judgements on his character were correct. 
Isabella seems to have found him boring. A more spirited woman than her sister Constanza, she became the subject of various scandals at court. She is said to have had an affair with Richard II's half-brother John Holland, earl of Huntingdon (died 1400), and Walsingham described her as a worldly and sensual woman, although he goes on to say that she repented and reformed before her death, which took place on 23 December 1392 when she was only thirty-seven. She was buried in the church of the Friars Preachers at Kings Langley in Hertfordshire. In her will she made no legacy to her husband; apart from a few bequests of jewellery, the residue of her estate was left to Richard II in the hope that he would grant her younger son Richard, earl of Cambridge (d. 1415), who was the king's godson, an annuity of 500 marks for life. The king later issued letters patent giving effect to her wishes. In view of her reputation another of her bequests is not without irony: she left a book of vices and virtues to one of her executors, Sir Lewis Clifford. 
Although Edmund showed no great enthusiasm or aptitude for war, he took part in several of the expeditions which England sent to France in the 1370s. He accompanied his eldest brother, the Black Prince, on the expedition to Spain in 1367 which culminated in the victory at Najera. In 1369 he brought a retinue of 400 men-at-arms and 400 archers to serve with John Hastings, earl of Pembroke, on campaign in Brittany and Angouleme, and in the following year he first joined Pembroke again on an expedition to relieve the fortress of Belle Perche and then accompanied the Black Prince on the campaign which resulted in the siege and sack of Limoges. In 1372 he engaged to serve with Edward III in a proposed expedition to France, but although the expedition put to sea it had to turn back after a few weeks and was then abandoned. By 1374 Brittany had become the main focus of English military activity: on 1 August Edmund, together with Edmund Mortimer, earl of March, and Lord Despenser, sealed indentures for an expedition which would, it was hoped, relieve Brest and Becherel in Brittany and St Sauveur-le-Vicomte in the Cotentin, which were hard-pressed by the French. The expedition did not sail, however, until 25 April in the following year. It took St Pol de Leon and laid siege to Quimperle, but the truce agreed at Bruges on 27 June put an end to military operations, and the expedition returned home with its leaders disappointed and out of pocket. Edward III now expected Edmund to substitute diplomacy for war, and on 1 September 1375 appointed him as a commissioner to negotiate with France in the continuing talks at Bruges. 
In none of these expeditions did Edmund hold sole command, and there is no suggestion in the chronicles that he had acquitted himself with great distinction. While serving with the Black Prince, however, he acquired some experience of campaigning in Spain, and when Iberian affairs once again came to the fore in 1380 John of Gaunt proposed that he should lead an expedition to Portugal which would join the Portuguese in an attack on Castile. The Anglo-Portuguese alliance of 1373 was renewed, and Edmund's eldest son Edward ('b'. 1373) was betrothed to Beatriz, daughter of Fernando, king of Portugal. Edmund's expedition sailed from Plymouth in July 1381; his lieutenants were mainly associates of Gaunt with previous experience of the Iberian peninsula; many of the troops, however, were Castilians loyal to Gaunt, and Gascons. The modern historian of the campaign has observed that 'the feeble Edmund of Cambridge was the worst possible leader to command so heterogeneous an army' (Russell, 303). Little went right on the expedition; the marriage between Edward and Beatriz was solemnized, but Edmund's irresoluteness and Fernando's deviousness led to the English army staying in camp at Vila Vicosa, close to the Castilian border, over the winter. Some elements in the army mutinied, partly perhaps through boredom but mainly because they had not been paid. In the spring of 1382 it seemed that they might at last see some action, but Fernando was under pressure to make peace with Castile, and an agreement was concluded in August. Edmund now had to extricate himself and his army as best he could, and he arrived back in England in October 1382 to a hostile reception and owing his troops much of their pay. In a final humiliation the pope annulled the marriage between Edward and Beatriz, because both were under age, and Fernando married Beatriz to Juan I of Castile. Gaunt was asked to help to discharge Edmund's debts, but he refused, and even insisted in his will that his executors should not contribute towards them. When Gaunt renounced his right to the Castilian throne in the treaty of Bayonne of 1388, any right that Edmund might also have had by virtue of his marriage to Isabella seems to have gone by default, for it is not mentioned in the treaty. None the less, personal relations between the two brothers seem to have remained cordial during these years. 
Edmund has been severely criticized by modern historians for the failure of the Portuguese expedition. It is true that he showed little initiative or enterprise as a leader; but the expedition was essentially a Lancastrian idea, intended to further Gaunt's ambitions in Castile, and Fernando's deviousness in negotiating with Castile behind Edmund's back put him in an almost impossible position. The debacle in Portugal suggests not so much that Edmund was incompetent, but that once again he had allowed his family to use him in the furtherance of their political and diplomatic schemes. 
Edmund never again led a military expedition overseas, but he joined Richard II's expedition to Scotland in 1385, and on 6 August, 'at the king's entry into Scotland', he was created duke of York and given an annuity of $1000 ('RotP', 3.205). Neither this annuity nor his earlier annuity as earl of Cambridge were ever fully replaced by grants of landed property, and he evidently had difficulty in obtaining payment of his annuities. In 1380, for example, he had had to sue at the exchequer for payment of the annuity of 500 marks granted to him at the beginning of Richard II's reign. He was granted lands in Wiltshire in 1387, and the reversion of the honour of Rayleigh in Essex in 1391, but like his younger brother Thomas, duke of Gloucester, he remained dependent on exchequer annuities for part of his income for the rest of his life. 
Despite Edmund's lack of an appropriate territorial endowment and the difficulties he encountered in obtaining payment of his annuities, he did not show the hostility to the king and his courtiers which Gloucester developed in these years: perhaps this is further evidence of his 'mol et paisible' character. In his loyalty to the crown he resembled his elder brother Gaunt rather than Gloucester, but his indolence and limited ability probably explain why he played only a minor part in government until 1386. He was appointed constable of Dover Castle and warden of the Cinque Ports on 12 June 1376 and held office until 1 February 1381. During that time he was also justice of the peace in Kent, as might have been expected, but otherwise he held few commissions of the peace until the last years of Richard II's reign. On 28 September 1385 he was appointed justice of Chester, but within two months he had sought and obtained power to appoint someone else to do the job on his behalf. He surrendered the post on 8 September 1387 and was replaced by Richard's favourite, Robert de Vere. 
Edmund was a member of the commission of government which was established in the parliament of October 1386, and in the autumn of the following year, as relations between Richard and Gloucester deteriorated, he attempted a moderating role. After the victory of the lords appellant at Radcot Bridge in December 1387, Edmund, together with the earl of Northumberland and three bishops, sought to mediate between the king and the appellants, though without success. In the Merciless Parliament of February 1388 he was appointed to the committee set up by the appellants to examine the charges against Sir Nicholas Brembre; the committee reported that it could find nothing in his conduct which justified his death. Later in the same parliament Richard nominated Edmund and Sir John Cobham to appear before the Commons and plead for Sir Simon Burley's life, again unsuccessfully. Edmund may have been ineffective, but he was loyal and moderate in his political stance, and in the violence of his dispute with the duke of Gloucester over Burley's life showed for once an independence of mind. In the calmer political atmosphere of the early 1390s he attended the council frequently, and in 1391 he and Gaunt were appointed to conduct negotiations at Amiens for peace with France, though perhaps he owed his place to his status rather than to his ability. 
Confident of his loyalty, Richard appointed Edmund keeper of the realm during his absence in Ireland from October 1394 to May 1395, and he was again appointed keeper for six weeks in the autumn of 1396 when Richard went to France for his marriage to Isabella, daughter of Charles VI. As political tension rose again in 1397, Edmund remained loyal to Richard. Froissart suggests that Gloucester discussed his opposition to Richard II's plans for peace with France with him, but had little respect for his opinions. The author of the 'Chronicque de la traison et mort de Richart deux roy Dengleterre' stated that Edmund was one of the nobles whom Gloucester and his fellow conspirators intended to arrest and imprison in 1397, but neither Froissart nor the author of the 'Traison' are reliable witnesses: the evidence for a conspiracy by Gloucester and others against the king in 1397 is virtually non-existent. 
In the parliament of September 1397, when Gloucester, Arundel, and Warwick were arraigned for treason, Richard evidently regarded Edmund as loyal. He was given licence to come to parliament with 100 men-at-arms and 200 archers 'for the comfort of the king' ('CPR', '1396-9', p. 192), but his part in the proceedings of the parliament seems to have been little more than formal. Trusting in his loyalty, Richard now gave him a greatly enhanced role as a justice of the peace, appointing him to the commission in Cambridgeshire, Northamptonshire, Essex, Norfolk, the West Riding of Yorkshire, and the Holland and Kesteven divisions of Lincolnshire. His son Edward, however, was more closely identified with the court, and was created duke of Aumale during the parliament. Perhaps Edward's standing at court served to protect Edmund from the conspiracies which now seemed to be aimed at his brother Gaunt, and when Richard set off for Ireland again on 1 June 1399 Edmund was once again appointed keeper of the realm. 
Henry Bolingbroke began his preparations to invade England as soon as he was satisfied that Richard had landed in Ireland. Edmund got wind of his movements by 28 June, and assumed at that stage that Henry intended to take Calais as a base for his invasion of England. He summoned shire levies from the south-east to muster at Ware and prepare to defend the realm against invasion, but about 1 July Henry landed in Yorkshire and Edmund now tried to raise a full-scale army to oppose him. He summoned those of the king's knights and esquires who were still in England; the shire levies from the southern counties answered his appeal, and so did a number of magnates, including John Beaufort, marquess of Dorset, and the earls of Suffolk and Wiltshire. His hastily assembled army numbered perhaps 3000; yet in the event he offered no resistance to Henry. At Berkeley on 27 July he went over to Henry; he rode with him to Bristol, and according to Walsingham used his authority as keeper of the realm to demand the city's surrender to Henry. 
Edmund's defection ensured that resistance to Henry would be no more than sporadic and localized. He had a sizeable army at his back, yet chose not to fight his invading nephew. Some historians have argued that this too shows his incompetence and irresoluteness, and that in the final crisis of his reign Richard had entrusted his realm to the wrong man. Edmund faced, however, a formidable opponent. Supporters from the north had been rallying to Henry since he landed, and he had been joined by the retinues of the earls of Northumberland and Westmorland, Northumberland's son Henry Percy (Hotspur), and the lords Willoughby, Ros, and Greystoke. Some of Edmund's troops had deserted well before he met Henry at Berkeley, while the best troops in his army were those commanded by John Beaufort, Henry's half-brother. It is possible furthermore that Edmund himself, for all his previous loyalty to Richard, had some sympathy with the exiled and disinherited Henry Bolingbroke. There is no evidence that his castles at Wakefield and Conisbrough in Yorkshire offered any resistance to Henry, and Doncaster, where Henry rallied his troops before marching south, was one of his possessions. 
Edmund did not, however, play any part in the events leading to Richard's capture and imprisonment in the Tower of London. His part in the deposition proceedings was formal, although he and the two archbishops conducted Henry to the throne after his claim to the crown had been accepted by the assembly that met on 30 September 1399. He gave his support to the new Lancastrian regime, and was appropriately rewarded by Henry IV. His possession of the castle and lordship of Rising in Norfolk was confirmed, he was granted the lordship of the Isle of Axholme in Lincolnshire, and received preference at the exchequer for the payment of his annuities assigned on the wool customs. He attended court and witnessed charters, but his political career was now drawing to its close. 
If the author of the 'Traison' is to be believed, Edmund's last important act was to relay to the king the report of a conspiracy against Henry in January 1400 that Edmund had received from his son Edward, who was probably implicated in the early stages of the plot. Edmund's action enabled Henry to move swiftly to frustrate the conspiracy. His loyalty to the new regime, as to the old regime before the events of 1399, remained firm. He made his will on 25 November 1400, at Kings Langley, where he died on 1 August 1402 and was buried beside his first wife in the church of the Friars Preachers. His second wife, Joan (d. 1434) ['see under 'Willoughby family (per. c.1300-1523)], daughter of Thomas Holland, earl of Kent, whom he had married about 1393, survived until 1434. He had two sons and a daughter from his first marriage: Edward, earl of Rutland, who inherited the dukedom of York on his father's death and was killed at Agincourt in 1415; Richard, who was created earl of Cambridge in 1414 and was executed the following year for his involvement in the Southampton conspiracy against Henry V; and Constance ['see 'Despenser, Constance, Lady Despenser (c.1375-1416)], who married Thomas, Lord Despenser, killed in 1400 for his involvement in the January plot against Henry IV that her elder brother had betrayed to their father. He had no children with his second wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 16024


Langley, Henry (1610/11-1679), nonconformist minister, was the son of Thomas Langley, a shoemaker of Abingdon, Berkshire, and attended John Roysse's Free Grammar School in the town. On 6 November 1629, aged eighteen, he matriculated as one of several scholars of Abingdon from Pembroke College, Oxford. He graduated BA on 11 June 1632, proceeded MA on 30 April 1635, and was elected to a fellowship. On 16 August 1640 he was named as a lecturer at St Martin's Church, Carfax, Oxford, but appears to have stayed only about a year. On 16 April 1642 the Commons ordered that he be recommended to the parishioners of Watlington, Oxfordshire, 'to be their lecturer to preach there every Saturday in the afternoon, and likewise every Lord's day', and that Price the vicar allow him to do this 'without any lett or interruption' ('JHC', 2, 530). On 20 June 1643 the rectory of St Mary's, Newington, Surrey, was sequestered to Langley from John Meggs. By a parliamentary order of 10 September 1646 he was named one of seven ministers authorized to preach in any Oxford church, with a view to winning support for the planned reformation of the university. 
Following the death on 10 July 1647 of Thomas Clayton, master of Pembroke, the fellows hurried to elect (three days later) Henry Wightwick, but parliament vetoed the choice. Abingdon inhabitants, noting the connections between their school and the college, petitioned that Langley be chosen, and on 26 August 1647 order was given for his appointment. His standing with the new authorities was registered in the university by his nomination on 30 September as one of Pembroke's two delegates to consult with the parliamentary visitors. They confirmed his appointment as master on 8 October, and next day 'thrust out Mr Whitewicke from his Headship by virtue of an Instrument stuck up in the Common Hall', which proclaimed Langley as the rightly constituted incumbent. In accordance with a parliamentary order of 2 March 1648, Langley was appointed on 12 April by the visitors to a canonry of Christ Church in the place of the extruded George Morley. On the same day he proceeded BD, and in May was one of the twenty delegates appointed by the proctors to be answerable for the conduct of the affairs of the university. On 5 July 1648 he was made an examiner of candidates for fellowships and scholarships and on 18 December 1649 was awarded a doctorate of divinity. 
During the 1650s Langley was an energetic supporter of godly reform in his college, strongly backing vice-chancellor John Owen's campaign against anti-trinitarianism. He was friendly with Samuel Hartlib and Tobias Garbrand, principal of Gloucester Hall. Langley held both his position as master of Pembroke and his canonry at Christ Church until the Restoration, when he unsuccessfully petitioned Charles II to confirm him in the latter. His leaving the college did not proceed smoothly. Wightwick complained to the commissioners on 11 October 1660 that Langley retained possession of the master's lodgings and he was ordered to vacate them within four days; the final payment to him from the college accounts was dated 19 December. On 13 May 1662 the college petitioned in chancery that he had stolen from it documents and plate, and had failed to account for donations: he denied the charges, claiming that his proposals for internal arbitration had been rejected. 
Now living at Tubney near Abingdon, Langley 'instructed the sons of dissenting brethren in academical learning' including logic and philosophy (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.': 'Fasti', 2.158). In 1669 he was reported to be preaching at Cogges and Tubney -- 'a dangerous person keeps conventicles there' ('Calamy rev.', 314). He was granted a licence at his house in Tubney on 16 April 1672. Wood records that also at this time Langley and other former members of the university held meetings in Thames Street in Oxford. In a letter of 18 June 1672 John Penny of Christ Church wrote that, in a sermon in the city the previous Sunday, Langley had: 'held forth two houres upon the Spirit of which subject they say he preacht in the late times neare two yeares, and they say he was all the while so unintelligible that from that time to this, no body could tell whence the sound thereof came; or whither tis goeing. ('Calamy rev.', 314)' When Langley made his will on 16 June 1679 he was already ill. He left 10's'. to each of his children, Henry Langley, Elizabeth Boyland, and Elliot Langley, and the lease of his house, held from Magdalen Hall, Oxford, to his wife, Elizabeth, named executor. He died on 10 September 1679 and was buried in St Helen's Church, Abingdon. 


@@@@@


doc= 16025


Langley, John (d. 1657), headmaster, was born in or near Banbury, Oxfordshire, and probably attended the grammar school there; his parents' names are unknown. In 1612 he was admitted to Magdalen Hall, Oxford, as a commoner, subscribing on 23 April 1613; he graduated BA on 5 July 1616 and proceeded MA on 24 April 1619. In 1616 Langley had been appointed usher of the King's School, Gloucester, and on 9 March 1618 was promoted to the headmastership. Although, as later became apparent, he was opposed to the prevailing regime of William Laud as dean of Gloucester, he was well regarded by the subsequent dean, Thomas Winniffe, and his chapter. In December 1627 Langley resigned to move to a better-paid post at Dorchester, but the Gloucester city fathers offered him an additional $10 p.a. to stay, and with the further encouragement of the cathedral authorities he was reinstated on 11 August 1628. It is possible that he had objected to teaching the choristers in the King's School, since on his return other arrangements were made for them. When Sir Nathaniel Brent visited the cathedral on behalf of Archbishop Laud in June 1635 Langley was threatened with suspension for refusing the oath; sentence was deferred because although he was (rightly) suspected of puritanism he was recognized as 'a very good schoolmaster' ('CSP dom.', '1635', 40). Langley was nevertheless replaced by November. On 19 September 1639 the city council, who had found the master of the Crypt School, which they controlled, to be generally negligent and to have sent few scholars to the universities, appointed Langley usher and teacher of Greek, as he had 'given good testimony in teaching and instructing many of the burgesses sonnes of this citye and others and inabling them for the universities' (Glos. RO, GBR 3/2, 132). On 27 September they withdrew the appointment as usher, but confirmed Langley as teacher of Greek and 'other learninge' (ibid., 134). But when in 1640 there was a prospect of his becoming headmaster of this school, the king directly intervened to forbid it. A privy seal letter of 22 April, undoubtedly framed by Laud, condemned the city's 'attempt to bring in... a man factiously sett agaynst the government of the Church of England', who had 'deserted' the dean and chapter's school after refusing to conform (ibid., 148). 
But Langley's connections soon helped him to a better prize; Winniffe was now dean of St Paul's, and on 30 December 1640 he and the earl of Middlesex nominated Langley for the high mastership of St Paul's School. Among three short-listed candidates Langley was judged 'extraordinary', and he was duly elected on 7 January 1641 (McDonnell, 171). He went on to achieve great renown both within his school and without. On 20 June 1643 the Commons committed to him (and his old adversary Brent) the licensing of books in philosophy, history, morality, and the arts; the stationers would claim in 1648 that his school work impeded performance of these duties. He himself published during this period 'Totius rhetoricae adumbratio' (1644), for his scholars at St Paul's. The same year he provided evidence at the trial of Laud, instancing ritualistic practices introduced into Gloucester Cathedral during his decanate. He also alleged that, as primate, Laud had persecuted the Gloucester lecturer John Workman (whose brother Giles had been Langley's under-master at the King's School). 
On 25 December 1644 Langley preached before the Commons in St Margaret's, Westminster. He retained a connection with Gloucester, being in 1656 appointed one of the collectors for repair of the cathedral. He died at his house in London on 13 September 1657 and was buried on the 21st at the Mercers' chapel, Cheapside, when Edward Reynolds preached in praise of his great and diverse learning. Langley left $30 to the Mercers' Company, $20 to the city of Gloucester to provide short-term loans to young tradesmen, $10 to Pembroke College, Oxford, to rebuild its derelict premises, and more than thirty individual bequests to London ministers and merchants. He was unmarried, and of close family his will mentions only his nieces Mary and Ann. He is said to have had 'a very awfull presence and speech' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 3.435) which, however, softened on acquaintance. 


@@@@@


doc= 16026


Langley, Thomas (fl. 1430), Benedictine monk and prosodist, was probably born in the last years of the fourteenth century. Nothing is known of his education or career, and even his association with the abbey of St Benet of Hulme, Norfolk, is uncertain. According to John Bale and later bibliographers Langley was a poet and metrist, the author of a series of epigrams and a treatise 'De varietate carminum', which survives anonymously in a single early fifteenth-century manuscript (Bodl. Oxf., MS Digby 100, fols. 178'r'-189'v'). A note added in a later hand indicates that the text was dedicated to a bishop of Norwich, which would seem to support the attribution. Tanner added that the bishop's name was John, although his evidence for this is obscure. Given the date of the manuscript, a likely dedicatee in this case would have been John Wakering, bishop of Norwich from 1415 to 1425. 
Langley's treatise considers the whole nature of poetry. He examines scansion, rhythm, and metrical forms, and he defends his study of what was considered a pagan practice by demonstrating that it could also be found in the work of many Christian writers. His text is very similar in form and content to another fifteenth-century treatise on metre, the 'Metristencheridion', written by John Seward, a London grammar-master. Like Langley, Seward discusses variations in metrical form using examples from Horace, and in particular Boethius's 'De consolatione philosophiae'. Seward wrote a generation earlier than Langley -- the earliest version of the 'Metristencheridion' was completed in 1415; it is very likely that Langley acquired a copy and used it as the basis for his own work. 
The Seward connection may explain the putative dedication of the 'De varietate' to a bishop of Norwich. The 'Metristencheridion' in its earliest form was itself dedicated to Richard Courtenay, bishop of Norwich, who died in 1415; it is possible the annotator of the Digby manuscript confused the two texts when adding his note, especially given their obvious similarity. In the same way the bibliographers may also have confused Langley with Seward when they suggested that he was the author of epigrams. Seward was the author of several sets of epigrams, including one sequence dedicated to JW, who may be identified with John Wakering. This in turn perhaps explains Tanner's suggestion that Langley's patron had been a Bishop John. Alternatively the alleged epigrams may be traced to a misreading of the opening lines of Langley's prologue to the 'De varietate', or of the later rubric which identifies the prologue as 'Epigramma in primum librum de varietate carminum'. 


@@@@@


doc= 16027


Langley, Thomas (c.1360-1437), administrator and bishop of Durham, was born about 1360 -- in 1433 he described himself as being in his seventies. He was the son of William and Alice Langley of Middleton, Lancashire. His patron was James Radcliffe of Radcliffe, member of a leading Lancashire family, from whose service he transferred to that of John of Gaunt, duke of Lancaster. He trained in the palatinate administration of Lancashire, and was rewarded with a prebend at St Martin's-le-Grand in 1395 and a canonry at St Asaph in 1397; in 1398 he was nominated an executor of Gaunt's will. He was subsequently associated with the establishment of Manchester collegiate church in 1421, and founded a chantry school at Middleton. With the accession of Gaunt's son as Henry IV, Langley served him as secretary (1399-1401), went on the Scottish expedition of 1400, and in 1401 was appointed keeper of the privy seal. Meantime he had obtained the archdeaconry of Norfolk in October 1399, prebends at York Minster and at Bridgnorth in 1401, and, after a dispute over papal provisions, the deanery of York in July 1403. In October 1404 he was recommended by the king as bishop of London and elected, but this was overridden by Pope Innocent VII ('r'. 1404-6) in favour of Roger Walden (died 1406). On 2 March 1405 the king appointed him chancellor of England, and secured his election to succeed the executed Archbishop Richard Scrope at York, a suggestion rejected by the pope. On 14 May 1406 Langley received a papal provision to the see of Durham, although his formal election was contested by Thomas Weston, archdeacon of Durham. He was enthroned on 4 September. He resigned the chancellorship on 30 January 1407, but was appointed a member of the king's council at an annual salary of 200 marks ($133 6's'. 8died). 
Continuing in royal service Langley was initially active in diplomacy with France. Later in December 1408, at the northern convocation at York, he was appointed to lead the northern delegation to the general council at Pisa to end the great schism in the papacy. He reached Pisa on 7 May 1409 and returned to England in October. On 2 May 1410 Langley was appointed to the newly reconstituted king's council, but rarely attended, probably because he regarded it as unduly influenced by Prince Henry, though he was also heavily engaged in northern affairs at the time. In the summer of 1411 Langley and Bishop Robert Hallum of Salisbury were chosen by Pope John XXIII ('r'. 1410-15) as cardinals, but their nominations were overruled by Henry IV. That autumn the king resumed control of government and appointed a new council, including Langley, and the latter remained in attendance until the death of the king, who nominated him as an executor. Under Henry V, Langley continued on the council, and was a chief adviser on foreign policy. In January 1414 he headed the commission which concluded a general truce with France to last one year, and then was joint leader of the embassies to Paris of August-September 1414 and March 1415 which failed to avert Anglo-French hostilities. When it was decided to renew war with France, Langley was appointed to the lieutenancy council of John, duke of Bedford. In July 1415, before leaving for France, Henry V made his will, appointing Langley as one of his trustees and an executor. And when Henry V again embarked for France, Langley was appointed chancellor, on 23 July 1417, and, under Bedford, led the council which administered England when the king was abroad. One consequence of Henry's absence was a substantial increase in the amount of judicial work referred to Langley as chancellor, in his capacity as keeper of the king's (public) conscience. Following the death of Henry V on 31 August 1422, Langley resigned the great seal, but was reappointed as chancellor by parliament on 16 November. He finally surrendered the great seal on 16 July 1424, although he continued, with decreasing frequency, to came to meetings of council until excused further attendance on the grounds of age in December 1433. 
With such experience in royal administration, it is unsurprising that Langley undertook reorganization of the palatinate powers of the bishops of Durham, using former colleagues from the duchy of Lancaster as receivers-general and treasurers, stewards, and members of his council. He introduced the practice of separate enrolment in his chancery of letters patent and letters close, although chance survivals from other sources indicate that many warrants were not registered. He upheld the claim of his palatinate to immunity from parliamentary taxation by agreeing to pay a sum above that likely to be assessed. There was also an increase in the amount of litigation conducted in his chancery. The actions brought there invariably involved the bishop, a practice parallel to, and no doubt derived from, that of the common-law side of the royal chancery. The revenues of the bishop have been estimated at over $4000 a year, making Langley one of the five wealthiest men in England, in terms of income. Rents slowly declined during his episcopate, in common with elsewhere in England at that date. In 1418 Langley attempted a review of his resources and commissioned a survey of his estates and a register of all inquisitions undertaken since the second quarter of the previous century. Rents of mines and forests yielded about $250 a year; lead sold between 1428 and 1431 yielded $858. It is impossible to be more precise as to revenue, because no account of a receiver-general, Langley's chief financial officer, has survived. 
Langley was responsible for substantial building operations at his castles of Norham and Durham, a new gaol at Durham, and gates to both bridges there, alterations to Durham Cathedral, and rebuilding of his manor house at Stockton and the west gate of his palace at Howden in the East Riding of Yorkshire. He loaned substantial sums of money to Henry V, and once to the abbey of St Werburgh, Chester. In 1433, probably at the instigation of Sir William Eure of Witton-le-Wear, co. Durham, a wealthy but aggressive and discontented landowner in the north-east, a comprehensive attack on Langley's palatine administration was made by a royal commission into franchisal abuses in northern England. With his defence strengthened by evidence from the cathedral muniments, Langley went to London and in June 1433 obtained confirmation from the king's chancery of charters recognizing his palatinate powers. The matter was heard in parliament, and the king's council found in Langley's favour. 
In view of the proximity of his diocese to the Anglo-Scottish border, it is unsurprising that Langley was employed on various occasions as ambassador to negotiate truces with the Scots, and in 1416 and 1423-4 the release from captivity of James I of Scotland. Between 1424 and 1432, moreover, Langley was at least titular leader of commissions to negotiate settlements of border disputes with the Scots. A conscientious diocesan, he resided twice a year except in 1419. Nevertheless, routine business functioned without him. He had a vicar-general and a suffragan to act for him. Although some of his official business was recorded in his diocesan register, this provides a very imperfect guide to his ecclesiastical administration. He reformed the statutes of the three collegiate churches of Auckland, Lanchester, and Chester-le-Street, to enforce if not residence at least the provision of vicars in the prebends. He also gave new statutes to Sherburn Hospital outside Durham. Langley was reasonably regular in attendance at the northern convocation of clergy at York. He died at Bishop Auckland on 20 November 1437. A keen huntsman, Langley none the less accumulated a small library, whose contents included works of theology, canon and civil law, and history. He donated a St Cuthbert window at York Minster in 1429, and he also founded a chantry in the Galilee chapel of Durham Cathedral, his designated burial place, whose two chaplains were to teach grammar and song to poor children freely -- the forerunner of Durham School. 


@@@@@


doc= 16028


Langley, Thomas (d. 1581), Church of England clergyman and translator, may have been the son of Thomas Langley, an Augustinian canon of Leeds, Kent, who died before 11 August 1534, in which case the younger Thomas was illegitimate. A student of Jesus College, Cambridge, in 1536/7, Langley graduated BA in 1538. In April 1546 he published an English abridgement of the eight books of Polydore Vergil's encyclopaedic reference book 'De inventoribus rerum'. Dedicated to Sir Anthony Denny, a courtier sympathetic to the cause of religious reform, the abridgement is no masterpiece, not least because it is some 90 per cent shorter than its original. Langley added a number of comments of his own, which are principally of interest in showing his antipathy towards both Catholics and Anabaptists. In spite of its shortcomings the work proved popular and was reprinted several times in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, the last edition appearing in 1686. 
No later than 1548 Langley was a chaplain to Archbishop Thomas Cranmer, in that year instituting articles of heresy against John Assheton, parson of Shiltelington. In 1552 he issued a translation, entitled 'Of the Christian Sabboth', of a work by Julius of Milayne (the Italian protestant Giulio da Milano). That year, too, he was instituted to the vicarage of Headcorn, Kent. He had resigned the living before 27 November 1554, having on 28 September been presented to the rectory of Boughton Malherbe, also in Kent, by Thomas Wotton. He held this living until 1564. Wotton, a protestant supporter of Lady Jane Grey who later corresponded with Thomas Cartwright, was imprisoned at the start of Mary's reign, and it is possible that Langley fled abroad -- the Thomas Langley admitted to residence at Geneva on 14 October 1557 may have been the translator, though he is registered as 'laboureur'. In 1561 it was claimed that he was married to 'a woman who was with child in Queen Mary's days and whose husband is thought to be alive', and that no banns had been called before their marriage (Willis, 13). All this may well have had to do with the oscillations of religious policy. Langley and his wife, Anne, had at least two sons and two daughters living at the time of their father's death. 
If there was uncertainty about the status of Langley's marriage it did not prevent his gaining further preferment. He was presented by Queen Elizabeth to the canonry of the ninth prebend at Winchester on 6 October 1559 and installed nine days later; in that year, too, on presentment of the crown, he was instituted to the rectory of Welford, Berkshire. He took his BTh at Oxford on 15 July 1560. In 1563 he was presented by the dean and chapter of Winchester to the vicarage of Wanborough, Wiltshire, and seems to have acquired fairly extensive properties both in that county and in Kent. By the time he made his will, on 21 December 1581, Langley could only put his seal to the document 'becawse I am blynde and cannott subscribe my name' (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/64, fol. 3'v'). Naming his old patron Thomas Wotton among the overseers, Langley asked to be buried in the chancel of Wanborough church. A successor was collated to his canonry on the last day of 1581. 


@@@@@


doc= 16029


Thomas Langley (1702-1751?), engraver, was born at Twickenham in March 1702. He was employed as a sub-turnkey at Newgate prison in 1724, when Batty published his 'Accurate Description of Newgate', but was evidently trained as a gardener and contributed a few pedestrian plans for kitchen gardens to his brother's 'New Principles of Gardening' (1728). He was also responsible for drawing the plates for this book, which include, apart from Batty's designs, copies of ruinscapes by Joachim von Sandrart from the brothers' remarkably large and wide-ranging collection of prints and books. By 1738 he was teaching drawing and engraving at Batty's academy in Meard's Court. His best and earliest known engravings were for 'Ancient Architecture' (1741-2). This was followed in 1746 by 'The Plan and Elevations of Windsor Castle', drawn by Batty. Most of his engraved work was for his brother's books; only two independent subjects are recorded, both of St Thomas's Church, Salisbury, after drawings by John Lyons. Michael Bryan's 'Dictionary of Painters and Engravers' (1895 edn) gives the date of his death as 1751, but this is uncorroborated. 


@@@@@


doc= 16030


Langley, Thomas (1769-1801), topographer, only son of Thomas Langley (died 1801), farmer and minor landowner, and Mary, daughter of John Higginson, was born at Marlow, Buckinghamshire, on 10 May 1769. His family had owned land in Marlow since before 1550. He entered Eton College in 1780, and matriculated from Hertford College, Oxford, on 17 May 1787; he graduated BA in 1791 and proceeded MA in 1794. Most of the cost of his education was borne by his uncle Alexander Higginson (died 1793), of London. After ordination he was in 1793 licensed to the curacies of Bradenham and Taplow, Buckinghamshire. On 2 October 1800 he was instituted to the rectory of Whiston, Northamptonshire, on the presentation of a neighbouring landowner, Frederick, second Lord Boston, with an arrangement to hold it pending the ordination of the latter's son W. A. Irby ('b'. 1780). 
Langley's 'The history and antiquities of the hundred of Desborough and deanery of Wycombe in Buckinghamshire' was published in 1797. It contains many picturesque descriptions, but lacks scholarly method. Its principal source was the manuscripts of Browne Willis. Information was also supplied by lords of manors, members of the clergy, and others with whom Langley corresponded. In 1799 Langley was collecting material for a projected history of Burnham hundred, to be illustrated with plates. 
In February 1800 Langley had completed an unpublished religious poem of some length. He died unmarried on 30 July 1801, and was buried on 5 August in the family vault at Marlow. He is commemorated by a tablet in the church there. 


@@@@@


doc= 16031


Langmead, Thomas Pitt Taswell- (1840-1882), legal writer, was the only son of Thomas Langmead, gentleman, of St Giles-in-the-Fields, London, and his wife, Elizabeth, daughter of Stephen Cock Taswell, a descendant of an old family formerly settled at Limington, Somerset. He assumed Taswell as an additional surname in 1864. He was educated at King's College, London, and on 9 May 1860 entered the Inner Temple, moving on 9 July 1862 to Lincoln's Inn, where he took the Tancred studentship and in Easter term 1863 was called to the bar. Meanwhile he matriculated in October 1862 at St Mary Hall, Oxford, where he graduated BA in 1866 with first-class honours in law and modern history. He was awarded the Stanhope prize the same year for an essay on the reign of Richard II and the Vinerian scholarship in 1867. He graduated BCL in 1869. 
Taswell-Langmead practised as a conveyancer, and in 1873 was appointed tutor in constitutional law and legal history at the inns of court. He also held the post of revising barrister under the 'River Lea Conservancy Acts', and for the last seven years of his life was joint editor of the 'Law Magazine and Review'. In 1882 he was appointed professor of English constitutional law and legal history at University College, London. He wrote articles on the need for better preservation of parochial records and drafted W. C. Borlase's abortive 'Parish Registers Bill' of 1882. His only other important contribution to the 'Law Magazine and Review' was an article entitled 'The representative peerage of Scotland and Ireland', in May 1876. In 1875 he published a textbook, 'English Constitutional History', which ran to several editions. He died unmarried at 18 Hova Villas, Hove, Brighton, on 8 December 1882 and was buried at Nunhead cemetery. 


