@@@@@


doc= 16032


Langrish, Browne (d. 1759), physician, was born in Hampshire, and first educated as a surgeon. In 1733 he was in practice at Petersfield, Hampshire, and published 'A New Essay on Muscular Motion', which discussed the structure of muscles and the phenomena of muscular contraction. In 1734 he became an extra licentiate of the College of Physicians, and began practice as a physician. He was elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1734, and in 1735 published 'The Modern Theory and Practice of Physic', which described experiments in the analysis of excreta and the examination of the blood. He practised in Winchester or Basingstoke, Hampshire, and in 1746 published 'Physical experiments on brutes, in order to discover a safe and easy method of dissolving stone in the bladder'. Experiments on cherry laurel water (prussic acid) were made, and Langrish concluded that it could be used in medicine with advantage. An unpublished letter (1747) to the Royal Society on oleaginous warm baths was published in an article in 1938, with critical comments from the authors F. T. Gardner and C. D. Leake ('Annals of Medical History', 131-5). 
Langrish delivered the Croonian lectures on muscular motion to the Royal Society in 1747, and they were published in 1748. In the same year he graduated MD, and published a work of thirty-five pages on smallpox which showed extensive reading and acute clinical observation. He died at Basingstoke, Hampshire, on 12 November 1759. 


@@@@@


doc= 16033


Langrishe, Sir Hercules, first baronet (c.1729-1811), politician, was born in Knocktopher, co. Kilkenny, the second but only surviving son of Robert Langrishe ('c'.1696-1770), landowner, of Knocktopher, and Anne, second daughter of Jonathan Whitby of Kilcregan in the same county. His great grandfather was Hercules Langrishe, parliamentary army officer ['see under 'Langrishe, Hercules]. He was educated at Trinity College, Dublin, where he graduated BA in the spring of 1753. A freeman of Kilkenny from 3 November 1750, he sat as MP for Knocktopher for six consecutive terms totalling almost forty years from 1761 until the abolition of the seat with the 'Act of Union' in 1800. The length of his tenure as MP has received much comment as has his advocacy for repealing the penal laws against Catholics, especially his introduction of the 'Catholic Relief Bill' of 1792. On 31 May 1755 he married Hannah (died 1803), second daughter and coheir of Robert Myhill of Killarney, co. Kilkenny, and Mary Billingsley, and sister of Jane, wife of Charles, first marquess of Ely; they had three sons and three daughters. Their eldest son, Robert, second baronet (1756-1835), also sat as MP for Knocktopher from 1783 to 1796. 
Between 1762 and 1793 Langrishe supported a number of bills in the Irish parliament to repeal a range of anti-Catholic penal laws enacted in the 1690s and early 1700s. Up to 1782 these bills (none of them successful before 1778) concentrated on extending a number of property rights to Roman Catholics, including taking out mortgages on land, obtaining leases for terms in excess of thirty-one years, and purchasing and bequeathing freehold land. The British government supported Roman Catholic relief to curb the power of Irish protestants who were beginning to demand legislative independence in the wake of the American War of Independence (1775-83). 
Modern research suggests that Langrishe may have supported Roman Catholic relief bills for primarily fiscal reasons. First, he was rewarded for his support of the government with appointments to a succession of offices -- commissioner of barracks (1766-74), supervisor of accounts (1767-75), commissioner of revenue (1774-1802), and commissioner of excise (1780-1802) -- and by being made a baronet on 19 February 1777. He was also appointed an Irish privy councillor in 1786. Second, the Roman Catholic relief acts facilitated his manipulation of the vote in the borough of Knocktopher, which was almost entirely his property. His piecemeal acquisition of the remaining leasehold property in the borough enabled him to let holdings almost exclusively to Roman Catholic householders who were excluded from the franchise because of their religion. By 1783 there was only one protestant tenant in Knocktopher, a Dublin resident given the task of passing his vote in Langrishe's favour. The increased security of tenure experienced after 1782 by Roman Catholics limited the opportunity for any electorally unreliable protestant to move into Knocktopher. 
Langrishe's politics were otherwise primarily pro-protestant. He opposed extending the parliamentary franchise to Catholics in 1784 and 1785 because, he felt, the resultant democracy would subvert the minority protestant administration in Ireland. He also opposed proposals to reform the tithe system in 1786-7, whereby concessions would be made to non-Anglicans, because this would have impoverished the Church of Ireland clergy and would have broken with 'the principles of the glorious revolution to which we owe our religion and liberty' (Kelly, 122). However, prompted by Edmund Burke's 'Letter to Sir Hercules Langrishe' (1792), he introduced a moderate relief bill in 1792 that allowed Catholics, among other things, to practise law, except as judges or as king's counsel. He seconded the 'Catholic Relief Bill' of 1793, whereby Roman Catholics with freehold property worth 40's'. gained the vote, partly from a fear of French revolutionary principles which he shared with the government. His view was that the 'old dangers of Popery were extinct; [and that] new dangers had arisen against which Catholics would be the truest allies' (Fewer, 'Land tenure', 58-9). As the French revolutionary regime grew more repressive he opposed proposals to extend the franchise or further relax the penal laws in 1794, 1796, and 1797. He also acted as an official informer to the government regarding the state of co. Kilkenny during the 1798 rising. 
Langrishe supported the government in other parliamentary matters by, for example, opposing the reduction of pensions and favouring the 'Police Bill' in 1786-8. At other times he opposed the government, especially during the unpopular administration of George, fourth Viscount Townshend (viceroy, 1767-72), who had prorogued the Irish parliament between 1769 and 1771. Langrishe satirized the viceroy's administration in an anonymous essay entitled 'The history of Barataria continued' that was published in the 'Freeman's Journal' (April-May 1771) and later reprinted with contributions by Henry Flood and Henry Grattan in 'Baratariana'. He subsequently advocated a conciliatory policy towards the American colonists in 1775 and passively supported the legislative independence of the Irish parliament in 1782. After 1791, however, he came to support the government's desire for a legislative union between Britain and Ireland. With the passing of the 'Act of Union' in 1800 he was subsequently compensated (as were other MPs regardless of whether they supported the act or not) for the loss of his parliamentary seat with the sum of $13,862 10's'., a sum far in excess of his estate's rental, which that year amounted to just over $525. Langrishe died at his residence in St Stephen's Green, Dublin, on 1 February 1811 and was buried on 8 February at St Ann's in the same city. 


@@@@@


doc= 16034


Langshaw, John (bap. 1725, d. 1798), organist and organ builder, was baptized at All Saints' Church, Wigan, Lancashire, on 11 July 1725, the son of John Langshaw, pewterer, and Ann Aspinall. In the 1760s he worked with John Christopher Smith, Handel's amanuensis, on a large mechanical organ for the earl of Bute at Luton Park. Barrel organs were widely used in English churches in the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries, and Langshaw's skilful work on the barrels of Bute's organ demonstrated the potential for those instruments: 'Langshaw, a very ingenious artist, was employed; and, under Smith's directions, set the barrels with so much delicacy and taste, as to convey a warm idea of the impression which the hand gives on the instrument. The organ was esteemed a masterpiece in musical mechanism. (Coxe, 53)' Langshaw was organist of Wigan parish church from 1770 to 1772 and of Lancaster Priory and parish church from 1772 until his death. He married Mary Haydock (1732/3-1800) at St James's, Westminster, on 27 May 1762. The couple had seven children and, in discussing his son John's musical education, Langshaw observed that 'a hundred a year (the utmost I get) will not both mentain my large family, & pay the high fees some Masters demand' (J. Langshaw to C. Wesley senior, 28 Sept 1778). Langshaw died on 3 March and was buried at Lancaster Priory on 7 March 1798. 
Langshaw's son 


@@@@@


doc= 16035


John Langshaw (1763-1832), organist and composer, was born on 24 February 1763 in London. In 1778 he studied with Benjamin Cooke, organist of Westminster Abbey, but according to his father was 'no little mortified' at Cooke's method of teaching (J. Langshaw to C. Wesley senior, 28 Sept 1778). From 1778 to 1784 he continued his musical training in London with the younger Charles Wesley, with whom he formed a lasting friendship and whose brother Samuel also befriended him. Langshaw became a music teacher and in 1798 succeeded his father as organist at Lancaster Priory, a position which he held for the rest of his life. For many years he was a distributor of Broadwood pianos, many of which were square pianos. His published compositions included songs, a theme with variations for pianoforte or harp, and arrangements of works by Handel and Haydn. According to Sainsbury his use of 'the ancient style of music' was an obstacle to the publication of other works, 'perhaps more worthy of notice', including voluntaries, concertos, songs, hymns, chants, duets, and arrangements of concertos by Geminiani. Langshaw married Sarah Grundy (1774-1865) on 2 January 1800 and the couple had nine children. Langshaw died on 5 December 1832 and was buried at Lancaster Priory on 10 December. 


@@@@@


doc= 16036


Langston, John (1640/41-1704), clergyman and ejected minister, is of unknown parentage and background. He was educated at Worcester grammar school before matriculating from Pembroke College, Oxford, as a servitor in 1655. Having left university without taking a degree he was appointed to the sequestered curacy of Ashchurch, Gloucestershire, but was ejected in 1660. After ejection he moved to London and 'taught a private Grammar School near Spitalfields', but after the 'Act of Uniformity' in 1662 he 'went with Captain Blackwell into Ireland partly as his chaplain and partly as tutor to his eldest son; and returned to London in 1663 and kept school again' (Calamy, 'Abridgement', 2.661). Here he acted as an assistant to William Hook (1601?-1678), and on 20 April 1672 the two men were licensed as congregationalist teachers 'in the house of Richard Loton in Spittle Yard' (Gordon, 299). After 1679 Langston preached in Bedfordshire, before settling at Ipswich. Here a rumour was maliciously spread, and widely believed, that Langston was a Jesuit, and he was forced out of the town. In 1686 he returned, having married a wife, Susanna. As he records, on 12 October 1686, following extensive preparations, including sermons, 'several days of prayer and humiliation, and several conferences together', seventeen persons 'having on this same day related to each other what God had done for their souls, embodied together as a Church of Christ, giving themselves up to the Lord and one to another'. At a meeting on 22 October these and thirty others 'elected and gave Mr Langston a call to the pastoral office' (Browne, 370). Having accepted on 29 October, he was inaugurated on 2 November. On 24 June 1687 the church held its inaugural meeting in the new chapel in Green Yard. In the mid-1690s Langston was paid by the Congregational Fund Board for work as a tutor. From November 1702 he was assisted in his ministry by Benjamin Glandfield (died 1720). He died at Ipswich on 12 January 1704, aged sixty-three, leaving property to his wife, who survived him, and $20 to the poor of his Ipswich congregation. 


@@@@@


doc= 16037


Langtoft, Peter (d. in or after 1305), Augustinian canon and chronicler, was a canon of Bridlington Priory by 1271 at the latest. His surname, very common in Lincolnshire and Yorkshire in the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries, is a place name of Scandinavian origin ('long toft') attested in 'Domesday Book'. Very little is known of his life. Until 1286 he represented Prior Geoffrey of Nafferton and the house in a series of negotiations, some of them at Westminster, but in 1293 he left Bridlington without permission from the archbishop of York, John Romanus. Probably he then settled near London and the court. But there is no further trace of him. 
With twenty-one medieval manuscripts still surviving, his work seems to have been the most widely diffused Anglo-Norman chronicle after the 'Brut d'Engleterre' and Wace's 'Brut'. His chronicle consists in fact of three books, all of them in verse: an abridgement and adaptation of Wace's 'Brut', 3010 lines long; a history of Saxon and Norman kings until the death of Henry III, 4200 lines long; and a history of Edward I, with whom he was contemporary. This third book, which is the most informative, consists of 2022 lines in its first redaction and 2591 lines in its second. 
Langtoft wrote his account of Edward I's reign long after the first two books, putting pen to parchment again only in 1294, at the request of a friend he calls Schafeld, and summing up the years 1272-94 in 370 lines. This friend was very probably John Sheffield, a royal clerk, sheriff of Durham from 1302 and of Northumberland from 1305, and a faithful supporter of Antony (I) Bek, bishop of Durham. 
It is thus not surprising that, in its earliest form, the text emphasizes the military and political fight Bek put up against the Scots. After 1296 and the victory of the English foot soldiers at Dunbar, the text divides into two different redactions, neither of which, it seems, was completed by Langtoft himself. In the first, which is the closest to him in time, the text was continued until 1305 and the execution of William Wallace, or even until 1306 and the execution of the earl of Atholl. Then an adapter, probably a courtier, who was indifferent to Bek and Durham, rather Francophile, and heavily influenced by contemporary French idioms, altered this first redaction, to show Robert Bruce, future king of Scots, as a mere murderer premeditating the killing of John Comyn, his competitor for the throne, in February 1306. This report, purporting to be testimony contemporary with the event, is a masterpiece of royal propaganda. 
The other redaction extends to and includes Edward's death. Most of the manuscripts containing it can be localized in north-east England; it thus seems to express the feelings of gentry dwelling there. In particular it shows distrust of Edward, who was regarded as too lenient towards the Scots and unwilling to make a proper distribution of the lands he had conquered or to limit the boundaries of the royal forests. 
The three books of the chronicle were composed in Anglo-Norman alexandrines gathered into long stanzas which use a single rhyme or assonance and produce an epic flavour. The main literary feature of the third book ('The Reign of Edward I') is the addition of a few stanzas of short satirical lines, bilingual or composed in Middle English, extremely nationalistic and anti-Scottish, with alliterative and tripartite schemes. These lines appear again as independent and purely English poems in some manuscripts of the 'Brut of England' and in Robert Fabyan's 'New Chronicles'. 
In 1338 Robert Mannyng, a Gilbertine canon in Sixhills Priory, Lincolnshire, completed 'for the love of simple men' (Mannyng, 1.77) a Middle English adaptation of Langtoft's chronicle as a whole. But for the first book he substituted a direct translation of Wace's 'Brut' and for the third he translated the second redaction only. The first redaction of this 'Reign of Edward I' did in fact enter the Anglo-Norman 'Brut d'Engleterre' and eventually the 'Chronicles of England' printed by Caxton in 1480. Only three medieval manuscripts of Mannyng's text are still surviving, so that it seems to have been much less widespread than Langtoft's. 
A Princeton University manuscript (Princeton University Library, Taylor MS 12), datable to the middle of the fourteenth century, attributes to Langtoft the translation into Anglo-Norman alexandrines of three political letters, the Latin text of which was very common in the medieval libraries of England. These letters are: a bull of Pope Boniface VIII, presented to Edward I on 26 August 1299 by Archbishop Winchelsey, declaring that Scotland had never been vassal to the king of England, but on the contrary had always depended on the Holy See; a letter sent to Boniface VIII on 12 February 1301 by the English barons proclaiming their determination to prevent the king from giving up any of his rights; and, longer than the previous letters, Edward's personal reply dated 17 May 1301, in which his suzerainty over Scotland appears to be largely grounded on the Arthurian history of Britain. Whether in the translation or in the authentic text, the spirit of this reply recalls Langtoft's chronicle itself, and the argument displayed is the one Edward I and Antony Bek expected from the monasteries when they consulted them about the succession of Scotland in 1291. These translated letters are in long single-rhymed stanzas, like those of the chronicle, and contain a total of 673 lines. 
The scribe of BL, Cotton MS Julius A.v, wrongly attributes to Langtoft an allegorical poem on the passion of Christ, but with more probability a lament of the Virgin recalling St Bernard's 'De planctu Virginis Marie'. 


@@@@@


doc= 16038


Langton, Bennet (bap. 1736, d. 1801), friend of Samuel Johnson, son of the Revd Bennet Langton (1696-1769) and his wife, Diana, daughter of Edmund Turner of Stoke Rochford, Lincolnshire, and descendant of the old family of the Langtons of Langton, near Spilsby in Lincolnshire, was baptized at St Cuthbert's, York, on 11 January 1736. As a young man he was so interested by 'The Rambler' (1750-52) that he obtained an introduction to Johnson, who at once took a liking to him. On 7 July 1757 Langton matriculated from Trinity College, Oxford, where he became friendly with Topham Beauclerk. The two youths took Johnson for his famous 'frisk' to Billingsgate. Johnson later visited the Langtons, and declined the offer of a good living from Langton's father. Langton took the degrees of MA in 1765 and DCL 1790. He was an original member of the Literary Club (about 1764). Johnson, however, was provoked to the laughter which echoed from Fleet Ditch to Temple Bar by Langton's will in 1773, and soon afterwards caused a quarrel, which apparently lasted for some months, by censuring Langton for introducing religious questions in a mixed company. 
On 24 May 1770 ('Annual Register', p. 180) Langton married Mary (1743-1820), daughter of Gresham Lloyd, and widow of John Leslie, tenth earl of Rothes (1698-1767), with whom he had four sons and five daughters. According to Johnson, he rather spoilt them (Fanny D'Arblay, 'Diary'). His eldest son, George (1772-1819), succeeded him in his estate; Peregrine, the second, married Miss Massingberd of Gunby, and took her name. His second daughter, Jane ('b'. 1776), was Johnson's goddaughter. She died on 12 August 1854, having always worn a 'beautiful miniature' of Johnson ('GM', 1854). 
Langton became a captain, and ultimately major, in the Lincolnshire militia. Johnson visited him in camp at Warley Common in 1778, and in 1783 at Rochester, where Langton was quartered for some time. Johnson once requested Langton to tell him in what his life was faulty, and was greatly irritated when Langton brought him some texts enjoining mildness of speech. Johnson's permanent feeling, however, was expressed in the words, 'Sit anima mea cum Langtono' ('May my soul be with Langton'; Boswell, 1282). 
During Johnson's last illness Langton came to attend his friend; Johnson left him a book, and Langton undertook to pay an annuity to Francis Barber, Johnson's black servant, in consideration of a sum of $750 left in his hands. Langton was famous for his Greek scholarship, but wrote nothing except some anecdotes about Johnson, published by Boswell in his 'Life' under the year 1780. Johnson and Boswell frequently discussed Langton's incapacity for properly managing his estates. He was too indolent, it appears, to keep accounts, in spite of exhortations from his mentor. Langton was very tall and thin; his gentle and amiable nature made him universally popular. According to Sir William Jones, Langton's conservative political opinions made him 'vehement against the lovers of freedom in all countries', while Hester Thrale confirmed that Langton was 'a Tory and a high Churchman up to the Eyes' (Rogers, 222). He was appointed in April 1788 to succeed Johnson as professor of ancient literature at the Royal Academy. Langton died at Southampton on 18 December 1801. 


@@@@@


doc= 16039


Langton, Christopher (1521-1578), physician, was born at Riccall in Yorkshire. He was educated at Eton College between 1534 and 1538, and on 23 August 1538 went as a scholar to King's College, Cambridge. He was admitted a fellow of King's College a week later than all the other scholars of his year, on 2 September 1541, and graduated BA in 1542. He received his last quarterage as a fellow at Cambridge at Christmas 1544. Langton married Margaret Chambers of London, the marriage licence being issued on 11 January 1546. 
On 10 April 1547, in London, Langton published 'A very brefe treatise, orderly declaring the principal partes of phisick, that is to say, thynges natural, thynges not naturall, thynges agaynst nature', with a dedication to Edward, duke of Somerset, in which he describes himself as 'a lernar and as yet a yong student of physicke'. The work discusses anatomy, pathology, and therapeutics according to ancient and modern methods, commending Pliny and quoting Hippocrates, Aetius, Paulus Aegineta, Celsus, Galen, and Avicenna. 
In 1550 Langton published 'An Introduction into Phisycke, wyth an Universal Dyet'. It is dedicated to Sir Arthur Darcye, and is largely based on the earlier work. One other book appeared: 'A Treatise of Urines, of All the Colours Thereof, with the Medicines' (1552). 
Langton took his MD at Cambridge in 1552, and was admitted a fellow of the College of Physicians, London, on 30 September 1552. However, he was expelled from the college for breach of the statutes and profligate conduct on 17 July 1558. On 16 June 1563, having been caught in a compromising situation with two young women, he was punished by being carted to the Guildhall and through the City. His professional ability must have been considerable, for in spite of this public disgrace he continued to have a successful medical practice. Lord Monteagle gave him a pension; both Sir Thomas Smith and Sir Richard Gresham were his patients; the latter left him a small legacy. 
Langton died in 1578, and was buried in London at St Botolph's Church without Bishopsgate, on 26 October. 


@@@@@


doc= 16040


Langton, John (d. 1337), administrator and bishop of Chichester, probably came from a family that had the lordship of the manor of West Langton in Leicestershire, and may have been related to the treasurer Walter Langton (died 1321), whom John succeeded in the York prebend of Fridaythorpe in 1296. There is no record of university study, but in a letter from the chancellor of Oxford of 'c'.1307-1310 he is described as 'esteemed colleague' ('confrater probatus'), and at the end of his life, in 1337, he founded a loan chest for deserving clerks at Oxford. He is first recorded in June 1278, when he became rector of Castle Sowerby, Cumberland, though only an acolyte. He may well have been the clerk of that name to whom Edward I gave two oak trees in March 1280. By May 1286 he was keeper of the rolls of chancery, the first person so to be titled. At the king's request he obtained a papal dispensation for pluralism in February 1291. He succeeded Robert Burnell (died 1292) as chancellor in December 1292. The appointment may have caused some surprise -- the Dunstable annalist comments that until then Langton had been only a chancery clerk -- and the increased use of the privy seal from this date may indicate that he did not succeed to Burnell's influence; but his dissent from the policy pursued before the outbreak of war with France in 1294 was remarked upon, especially by the Worcester annalist. 
The usual trawl of benefices accorded to Edward I's civil servants came Langton's way, and by 1294 he was treasurer of Wells. When the rich bishopric of Ely fell vacant in 1298, Edward I pushed hard to get him elected. But only a minority of the monks supported Langton, Archbishop Winchelsey was opposed, and, despite a visit to the curia between February and June 1299, Langton finally had his election quashed by the pope in June 1299. He was compensated with a dispensation to retain benefices -- sixteen in all -- to the value of $1000, and also with the archdeaconry of Canterbury. Further conflict with Winchelsey broke out over the valuable rectory of Reculver, to which Langton had been presented by the king in 1293, but which he was eventually forced to surrender in 1302. However, Langton supported the archbishop in his dispute with St Augustine's, Canterbury. 
For reasons that remain obscure Langton was dismissed from the chancellorship in August 1302. Yet on 5 April 1305 he was elected to the bishopric of Chichester. Consecrated at Canterbury on 19 September 1305, in the following month he participated in a high-level mission to the new pope, Clement V ('r'. 1305-13), at Lyons. Following Edward II's accession, in August 1307, Langton regained his former post as chancellor, and was one of the bishops Winchelsey commissioned to crown the new king in his absence. In 1309 he was active on the king's council, and his presence at the Stamford parliament in July 1309, where the exile of Piers Gaveston was annulled, suggests support for the king. However, in March 1310 he was one of five bishops elected as lords ordainer, and this may account for his removal from the chancellorship on 11 May. The office remained unfilled until Walter Reynolds (died 1327) was appointed on 6 July. In the summer of 1311 Langton participated at the London trial of the templars. 
At the Lincoln parliament in 1316 Langton was an auditor of petitions for England, and was sworn of the king's council. The earl of Lancaster at this time urged him to prosecute John de Warenne, earl of Surrey (died 1347), for adultery, a course of action that in March 1315 Langton had been anxious to pass on to the archbishop of Canterbury. W. H. Blaauw, writing in 1853, contended that at some point Langton did excommunicate Warenne for adultery, and that in consequence the earl assaulted the bishop's officers, and was even himself imprisoned, but this cannot be substantiated. Langton took a large part in the negotiations between the king and Lancaster preceding the treaty of Leake of 1318 and was one of the standing council appointed as a result of the treaty. At the Westminster parliament of October 1320 he was again an auditor of petitions for England and Wales, while in July 1321 he was one of the bishops who mediated between the king and the barons. 
Langton's role in public affairs decreased with age, although he was one of the commission appointed in July 1327 to give effect to the statute reversing the financial depredations of the Despenser regime. As a diocesan he vigorously contested royal attempts to convert the collegiate churches of Hastings and Bosham into royal free chapels, and in 1314 he annulled a statute of the dean and chapter on the grounds that it had been made without his permission; among its provisions was a prohibition of pluralism on the part of the cathedral vicars. He spent $341 on the window in the south transept of Chichester Cathedral beneath which he is buried, and bequeathed $100 to the cathedral fabric. A chantry was erected to him in the chapel of Sts Thomas of Canterbury and Edmund of Abingdon. He died shortly before 19 July 1337. 


@@@@@


doc= 16041


Langton, John (fl. 1389-1392), Carmelite friar and theologian, was perhaps born about 1340 and came, according to Bale, from the west of England: he may accordingly be the John Langton who was ordained as subdeacon at Worcester on 11 June 1362, and about 1389 was an unsuccessful candidate for the Bath and Wells prebend of Combe Sexta. Traditional accounts, however, have him originating from London and entering the order at the London Whitefriars before being sent to Oxford. He had gained the degree of BTh by 1392, but had already been described as a scholar of canon law in 1389, which probably accounts for his inclusion among the judges in the episcopal proceedings against the Cistercian Henry Crump at the Carmelite house in Stamford in 1392. It was Langton who recorded the proceedings: the main charge against Crump was that of denying the rights of the mendicants in such matters as hearing confessions, but it is more likely that the real issue was that Crump had been guilty of adopting a Wycliffite view of the eucharist as a reflection of the body of Christ rather than the true body itself. Langton is said to have compiled a collection of sayings ('Collectanea dictorum') and another of questions ('Quaestiones ordinariae'), but neither is known to have survived. He has been, but should not be, confused with another noted anti-Lollard preacher, the Benedictine doctor of theology John Langdon (died 1434), author of a chronicle, 'De rebus Anglicis', and afterwards bishop of Rochester. 


@@@@@


doc= 16042


Langton, Robert (1470-1524), ecclesiastic and pilgrim, was born at Appleby, Westmorland, on 25 June 1470. The names of his parents are unrecorded, but he had two brothers and five sisters. He also had powerful kinsmen in the church, for Thomas Langton, who died in 1501 as archbishop-elect of Canterbury, was his uncle, and Christopher Bainbridge, who became a cardinal and archbishop of York, was his cousin. Robert owed his education and early preferments to the former. From 1487 he studied at the Queen's College, Oxford, where his uncle was provost, doubtless financing his tuition from a series of benefices which began in 1483 with a prebend in Lincoln Cathedral. Though not recorded as having taken orders, in 1485 he was also collated to a prebend in Salisbury Cathedral, and on 25 June 1486 he became archdeacon of Dorset in Salisbury diocese, where Thomas Langton was then bishop. Then on 6 April 1493 Robert Langton was recorded at Bologna, and he probably remained in Italy until he took his DCL degree at Bologna on 14 May 1498. The degree was incorporated at Oxford in 1501, the year in which Thomas Langton died. 
His uncle's death did not prevent Langton's adding livings in Devon and Wiltshire to his collection of benefices, but his principal patron was now his cousin Bainbridge, thanks to whom he was admitted treasurer of York Minster on 24 April 1509. On 23 September following, immediately before leaving England for Rome, Bainbridge appointed Langton to a commission to administer York diocese in his absence. But Langton did not stay long in England, for on 11 October 1511 Bainbridge licensed him to go on pilgrimage to Santiago de Compostela, Rome, and other places. His travels were wide-ranging, in Spain, southern France, and Italy, and eventually brought him to Rome, where he was recorded in March and April 1514. He probably returned to England soon afterwards, for by May 1514 he had resigned both his archdeaconry and his treasurership, though he retained his prebends in Lincoln (until 1518) and Salisbury, and added to them prebends in York and Southwell minsters. He took up residence in the London Charterhouse. 
A wealthy man, Langton was a benefactor to the God's House hospital in Southampton (where he maintained another residence), and above all to his alma mater at Queen's. Probably beginning in 1516, he financed the building of an ante-chapel which more than doubled the size of the college chapel, at a reported cost of $300. The work was probably largely completed by 1518, a date recorded in several stained-glass panels. He also paid for work on the provost's lodgings. Langton died in 1524 in the Charterhouse, where he requested burial, between 20 June, when he drew up his will, and the 30th, when a successor was collated to his Salisbury prebend. His memorial brass at Queen's, the stylized representation of a cleric, is far removed from the portrait of him recorded as 'lately' seen in 1858, depicting 'an elderly man, with white flowing beard, moustache, and hair; the features of a pronounced character, the nose being long and aquiline, and the eye piercing' (Thompson, 347). The picture, said to have come from Annesley Hall, Nottinghamshire, is not otherwise recorded. 
Langton is also commemorated by his educational benefactions and by a book. In his will he made cash bequests totalling at least $623, including $10 for poor scholars at Oxford and $200 to Queen's 'to purchase lande and to make a scole howse in Appylby where I was born' (will, fol. 166). In 1681 it was recorded that he and his younger kinsman Miles Spenser had financed the 'Litle Schole' in front of Appleby grammar school's main building, and the two men's names were still engraved on the school seal in the 1920s. Langton's book shows him in a drier light. In 1522 he published 'The pylgrymage of M. Robert Langton clerke to Seynt James in Compostell and in other holy places of Crystendome' (STC 15206). Only one copy is known to survive, in Lincoln Cathedral Library, though a modern edition appeared in 1924. It is presented in the form of a travelogue, starting at Orleans and listing the places, with the distances between them, visited on his journey to Santiago and beyond. The itinerary is followed by a series of glosses on many of the places named in it, providing details of their relics and images, and sometimes also of points of secular interest, such as the tomb of Dante at Ravenna and the famous statue of Laocoon (disinterred only in 1506) in Rome. 
In 1509 Langton walked alongside John Colet in Henry VII's funeral procession, and he named Cuthbert Tunstall and Richard Pace, both members of Colet's circle of moderate humanist reformers, as supervisors of his will. Like Colet, Langton wanted to advance the provision of learning. Unlike him, he clearly believed wholeheartedly in the spiritual value of pilgrimages: in the preamble to his 'Pylgrymage' Langton declares that he has lately visited Jerusalem, and the emblems on his coat of arms may indicate that he travelled to Egypt and Sinai as well. In his old-fashioned stress on the penitential benefits of pilgrimages for those who 'take peyne on them for Crystes sake and encrease of theyr merytes' ('Pilgrimage', 39), and his omitting to record the indulgences associated with relics and shrines, Langton may nevertheless reflect the aspirations of Colet and his associates to recover a pre-scholastic piety. In the early 1520s, however, such a position was out of step with popular devotion, perhaps explaining the apparent failure of his book. 


@@@@@


doc= 16043


Langton, Simon (d. 1248), ecclesiastic and diplomat, was the youngest son of Henry Langton of Langton by Wragby, Lincolnshire, and brother of Archbishop Stephen Langton, who made him archdeacon of Canterbury. A third brother, Walter, inherited the family estate, but he was childless and on his death in 1234 his lands and debts fell to Simon. Simon was probably educated at Paris, where Stephen was the leading professor of the day, and he was almost invariably titled 'master'. A number of written works have been attributed to him in the past but they have either disappeared or had their attribution questioned. 
Langton first appears in public records in 1208, when his brother Stephen was seeking acceptance as archbishop of Canterbury by King John. As Stephen's agent Simon made two trips to England in 1208, and probably another in 1209, during which he proved himself a hard bargainer. When John's resistance finally ended in 1213, he welcomed Simon to England very warmly. But during the next two years Simon Langton appears as the leading member of the archiepiscopal 'familia', perhaps acting as its chancellor, in its continued opposition to the king, and he went to Rome in 1214 to rebut charges made against his brother. After he had been given rich prebends in both London and York, his fellow canons of York elected Simon Langton their archbishop in 1215, despite a papal prohibition against his seeking the office. But when he went to Rome to seek confirmation his election was quashed and he was forbidden any episcopal office without specific papal approval. Unchastened, Langton proceeded to join Louis of France in his invasion of England and to become Louis's chancellor. He flouted the orders of the papal legate who had been sent to oppose Louis, and for this disobedience he was excommunicated by name. Consequently, when Louis withdrew in 1218, Langton was forced to surrender all his benefices and go to Rome for absolution. In time he was reconciled, made a papal subdeacon, and allowed to hold a benefice in France, but he was exiled from England by both king and pope. He seems to have resided in Paris where he was a canon of Notre Dame and where he received a pension from the French crown. 
A rumour late in 1220 that the pope might allow Simon Langton to return to England occasioned a passionate protest from a large group of magnates. The king remitted his ire and indignation towards the end of 1223, but it was not until 1227 that both king and pope, at the urging of the archbishop, now old and ill, permitted Langton's re-entry. Langton arrived at Dover on 25 July, having already been named archdeacon on 14 May. In December, only seven months before his own death, Archbishop Stephen issued acts granting his brother and his successors authority over all churches of the archdiocese including those of the archbishop and his chapter, giving them the power to choose and remove rural deans, and increasing the wealth of the archdeacons by appropriating to the office the rich churches of Teynham and Hackington. These acts were ratified by the monks of Christ Church, Canterbury, who were assured that no church of secular canons would be built at Hackington to compete with their church (as proposed by the last two archbishops), and furthermore, the archdeacon gave them the archidiaconal house in Canterbury. In its stead Langton built a new official mansion at Hackington which he called New Place. 
For the most part the duties of Langton's office were performed by his officials, two of whom are known: Master Robert of Gloucester and Master Roger of Elham. But Langton's term of office would be marked by three great controversies with the Benedictines of the archdiocese. First in 1235 Archbishop Edmund appealed to Rome against the election by the monks of Rochester of Richard Wendene (died 1250) as their bishop. Langton was the archbishop's advocate, but the action was lost and Langton was ordered by the pope to assist in the consecration and to install the monks' choice. Then in 1237 the abbey of St Augustine renewed its ancient claims against the archdeacon's jurisdiction over their appropriated churches, particularly in vacancies, but the matter was compromised yet again. Finally, in 1238, the monks of Christ Church, Canterbury, challenged the archbishop over their liberties, rights, and customs. The case was appealed to Rome, where the archbishop was again represented by the archdeacon, who accused the monks of forging their charters. This charge was proved, the prior was deposed, and two monks were exiled to other monasteries. But then the monks elected a new prior without proper involvement of the archbishop, who proceeded to excommunicate them. Langton supported Edmund wholeheartedly, and, after the archbishop died in 1240, brought a new claim that he, not the prior, should have spiritual jurisdiction in the archdiocese. The case was closed only when the king entered the lists in favour of his own candidate for the see and threatened royal wrath. 
Langton was often more involved in the service of the pope and the king than of Canterbury. From the autumn of 1229 until that of 1237 there is no evidence that he spent any time in England. A rumour of his death reached the royal court in January 1232 and led to the appointment of a replacement until the story was found to be erroneous. His destination in 1229 was given as Rome, and the monastic chroniclers blame him for having sabotaged in 1231 and 1232 the elections to the archbishopric of Ralph Neville (died 1244) and John Blund (died 1248) respectively. Clearly he was held in high regard by Pope Gregory IX ('r'. 1227-41), who gave him a task to perform in Paris. It was in France, too, that King Henry made use of Langton's diplomatic talents by charging him to negotiate truces with the king of France and the count of La Marche. This proved a long and complicated process that went on from November 1234 until August 1235, for which services the king was effusively grateful. Langton was back in England for the legatine council of London on 20 November 1237, where he proceeded to make an enemy of the legate by demanding that the latter's commission be read. He accompanied Archbishop Edmund to and from Rome in 1238, but he is not known to have gone abroad thereafter and in 1241 he decided that he was too old and infirm to cross the Alps again, even to pursue his feud with the monks of Christ Church. In 1242 Henry wrote specially to Langton to ask his prayers for the success of the expedition the king was leading to Gascony, but two years later had to seek to restore the reputations of royal clerks who had been given an unfavourable report to the pope by a commission that included the archdeacon of Canterbury. Langton can be shown to have remained active into 1247, and he did not die until 1248. 
The Benedictines cursed his memory as persecutor and troublemaker; Matthew Paris denounced him as one who had stirred up trouble throughout England and France. But Simon Langton was remembered affectionately by the Franciscans, whom he had welcomed into England, and by the college of poor priests in Canterbury, of which he was second founder. At the University of Paris he left a library for the use of poor scholars, and at the cathedral of Notre Dame he endowed the celebration of his own and his brother's obituaries on the feast of the translation of St Thomas Becket, a feast that Stephen Langton had added to the church calendar. 


@@@@@


doc= 16044


Langton, Stephen (c.1150-1228), archbishop of Canterbury, was one of three sons, perhaps the eldest, of Henry Langton, a minor landowner in Langton by Wragby, Lincolnshire. A moated farmhouse to the west of the church could mark his birthplace. 
The first certain date in Langton's life is his appointment as cardinal in 1206, though he is known to have taught theology in Paris in the 1180s. By then he would have completed courses in both the arts and theology, which would have taken fifteen years, from perhaps 'c'.1165 to 1180, and it is likely that he would have been fifteen when his studies there began. One brother, Simon Langton, followed him to Paris. Where the brothers were first educated is unknown, though Lincoln, about 12 miles from Langton, had schools. At first the family must have supported Stephen, but later he received benefices at York and Notre Dame, Paris. Some time between 1191 and 1205 Stephen was in York, where he witnessed two charters of Archbishop Geoffrey as Master Stephen Langton. If it were Geoffrey who gave him his prebend (and it is known that another Paris master, Pierre de Corbeil, was made archdeacon by him), this would have added to his later unpopularity with King John, who never enjoyed good relations with his brother. Much later in 1226 Stephen referred warmly to his former membership of the church of York. His position at Notre Dame, on the other hand, which would have provided him with a house as well as an income, must have depended upon the approval of King Philip Augustus, another negative point for John. 
About 1165 there may have been approximately 3000 students in Paris, forming one-tenth of the city's total population. The schools were concentrated on the Ile de la Cite, and around, even on, the Petit Pont which joined the Ile to the Left Bank. Langton's teachers in arts are not known, but when he moved, 'c'.1170-75, to theology, he came into contact with a number of masters, of whom the most significant was Peter the Chanter. Whether he was formally Peter's pupil is a matter of dispute, but it is agreed that Peter influenced him deeply in his choice of questions to tackle, and in interpretation of scripture. Like the Chanter, Langton attracted able pupils, of whom two, probably six, had distinguished careers. Richard Poor became dean of Salisbury in 1197 and was elected to Chichester, the first of his three bishoprics, in 1215, while Thomas of Marlborough became abbot of Evesham (1229-36), having previously taught law in Exeter and Oxford. Henry of Sandford, archdeacon of Canterbury and bishop of Rochester (1227-35), was certainly a great admirer of Langton and, like Alexander of Stainsby, bishop of Coventry and Lichfield (1224-38), may well have been another pupil. Andrew Sunenson, archbishop of Lund (1201-24), may have been a fifth, since some of his writings follow Langton's very closely, and Bernard (II), archbishop of Santiago de Compostela (1224-37), a sixth, because he had an extensive collection of Langton's works. 
Langton wrote most as a teacher of theology, exemplifying the three sides of a master's work distinguished by the Chanter: disputation of theological questions, biblical commentary, and sermons. In each area the sheer scale of manuscript evidence has prevented the close study, and certainly the editing, of more than a little. The difficulties are increased because many works survive in a number of forms: as yet no consensus has emerged about whether these reflect notes ('reportationes') made by different students of the same, or separate, verbal presentations: the contribution of Langton's own editing is also unclear. It is possible that some revision may have occurred when he was unable to exercise his archiepiscopal office for much of 1207-13 and 1216-18. 
The centre of Langton's work is a series of commentaries on the whole of the 'New' and 'Old' testaments, with the probable exception of the 'Psalms'. They form a far larger contribution than that made by any other contemporary scholar. Some commentaries began as lectures, indeed some only exist as notes made by others which refer to Langton as 'the master'. Normally he draws on the work of earlier teachers contained in the 'Glossa ordinaria', and on writers nearer his day, like Andrew of St Victor, and Peter Lombard. One manuscript of a commentary on Paul's epistles portrays the relationship: in the centre of the page is the biblical text, around it Lombard's comments, and circling the whole, Langton's. For some books he comments on all the traditional senses of scripture, for some the literal sense only, or merely the moral. It is quite clear that, although establishing the meaning of the text is inescapable, he lays more stress on drawing out the spiritual meaning. At the start of his commentary upon the lesser prophets, taking a verse from 'Ecclesiasticus', 'May the bones of the Twelve Prophets spring up out of their place' ('Ecclesiasticus' 49: 12), he explains the dry bones as the letter of scripture, but their marrow and fatness as the spiritual interpretation, which is harder to extract. 
This extensive biblical work made Langton aware of difficulties caused by the lack of any accepted method of arranging the 'Bible's' books, and of dividing them into chapters. He produced schemes for both of these which rapidly won approval, and were still basically those used at the end of the twentieth century. There is less agreement about his share in a handbook which soon circulated as an appendix to the 'Bible', explaining the meaning of Hebrew names in the 'Bible', usually known from its opening entries as 'Aaz-apprehendens'. Some manuscripts attribute it to him, but in view of the fact that some others date back to the eighth century, Langton's share may be that of editor and popularizer. He also produced a commentary on what was then the main textbook for biblical history, the 'Historia scholastica' of Peter Comestor. 
Within some of Langton's commentaries there are sections where he explores a 'quaestio', and references to 'quaestiones' which exist separately. The 'quaestiones' themselves contain some material also in his commentaries, and some which is quite independent, and which may survive in a number of different versions. Some 'quaestiones' on related topics are grouped into collections, or 'summae' -- the 'Summa de virtutibus et vitiis', for example, deals with the seven deadly sins. Many of the 'quaestiones' generally seem to have arisen out of disputation, which by that time took place at a different time from lectures. Only recently has the first thorough catalogue of these 'quaestiones' been made. 
The number of Langton's surviving sermons is very considerable: Schneyer's repertory lists over 600, but Roberts based her study on 122 that survive in several named copies. It is likely that the final figure of genuine sermons will fall somewhere between these two figures. Only a handful of them have yet been edited and their discussion has to be tentative. It is generally accepted that most were preached during his Paris years, although a few can be definitely placed later. Most were aimed at clerical audiences, some at monks, rather fewer at a mixed or mainly lay audience. It is supposed, by analogy with other known preachers, like Bernard of Clairvaux, that to the laity Langton would have spoken in the vernacular, although all surviving sermons are in Latin. 
Some characteristics are common to all Langton's work: here two will be mentioned, self-confidence and liveliness. The first arose from his thorough training and grasp of earlier literature. He was fluent and clear in speech, and familiar with both Parisian masters and the fathers. He had absorbed the work carried out by Hugh and Andrew of St Victor to establish the meaning of the biblical text, which Peter Lombard, Peter Comestor (Peter Manducator), and Peter the Chanter had all accepted was essential. Among the fathers he had read particularly Jerome, Augustine, and Gregory. This preparation gave Langton courage sometimes to agree with a modern master like Andrew rather than Augustine. Quite frequently he referred to Jewish interpretations, but at present there is no consensus about whether he had any knowledge of Hebrew. Many of his references were derived from Hebraists among his immediate predecessors, like Peter Comestor, Peter the Chanter, and Andrew, rather than Jerome, and although he seems to have talked with Jews, he did not approve of entering into disputation with them, which some of his contemporaries did. The Jews were, for him, like slaves who carried the satchels of Christians -- 'Iudei enim capsarii nostri sunt' (Dahan, 130). 
Langton's liveliness, although it can be overlooked, is shown in his frequent use of examples to illustrate the argument. The use of 'exempla', or short stories, in sermons had a long history by his time, going back to Jesus's use of parables. Langton drew upon the 'Bible' most regularly for such stories, but he also turned to many sides of contemporary life. His comments upon life in the schools, for example, are vivid. He knew that many students, whatever they professed to be doing, spent their time gazing at the walls of the lecture room, but justified the charging of fees to them by appeal to the tradition that Abraham had become rich by teaching astronomy in Egypt. He illustrated the effectiveness of 'exempla' in a comment upon the story in 'Judges' 3 of Samgar's killing 600 Philistines with a ploughshare when Aod only dispatched one with a sharp sword: 'See! This makes clear that a preacher should not always use polished, subtle preaching, like Aod's sword, but sometimes a ploughshare, that is rustic exhortation. Very often a popular story ['exemplum'] is more effective than a polished, subtle phrase. Aod killed one man only with a two-edged sword, Samgar six hundred with a ploughshare; so, whereas the laity are easily converted by rude, unpolished preaching, a sermon to clerks will draw scarcely one of them from his error. (Lacombe and Smalley, 173)' Langton's serious approach to sermons may have developed when he experienced some kind of conversion through listening to the charismatic preaching of Foulques de Neuilly, in the 1190s. Jacques de Vitry says that Langton was one of seven remarkable preachers who were deeply affected by him. It must have been his forceful preaching that led to his being nicknamed Thunder-Tongued (de Lingua-Tonante) in some manuscripts. In Paris, Langton belonged to a circle of masters who were committed to the reform of the church, and one of his stories casts a curious light forward to what was to befall him when he went to England. It occurs in the same commentary on the lesser prophets when he reaches the story of Amasius, the high priest of Bethel, hiding behind King Jeroboam as he received Amos. Langton describes Amasius as representing 'a bad priest or any bad, greedy prelate... [who] for a whore or a little worldly profit' was 'ready to go two leagues or more on a winter's night, but to hear a poor man's confession... will not leave his table, even for a few minutes' (Smalley, 'Four senses', 72-3). Amos is the reformer, fresh from Paris. To him Amasius says: ''Thou seer', O popular and learned doctor, who threatens us so terribly with thy piety! 'Go, flee away into the land of Judah', leave my bishopric or my parish, return to your studies in Paris, 'eat bread there and prophesy there', confine your teaching and preaching in Paris. 'In Bethel', that is my bishopric, 'prophesy no more', that is preach no more. (ibid.)' Certainly there can be no doubt that Langton, once he moved from the schools to the world, found himself faced with pressures and tensions of such complexity that they nearly tore him apart. 
Early in 1206 Langton's life as a successful teacher came to an abrupt end: Innocent III called him to Rome, to become cardinal-priest of St Chrysogonus; by the end of that year he had persuaded the monks of Canterbury to elect him archbishop of Canterbury. Just what considerations had moved the pope to either course are not entirely clear, but they may be connected. Both men were of similar age, and had known each other for about twenty years, since Innocent had studied in Paris before 1187. Like Langton, the pope admired Thomas Becket, whose shrine at Canterbury he visited. That experience may have made him aware how the community felt about the dead saint, with whom they had often disagreed while he was alive, and their defence of their rights in the choice of his successors. Certainly the long struggle between Christ Church and two later archbishops, Baldwin and Hubert Walter, over their plan to create a collegiate church, would have been very well known at Rome. It may be more than coincidence, then, that the pope sent for Langton not long after news of Hubert Walter's death on 13 July 1205, and the subsequent dispute, arrived in Rome. 
Langton would have been able to observe closely the procession of embassies over the next months as the monks, the suffragan bishops of Canterbury, and the king all tried to make their cases. Ultimately, in December 1206, after the pope had rejected the royal and monastic nominees, and the claim of the suffragans to take part in the election, the monastic delegation elected Stephen Langton. Their choice was influenced by Innocent after the community had shown itself to be divided. To John, Langton was quite unacceptable: he was not someone he knew, had spent too much time in France, and had been chosen after a process that allowed no consideration of royal preferences. It is likely, too, that he wanted a more compliant person than Hubert Walter, with whom his relations had become very strained. 
To John's objections Innocent replied by praising Langton's qualities as a 'Doctor not only in the liberal arts but also in theological learning' (Cheney and Semple, 86-90). When he added that 'as a result he was judged worthy to hold a prebend of Paris' and another at York, he struck notes, as has been observed, that would have jarred. Innocent's stance was based on the provision in canon law that, when an election took place in his presence, there was no formal need for royal approval, and he seems to have thought that John would concede, as he had done in earlier disputed elections. His warning in the same letter, that John would find it dangerous to 'fight against God and the Church in this cause for which St Thomas, that glorious martyr and archbishop recently shed his blood', was scarcely emollient. The two parties, king and pope, saw the problem from diametrically opposed points of view, and it was to be nearly six and a half years before they could come to terms. 
Matters stood still from the election until 17 June 1207 when Innocent consecrated Stephen Langton at Viterbo. Not long afterwards Langton wrote a long open letter to the English people which provides some hints as to why he accepted the position. The first is his feeling of deep pastoral concern for England, not surprising for one whose career had become increasingly devoted to preparing others to be priests. The second is a sense that he had only accepted because ordered to by the pope, 'de mandato superioris' -- again something that would spring out of his own teaching. Lastly, when he, like Innocent, claimed that the struggle involved Becket and the liberties he had established, he betrays a feeling of deep personal identification with his predecessor. Later his choice of seal was to reflect this: the reverse shows the martyrdom within an inscription which may be translated 'May the picture of a death in the external world, be for you a life of love within'. The letter, in short, suggests that Langton accepted what he must have known to be an almost impossible task because he felt deeply committed to trying to put into practice what he had taught. 
The letter went on to emphasize Frederick Barbarossa's fate: he had struggled against the church, and then drowned in a stream which even a child could have waded through, because God's justice had caught up with him. Langton also, perhaps more ominously, stated that if a rebel remained in schism the church could justly absolve his men of their fealty, since he had withdrawn his fealty from God. Such words can hardly have weakened John's resolve. When he heard of the consecration, he expelled the monks from Christ Church (11 July) and began the course that led to an interdict being laid on his kingdom on 24 March 1208 and his own excommunication in November 1209. 
Meanwhile the king took his revenge on Langton's family, causing his father to flee to St Andrews, where he died. His other brother, Walter, may well have gone overseas about then, since in 1211 he was fighting in the Albigensian crusade. Stephen moved into northern France and spent most time at the Cistercian monastery at Pontigny, where Becket had also passed part of his exile. In 1222 he remembered Pontigny generously, granting it an annual pension of 50 marks from the church at Romney. Sometimes he is recorded elsewhere. In October 1209 he went to Melun where he consecrated Hugh of Wells as bishop of Lincoln, and next year settled a dispute between the bishop and city of Cambrai. A year later, in 1211, he presided at the funeral of William de Briouze at the abbey of St Victor in Paris. The winter of 1212-13 was spent in Rome, and at some time between 1210 and 1213 he undertook a preaching tour against usury in Flanders with his fellow Englishman and master of the Paris schools, Robert de Courson. 
Fruitless negotiations for Langton's acceptance in England took place each year from 1208 to 1211. Stephen used his brother Simon as his representative on the first two occasions, and in October 1209 had sufficient hope to cross himself to Dover. But such parleys all foundered on two issues: the king wished to have his own position in elections formally recognized by the pope, while the archbishop and his fellow exiles wanted to bind him to compensate them for their own losses. The trust necessary for settlement was lacking. Twice, in 1208 and 1211, Langton cavilled about the terms of safe conducts provided for him and refused to negotiate in England. 
Ultimately, in the autumn of 1212, the political situation forced John to give way. Some of his nobles were plotting against him, the Welsh were causing problems, and so he sent a powerful group to Rome which early in 1213 accepted terms offered in 1211. Langton and other English bishops were probably in Rome to witness this collapse. The king was to promise to obey the pope, to provide safe conducts for the archbishop, the other exiled prelates, and the monks of Christ Church, to hand over the Canterbury estates to Langton, after he had taken an oath of fealty from him, and to compensate the exiles for their losses. Innocent gave John until the beginning of June to agree. This he did on 13 May before Pandulf, the papal nuncio, and Langton entered England on 9 July. On 20 July he absolved the king from his excommunication at Winchester and celebrated mass in his presence. The struggle for Canterbury seemed to be over, but a wider struggle had already begun. 
The next two years were full of activity, as Langton tried to deal with the problems left by the interdict, and then to mediate between John and his restless barons. On his return Langton was about sixty years old, lacking close knowledge of either king or nobles because he had been out of England for forty years, apart from a short period in York, and a mere visit to Dover. It must have taken time for him to establish himself and to try to win the king's confidence. The task must have been almost impossible if John knew that Simon Langton had been in the pay of Prince Louis. Stephen's role was further complicated by the king's surrender of his kingdoms into the hands of Pandulf, just three weeks before his own return. Holding England and Ireland as fiefs from the pope, in return for an annual tribute of 1000 marks, like his later taking the cross (March 1215), may have protected the king against the discontented, but growing papal intervention in England was now inevitable. That was critically affected by the distance between England and Italy. A fast messenger took at least thirty days to traverse it, so by the time the pope's reaction to news of English events arrived back, at least two months had passed: again and again Innocent's orders did not fit the new situation. He got news, too, from king and papal representatives who might well paint Langton's interventions in a poor light. Innocent's primary desire was for peace, and for the crusade: he had little understanding or sympathy with anyone who wanted to disturb the balance of things. The pope was also concerned with the great council to which he had sent out summonses on 13 April 1213, although it was not to gather until November 1215. Langton, on the other hand, clearly acquired sympathy with some of the barons' aims, as he tried to mediate between them and the king, because he suspected John's good faith. Thus, in the end, he was trusted by neither king nor pope, and suspended from office. 
Innocent's instructions to Langton of 15 July 1213 told him to 'do all that you believe helpful to the salvation and peace of the king and kingdom, not forgetting the honour and advantage of the Apostolic See and the English church...' (Cheney and Semple, 155). Langton's priorities were rather different, as he became involved in two issues: the settlement of compensation for the exiles and the filling of vacant positions in the church, both being issues which brought him into conflict with king and pope. John obviously wanted to be committed to pay as little as possible; Stephen and the other exiles wanted to bind the king firmly, and had only the threat of refusing to lift the interdict to persuade him to come to terms. The situation clearly puzzled ordinary people, since Langton was forced to devote a large part of his sermon delivered at St Paul's on 25 August 1213 to it. The newly arrived papal legate, Nicolo of Tusculum, was annoyed that the bishops would not compromise, while Peter des Roches, bishop of Winchester, worked skilfully to reduce John's contribution. When finally John accepted a solution, on 17 June 1214, it satisfied no one, and entirely ignored the losses of churchmen who had stayed in England. 
The task of filling vacant sees and abbeys was equally contentious. At first John attempted to proceed as though things could continue exactly as before, summoning groups of canons or monks to conduct elections in the royal chapel -- a process to which Langton and the bishops objected. They hoped for a freer form of election, although they must have realized that John was unlikely to agree. The pope had put elections firmly under Cardinal Nicolo on 31 October 1213, urging him to ensure that those elected 'on your recommendation' should be 'suitable clerks who should be men not only distinguished by their life and learning, but also loyal to the king, useful to the state, and capable of giving counsel and help -- the king's assent having been requested' (Cheney and Semple, 166). When John left for Poitou in February 1214 he arranged that elections were to be supervised by a committee of five: two great lay curialists, William Brewer and William (I) de Cantilupe, with the abbots of Beaulieu, Selby, and St Mary's, York. Langton was outmanoeuvred; the result was that most new bishops were king's men, and Langton had no chance to see whether reformers might be treated as he had thought they would be when he was a teacher. 
Much the most difficult part of Langton's job was to try to work for 'the peace of the king and the kingdom', as Innocent put it, since John was planning to take a great expedition to Poitou in 1214 against the king of France, a repeat of the project of 1212-13 which had been prevented by baronial opposition. Very soon after the reconciliation with the king Langton intervened to persuade him not to punish those barons who had refused service, and from then on he was almost continually involved in negotiations. Nowadays the picturesque stories told by Roger of Wendover, of Langton's making John promise at the time of his absolution to restore the good laws of Edward the Confessor and producing a charter of Henry I at St Paul's on 25 August to the assembled barons, are discounted. There is, however, general agreement that without Langton the course of events would have been very different. 
Langton's was probably the mind responsible for the attempt to set down in writing what the barons wanted, and to frame it in a way which would bind the king. His concern that a king should act according to law and after proper judgment had been themes of his teaching. At first he seems to have hoped that persuading the king to swear to repeat his coronation oath, or something like it, at the time of his absolution would be enough, but by November 1213 he seems to have realized that more was necessary. When the political balance tipped against the king following the battle of Bouvines (27 July 1214) the problems became ever more difficult. Langton lost the pope's trust. Innocent came to connect the growth of discontent in England with the archbishop's arrival, and was ready to aid the king by instructing the archbishop to denounce conspirators against him. The role given to Langton, and to other bishops, in the articles of the barons to clear up various still unsettled matters reflects the barons' confidence. The first clause in 'Magna Carta' granting freedom to the English church, including freedom of elections, may be one achievement of the archbishop, though he and the bishops may well have been troubled by the security clause that denied royal rights which they supported. 
Both the articles and 'Magna Carta' were forced out of John by the short civil war of May 1215, but the peace they symbolized quickly broke down, despite Langton's continuous efforts to prevent this. He and the bishops, for example, tried to bring the parties together at Oxford on 16 August and at Staines on the 28th. Soon afterwards, when Innocent's letter of 7 July, which had been written in ignorance both of the charter and of renewed hostilities, arrived, it excommunicated all 'disturbers of the king and kingdom' (Cheney and Semple, 208), and laid their lands under interdict, ordering the archbishop and his suffragans to publish these sentences, or be suspended. By that time Langton had completely lost royal favour when he refused to surrender Rochester Castle (a cause of tension ever since the reconciliation of July 1213), almost certainly because by then he did not trust the king. In some senses his refusal to excommunicate the rebels, presumably on the ground that the pope lacked full knowledge of the facts, brought to an end an intolerable situation. The bishop of Winchester, the first addressee of the letter, suspended him, about the middle of September as he was leaving for Rome to attend the council. If Langton's career had ended here, his archiepiscopate might have seemed a disaster. 
Langton made his way south to Rome, where on 4 November 1215 Innocent confirmed his suspension. A few days later the great council opened at the Lateran, at which, perhaps unsurprisingly, Langton seems to have taken little part. Indeed, almost nothing is known about his movements until he returned to England in May 1218, having been permitted to do so by Honorius III. By then he found a very different political situation from that of 1215. The throne was occupied by a boy, but power was exercised on the young Henry III's behalf by a triumvirate: William (I) Marshal, the regent, Peter des Roches, bishop of Winchester, and Pandulf, since 1218 papal legate. In 1219 Langton took charge of the investigation into the miracles of Hugh of Lincoln, and next year presided at two great celebrations: Henry's second coronation at Westminster (17 May 1220), and two months later the translation of Becket's relics to a new shrine at Canterbury. There he emphasized Becket's essential Englishness, a nice note for a prelate who was so unused to England, and whose brother Simon was still not allowed back into the country because of his support for Prince Louis's attempt to seize the throne. That autumn he travelled to Rome to ask for the recall of Pandulf, taking with him a Becket relic as a gift for the pope. He was back by July 1221 with the order for Pandulf's return, and from then until his death he played a significant role in public affairs. 
Power was still not in Henry's control, but exercised by the justiciar, Hubert de Burgh, and des Roches, along with the archbishop, who took over something of the moderating role that the Marshal had filled. Langton was involved in many critical episodes, as the justiciar and des Roches jockeyed for influence, and the body of loyal royal administrators tried to maintain peace and order. One means, the reissuing of the great charter of 1215, certainly owed something to Langton's belief in it as powerful reassurance of royal good intentions. In January 1223 he persuaded the king to confirm it verbally, and two years later was behind its reissue in what was to be its definitive form. The gesture did not placate all those being forced to disgorge castles and offices that they had long controlled, and next year occurred the one serious breakdown of internal peace since the end of the French invasion. William de Breaute then held Bedford, on his brother's behalf, against the justiciar for eight weeks from June to August 1224. Langton was at the siege and its bloody end when the garrison was hanged. There he was acting out his earlier view that removing custody of a castle from a noble was proper if a judgment of the royal court preceded action. To Honorius the archbishop's conduct seemed extraordinary, because he believed that troops should have been fighting against the king's enemies in Poitou, but he, like Innocent earlier, suffered from having no real knowledge of what was happening in England. 
Closer to his concern for reform, Langton made time to hold a provincial council for his province at Oxford in 1222. The significance of its sixty canons is reflected in their survival in sixty manuscripts. Nine of its provisions cite those of the Fourth Lateran Council, while another sixteen reflect it. Others repeat statutes issued by a synod for the diocese of Canterbury which Langton had managed to hold in 1213-14. Very quickly other bishops included the Oxford canons in their own diocesan legislation, and so Langton's work endured as the basis of the church's law. As examples of provisions affected by the Fourth Lateran Council may be cited prohibitions against clergy taking part in judgments involving the loss of blood, or celebrating mass more than twice a day save at Christmas or Easter, and attempts to insist that every vicar should receive an income of at least 5 marks a year, and that no person should occupy more than one benefice involving cure of souls (clauses 13, 11, 21, 44). Altogether a wide range of issues involving both regular and secular clergy were covered, so that the life of the later medieval church was deeply influenced by Langton's work. 
In 1227, when he was in his seventies, perhaps nearly eighty, Langton retired from court, but it is striking how king and justiciar continued to maintain contact with him. On 7 July 1228 Langton took part in the celebration of the feast of the Translation of Becket in Canterbury, having seen Henry and Hubert the day before when they came to ratify the terms of a truce with France. By then he was very weak and was taken by litter to his manor at Slindon, Sussex, where he died, probably on 9 July (the sources disagree), to be buried, a few days later, at Canterbury, where his monument, as a result of a rebuilding in the 1430s, now lies protruding through the east wall of St Michael's Chapel, at the south-west end of the nave. 
Understanding of Langton's life has changed considerably since the late nineteenth century, when interest centred primarily on the political side of his archiepiscopate, as told in chronicle sources, and particularly on his part in the negotiations that led to 'Magna Carta'. Now a better appreciation of the complex politics of John's reign lends a different aspect to Langton's contribution, and his achievement as one of the most important theologians of the turn of the twelfth century has emerged. The change can be seen beginning in F. M. Powicke's Ford lectures of 1928 (which still set the main chronology). They were much influenced by the work of one of his pupils, Beryl Smalley, then beginning to hew out from the manuscripts an entirely new Langton. She has been followed in this task by many, but very few of his works are yet edited, or their chronology established. 
Undoubtedly Stephen Langton was one of the great churchmen of the middle ages, moving at the heart of public affairs for much of his archiepiscopate. As ecclesiastical statesman he helped to make the tensions of John's reign less bloody than they might have been, to create the climate in which 'Magna Carta' could be produced, and to see that later it was brought within the regular means of maintaining trust between king and people. As primate and diocesan he left behind relatively few 'acta' compared with Baldwin or Hubert Walter, but he provided the church with a standard for reform in his legislation. At Canterbury itself he finished the great archiepiscopal hall begun by Hubert Walter. On the world of learning his mark was as great as any of his predecessors, Anselm excepted, and he enriched the resources of prayer with one great sequence, 'Veni, sancte spiritus' ('Come, Holy Ghost'). A great scholar, an indefatigable negotiator, a wise elder statesman, he deserves to be remembered, even though he might have judged his own achievements severely against the standards he had taught in the schools. 


@@@@@


doc= 16045


Langton, Thomas (c.1430-1501), bishop of Winchester and archbishop-elect of Canterbury, was born at Appleby in Westmorland. The terms of his will imply that the year of his birth was about 1430. He had graduated MA at Cambridge by 1456 and was a fellow of Pembroke College by 1462-3, when he served as senior proctor of the university. He vacated his fellowship in 1464 to study at Padua, but soon returned to Cambridge because of a shortage of funds, and was admitted BTh in 1465. During his second stay in Italy (1468-73) Langton was created DCnL at Bologna in 1473 and DTh by 1476. 
Langton's first benefice may have been the rectory of Seaham, Durham, which he held by May 1473. Described as a royal chaplain, he became a canon of Crediton briefly in November 1477, and on 18 February 1478 was collated to the treasurership of Exeter, at the king's nomination. In January 1478 he was appointed to a canonry and prebend in Wells, and in 1479 the king presented him to the rectory of Pembridge in Herefordshire, which he continued to hold until 1485. He was given the rectory of All Hallows, Bread Street, by the archbishop of Canterbury on 1 July 1480, and the rectory of All Hallows Gracechurch by the prior of Canterbury in May 1482. He was also a canon of Lincoln. On 4 July 1483 Langton was papally provided to the bishopric of St David's at the request of the protector, Richard, duke of Gloucester, who had already given him custody of the temporalities. Langton was consecrated on 7 September. As king, Richard secured Langton's translation to the more valuable see of Salisbury early in 1485. The temporalities had been in Langton's custody since March 1484, Bishop Lionel Woodville being then an attainted traitor in sanctuary. 
Langton's experience of travel on the continent doubtless proved invaluable at the outset of his secular career as a diplomat. In November 1476, and again in March 1477, Edward IV appointed him to go to Castile to explore a possible marriage between the prince of Wales and the Infanta Isabella. In November 1477 and March 1478 he went to France, to try to dissuade Louis XI from his proposed attack on Burgundy. On 26 August 1478 Langton was empowered to conclude with the king of France the betrothal of Edward IV's eldest daughter, Elizabeth, with the dauphin, and was reappointed to this fruitless project in May 1479 and August 1480. Edward IV also employed Langton on missions to Maximilian, duke of Austria and later emperor, in 1480-81. On 29 February 1484 Richard III appointed Langton his proctor to the curia to swear obedience to the pope, and on 21 March empowered him to negotiate a truce with Charles VIII of France. When he was not on embassy Langton was busy at court, and he accompanied Richard III on his progress in August 1483, during which he wrote a celebrated letter to the prior of Christ Church, Canterbury, in praise of the new king, declaring that 'God hath sent him to us for the weal of us all' (Ross, 151). 
According to a privy seal warrant sealed on 6 October 1485 Langton forfeited his temporalities as bishop of Salisbury by his adherence to Richard III at Bosworth; however, on 6 November he was granted full pardon and restitution of his lands and revenues, and by the end of the month he was exercising his episcopal patronage unimpeded. He immersed himself in the administration of his diocese, being particularly assiduous in his efforts to eradicate Lollard heresy, both at Salisbury and later at Winchester, visiting the royal court only when summoned to parliament or convocation. Having been excluded from Henry VII's first parliament in 1485, he was summoned to the next, in November 1487, and to all subsequent parliaments until his death. Also in November 1487 he was appointed to the commission of the peace for Wiltshire; he served in this capacity for Wiltshire, Hampshire, and Surrey until his death. In December 1487 he was elected provost of Queen's College, Oxford. The most convincing proof that Langton had gained the confidence of Henry VII is provided by his translation, early in 1493, to the see of Winchester, the richest in England. But he continued to shun the court, and occupied himself with diocesan administration and the rebuilding of the palace at Bishop's Waltham, Hampshire. When Cardinal Morton died on 15 September 1500, Henry VII secured Langton's election as archbishop of Canterbury on 22 January 1501, but only two or three days later Langton fell ill with plague, and on 27 January he died. 
The text of Langton's will, dated 25 January, runs to more than one hundred items. His money legacies amount to upwards of $2000, including the provision of six exhibitions in Queen's College, Oxford, and more than a dozen other benefactions to the universities. Richard Pace (died 1536), the future diplomat and dean of St Paul's, who had been sent as a young man to study at Padua at Langton's expense, remembered that the bishop 'befriended all learned men exceedingly, and in his time was another Maecenas, rightly remembering (as he often said), that it was for learning that he had been promoted to the rank of bishop' (Wegg, 4-5). He also advanced the fortunes of his nephews Robert Langton (1470-1524) and Christopher Bainbridge (1462/3-1514) -- the latter was subsequently appointed cardinal-archbishop of York. Thomas Langton is buried in the richly decorated chantry chapel he had built at the east end of the south aisle of the retrochoir of Winchester Cathedral. 


@@@@@


doc= 16046


Langton, Walter (d. 1321), administrator and bishop of Coventry and Lichfield, was probably born in Langton West within Church Langton parish, Leicestershire, where in 1306 he received a grant of free warren. At his death he still held 3 acres there. By his own account he was the son of Simon Peverel (died in or before 1304) and Amicia Peverel (died in or before 1297); he was the elder brother of Sir Robert Peverel. When Walter died, his heir was Robert's son Edmund. The idea that he was a nephew of William Langton of Rotherfield, dean of York, arose from confusion with another Walter. It is tempting to suggest a relationship between Walter and Edward I's chancellor John Langton, but the latter name seems to have been a common one, and it is impossible to make any secure identification among the John Langtons with whom Walter Langton was associated. 
Guisborough describes Langton as a poor clerk; elsewhere he is said to have been in Edward I's service from his youth. Appearing first as a wardrobe clerk in 1281-2, he presented the account roll for the Welsh war of 1282-4 in lieu of the controller, Thomas Gunneys. He was in Gascony with the king in 1286 and 1289. By 1287 he was acting as cofferer of the wardrobe, by 1290 as its controller -- the year in which, after some months as temporary lieutenant, he succeeded William Louth, created bishop of Ely, as keeper of the wardrobe. In that position he was responsible for improving the wardrobe's methods of accounting for its expenditure and receipts. After Chancellor Robert Burnell's death in 1292, he had temporary custody of the great seal before John Langton's appointment, while in 1295 he followed William of March (died 1302) as treasurer of the exchequer, an office he was to retain until 22 August 1307 -- just over a month into Edward II's reign. 
Thanks to Edward I, Langton became a notable pluralist, and when on 7 January 1296 the Lichfield chapter sought licence to elect a bishop he was chosen (19 February). Archbishop Robert Winchelsey (died 1313) gave his assent on 11 June; the spiritualities were restored the same day. Immediately afterwards he took the oath of fealty to the vicegerent of the king and received livery of the temporalities on the 16th. His consecration by Beraud de Got, cardinal-bishop of Albano, took place on 23 December at Cambrai, where he was engaged in peace negotiations with the papal nuncios. This was irritating to a metropolitan concerned to uphold his chapter's claim to license the ceremony's performance 'alibi'. On his return he had to make his profession of obedience to Winchelsey before the high altar at Canterbury, and again at the archiepiscopal manor of Teynham, an elaboration which -- the continuator of Gervase of Canterbury implied -- was a conscious attempt to underline the priory's rights. As might be expected he had little time for his diocese. His episcopal register contains sections for his vicars-general: Master Robert Redeswell, archdeacon of Chester, for the period 1298-1308, Master Ralph Leicester for 1312-13 -- there were others. Only slight indications of visitatorial activity can be traced, and many episcopal mandates emanate from outside the diocese. 
He attended the marriage of Edward I to Margaret of France in September 1299, and on the following Saturday in the chapel of the archbishop's palace at Canterbury he celebrated mass for the queen, who received the customary gift of wax at his hands, afterwards deposited at the shrine of St Thomas. By the end of the reign he was regarded by Walter of Guisborough as the man specially favoured by the king, dealing with the burdensome business of the entire realm, and overshadowing Chancellor Langton. Queen Margaret described Langton as 'the king's right eye' ('Liber epistolaris', 317), and it was he, so the story goes, who was chosen by Prince Edward to present the case to his father for giving Gaveston the county of Ponthieu. This so enraged the king that, losing his temper, he pulled out tufts of his son's hair. 
It has been assumed that as a curialist -- a secularly minded clerk, devoted to royal service regardless of ecclesiastical susceptibilities -- Langton was in bitter conflict with Winchelsey at least from 1301, when the archbishop is said by Langtoft to have demanded Langton's dismissal as treasurer at the Lincoln parliament. It has even been alleged that an accusation by John de Lovetot in that year, to the effect that Langton was living in adultery with his stepmother and had murdered her husband, the accuser's father, was brought at Winchelsey's instigation. Other charges, such as pluralism and simony may have been close to the mark, but that of communicating with the devil was a common fabrication. Winchelsey himself claimed that he knew nothing of such matters before receiving a papal mandate. In May 1301 Langton was cited to respond and suspended from episcopal office. At this as at other times the king stood by his treasurer, making him a member of an embassy at the curia, where he had gone to plead his case. Following an inquiry by Winchelsey and the Dominican Thomas Jorz (died 1310) he was cleared of all charges, although Boniface VIII's formal absolution was delayed until 8 June 1303. Lovetot was imprisoned for homicide and died in detention. J. H. Denton, Winchelsey's biographer, repudiates the notion that the archbishop bore any animus against Langton at this time, arguing that he promoted the accused's absolution and return to England. To what extent the treasurer in his turn disliked the archbishop, or contributed personally to his suspension in 1306 by a co-operative Clement V ('r'. 1305-13), is difficult to assess, but it is credible that Langton would have felt that the primate's removal smoothed the path of royal policy. 
In the early 1290s Langton was closely concerned with political and diplomatic affairs, being one of the judges in the Great Cause, the succession to the Scottish throne, which in November 1292 was decided in favour of John Balliol. Two years later, with the earl of Lincoln, he counselled Edward to make a temporary surrender of Gascony to Philippe IV, who found occasion to retain it until 1303. In 1305 he was a member of an embassy sent to Lyons to secure papal absolution from Edward's oath to maintain the charters, and attended Clement V's consecration on 14 November. On 2 July 1306, jointly with Archbishop William Greenfield of York (died 1315), Langton was appointed keeper of the realm during Edward I's absence in Scotland. Before long, however, he deputed William Carleton (died 1309) to act for him in the treasury. He was instructed to open the parliament of January 1307 at Carlisle, where John Ferrers, claimant to the earldom of Derby, accused him of champarty -- supporting a plaintiff in the courts for reward. Langton produced a royal pardon, which Ferrers alleged to be a forgery. He was not at Edward I's deathbed on 7 July, but heard the news at Wentworth in Yorkshire. By 23 July he had reached Burgh by Sands to commence his duties as the late king's executor. 
On his way to Westminster to arrange the funeral he was arrested and imprisoned, variously in the Tower of London, at Windsor, and at Wallingford. The Pauline annalist gives the date of his arrest as three days after the funeral cortege's arrival at Waltham on 4 August. On 22 August Walter Reynolds replaced him as treasurer. Nevertheless, a chancery warrant dated 1 October ordered the delivery of 20,000 marks to Langton and his fellow executors for royal funeral expenses. Gaveston may be assumed to have had a hand in Langton's disgrace and he benefited financially from the confiscation of the treasurer's assets, although the exaggerated claims made concerning these by some chroniclers are contradicted by the evidence of the wardrobe books and enrolled accounts of Langton's lands. Edward, according to the bulk of chronicle opinion, was bent on revenge. 
Although Langton had alienated many and shared in the unpopularity of Edward I's final years, there were those, including Thomas of Lancaster (died 1322), who had reason to be grateful for his help and shared his dislike of Gaveston. But in Winchelsey's absence the young king's violations of ecclesiastical privilege -- the impeding of an executor's functions, the seizure of clerical goods, and the imprisonment of a bishop -- passed without repercussion. Langton was ordered to appear before a panel of justices to answer for trespass, misprision, and losses inflicted on the king and others. Treasurer Reynolds and the barons of the exchequer were to search the memoranda for evidence of extortions, false enrolments, the securing of wrongful judgments, and the diversion of treasure from the exchequer to his own household. Other charges concern the sale of woods and land, appointment of inadequate sheriffs, and grants by chancery writ in Edward's absence. Proceedings at the exchequer between 1307 and 1311, for the collection of debts owed to him, and also before the justices at Windsor between 1307 and 1310, are extant. Many charges he admitted. His unscrupulous manipulation of statute merchant is revealed by the existence of some eighty-five extant recognizances in his favour, while income from his property contributed over $2400 to the exchequer in 1308. 
The king postponed the trial until after his coronation, for which he had hoped to enjoy Winchelsey's ministrations. By April 1308 Clement V was urging Langton's release, and Edward, in his efforts to secure the recall of Gaveston (now in exile for the second time), the rescinding of the latter's contingent sentence of excommunication, and other favours, on 3 October relinquished the bishop's temporalities. Finally, on 9 November, a date carefully noted in his episcopal register, Langton was set at liberty, being summoned to the parliament of March 1309. In August he received absolution for an unspecified offence against the papacy. June 1311 saw him imprisoned in York Castle for alleged involvement in a homicide, but in deference to clerical privilege he was transferred to the archbishop's custody, and by October he was free again. In January 1312 all charges were dropped, his lands were finally released, and he was permitted to pursue those that had been alienated as well as debts still unpaid, a task that was to occupy him and his executors for some fifty years. 
Too able an administrator to be ignored, on 23 January 1312 he resumed the treasurership. One anonymous correspondent described him as the closest man to Edward after Gaveston, though Trokelowe thought he attained only a partial grace. He may have been behind the policy of calling in judicial estreats, cancelling atterminations, and pressurizing sheriffs to collect arrears. However, the ordainers, claiming that he had been appointed contrary to the ordinances, forcibly disrupted his work at the exchequer, and on 17 May 1312 secured his removal. According to Murimuth, Winchelsey excommunicated Langton during that year for ignoring a summons to a provincial council, arising from his reluctance to observe the ordinances. Langton defended himself at Avignon, where Winchelsey's case was promoted by Murimuth. The archbishop's death in May 1313 ensured Langton's rehabilitation, and he became a member of Edward's council, only to be removed as 'undesirable' in 1315 during the Westminster parliament. He played a conciliatory part with other bishops in the negotiations preceding the treaty of Leake and was a member of the standing council. In 1318 he was unsuccessfully claiming compensation of $20,000. He died at his residence in the Strand, London, on 9 November 1321. 
Langton gave vestments, a gold chalice and two phials (worth $80), and a bejewelled gold cross (worth $200) to Lichfield Cathedral, enfeoffed the vicars choral with houses, and provided 20's'. a year for their commons. He commenced the building of the 'decorated' lady chapel, to the east of the chancel, and bequeathed money to complete it, though Edward II temporarily requisitioned this for his Scottish campaign of 1322. Within the chapel he erected a shrine for the relics of St Ceadda (Chad) at a cost of $2000, and was buried nearby on 5 December 1321. What is said to be his defaced effigy in Derbyshire marble rests in the south aisle of the choir. Following Bishop Burnell's example at Wells, Langton built and crenellated a wall round the close with fortified gates, and he constructed a new palace on the edge of the enclosure. Within the town he built 'the great bridge' and secured a grant of pavage. He repaired his London house, and completely rebuilt his residences at Eccleshall Castle and Haywood. 


@@@@@


doc= 16047


Langton, William (1803-1881), banker, son of Thomas Langton (1770-1838), a merchant who spent some years in Russia and Canada, and his wife, Ellen (1766-1846), the daughter of the Revd William Currer, vicar of Clapham. He was born at Farfield, near Addingham, in the West Riding of Yorkshire, on 17 April 1803. He was educated mainly in Switzerland, and became fluent in several foreign languages, especially Italian. From 1821 to 1829 he was employed by the mercantile house of T. and W. Earle of Liverpool, latterly as agent for several Russian firms. In August 1829, after the Russo-Turkish War of 1827-9, which had disrupted the Russian trade, he joined Heywoods Bank in Manchester. He remained with Heywoods until 1854, when he was appointed managing director of the Manchester and Salford Bank, which flourished under his aegis for the next twenty-two years. He resigned in October 1876, after losing his eyesight. 
Langton was one of the leading members of the influential elite which guided and dominated the cultural, intellectual, and philanthropic life of mid-nineteenth-century Manchester. He was associated with the establishment of some of its prominent institutions, and was among the founders of the Manchester Athenaeum in 1836 and the mechanics' institution two years earlier. His services were publicly recognized in 1881 by the presentation to the Athenaeum of his marble medallion bust, along with those of his co-founders, Richard Cobden and James Heywood. When the Chetham Society was founded in 1843, he was elected treasurer, and he subsequently served as the honorary secretary. He edited several volumes for the society. In 1846 he acted as secretary to a committee which was formed to promote a university for Manchester. Though unsuccessful, this scheme was instrumental in suggesting to John Owens the foundation of the college which bears his name and which formed the basis of the later university. 
Langton was also, in association with Dr Kay (afterwards Sir J. P. Kay-Shuttleworth), a chief promoter of the Manchester Provident Society and of the Manchester Statistical Society, both established in 1833. In all his many cultural and philanthropic activities he was the close associate and collaborator of his friends and employers the Heywood family. 
Langton married at Kirkham, Lancashire, on 15 November 1831, Margaret, daughter of Joseph Hornby of Ribby, Lancashire; the Hornbys and Langtons had had close business ties for over a century. The couple had three sons and six daughters; two of the daughters married sons of Sir Benjamin Heywood. Langton was an accurate genealogist, herald, and antiquary, a philologist, a skilful draughtsman, and a graceful writer of verse, both in his own language and in Italian. He spent his retirement at his house, Docklands, in Ingatestone, Essex, where he died on 29 September 1881. He was buried in Fryerning churchyard, Essex. 


@@@@@


doc= 16048


Langton, Zachary (bap. 1698, d. 1786), Church of Ireland clergyman, was baptized on 24 September 1698, the third, but second surviving, son of Cornelius Langton (1668-1712), of Kirkham, Lancashire, and his wife, Elizabeth ('bap'. 1661, died 1736), daughter of the Revd Zachary Taylor, of Kirkham. He was educated at Kirkham grammar school, where Zachary Taylor was headmaster. His father's will was that he be 'made a scholar and have university education if he may be thought fit and capable' (Fishwick, 152). He duly matriculated at Magdalen Hall, Oxford, on 5 April 1718 and was elected an exhibitor, under Barker's trust, on 7 September; he graduated BA on 18 December 1721 and proceeded MA on 10 June 1724. 
According to his mother Langton left 'a very comfortable subsistence near London' (Fishwick, 152) in order to follow to Ireland his kinsman Robert Clayton, nominated bishop of Killala in December 1729. He may well have been the young clergyman very often seen by Mary Pendarves at Killala in 1732. Langton was collated to a prebendary of Achonry on 5 July 1735 and to a prebendary of Killala on 6 December 1735. Late in 1735 Clayton was translated to Cork. Langton was chaplain to William Stanhope, earl of Harrington, lord lieutenant of Ireland from 1746 to 1751. In Garstang, Lancashire, on 14 August 1749 he married Bridget ('bap'. 1703, died 1761), daughter of Alexander Butler of Kirkland; they had no children. In 1753 he published anonymously 'An Essay Concerning the Human Rational Soul'; the Dublin edition of 1759 was dedicated to John Russell, fourth duke of Bedford, lord lieutenant of Ireland from 1757 to 1761. 
Bridget Langton died in Garstang on 14 November 1761, which may account for Langton's return to England in that month. He was present at Kirkham for the public recantation of a Roman Catholic priest, William Gant, on 28 May 1769. He retained his Achonry prebend until 1782 and his Killala prebend until 1785. He died in Oxford on 1 February 1786. 


@@@@@


doc= 16049


Langwith, Benjamin (1684-1743), antiquary and Church of England clergyman, was born in Yorkshire and baptized on 14 December 1684 at Holy Trinity, Goodrangate, York, the son of Oswald Langwith, clerk of the vestry of York Minster. He was educated at Queens' College, Cambridge, whence he matriculated in 1701, and was elected fellow and tutor. He graduated BA in 1705, MA in 1708, BD in 1716, and DD in 1717. The antiquary Ralph Thoresby placed his son under his care, but, owing to Langwith's negligence, was forced to remove him. Langwith was ordained priest in July 1712 and was instituted to the rectory of Petworth, Sussex, in 1718. He was made prebendary of Chichester on 15 June 1725. On 2 November 1734 he married Sarah Gregory at Headley, Hampshire. 
Langwith gave Francis Drake some assistance in the preparation of his 'Eboracum'. Four of Langwith's scientific papers appeared in the 'Philosophical Transactions'. He also wrote 'Observations on Dr. Arbuthnot's Dissertations on Coins, Weights, and Measures', which was published posthumously in 1747, edited by his widow. It was reissued in the second edition of Arbuthnot's 'Tables of Ancient Coins' (1754). Langwith died in 1743 and was buried at Petworth church on 2 October 1743, aged fifty-nine. His widow, Sarah, died on 8 February 1784, aged ninety-one, and was buried in Westminster Abbey. 


@@@@@


doc= 16050


Lanier, Sir John (d. 1692), army officer, volunteered as a young man to serve with the English troops in French pay in Flanders, during which time he lost an eye. He was promoted to lieutenant-colonel, commanding the duke of Monmouth's regiment of horse in 1674 following the battle of Enzheim, and kept that post until his return to England in May 1678, when he was knighted and commissioned as a brigadier of horse. In 1679 he succeeded Sir Thomas Morgan as governor of Jersey. He quarrelled with the states, fell out with the Carteret family over precedence, challenged Sir Edouard Carteret to a duel, and spent so much time away from the island that he was forbidden by the privy council to leave without the king's permission. He improved the defences of Elizabeth Castle by building a magazine, on the north side of which may still be seen his coat of arms set in stone. He was replaced in July 1684, although the king claimed to be 'well satisfied' with his services. 
After the accession of James II he was given the colonelcy of the Queen's regiment of horse and made a brigadier-general. Lanier was one of the professional soldiers, often with experience of foreign service, who had been promoted by James but who, by the summer of 1688, were conspiring to deliver their allegiance to William, prince of Orange. James promoted Lanier major-general and, in the autumn of 1688, posted him to Ipswich with three regiments to prevent a Dutch invasion. Recalled and dispatched to the south-west upon news of William's landing, a stream of desertions from troops under Lanier's command promoted the retreat of James's army towards London. Lanier declared for William III and was sent to Scotland, where he took over the siege of Edinburgh Castle from Hugh Mackay. Lanier accepted the duke of Gordon's surrender and took possession of the castle on 12 June 1689. He was subsequently posted to Ireland, where in February 1690 he led a force from Newry to attack Dundalk, which he found strongly garrisoned by the Irish. He burnt the western suburbs, took the lightly garrisoned Bedloe Castle, and drove off 1500 cattle. Lanier led King William's advance guard of horse to the Boyne and was present in the battle on 1 July 1690. He was also present at the siege of Limerick in August, where some held him responsible for the failure to intercept Sarsfield's raid on the artillery train. He directed the abortive attempt to seize Lanesborough Bridge on the Shannon in December 1690, and took part in an ineffective raid on Ballymore in the following spring, shortly after which he was relieved of his command in Ireland and sent back to England. 
In December 1691 Lanier declined an offer of a generous pension if he resigned, but was nevertheless promoted to lieutenant-general on 23 January 1692. However, so resentful was he of William's supposed favour for his Dutch and German officers that in May 1692 his name was included in a lengthy list of officers against whom Jacobite sympathies were alleged. Lanier marched with his regiment to Flanders in July, was fatally wounded at the battle of Steenkerke on 3 August 1692, and died there a few days afterwards. His corpse was returned on an Admiralty yacht to England for burial there. Although he had a wife while he was in Jersey, he died a widower and left no heirs. 


@@@@@


doc= 16051


Nicholas Lanier (d. 1646), resident in the parish of St Martin-in-the-Fields, where he was buried on 4 November 1646. No firm family connections have been established, and this Lanier is said to have been a tradesman of some kind (possibly a pastry-cook). He was not a musician, and was clearly not the creator of the Lanier etchings, as was at one time supposed. The original error probably arose because of the misreading of the date of the etchings as 1636 instead of the correct 1656. 


@@@@@


doc= 16052


Lanier, Nicholas (bap. 1588, d. 1666), musician and art dealer, was baptized on 10 September 1588 in the church of Holy Trinity Minories, London. His father, John Lanier (died 1616), was a sackbut player in the royal court band or musick, and his mother, Frances ('bap'. 1566, died after 1616), was the daughter of Mark Anthony Galliardello, an Italian member of the musick. The strong musical tradition in the family stemmed from Nicholas's paternal grandfather, also called Nicholas (died 1612), a Huguenot musician (originally from Rouen) in the service of Elizabeth I. John Lanier's five brothers -- Alphonso, Innocent, Jerome, Clement, and Andrea -- were also all members of the musick. 
The younger Nicholas Lanier entered the household of Robert Cecil, earl of Salisbury, as an apprentice musician, probably about 1601. Later he seems to have acted for a time as music tutor to Salisbury's heir, William, Lord Cranborne. He himself came under the influence of John Coprario, who was also attached to Salisbury's household, and of the younger Alfonso Ferrabosco. In 1610 Lanier joined Cranborne in Paris and possibly accompanied him to Italy; he certainly visited Venice in the autumn of that year as a diplomatic courier. 
On 26 December 1613, in the former banqueting house of Whitehall Palace, Lanier sang his own song 'Bring away this sacred tree' in 'The Squires' Masque', an entertainment with text by Thomas Campion and music mostly by Coprario. This song marked Lanier's first tentative use of the Italianate declamatory or 'recitativo' style, which was to be the main feature of his vocal compositions. Perhaps partly as a result of this debut Lanier succeeded to a vacant place as a lutenist and singer in the king's musick (12 January 1616), of which John Dowland was then also a member. Lanier was in addition a skilled viol player. During the next decade he was associated with a number of court masques, mostly with texts by Ben Jonson, including 'The Vision of Delight' (1616) and 'The Masque of Augurs' (1621). Little of his music for these events survives, with the notable exception of the song 'Do not expect' from 'The Masque of Augurs'. The masque 'Lovers Made Men', performed on 22 February 1617 at the home of Lord James Hay, was especially significant, as it seems that Lanier not only composed all the music but also designed the stage sets and costumes. Through a combination of his own talents and the influence of powerful patrons such as the duke of Buckingham and the earl of Arundel he became a member of the privileged circle surrounding Prince Charles. Here he developed as a connoisseur of art and also as a practising painter. The precise date of his appointment as master of the king's musick is unknown, but he is first named as such in documents dated 13 and 22 June 1626 (Ashbee, 3.18). 
Immediately after the funeral of James I on 7 May 1625 Lanier was dispatched by the new king, Charles I, to Italy, to search out and purchase paintings for the enlargement of the Royal Collection. Through Daniel Nys, a French-born art dealer, agent, and entrepreneur, Lanier made contact with the duke of Mantua, Ferdinando Gonzaga, with a view to buying the extensive and celebrated Mantuan collection. The negotiations were long and tortuous and were not finally completed until 1628; the total price paid for this splendid collection was 68,000 scudi (then about $15,000). (Lanier was not involved in a second sequence of negotiations, which culminated in the purchase of Mantegna's 'The Triumph of Caesar'.) 
During this period Lanier made two separate visits to Italy, being based for the most part in Venice. At the end of his first trip he returned to England with his own portrait by Van Dyck (now in the Kunsthistorisches Museum, Vienna). As a result Van Dyck was invited to enter the service of King Charles. Lanier had already begun to collect drawings, both for himself and for his patron Lord Arundel, at a time when such pieces were considered valueless, and was the first to imprint on them a distinctive collector's mark. Among his friends were members of the Oliver family of miniaturists, and a miniature of Lanier, perhaps by Peter Oliver, was said by Vertue (Vertue, 'Note books', 1.62) to have been in the Royal Collection. Lanier may also have received instruction in painting technique from Oliver. 
Lanier now returned to his musical duties at court. The murder of the duke of Buckingham on 23 August 1628 inspired him to compose his most celebrated work in 'stilo recitativo', a setting for solo voice with instrumental accompaniment of the legend of Hero and Leander, the words also being by Lanier. It shows the influence of Monteverdi, whom Lanier probably had met in Venice. Both the piece itself and Lanier's singing of it were greatly admired by King Charles. Most of his surviving vocal compositions (about thirty songs) date from the 1630s. A handful of instrumental works in dance form also survives. On 15 July 1635 Lanier was appointed first marshal of the Corporation of Musick, a body set up to supervise standards among professional musicians. 
With the outbreak of the English civil war in 1642 Lanier followed the court to Oxford, where he painted the half-length self-portrait now hanging in the faculty of music there. This shows the influence of Rubens, who had visited England in 1629. Lanier depicts himself in sober costume, in face and appearance not unlike his king, holding a brush and artist's palette, together with a 'memento mori' skull and a fragment of his own music. By spring 1645 he had already left England, and he spent the next fifteen years variously in France and the Netherlands. However, his self-imposed exile was not complete; official passes (still extant) gave him permission to enter England with paintings, presumably purchases for patrons, and in 1649-50 he was present on several occasions at the gigantic sale of King Charles's art collection which he had himself largely helped to create. At the sale he managed to buy for $10 his own portrait by Van Dyck. He was joined in exile by his wife, Elizabeth, whom he had probably married about 1626; there were apparently no children. 
Lanier also experimented as a printmaker. About 1636 he had produced a handful of etchings after drawings by Giulio Romano, and in 1656, possibly in Paris, he made a few more, after Parmigianino. Recent research has dispelled former doubts as to his authorship of the second set. 
Following the Restoration in 1660 Lanier was reinstated in his former posts as master of the musick, marshal of the Corporation of Musick, and groom of the queen's bedchamber. However, in his will (drawn up on 5 March 1661) he was already complaining of 'divers infirmities, incident to old age', and he was by that time probably no longer fully equal to the demands of his offices. Samuel Pepys records several musical meetings in Greenwich (where he was temporarily staying because of the plague) between 30 October 1665 and 3 January 1666, at which Lanier was present and sang, 'in a melancholy method, very well, and a sober man he seems to be' (Pepys, 30 Oct 1665). Lanier died a few weeks later, apparently suddenly, and was buried on 24 February 1666, probably at St Alfege, Greenwich. His widow survived him for a further seven years and died in February 1673. 
Mystery surrounds another 


@@@@@


doc= 16053


Lanigan, John (1758-1828), biblical scholar and historian, was born at Cashel, co. Tipperary, the eldest child of Thomas Lanigan, a schoolmaster, and his wife, Mary Ann Dorkan. He was educated at his father's school and at a classical school kept by a protestant clergyman at Cashel. In 1776 he entered the Irish College at Rome to study for the Roman Catholic priesthood. Here his intellectual gifts attracted the attention and patronage of influential figures such as Cardinal Marefoschi and Pietro Tamburini, though he also showed evidence of a certain acerbity of temperament that led to a complaint from the cardinal to Archbishop James Butler of Cashel in 1783, shortly before his ordination. He was nevertheless ordained priest, and was then introduced to the University of Pavia by Tamburini, who had become a professor there. 
Here Lanigan was deeply influenced by the 'Catholic Enlightenment', which in Italy was especially concerned with historical theology. In 1786 Grand Duke Leopold of Tuscany, brother of Emperor Joseph II, encouraged the convocation of an ecclesiastical synod at Pistoia. The acts of this synod were denounced as Jansenistic, and in fact it received little support from the clergy or laity of Tuscany. Tamburini was the leading theologian at the synod, but Lanigan declined his invitation to take part in it. Despite this, his intellectual powers made such an impression at Pavia that in the spring of 1788 he was offered the professorship of scripture, Hebrew, and ecclesiastical history. At the same time, however, Archbishop Butler wrote from Ireland to say that Francis Moylan, recently appointed bishop of Cork, was planning to open a classical school, as permitted by legislation of 1782, and would like Lanigan to be headmaster. Lanigan accepted, but laid down a list of conditions, which although individually not unreasonable sounded peremptory when taken together. In the event he accepted the professorship in Pavia. His inaugural address, 'De origine et progressu hermeneuticae sacrae', was published in 1789. Shortly afterwards he published 'Saggio sulla maniera d'insegnare a' giovani ecclesiastici la scienza de' libri sacri'. This was followed in 1793 by a substantial and valuable study of the history of the books of the 'Bible', 'Institutionum Biblicarum pars prima', and in 1794 he received the doctorate of divinity of the university. 
Yet there are indications that Lanigan was not settled at Pavia, especially in his enquiries in 1795 to archbishops John Thomas Troy of Dublin and Thomas Bray of Cashel about the possibility of being appointed to a teaching post in the newly opened seminary at Maynooth in Ireland. Then in March 1796 Italy was invaded by the French Revolutionary army. The University of Pavia was closed, and Lanigan fled to Ireland. The news that he might apply for a post at Maynooth had already aroused misgivings, and when Lanigan landed in Cork he was coldly received by Bishop Francis Moylan, and likewise by Archbishop Bray in Cashel. He made his way to Dublin, where he was offered a post as assistant by Martin Hugh Hamill, once a fellow student in Rome and now parish priest of Francis Street Chapel. Meanwhile an appointment had been made to the chair of scripture in Maynooth, but the person appointed resigned early in 1797 and Lanigan applied for the post. This led to acrimonious exchanges, and it is not easy to be sure exactly what happened. Some of his friends claimed that he had been approached by the two most important episcopal members of the Maynooth board of trustees, the archbishops of Armagh and Dublin, but it is not easy to credit this. Another version is that he was proposed by the archbishop of Armagh, seconded by the archbishop of Dublin, and appointed, when Bishop Moylan, who had come late to the meeting, demanded that he first sign an anti-Jansenist formula. The truth is obscured by the heated exchanges that clearly took place, but Lanigan, so his friends said, turned down the appointment. The fact that there is no minute of an appointment in the journal of the Maynooth trustees does not, of course, necessarily imply that none was made, and it is clear that the taint of Jansenism that clung to Lanigan was undeserved. 
This gifted scholar was now without a post. He was rescued by the Dublin Society, which appointed him in 1799 as 'translator, editor and corrector of the press', and in 1808 as librarian. In 1800 he published for the society 'An Essay on the Practical History of the Sheep in Spain, and of the Spanish Sheep in Saxony' (1785), translated from a work by George Stumpf, a project surely dictated by financial needs rather than personal interests. He took part in the current controversies over Catholic emancipation and the veto, but his real interest became concentrated on Irish church history. He was a leading member of the group who founded the Gaelic Society in 1808, and he assiduously collected the material for his planned work. In 1813, however, the first signs of mental illness began to appear, and he was condemned to lengthening stays in an asylum in Finglas, to the north of Dublin, where he died, aged seventy, on 7 July 1828. 
Lanigan's most important work, 'An Ecclesiastical History of Ireland from the First Introduction of Christianity among the Irish to the Thirteenth Century', was published in 1822. It ran to four volumes, including almost 2000 pages in all, and, given the state of Irish historical studies at the time, was a remarkable achievement. It was unashamedly confessional, in that it assailed the protestant historians who had written earlier, especially the most recent of them, Edward Ledwich. Lanigan's castigation of Ledwich in particular was deserved, but his tetchiness made it devastating. However, coupled with this was a remarkable knowledge of the sources then available, and a robust critical mind honed in the atmosphere of the Catholic Enlightenment in Pavia. J. F. Kenney, whose 'Sources for the Early History of Ireland', volume 1 (1929) is still in some respects the starting point for all exploration of the period, wrote, 'He became the Lingard of Irish church history, and his monumental work on that subject remains of value' (Kenney, 61). 
Lanigan's personal library was sold a few months before his death. He was buried in the cemetery of Finglas parish church. In 1861 a cross with an inscription in Latin and Irish was erected over his grave. 


@@@@@


doc= 16054


Lankester, Edwin (1814-1874), public health reformer and natural historian, was born on 23 April 1814 at Melton, near Woodbridge, Suffolk. His father, William Lankester (1791-1818), was a builder who died of tuberculosis at the age of twenty-seven leaving his widow, Susan, 'nee' Taylor, his four-year old son Edwin, and possibly a younger daughter. Injudicious use of William's small estate left the family poor, and Edwin's schooling at local establishments ceased when he was barely twelve years old; in 1826 his mother became landlady of the Royal Oak inn, Woodbridge. Edwin was then articled to Samuel Gissing, surgeon, of Woodbridge, until 1832. After enduring two brief and unsatisfactory assistantships in Hampshire and London he became, in 1833, assistant to Thomas Spurgeon of Saffron Walden, Essex, who took pleasure in furthering the education of his employees. He gave Lankester the use of his library and helped him in his study of the classics. Lankester also became secretary of the local natural history society and curator of the town museum. 
Friends then lent Lankester $300 to support him through a medical course at the newly opened University of London, where he studied from 1834 until he qualified as MRCS and licentiate of the Society of Apothecaries in 1837. During that time he became president of the college medical society, published his first medical paper, and won the Lindley silver medal for botany. (In 1846 John Lindley would name a newly discovered tropical plant, 'Lankesteria parviflora', after his former pupil.) Through Lindley, Lankester obtained the post of resident medical attendant and science tutor to the family of Charles Wood of Campsall Hall, near Doncaster, where, with his colleague Dr Leonard Schmitz and his two pupils, he was able to broaden his own scientific knowledge while playing an active part in the Doncaster Lyceum. Here, too, he wrote his first book (published 1842), a scientific account of the neighbouring Askern mineral springs. In 1839 he travelled to Heidelberg, learned German, and graduated MB, accomplishing this feat in only six months. 
Lankester then settled in London, supporting himself by means of part-time medical appointments at two dispensaries, literary work, and popular lectures. From 1842 until at least 1856 he held a lectureship at the prestigious Grosvenor Place medical school. He made many friends at this time, including Charles and Catherine Dickens, Douglas Jerrold, and Arthur Henfrey. He lodged with Edward Forbes at Golden Square and was an original member of the Red Lion Club founded by Forbes in 1839. He wrote regularly for the 'Daily News', chiefly on medical reform in support of Thomas Wakley, and for 'The Athenaeum'. He was a regular attendant at the meetings of the British Association for the Advancement of Science, and from 1839 to 1864 was the secretary of section D (botany and zoology). In 1844 he became secretary of the newly formed Ray Society for which he edited 'The Memorials of John Ray' (1845). He was elected a fellow of the Linnean Society in 1840 and of the Royal Society in 1845. 
Also in 1845, on 3 July, Lankester married Phebe Pope ['see 'Lankester, Phebe (1825-1900)], eldest daughter of Samuel Pope of Highbury, a former Lancashire mill owner. The couple set up home at 22 Old Burlington Street, but later moved to Savile Row, and in 1872 were living at 68 Belsize Park. Phebe was a botanist in her own right, producing popular botanical books and, after her husband's death, books on health matters. Seven of their eleven children survived to adulthood. Their eldest son, Sir (Edwin) Ray Lankester (1847-1929), was a brilliant zoologist, founder of the Plymouth marine laboratories, and director of the British Museum (Natural History). 
In 1841 Lankester obtained the extra licence of the Royal College of Physicians, allowing him to practise in the provinces; he sat for the London licence five years later but failed an examination designed for students fresh from crammers. As a result, he abandoned clinical medicine as a career, turning to science and social medicine. In 1850 he obtained the chair of natural science at New College, London, holding it until the college terminated the appointment in 1872. He was a popular public lecturer, contributed to numerous encyclopaedias and reference works, wrote 'The Natural History of Plants Yielding Food' (1845) and other books of popular science, translated Schleiden's 'Grundzuge der Wissenschaftlichen Botanik' (1849), and edited William McGillivray's 'Natural History of Deeside' (1854) for the prince consort. He also translated Kuchenmeister's 'Die in und an dem Korper des lebenden Menschen vorkommenden Parasiten' (1855) which became a seminal work in British dermatology. Lankester was a skilled microscopist, was joint editor of the 'Quarterly Journal of Microscopical Science' from 1852 to 1871, and was president of the Microscopical Society of London in 1859 and 1860 and of the Quekett Microscopical Club in 1865; in 1859 he published his immensely popular 'Half Hours with the Microscope'. In the same year he was appointed examiner in botany for the teachers' qualification newly instituted by the Department of Science and Art. He was a juror for the international exhibitions of 1851 and 1862. In 1858 he followed Lyon Playfair as superintendent of the food collection at the South Kensington Museum, where he reorganized and relabelled the exhibits to the benefit of the lay public, and published his associated lectures (1860, 1861). His employers considered that he had exceeded his brief and terminated his appointment in 1862. From 1856 to his death both Lankester and his wife published with Robert Hardwicke. Lankester advocated the teaching of physiology in schools and held advanced views on the place of women in society. 
In 1849 Lankester was elected to the vestry of his parish, St James's, Westminster, and was active on a number of its committees when, in 1854, the infamous outbreak of cholera occurred in Broad Street. John Snow, who had published his brilliant theory on the epidemiology of the disease in 1849, quickly traced the outbreak to the local pump, but it was Lankester who enabled him to prove his theory by persuading his reluctant vestry to set up a cholera committee, finance an epidemiological study, and publish the results. Lankester also made a microscopical study of water samples and was able to disprove the then prevalent fungoid theory of the cause of cholera. 
In 1856, as a result of his work on cholera, the vestry appointed Lankester to be the first medical officer of health for Westminster, a part-time post which he held until his death. He aimed to reduce by half the appalling death rate in the slums, while fighting a parsimonious vestry for adequate funds. He appointed a sanitary inspector to carry out regular inspections of the slum housing, drastically reduced the number of cow-houses and slaughter-houses in the basements, and tackled the water supply and the open sewers. His vaccination policy almost halved the incidence of smallpox in the parish, and his leaflets on precautions against cholera were delivered to every household. He made fortnightly reports to his vestry and published his deliberately uncompromising annual reports. 
Lankester was an active participant in a number of medical societies, and it was as a member of the Provincial Medical and Surgical Association that he played an important part in its transformation to the British Medical Association (1856). He was also deeply involved in the struggle of both associations for a 'Medical Reform Bill' (1858), fighting the royal colleges for real reforms and taking part in or leading a number of delegations to ministers. 
On the death of Thomas Wakley, coroner for central Middlesex, Lankester was chosen as the medical candidate for the post, beating the legal candidate after a hugely expensive fight from which his own finances never recovered. His unorthodox use of the coronership to investigate the social evils causing death was violently opposed by his employers, the Middlesex magistrates, who retaliated by starving him of funds. With the help of the Social Science Association he publicized workhouse deaths, infanticides, and the huge infant death rate, which was often hidden by the incomplete registration of births. He pointed out the need for local mortuaries and for pathologists trained in post-mortem work, and was active in the Coroners' Society. His published annual reports were eagerly awaited by his colleagues and the public. As always, he insisted on the need to educate the public in health matters, himself publishing further popular books. 
Lankester was an attractive man, tall, rather portly, with a high complexion and dark eyes and hair; his voice was deep, his manner warm and kind, and he had many friends attracted by his genial and sociable nature. His love of the countryside and of wild plants and animals was intense. He was a sincere Christian, probably moving between nonconformism and the Church of England, and he believed that God shaped the earth over millions of years for the express benefit of man. He was a born publicist, teacher, and reformer, always fighting for the poor and defenceless, but was eventually worn out by ceaseless conflict with a class-conscious, mean, and callous establishment. A prodigious worker, he took on far too many responsibilities and this, combined with his lack of method, resulted in constant admonishments for delay. Lankester succumbed to overwork and anxiety at the age of sixty and died of diabetes on 30 October 1874, at 7 The Paragon, Margate; he was buried at Hampstead. His estate of $2000 was seized by the receiver to cover debts accrued in his fight for the coronership. His memory has been unjustly eclipsed by that of his brilliant son Ray. 


@@@@@


doc= 16055


Lankrink, Prosper Henricus (1628-1692), painter and collector, was born in Germany, the only son of an army officer who had moved to Antwerp to take up a commission in the Flemish army. After his father's death, his mother ensured Lankrink was well educated (Vertue refers to a 'liberal' education) with the intention he would enter holy orders. However, after revealing a real talent for painting and drawing, it was agreed that he should instead serve an apprenticeship with a local painter and study at the Antwerp Academy, where he soon developed into a promising landscape artist. Formative influences at this stage were the work of Titian and Salvator Rosa which he was able to study in the collection of a local collector, Myn Heer Lyam. Following his mother's death, Lankrink is said to have visited Italy before arriving in London in the mid-1660s. He lived first in Piccadilly and then from 1686 until his death in 1692 at 2 Great Piazza, Covent Garden, in the north-west corner of this fashionable development. 
During the 1670s and 1680s Lankrink enjoyed a successful independent practice as a landscape and decorative painter. An early patron was the naval commander Sir Edward Spragge who introduced him to fellow collectors and patrons, most notably Sir William Williams, who became a major collector of Lankrink's work. According to Vertue, Williams's house was almost 'intirely furnished' with Lankrink's paintings, all of which were destroyed soon after by fire. Very few other examples of his work survive or can indeed now be identified. But from examples that do periodically appear in the sale rooms and descriptions in earlier sale catalogues, his paintings seem to have been heavily indebted to seventeenth-century Italian classical landscape artists, and characterized by a broad sweep of sky, framing blocks of foliage and classical ruins and peopled by small pastoral or biblical figures. According to one contemporary, Bainbrigg Buckeridge, writing in 1706, Lankrink's paintings were 'wonderful, both as to the invention, harmony, colouring and warmth, but above all surprisingly beautiful and free in their skies, which by general consent excell'd all the works of the most eminent Painters in that kind' (Buckeridge, 399-400). His skill in portraying small figures, Buckeridge maintained, resulted from his 'practising drawing by the life' (ibid.). On the evidence of the sale catalogue of his own collection (see below) he also produced a number of portraits including a self-portrait and a portrait of the artist and copyist Symon Stone, both 'done 3 ways' (showing the sitters in three positions). Only one print after his work, a mezzotint by John Smith after 'Nymphs Bathing', is now known. 
In addition to his own independent practice, Lankrink was closely involved with the studio of Peter Lely, Charles II's principal painter, where he was employed to paint flowers, ornaments, landscape backgrounds, and occasionally draperies. Not surprisingly therefore, as someone familiar with the Covent Garden studio, he played an important part in the dispersal of its contents following Lely's death in 1680, completing a number of unfinished canvases, helping to organize the sale of artist's materials, and purchasing for himself items as varied as pigments, drawing paper, frames, '42 postures without head', '11 palettes', and '16 gross of pencils' (BL, Add. MS 16174, fol. 21'v'). 
As well as listing his qualities as a painter, many contemporaries acknowledged Lankrink's importance as a collector. He began forming his collection in Antwerp and seems to have taken advantage of the dispersal of both Rubens's and Rembrandt's collections in the 1650s. He continued to collect after he arrived in London, regularly attending the growing number of art auctions held in Covent Garden and Lincoln's Inn Fields and buying extensively at Lely's paintings and drawings sales in 1682 and 1688. Frequent references in Constantijn Huygens's journal to Lankrink accompanying other collectors to auctions, attending sale previews, going through the stock of artist-dealer friends, and offering conservation advice about fellow collectors' drawings suggest that he was a well-known and respected figure in the art circles of Restoration London. At his death in 1692 his collection was described as 'certainly the most Curious and the most Numerous, that ever was seen in this Country, in a private man's possession'. Totalling some 464 items it comprised mainly sixteenth- and seventeenth-century Dutch and Flemish landscape, still-life and flower pieces, portraits, and subject pictures, including works by Lely, Rembrandt, and Rubens plus a handful of works 'in the manner of Tintoretto and Titian' (Cust, 30-32, 35). It was sold by auction on 23 January 1693 from his house in the Great Piazza. His collection of old master drawings, with a similar Dutch and Flemish bias, but also containing works by sixteenth-century Italian artists such as Parmigianino and Veronese, was sold the following year, having first been stamped with his characteristic PHL collector's mark. 
Lankrink was described by Vertue as of a 'debonnair-temper... a good Bottle Companion, & Excellent Company but also a grate Favourite of the ladies' and was clearly popular among his many friends and acquaintances (Vertue, 'Note books', 2.145). He lived well and was often in debt; at his death at his home in 1692 his collection had to be sold to clear his outstanding debts and he had borrowed heavily from a friend and fellow collector Mr Austen to finance his purchases at Lely's sales. He appears never to have married and left no will. At his particular request he was buried facing the garden under the great porch of St Paul's, Covent Garden. The preface to his painting sale catalogue serves as a fitting epitaph to this relatively little known but intriguing and talented character: 'Mr 'Lankrink' has been look'd upon as one of the most excellent Painters in 'Europe', as well in respect to the Perfection of his own Painting, as for his great Knowledge, and vast Understanding, in what is left, of the finest and most finish'd Pieces, of the greatest Masters. Other Nations have envied the Happiness we have had, of enjoying such a famous Man, for several years. (Cust, 30)' 



@@@@@


doc= 16056


Lanquet, Thomas (1520/21-1545), historian, is of unknown origins. Wood asserts that he studied at Oxford, but neither he nor the university records offer evidence to support the claim. Lanquet is known for having undertaken a history of the known world in which the fortunes of nations and peoples are summarized together year by year. His purpose was didactic and moralizing, as he explains in his introduction (Lanquet and Cooper, fols. 1-2'v'). 'In reading of historyes examples of politicall vertues and civill affayres ought to bee observed', he declares, and he eulogizes Henry VIII as a perhaps surprising illustration of the truth 'that good princis bee preserved and defended by god'. He displays humanistic leanings in a chapter devoted to 'the originall begynnyng of man, after the false opinion of the Ethnike [heathen] philosophers', but his framework is firmly Christian. Lanquet proposed to divide his history into three sections, from the creation (dated to 3962 BC) to Abraham, from Abraham to the birth of Christ, and finally down to his own time. But he died in London in 1545, aged twenty-four, having reached only the accession of Tiberius (AD 17). 
Lanquet's work was completed by Thomas Cooper, later successively bishop of Lincoln and of Winchester, and it was published in 1549 as 'An Epitome of Cronicles', with a dedication to the duke of Somerset. In the epistle to the reader announcing his taking up the reins, Cooper describes Lanquet as a 'studious younge man' and acknowledges his 'greate laboure and diligence' (Lanquet and Cooper, fol. 84). The tribute was well deserved. On the evidence of references to such writers as Homer, Herodotus, Thucydides, Xenophon, Plutarch, Sallust, Julius Caesar, Eusebius, and Bede, Lanquet was widely read in Greek and Latin sources. His having consulted 'the conspiracy of Catiline, translated into english by Thomas Paynell' (ibid., fol. 82'v'), a work intended to encourage obedience to the crown, may be a further pointer to Lanquet's political position. In other respects Lanquet's views are hard to discover, possibly a sign of an eirenic temperament. He states explicitly that he finds the British and Scottish origin myths incredible, but nevertheless resolves to use them -- 'I wil not discent from the common opinion therof, but wil also folow it as nere as I may' (ibid., fol. 32). He knew the scriptures well but says nothing, even in his account of the life of Christ, to indicate his own religious position. In a comment on the early Jewish sects he compares the Essenes to Anabaptists, who 'condemned bothe the Lutheranes and papistes, and studyed to bee seene holyer than thei bothe' (ibid., fol. 75'r'- 'v'), but that is the limit of his partisanship. In 1559 Robert Crowley reissued the 'Epitome' with a continuation to the accession of Elizabeth, virulently anti-Catholic in its account of recent events. But in 1560 Cooper in turn brought out another edition, repudiating Crowley's and in its continuation much less violent against Rome. This edition was reissued in 1565. Lanquet is also said by Bale to have written an account of Henry VIII's capture of Boulogne in September 1544, which has not survived. 


@@@@@


doc= 16057


Lant, Thomas (1554/5-1600/01), herald and draughtsman, was born in Gloucester, one of the seven children and four sons of Thomas Lant of Gloucester and his wife, Mayens or Mary Mounsloe of Shropshire. At the age of twelve he became a page to Richard Cheyney, bishop of Gloucester, and after Cheyney's death in 1579 page to Henry, Baron Cheyne of Toddington, with whom he remained 'some two or three years' (College of Arms, Arundel MS 40, fol. 1). He may have been the Thomas Lant who in 1580 gathered a collection of tunes on a roll of parchment (King's College, Cambridge, Rowe MS 1). Lord Cheyne recommended Lant to Sir Philip Sidney, whom he accompanied to the Low Countries in November 1585; he remained there until Sidney's death on 17 October 1586. Lant was the draughtsman of a remarkable roll measuring over 35 feet by about 73/4 inches, engraved on thirty copperplates by Theodore De Bry, recording Sir Philip's funeral procession at St Paul's Cathedral on 16 February 1587. Lant's portrait appears on the first plate; dated 1587, it gives his age as thirty-two. 
Lant was next employed by Sidney's father-in-law, Sir Francis Walsingham, the secretary of state, on whose recommendation and that of Sidney's uncle the earl of Leicester he obtained appointment as Portcullis pursuivant at the College of Arms, his patent being signed by the queen on 20 May 1588 and dated under the great seal 9 January 1589. In 1589 he compiled an augmented version of the account of the English baronage by Robert Cooke, Clarenceux (BL, Sloane MS 4959). As Portcullis Lant wrote 'Observations and Collections Concerning the Office and Officers of Arms' (College of Arms, Arundel MS 40), a good source of information on the College of Arms in the 1590s, which he described as 'a company full of discord and envy' (College of Arms, Arundel MS 40, fol. 6'r'). At the back of this manuscript his arms appear impaled with those of Houghton of Beckbury, Shropshire, reflecting his marriage at an unknown date to Elizabeth ('c'.1573-1629), daughter of Richard Houghton. He may be the Thomas Lant, author of 'Daily Exercise of a Christian' (1590). In 1595 he presented to the queen a catalogue of officers of arms known as Lant's roll, unfortunately containing inaccuracies but purporting to show that promotion in the College of Arms was always by seniority. A number of copies survive. A manuscript in Lant's hand includes notes on the creation of peers and knights (College of Arms, MS B.P.11). 
In 1596 Lant challenged the universally disliked Ralph Brooke ('c'.1553-1625), York herald, and never had an answer. Subsequently meeting Brooke near Temple Bar he boxed him under the right ear and 'bumbasted his shoulders & his sydes very handsomely' (College of Arms, Arundel MS 40, fol. 38'v'). He was created Windsor herald on 23 October 1597, though the patent was issued only on 29 November 1600, shortly before his death. He was alive on 26 December 1600 but is thought to have died early in the new year. Letters of administration for his estate were granted to his widow on 9 May 1601. They had two children, a daughter, Theodosia, who married James Norton, and a son, Thomas, who was born after his father's death and died on 18 May 1688, aged eighty-six, as rector of Hornsey, Middlesex. Elizabeth Lant, on 28 September 1609 at the Savoy Chapel, Westminster, married the physician and alchemist Francis Anthony (died 1623). The marriage licence describes her as aged about thirty-six, relict of Thomas Lant, gent., deceased eight years since. 


@@@@@


doc= 16058


Lantfred (fl. 974-984), monk and author, belonged to the Benedictine community at the Old Minster, Winchester, and wrote the earliest account of the miracles that took place following the translation of the relics of Bishop Swithun there on 15 July 971. Very little is known of Lantfred's career. A contemporary Winchester author, AElfric, describes him as 'the foreigner' ('se ofersaewisca'); and the spelling of his name as he gives it in his account of St Swithun, the 'Translatio et miracula Sancti Swithuni' ('Translation and miracles of St Swithun'), implies an origin in Francia, probably West Francia (a German spelling of the same name would be Lantfrid). A Frankish origin for Lantfred is confirmed by the occurrence of various Latinized Old French words in his 'Translatio', as well as by a letter (datable to 974-84) addressed to Archbishop Dunstan by an author who signs himself as '.L.'; on stylistic grounds, the letter is unambiguously the work of the author of the 'Translatio'. In this letter Lantfred reports to Dunstan that he has returned to Fleury, but, as a result of a fire there, has need of various books which he left in England in the possession of Osgar, a former Winchester monk who later became abbot of Abingdon. That Lantfred came to Winchester from Fleury at the invitation of Bishop AEthelwold (died 984) is implied by the fact that AEthelwold, in the preface to his 'Regularis concordia', records his gratitude for advice on monastic customs given to him by monks from continental houses including Fleury -- a reference, perhaps, to advice given by Lantfred. 
Lantfred's 'Translatio et miracula Sancti Swithuni' is one of the most polished pieces of Latin prose composed in England between the time of Aldhelm (died 709/10) and the Norman conquest. From references in the text it is evident that it was composed within a few years of the translation of St Swithun in 971; Lantfred describes himself as an eyewitness for many of the miracles. The persuasive nature of Lantfred's work helped to establish the cult of St Swithun, a fact reflected in the number of manuscripts and later redactions of the work. The 'Translatio' is not only a valuable account of the origin and early development of an Anglo-Saxon saint's cult, but a precious (and firsthand) witness to various aspects of Anglo-Saxon life, including pilgrimage, travel, slavery, medicine, law enforcement, capital punishment, and trial by ordeal. It is composed in extremely flamboyant Latin prose, being the earliest attested Anglo-Latin example of rhyming prose, and bristles with learned words of various kinds, including archaisms and Graecisms, mostly derived from the Greek 'New Testament' (though, to judge from errors in declension, it is most unlikely that Lantfred himself knew any Greek). Lantfred's Latin prose is also characterized by the use of poeticisms, and of Virgilian diction in particular. Although (with the exception of the 'Bible') the number of works quoted in the 'Translatio' is limited, Lantfred was clearly a scholar of considerable learning. 
A manuscript now in Cambridge (CUL, Kk.5.34), which was written at Winchester in the late tenth century, contains three Latin poems under the rubric 'Versus.L. de quodam superbo', and there is reason to think that the '.L.' in question is Lantfred. The first two poems are conceived as high-spirited (and frequently vitriolic) master-student debate poems; the third is a sophisticated meditation of the problems of predestination and free will, which has as its nuclear image Boethius's metaphor of God observing the human race from a watch-tower. The poems share many features of diction with Lantfred's 'Translatio', and reveal that he was an accomplished poet as well as a master of Latin prose. 


@@@@@


doc= 16059


Lanyon, Sir Charles (1813-1889), architect and engineer, son of John Jenkinson Lanyon (1770/71-1835) of Eastbourne, Sussex, and his wife, Catherine Anne Mortimer (1772/3-1840), was born at Eastbourne, Sussex, on 6 January 1813. Having received his early education at a private school in Eastbourne, he was articled to Jacob Owen of the Royal Engineers' department in Portsmouth, later of the Irish board of works, Dublin, in preparation for the profession of civil engineer. On 2 February 1837 he married Owen's daughter Elizabeth Helen (died 1858); they had ten children, including Sir (William) Owen Lanyon. In 1835, at the first examination for Irish county surveyorships, Lanyon took second place; he was appointed county surveyor of Kildare, and in the following year transferred at his own request to co. Antrim. Here he executed several works of great importance, among others the constructing of the great Antrim coast road from Larne to Portrush, and he designed and erected many bridges in the county, including the viaduct of 1837 at Glendun and the Ormeau Bridge of 1860-63 over the Lagan at Belfast. He laid out several of the chief local railways, such as the Belfast and Ballymena line and its extensions to Cookstown and Portrush, later amalgamated with other lines to form part of the Belfast and Northern Counties Railway. He was also engineer of the Belfast, Holywood, and Bangor Railway, and the Carrickfergus and Larne line. He was architect of some of the principal buildings in Belfast, such as the Queen's College, now Queen's University (1846-9), the court house (1848-50), the county gaol (1843-5), the custom house (1854-7), and the Institute for the Deaf and Dumb and Blind (1843-5; dem. 1965). His palm house in the botanic gardens, Belfast, built in two phases between 1840 and 1852, although small, is notable as one of the earliest examples of curvilinear iron and glass anywhere. Much of Lanyon's work was carried out in private practice, in which he was assisted by two partners, first W. H. Lynn (1829-1915), from 1854, and then his own eldest son, John (1839-1900), from 1860. The joint firm was one of the most prolific in Ireland, responsible for many churches, banks, and country houses throughout Ireland. 
Lanyon resigned the county surveyorship in 1860, and then retired from practice completely following the breakup of his firm in 1872, to devote his energies to public life, in which he was already involved. In 1862 he became mayor of Belfast, and in 1866 Conservative member of parliament for the town. In 1868 he was defeated at the polls. In 1876 he served as high sheriff of co. Antrim. He was one of the Belfast harbour commissioners and a deputy lieutenant and magistrate of the county. In 1862 he was elected president of the Royal Institute of Architects of Ireland, and held office until 1868, when he was knighted by the duke of Abercorn, then lord lieutenant. He was also a fellow of the Institute of British Architects and a member of the Institution of Civil Engineers of both England and Ireland. For a long time he was a prominent member of the masonic body, in which he rose to be grand master of the province of Antrim. He died, after a protracted illness, at his residence, The Abbey, White Abbey, co. Antrim, on 31 May 1889, and was buried on 4 June in the churchyard of Knockbreda, near Belfast. 


@@@@@


doc= 16060


Lanyon, Sir (William) Owen (1842-1887), army officer and colonial official, born in co. Antrim, Ireland, on 21 July 1842, was the son of the civil engineer and architect Sir Charles Lanyon (1813-1889) of The Abbey, White Abbey, near Belfast, co. Antrim, and his wife, Elizabeth Helen (died 1858), daughter of Jacob Owen of the board of works, Dublin. Like his brothers, Lanyon was educated at Bromsgrove School, Worcestershire (1855-9), which then took many boys from Ireland. On 21 December 1860 he was commissioned ensign by purchase in the 6th Royal Warwickshire regiment, with which he served in Jamaica during the 1865 insurrection. The same year he was appointed aide-de-camp to the general commanding in the West Indies. He purchased his lieutenancy, 6th foot, in 1866, exchanged to the 2nd West India regiment, and in 1868 purchased a company. He was aide-de-camp and private secretary to Sir John Peter Grant, governor of Jamaica from 1868 to 1873. In 1873, and until invalided in January 1874, Lanyon served as aide-de-camp to Sir Garnet Wolseley in the Second Anglo-Asante War, suffering fever and gaining Wolseley's praise (brevet of major). In 1874 he was sent by the Colonial Office to the Gold Coast on a special mission connected with the abolition of slavery, for which he was in August 1875 made CMG. From September 1875 to April 1880 he was administrator of the diamond fields territory, Griqualand West. He improved the finances and raised and commanded the volunteer force there during the Griqua rebellion and the 1878 invasion of the Batlapin chief, Botlasitsie, whom he defeated and subdued. He was thanked by the home government and the Cape legislature (CB, November 1878, brevet of lieutenant-colonel). 
Appointed by Sir Michael Hicks Beach (colonial secretary, 1878-80), from March 1879 Lanyon was administrator of the Transvaal under the successive high commissioners Wolseley and Sir George Colley. Lanyon assisted Sir Bartle Frere in his negotiations with the Transvaal Boers. Wolseley was glad to leave the Transvaal administration in 'Billy's competent hands' (Lehmann, 'First Boer War', 63). Lanyon concentrated on tax gathering in which he was, if sometimes acting arbitrarily and illegally, notably successful. He claimed to have produced a surplus in the former bankrupt republic. This was disputed: according to Lord Kimberley there was an 'enormous and hopeless deficit' (de Kiewiet, 279). On Wolseley's recommendation Lanyon was made KCMG in April 1880: disliking the name William, he called himself Sir Owen. 
Lanyon, like Wolseley, despised the Boers, whom he considered a 'semi-civilized people'. Distant and overbearing, he ignored their wishes. They disliked him. He was tall, dark, tanned, and swarthy, and they knew of his West Indian service. They believed he had African blood, was a 'West Indian bastard', and that they were being oppressed by a 'kaffir' -- a further British insult. Kruger wrote in his memoirs that Lanyon was 'absolutely unfitted for this difficult task' (Kruger, 1.154). The new Gladstone government (April 1880) retained Lanyon in post. He responded to local press criticism by imposing restrictions on newspapers. As Boer unrest increased he assured the Colonial Office that they were contented, and requested a substantial salary increase. Following his reports the imperial government reduced British troops in the Transvaal; Lanyon also sent volunteers away to the Basuto 'gun war'. In December rebel Boers declared their republic and attacked British troops (the Anglo-Transvaal War, 1880-81). A few days before, Lanyon had written to Colley that the Boers were 'mortal cowards, so anything they do will be but a spark in the pan' (Lehmann, 'First Boer War', 101), and in January 1881 he wrote to the Colonial Office that 'the collapse will be as sudden as the outbreak' (ibid., 102). The British in Pretoria were blockaded rather than besieged. The troops there were commanded by Colonel William Bellairs, an experienced and cautious officer. In February, Lanyon urged an offensive against the Boers; Bellairs believed it imprudent but acquiesced. The attack (Red House laager, 12 February) was a disaster, with heavy British casualties. After the war, in April 1881, Lanyon was recalled and replaced by Bellairs. Lanyon's failure in the Transvaal ruined his reputation and effectively ended his career. He was criticized in the British press and later by historians: according to C. W. de Kiewiet, Lanyon was guilty of 'stupid ignorance' of the Boers, and 'his conduct as a soldier was conceited, fatuous and shortsighted' (de Kiewiet, 273). He never again held a Colonial Office post. 
Lanyon served in the 1882 Egyptian campaign as colonel on the staff and base commander at Isma'iliyyah (third class Osmanieh), and also served with the Gordon relief expedition (1884-5). In 1882 he married Florence, daughter of J. M. Levy of Grosvenor Street, London; she died in 1883. Lanyon died of cancer at New York, after a long and painful illness, on 6 April 1887, aged forty-four. 


@@@@@


doc= 16061


Lanza, Gesualdo (1779-1859), singing teacher, was born in Naples, the son of Francesco Giuseppe Lanza ('c'.1750- 'c'.1812), composer and the author of '6 arie notturne con accomp. di chitarra franc. e v. a piac.' (1792) and of six trios, op. 13, and six canzonets with recitative, op. 14, who moved to London in the early 1790s and for some time was a private musician to the marquess of Abercorn. Lanza was taught music by his father, and soon became known in London as a singing teacher. Among his pupils were Catherine Stephens, later countess of Essex, and Anna Maria Tree, the sister-in-law of Charles Kean. He also had a music-selling business at Chesterfield Street, St Pancras New Road. In 1842 Lanza started singing classes at 75 Newman Street. Later in the same year he announced a series of lectures, 'The national school for singing in classes, free to the public', and on 5 December 1842 he delivered a lecture at the Westminster Literary and Scientific Institution illustrative of his new system of teaching singing in classes. 
In 1813 Lanza published 'The Elements of Singing', which was highly praised. His other publications include 'The Elements of Singing in the Italian and English Styles' (1809), 'Sunday Evening Recreations' (1840), and 'Signor Lanza's New Method of Teaching Class Singing' (1843). Lanza composed the music for 'The Deserts of Arabia' (1806), an operatical entertainment written by F. Reynolds, a masque, 'Spirits of Dew', a 'Stabat mater', and a 'Grand missa di gloria' (1835), as well as songs and ballads. He died in London on 12 March 1859 and was buried in Highgate cemetery. His daughter, Rosalie Lanza, was a well-known opera singer. 


@@@@@


doc= 16062


Lapidge, Edward (1779-1860), architect and surveyor, was the eldest son of Samuel Lapidge (died 1806), the chief gardener at Hampton Court and before that an assistant to Lancelot Brown; he was the brother of Rear-Admiral William Lapidge (1793-1860). He is known to have had three sons: Charles, William Frederick, and Samuel. Samuel trained to be an architect but, after financial difficulties, emigrated to New Zealand. 
In 1808 Lapidge sent to the Royal Academy a view of the garden front at Esher Place, in 1814 a drawing for a villa at Hildersham in Cambridgeshire, and in later years various other drawings. In 1824 he was appointed surveyor to the county of Surrey. Between 1825 and 1828 he was engaged in building his most important work, the new bridge over the Thames at Kingston. His prime interest was in civil engineering, and in 1850 he exhibited at the Royal Academy a design for a suspension bridge. Between 1827 and 1840 he designed and built a number of churches, including St Peter's, Hammersmith, Middlesex (1827-9), and Doddington church, Cheshire (1836-7). However, these buildings, while competent, were not inspired. In 1836 he was an unsuccessful competitor for the new houses of parliament, and in 1837 for the Fitzwilliam Museum at Cambridge. 
Lapidge was elected a fellow of the Institute of British Architects in 1838. He had two pupils: George Wightwick and H. H. Russell. He died on 19 February 1860 at Hampton Wick, Middlesex, and was buried there. 


@@@@@


doc= 16063


George Henry Laporte (1802-1873), animal and military painter, worked in both oil and watercolour, shared his father's address until 1827 or before, and may well have been taught by H. B. Chalon. He exhibited at the Royal Academy and elsewhere from 1818, and was a member of the New Society of Painters in Water Colours from 1834. He was animal painter to the duke of Cumberland and king of Hanover from 1836, and he contributed forty-three plates to the 'Sporting Magazine'. His work declined after the 1830s, when both horses and landscapes had shown considerable strength. He died at 13 Norfolk Square, Paddington, on 23 October 1873. His wife, Eliza, 'nee' Elgie, whom he married in the autumn of 1850, predeceased him, and their only child, Georgina Dora Laporte (1852-1884), died unmarried. 


@@@@@


doc= 16064


Laporte, John Peter (1761-1839), watercolour painter, may have been born in Dublin. He may be identified with the John Peter, son of Gabriel and Anne Laporte, who was baptized at St Anne's, Soho, on 29 March 1761. When first definitely heard of in London he was a pupil of the Dublin-born Huguenot landscape painter John Melchior Barralet, in whose house, 3 Orange Street, he was living in 1779. A fellow pupil of one of the Barralet brothers, perhaps John James, was William Frederick Wells, later the moving spirit behind the foundation of the Society of Painters in Water Colours; another lifelong friend of Laporte was the sporting painter H. B. Chalon. 
Laporte first exhibited at both the Royal Academy and the British Institution in 1785, habitually showing landscapes. During the 1780s he changed address frequently, living for the most part in the artists' quarter around Tottenham Court Road and Soho. For some years from about 1789 he lodged at 4 Gresse Street, sharing with the topographical artist John Hassell in 1792-3. By 1802 he had moved to 21 Winchester Street, Edgware Road, which remained his home until about 1830. In his 'Tour of the Isle of Wight' (1790), Hassell records meeting him at Alum Bay in 1789, and they probably visited Wales together in 1792. Laporte was a regular visitor to the Lake District from 1790 and to Ireland from 1795. It is possible that he travelled to Madeira in 1807 or 1808, and later to Italy and Switzerland, but equally his exhibited views may have been worked up from other travellers' drawings. 
Laporte built up a considerable practice as a drawing master, but the repeated claim that he was professor of drawing at the Addiscombe military academy is a confusion with Wells. Probably his most distinguished pupil was Dr Thomas Monro, the patron of Girtin and Turner, to whom he sold drawings to the value of $500 or $600, according to Joseph Farington. He may well have met Turner, either at Monro's house in the Adelphi, where he dined frequently, or through their mutual friend Wells. In any event, Laporte's work does occasionally show hints of Turner's early style, although for the most part it remains true to the Sandby tradition. His favourite compositional form leads the eye 'along the line of some high object (in one case the side of a wood, in the other an almost precipitous hill) diagonally across the picture to the skyline' (Williams, 62). 
Occasionally Laporte produced oil paintings, one of which is in the Derby Art Gallery. However, his best-known works are in gouache, and he also worked in pure watercolour. His 1812 lesson book 'The Progress of a Water-Coloured Drawing' illustrates both his teaching and his painting technique. Step-by-step instructions were fashionable, but Laporte's guide was more than a painting-by-numbers exercise, since the pupil was supposed to create the basic composition. The sample composition was typically Claudian, and the insistence on a 'dead coloured' grey ground for distance was also becoming old-fashioned. Laporte did not join the Society of Painters in Water Colours, but was a member of the rival Associated Artists in Water-Colours which held exhibitions between 1808 and 1812. This does not imply a break with Wells, since in 1819 they collaborated on a series of seventy-two soft-ground etchings after landscape drawings by Gainsborough. His other publications were 'Characters of Trees' (1798-1801), 'A Drawing Book' (1800), and 'Progressive Lessons Sketched from Nature' (1804). He died from 'decay of nature' at 2 Upper Coleshill Street, Pimlico, on 8 July 1839. Examples of his work are in the British Museum and the Victoria and Albert Museum, London, and the art galleries at Aberdeen, Accrington, Leeds, Leicester, and Newport. 
Laporte's daughter Mary Anne ('b'. 'c'.1795) painted portraits and fancy subjects. She exhibited at the Royal Academy and the British Institution from 1813 to 1821, and was a member of the New Society of Painters in Water Colours from 1835 until 1846, when she retired because of ill health. Laporte's son 


@@@@@


doc= 16065


Lapraik, John (1727-1807), poet, was born at Laigh Dalquhram, near Muirkirk, Ayrshire. After education in the parochial school he succeeded his father on the estate, which was of considerable extent, and had been in the family for generations. He also rented the lands and mill of Muirsmill, in the neighbourhood. In 1754 he married Margaret Rankine, sister of Burns's friend, 'rough, rude, ready-witted Rankine'. She died after the birth of her fifth child, and in 1766 Lapraik married Janet Anderson (1740/41-1826), a farmer's daughter, who bore nine children, and survived her husband by nineteen years. 
Ruined by the collapse of the Ayr Bank on 12 August 1773, Lapraik had first to let and then to sell his estate, and after an interval to relinquish his mill and farms, on which for several years he struggled to exist. Confined for a time during 1785 as a debtor, he figured as a prison bard. 
Early in 1785 Burns heard the song 'When I upon thy bosom lean' at a 'rocking', or social gathering, in his house at Mossgiel Farm, Muirkirk. Learning that Lapraik was the author, he made his acquaintance, and within the year addressed to him his three famous 'Epistles'. Lapraik's other significant connection with Burns, according to local legend at least, is that he helped inspire the sentiments of 'Is there for honest poverty' ('A Man's a Man for a' that'). Burns sent an improved version of Lapraik's song to Johnson's 'Scots Musical Museum'. An early version of the song may be one of the lyrics published in the 'Weekly Magazine', 14 October 1773. 
Burns's generous patronage encouraged Lapraik to publish his verses, which appeared at Kilmarnock in 1788 as 'Poems on Several Occasions'. The volume contains nothing equal to 'When I upon thy bosom lean'. James Maxwell of Paisley notices Lapraik unfavourably in his 'Animadversions on some Poets and Poetasters of the Present Age' (1788). 
After 1796 Lapraik opened a public house in Kirk Street, Muirkirk, conducting also the village post office on the same premises. Here he died on 7 May 1807 and was buried in the churchyard of Muirkirk parish church. A cairn was erected in 1914 by the 'Lapraik Burns Club' of Muirkirk to mark the spot where Lapraik's house once stood at Laigh Dalquhram. 


@@@@@


doc= 16066


Lapworth, Edward (1574-1636), physician and poet, was born in Warwickshire. His father, possibly the Michael Lapworth who was elected fellow of All Souls, Oxford, in 1562 and graduated BM in 1573, was physician to Henry Berkeley. 
Lapworth is probably the Edward Lapworth who matriculated from Exeter College, Oxford, on 31 January 1589. He was admitted BA from St Alban's Hall on 25 October 1592, and MA on 30 June 1595. From 1598 to 1610 he was master of Magdalen College School, and as a member of Magdalen College he supplicated for the degree of MB and for licence to practise medicine on 1 March 1603. He was licensed on 3 June 1605, and was admitted BM and DM on 20 June 1611. He was 'moderator in vesperiis' in medicine in 1605 and 1611 and 'respondent' in natural philosophy on James I's visit to Oxford in 1605. In July 1611 he had permission to be absent from congregation so that he might attend to his practice. In 1617 and 1619 Lapworth seems to have been in practice at Faversham, Kent. In 1618 at Oxford he was designated first Sedleian reader in natural philosophy under the will of the founder (though the bequest did not take effect until 1621), and on 9 August 1619 he was appointed Linacre physic lecturer. From this time he resided part of the year in Oxford, but in the summer he usually practised in Bath. 
Lapworth married, first, Mary Coxhead, who was buried on 2 January 1621; and, second, Margery, daughter of Sir George Snigg of Bristol, baron of the exchequer, and widow of George Chaldecot of Quarlstone. With his first wife he had a son, Michael, who matriculated at Magdalen College in 1621, aged seventeen; he also had a daughter, Anne, who was her father's heir, and became the mother of the poet and dramatist William Joyner. 
According to Guidott, in person Lapworth was 'not tall, but fat and corpulent', a scholarly man, with a taste for poetry. At the marriage of Theophila Berkeley to Sir Robert Coke in 1613 there were, it is said, 'songs of joy from that learned physician, Doctor E. Lapworth' (Smyth, 3.401). The verses he contributed to a variety of books included lines on Elizabeth's death and on James I's accession. There were some verses of his in Joshua Sylvester's 'Du Bartas, his Devine Weekes and Workes' (1605), and in the treatise of Edward Jorden on 'Naturall Bathes and Minerall Waters' (1631). The lines given in MS Ashmole 781, fol. 137, as by 'Dr. Latworth on his deathbed', seem to be his; they begin 'My God, I speak it from a full assurance'. There are some notes of his as to a child with two heads being born at Oxford in 1633 (Queen's College, Oxford, MS 121, fol. 29; 'CSP dom.', '1633-4', 284). He was the owner of Harleian MS 978 (Bodl. Oxf., MS James 22). 
Lapworth died in Bath on 24 May 1636, a year after resigning his Oxford lectureship. He was buried in the church of St Peter and St Paul, Bath. 


@@@@@


doc= 16067


Larcom, Sir Thomas Aiskew, first baronet (1801-1879), surveyor, the son of Captain Joseph Larcom, RN (died 1818), and Ann, daughter of William Hollis of Liverstoke, was born at Gosport, Hampshire, on 22 April 1801. He had an elder brother and three sisters. After studying at the Royal Military Academy at Woolwich he was in 1820 commissioned second lieutenant in the Royal Engineers. In 1824 he was chosen by Thomas Colby to work on the Ordnance Survey, originally in England and Wales and, after 1826, in Ireland. From 1826 to 1828 he worked with Joseph Portlock on the great triangulation by which the Irish survey was connected with that of England. In 1828 Colby appointed Larcom as his assistant in the headquarters of the Irish survey in Mountjoy, Phoenix Park, near Dublin, where he took charge of the practical side of the work and proved an exacting but popular and inspiring taskmaster. He organized the many civilians and soldiers needed to compile, engrave, and publish the remarkable 6 inch maps of Ireland. He organized the adoption after considerable controversy of the electrotype process, which allowed maps to be updated more readily, and the introduction of contour lines to replace hachuring. Mountjoy under Larcom became a centre of scientific education and was visited by numerous individuals, institutions, and businesses who were supplied with information gathered by surveyors, even before the maps for which it was compiled were published. Larcom believed that the work of the survey should be expanded to include a detailed descriptive memoir of each locality. The Irish administration approved the scheme, but, after the publication in 1837 of the memoir of Templemore in Londonderry, refused on grounds of economy to authorize further memoirs. This was perhaps not surprising given that the memoir contained such information as the diameter of every mill wheel in the townland and the amount spent on manure down to the nearest penny. Larcom himself, however, continued to study the Irish language and, with the help of agents, accumulated an unrivalled store of information about the history, languages, and antiquities of Ireland, much of which might otherwise have been lost. He also established the meteorological observatory in Phoenix Park, intending it as part of a nationwide network of weather stations. 
With his systematic approach and realization of the value of maps, Larcom prompted many improvements in the gathering and presentation of official information. He prepared the maps needed to effect the changes caused by the 'Irish Reform Bill' and in 1836 compiled a remarkable map of the country to show proposed railway building and prepared the topographical part of the 'Report on Irish Municipal Reform', completing elaborate maps of sixty-seven towns in one month. In 1840 Larcom married Georgina (died 1898), daughter of General Sir George D'Aguilar, with whom he had four sons and a daughter. In 1841 he became a census commissioner and at his instigation the Irish census of that year included a classification of the occupations and general condition of the population, as well as its numbers; a permanent branch of the registrar-general's department was formed for the collection of agricultural statistics, and thematic maps accompanied the census reports. The pattern set by the Irish census was later adopted in England. In 1842 he was appointed commissioner for inquiring into the state of the Royal Irish Society and again in 1845 in connection with the Queen's colleges. 
Although always theoretically subordinate to Colby, it was Larcom who moulded the Irish survey to a model of a national survey board, initiating projects and supplying information of the highest standard to enquirers. His personal dedication to the survey's work was reflected in the use of the term 'Larcom's survey' for the 6 inch maps of the 1830s. Information gathered by the survey was used by Larcom during the 1846 famine when he helped to organize road building and drainage as public relief works for the destitute. By this time the 6 inch survey was nearing completion and, as part of a plan to bring the Irish survey under the control of the Southampton Ordnance Survey headquarters, Larcom was removed from his post on 4 May 1848 leaving him with only a temporary appointment with the famine relief commission to mark more than twenty years of service. 
Larcom's plight attracted attention, but was overshadowed by the general problems in the country. He occupied himself preparing an edition of the seventeenth-century 'down survey' of William Petty (1851) and held temporary positions with poor relief and boundary reform commissions before, in 1853, he was appointed under-secretary for Ireland, an office which for the first time was non-political and permanent. Under him the administration became conspicuously more efficient and stable, although not daringly innovative. Its most important legacy was the valuations from Richard Griffith's cadastral survey of the country in the 1850s and 1860s, using which local taxation was reformed and other changes made. Notable reforms were made to the poor law, medical dispensaries, sewerage, and local government. Larcom, adopting the policy of his friend Thomas Drummond who had also become under-secretary after service on the survey, aimed to govern all parties disinterestedly, to remove abuses, and to prevent disorder by systematic vigilance through fostering a belief in the ubiquity of the government's power. He was promoted major-general in 1858 and created KCB in 1860. His unique knowledge of the country enabled him to use his position to encourage economic growth, in particular capital investment and schemes to help the poor. He also encouraged education, particularly the Queen's colleges for the upper classes, despite Roman Catholic opposition, and hoped to lessen religious discord by encouraging the teaching of aspects of religion which all denominations had in common. He saw a steady increase in prosperity during his term of office. Each year he drew up memoranda to be read by the lord lieutenant, showing by official returns the progress of agriculture, improvements in standards of living, and reductions in crime. They also showed his belief that copious and accurate information was the basis for good science and good government. 
The final years of Larcom's administration were marked by the Fenian uprising, which he helped quell, leaving Ireland peaceful on his retirement in 1868. He was created a baronet on 24 December 1868 and was also sworn of the privy council in Ireland that year. He spent his retirement collecting information about Ireland during his term of office, which he arranged in volumes and presented to the learned societies, chiefly Irish, with which he had been associated. He died at Heathfield, near Fareham, on 15 June 1879. In appearance Larcom was of middle height and thickly set, with an imposing head. He is justly remembered for his significant contribution to the Irish survey and for establishing the need for good-quality information on which to base government administration. 


@@@@@


doc= 16068


Lardner, Dionysius (1793-1859), writer on science and public lecturer, was born on 3 April 1793 in Dublin, the son of William Lardner (died 1808), a solicitor. 
Lardner matriculated at Trinity College, Dublin, in 1812 and graduated BA in 1817, MA in 1819, and LLB and LLD in 1827. He married Cecilia Flood on 19 December 1815; they separated in 1820. About 1820 he began a prolonged relationship with Anne Maria Darley Boursiquot (1795-1879), wife of a Dublin wine merchant; he almost certainly fathered her son Dion Boucicault (1820-1890), the actor and dramatist, and provided him with support until 1840. 
Although in holy orders Lardner never held a clerical living. Until 1827 he lived in Dublin, in the early stages of a career as a scientific writer and lecturer, contributing articles to the 'Transactions of the Irish Academy'. He published a variety of treatises, mostly on mathematical subjects, intended for beginners in arithmetic, geometry, and calculus. Lardner was appointed the first professor of natural philosophy and astronomy at the new London University in 1827, at which time he moved to London. After a stormy tenure he resigned his professorship in 1831; he had attempted to introduce a measure of Anglicanism into a determinedly non-clerical foundation (one of the rare times in his career when his clerical status seemed to matter), and he found the compensation inadequate for his social ambitions. 
Lardner's activities and writings may be grouped in three phases, Dublin, London, and Paris. The middle, London, period (1827-40) was the most significant. In this period Lardner was a significant participant in the autodidactic and scientific cultures centred in the capital. At the height of his career, he lectured extensively on scientific and technical subjects, wrote prolifically, and became a scientific celebrity. He wrote treatises on mechanics, pneumatics, and Newton's optics for the Society for the Diffusion of Useful Knowledge, and contributed the chapters on algebra and geometrical analysis to the 'Encyclopedia Metropolitana'. He oversaw seven editions of 'The Steam Engine Familiarly Explained and Illustrated', which eventually had eleven editions in Britain, as well as American editions and translations into French, German, Italian, and Danish; 'The Athenaeum' called it 'the most popular mechanical treatise ever published' (962). He promoted the new 'Monthly Chronicle' and edited it in 1838 and 1839. He contributed important articles to the 'Edinburgh Review', notably a clear account of Charles Babbage's calculating engine (which Babbage himself recommended), and discussions of issues relating to steam transportation. He enjoyed great popularity as a lecturer, appearing at the Royal, London, and London mechanics' institutions; his lectures to provincial literary and philosophical societies and mechanics' institutes were eagerly awaited and widely praised as appearances of a great figure from the metropolis. Some of his lectures took the form of short courses on such general topics in the physical sciences as pneumatics or mechanics, but his forte was the single lecture on a topic of contemporary moment, delivered in a popular style to a general audience. One such lecture at the Royal Institution attracted the largest audience of the decade to the same hall where Faraday established his fame; on two occasions (1834 and 1835) he delivered popular evening lectures at British Association meetings, discussing Babbage's calculating machines and steam locomotion. 
Lardner's editorship of the 'Cabinet Cyclopedia', which he had proposed to the Longman publishing group in 1827 or 1828, continued through the 1830s, bringing him into contact with leading literary figures, and it was especially important to his contemporary renown. It eventually comprised 133 volumes, published between 1830 and 1844; all but the final four volumes appeared before 1840. For the 'Cyclopedia' he solicited contributions from eminent literary figures: Sir Walter Scott (two volumes on the history of Scotland), Thomas Moore (four volumes on the history of Ireland), Robert Southey (four volumes on naval history), Connop Thirlwall (eight volumes on the history of Greece), as well as translations of de Sismondi's histories of the Italian republics and of the fall of the Roman empire. Mary Shelley contributed (anonymously) to volumes of biography. He enrolled prominent scientists as well: Sir David Brewster contributed a volume on optics, while John F. W. Herschel wrote his 'Preliminary Discourse on the Study of Natural Philosophy' for Lardner's project. The indefatigable Lardner himself wrote six titles (in seven volumes) for the 'Cyclopedia', expounding the topics of mechanics, hydrostatics and pneumatics, heat, arithmetic, geometry, and electricity. He promoted other literary ventures as well, including a 'Cabinet Library', of which nine volumes appeared between 1830 and 1833, and the 'Monthly Chronicle', proposed jointly by Lardner and Edward Lytton Bulwer, and edited solely by Lardner in 1838 and 1839. 
Cambridge University awarded him an LLD in 1833; he had been elected a fellow of the Royal Society as well. He was twice a member of the council of the British Association for the Advancement of Science (in 1838-40), and twice a vice-president of its mechanical science section (in 1837 and 1839). 
In 1840 Lardner's career unravelled dramatically when he eloped with Mary Spicer Heaviside (died 1891), wife of Captain Richard Heaviside of the 1st dragoon guards. Lardner had been divorced from Cecilia Flood in 1832 and the marriage had been dissolved by statute on 14 June 1839. When he and Mary Heaviside fled to Paris in March 1840 Captain Heaviside pursued them, subjected Lardner to a flogging, but could not induce Mary to return with him to England. In a sensational trial in August 1840, Heaviside successfully sued Lardner (now 'in absentia', first in Paris and then in the United States) for criminal conversation, winning an $8000 judgment from a Lewes jury. The Heavisides were divorced in 1841, and after their marriage was dissolved by statute in 1845 Lardner and Mary Heaviside married in Paris, on 2 August 1846; they lived in Paris until Lardner's death. 
After the 1840 scandal interrupted his London career Lardner lectured widely in the United States from 1841 to 1844. Although he reputedly prospered from both lecture fees and the subsequent publication of his American lectures, the American sojourn brought no scientific notice. In the final decade of his life, in Paris, he completed his systematic treatise 'Railway Economy' (1850), and returned to elementary didactic treatises on a wide range of scientific topics, many published under the general heading of 'The Museum of Science and Art'. 
Although Lardner's activities of the 1830s seemed bewilderingly diverse, much of his energy focused on the steam engine and its applications to rail and sea transport. He was an enthusiastic promoter of the steam engine, and believed that national social and economic progress could follow from its application to railways. He eagerly anticipated the reductions in costs and the greater productivity of land that railways would allow, as well as the growth of cities, and the suburbanization which would make them pleasanter places to live in. The railway, he believed, would economically develop (and socially transform) Ireland, for rail links would carry the commerce of Britain and Europe to Ireland's west coast, the logical point for trans-shipment to the Americas. His pre-eminent position in the world of popular science made him for a few years in the 1830s the unofficial voice of British science on steam engines and transportation. His articles in the 'Edinburgh Review', and testimony before parliamentary committees, strengthened that position. The British Association commissioned (and subsidized) his investigations into 'railway constants'. 
Lardner nevertheless became involved in a series of controversies with railway and steamship engineers and companies, and from those controversies emerged as a foolish theoretician, out of touch with the reality of engineering genius. He forecast that the speed of a train passing through the Great Western Railway's Box Tunnel would create a suffocating vacuum for the passengers; he believed that air resistance would place a broad gauge locomotive at a decisive disadvantage, and then later (in his railway constants investigation) discounted the effects of such resistance; in his most famous dispute he doubted that steamships could carry adequate coals to make a crossing from Britain to America practicable. That argument, made most dramatically at Bristol in the 1836 British Association meeting, drew strong opposition from Isambard Kingdom Brunel and stirred the passions of those who had invested money or energy in the possibility of such travel. In the next year's British Association meeting (at Liverpool) Lardner moderated his position but the successful voyages of the 'Sirius' and the 'Great Western' in 1838 allowed his opponents to burlesque his views. His 'impracticable' became (in the public mind) 'impossible', and his own flight to the United States in 1840 -- by steamship -- recalled his erroneous prophecy. 
At the centre of much of Lardner's writing -- and career -- lay the convictions that science could be easily and familiarly explained, and that technology depended on science. He wrote (and lectured) with greatest success for those who wished to improve their practical skills, and for those who hoped that some scientific veneer would enhance their gentility. He recognized little distinction between science and technology, for in his view the latter was simply a department of the former; the British Association's creation of a mechanical science section illustrated such a conviction. Learning was necessary for technique; mere practical men could not advance technology without the guiding hand of science. His controversies arose from those beliefs, for he was unwilling to cede expertise to such mere practical men as Brunel and the Stephensons. He criticized railway and steamship companies as well as engineers, arguing that their competitiveness made them secretive and hence inimical to scientific investigation. Without such research, technological progress would be stifled. He argued that national progress -- economic, social, even moral -- depended on the progress of technology, and that that progress could not be trusted to the greed of the market place. He was therefore committed to the notion that railways should be guided by rational, not market, impulses, and he supported the railway clearing house scheme of the 1840s. He favoured state regulation of railway enterprise for a number of reasons, adding, in his 'Railway Economy', financial peculation to competitive, irrational, unscientific folly as grounds for the state regulation. 
Lardner died at Naples on 29 April 1859. Opinions on his character and significance have been varied. His personal behaviour betrayed both social insecurity and an irregular private life. In the years of his fame he acted the parvenu, deliberately courting fashion, inviting aristocratic women to his lectures, mixing in a glittering theatrical demi-monde. However, his position in the inner circles of science remained marginal. Although his editorship of the 'Cabinet Cyclopedia' made his name famous, some of the literary figures with whom it brought him in contact held him in contempt. To Dickens he was the 'prince of humbugs' ('The Letters of Charles Dickens', ed. W. Dexter, 1938, 1.154); to Southey he was a 'knave' ('New Letters of Robert Southey', ed. K. Curry, 1965, 2.328); Thackeray satirized him at length in his 'Yellowplush papers', in which Lardner emerged as 'the little Irishman in the whig, who et, drank, and talked as much as 1/2 a duzn' ('Fraser's Magazine', 18, 1838, 196). In 1833-4 his friend William Charles Macready, the actor, repeatedly found him 'very interesting' ('Diaries', 1.6), and a source of 'much interesting conversation, or rather information' (ibid., 1.144). Macready read his 'Mechanics' (part of the 'Cabinet Cyclopedia') with 'great delight' (ibid., 1.156), but by 1836 Macready had decided that Lardner 'really 'bores' me' (ibid., 1.326) and that seems to have been typical of the responses he eventually inspired. When his elopement put an end to his London career he had perhaps already outlived his success. His treatises did not progress beyond the level demanded by the autodidactic hopes that inspired mechanics' institutes, the Society for the Diffusion of Useful Knowledge, and the 'Cabinet Cyclopedia'. His conversation like his writing remained at the level of elementary pedagogy, and his frantic social ambitions had worn thin his welcome. 
Subsequent historical writing has generally held Lardner in low esteem. Most such critical views have come from railway historians, who have contrasted the vain and foolish cabinet philosopher with the triumphant empirical genius of engineers. Lardner made egregious mistakes: his miscalculations of steamship possibilities, his odd arguments about air resistance to locomotives; it has been easy to make him a buffoon. But such writers have also uncritically accepted the early Victorian horror at his elopement (although Lardner and Mary Heaviside seemed to have remained devoted to each other until Lardner's death), and have prolonged the satire which his pretentious classical name invited from his contemporaries ('Goodness be with us', Scott exclaimed in 1829, 'what a name'; 'The Journal of Sir Walter Scott, from the Original Manuscript at Abbotsford', 1890, 2.318). Some more modern notices, while slight, have granted his importance as a contributor to debates about government regulation of railways, and have reasserted the central position he occupied in celebrating science and technology to the readers of the 1830s. As an important mediator of the culture of the new technologies of his time, his influence should not be underestimated, and his writings are a key source for understanding nineteenth-century popular ideas about progress and its relation to technological development. 


@@@@@


doc= 16069


Lardner, Nathaniel (1684-1768), Presbyterian minister and patristic scholar, was born at the Hall House, Hawkhurst, Kent, on 6 June 1684, the elder son of Richard Lardner (1653-1740). He also had a sister, Elizabeth. His father, who was grandson of Thomas Lardner, a cordwainer at Portsmouth, was educated at the academy of Charles Morton (1626-1698) and became an Independent minister. He served between 1673 and 1732 at Deal, at Plaisterer's Hall, London, and then at Chelmsford. Nathaniel's mother was a daughter of Nathaniel Collyer (or Collier), a Southwark tradesman who in the plague year, 1665, had retired to Hawkhurst. Lardner appears to have attended a grammar school, probably at Deal, and from there went to study at the Presbyterian academy in Hoxton Square, London, under Joshua Oldfield, assisted by John Spademan and William Lorimer. Towards the end of 1699 he accompanied Martin Tomkins to study at Utrecht. Daniel Neal, later his brother-in-law and a historian of puritanism, was among his fellow students. In the winter of 1702 he studied at Leiden. 
In 1703 Lardner returned to London and joined the Independent church in Miles Lane, under Matthew Clarke the younger. He continued his studies for a further six years, and it was not until 2 August 1709, in Tomkins's pulpit at Stoke Newington, that he preached his first sermon. In 1713 Lardner became domestic chaplain to Lady Treby (formerly Mary Brinley), fourth wife and widow of Sir George Treby (died 1700), chief justice of the common pleas. He was tutor to their youngest son, Brinley, and in 1716 travelled with him for four months in France and the Netherlands, keeping a journal of the tour. He was a contributor to 'Occasional Papers' (1716-19), its authors, six Presbyterians and two Independents, including -- at that time -- Lardner (in 1730 he became a Presbyterian), largely siding with Benjamin Hoadly in the Bangorian controversy, which erupted following Hoadly's sermon of 31 March 1717, in which he denied that there was biblical warrant for any visible churchly authorities. 
Following Lady Treby's death at the beginning of 1721, Lardner went to live with his father in Hoxton Square, acting as his assistant (until 1729) at Hoxton Square meeting-house, though he was never formally ordained. He joined a literary club and a clerical club which met at Chew's Coffee House, Bow Lane. The death of his pupil Brinley Treby in 1723 greatly affected his spirits and health. He became very deaf; early in 1724 he wrote that when at public worship he could hear neither the preacher's voice nor the congregation singing. He was at this time taking part in a course of Tuesday evening lectures at the Old Jewry, instituted in 1723. Late in that year he also began another series of lectures, out of which grew a notable book, 'The Credibility of the Gospel History' (12 vols., 1727-55). 
The appearance in February 1727 of the first two volumes of part one of Lardner's 'Credibility' brought him into the front rank of Christian apologists. Further volumes appeared until the twelfth in 1755, which was followed by a supplement in 1756. Parts of the work were translated into Dutch, Latin, and German. However, he sold the copyright in 1768 for $150, which was less than his original investment. On 24 August 1729 Lardner preached for William Harris at the Presbyterian meeting-house in Poor Jewry Lane, Crutched Friars. He had held Harris in high esteem since his youth, and the latter unexpectedly offered him a position as his assistant preacher, though he did not assume responsibility for pastoral care. At this period Lardner was engaged in an important correspondence on theological topics with John Shute Barrington, first Viscount Barrington. This eventually led to Lardner's publishing 'A Letter... Concerning... the Logos' (1759). 
Lardner almost died from a fever in 1728, and he experienced further ill health in 1736-7. The death of his father, with whom he had continued to live, and of his ministerial colleague William Harris occurred in the same year, 1740. He was now urged to replace Harris as minister, but worries about ordination, deafness, and literary work held him back. He eventually decided to remain as assistant, and George Benson was elected pastor in November 1740. Lardner disliked engaging in religious disputes, and it is clear that he shrank from the ordeal of a theological examination and a detailed confession of faith. 
It was primarily through his many and varied publications that Lardner became renowned. The collected edition of his 'Works' first appeared in 1788 and ran to eleven volumes. Lardner regarded the average reader as capable of assessing the internal evidence for the historical character of the 'New Testament', and thus he discussed the documentary writings of Josephus and other contemporaries of Jesus, as well as invoking later patristic authors. Lardner also brought together a pioneering collection of critically appraised materials for determining the date and authorship of 'New Testament' books. His 'A large collection of ancient Jewish and heathen testimonies to the truth of the Christian religion' appeared in 1764. He contributed extensively to patristic scholarship, and a number of works, including a history of the heretics of the first two centuries AD, were published posthumously. Lardner's scholarship was undoubtedly pioneering, and was not superseded until well into the nineteenth century. 
A friend of Archbishop Secker and the bishop of Chichester, Edward Waddington, Lardner also corresponded with such dissenters as John Brekell, Samuel Chandler, Philip Doddridge, and Henry Miles. He sent Doddridge some volumes of his 'The Credibility of the Gospel History' in return for several gifts of Doddridge's works, and made observations on Celsus, Julian, and the Manichaeans. Thomas Morgan, the moral philosopher, who had written against revelation, addressed himself to Lardner, thinking he 'could not talk to any man of greater impartiality and integrity' ('Memoirs of the Life and Writings', 59). 
Lardner was, however, conservative in his acceptance of the miraculous element in the biblical narrations. Yet his treatment of demoniacal possession, which he attributed to 'bodily diseases and indispositions' rather than to evil spirits as such ('The Works of Nathaniel Lardner', ed. B. Cole, 11 vols., 1788, 1.429-96), was uncharacteristically rationalistic. All the more remarkable, therefore, was his independence of mind in relation to dogmatic theology. He regarded Christianity as 'a republication of the law of nature, with the two positive appointments of baptism and the Lord's Supper' ('Memoirs of the Life and Writings', 81). The gospel was advantageous because people 'needed to be awakened and excited to the practice of what they did know' (ibid., 83). At Salters' Hall in 1719, where the ostensible subject of discussion, the Trinity, was overshadowed by the issue of subscription, he was a nonsubscriber. He disowned the Arian doctrine which denied the co-equality of the Son with the Father; but for a time Lardner was attracted to the modified Arianism adhered to by the Anglican philosopher and theologian Samuel Clarke (1675-1729) and by the dissenter James Peirce. By 1730 Lardner adhered to what he called the Nazarene doctrine of the Saviour's miraculous conception, as distinct from the Ebionite, according to which Jesus was the son of Joseph and Mary only. This opinion he taught from the pulpit as early as 1747, but did not publish it until 1759, and then anonymously. 
Lardner was of slender build and middle height. He had a frank, intelligent face, and all accounts speak of his good humour and civility. Early in 1745 he received the diploma of DD from Marischal College, Aberdeen, and in June 1746 he was appointed a London correspondent of the Scottish Society for Propagating Christian Knowledge. He retained his place as assistant until 1751; the smallness of the morning congregation was among his reasons for resigning, and he preached his last sermon on 23 June. His lack of popularity as a preacher was partly due to indistinct enunciation; he slurred his words and dropped his voice, defects to which his deafness rendered him insensible. From about 1753 communication with him was by writing only, and he amused himself when alone with looking over the sheets covered with the miscellaneous jottings of his visitors. 
Lardner's old age was lonely. His brother, Richard, a barrister, died in April 1733, his brother-in-law, Daniel Neal, in 1743. In 1748, following the death of his sister Elizabeth, Neal's widow, he wrote that 'now all worldly friendships fade, and are worth little' ('Memoirs of the Life and Writings', 97). However, his literary activity and also his benevolence continued to the end of his life, and shortly before his death he exerted himself to procure aid for foreign protestants. Joseph Priestley often visited him, but when he did so in 1767 found his memory to be failing. 
In July 1768, although quite feeble, Lardner took his annual journey to Hawkhurst, accompanied by one of his nieces and her husband. Although he reached Hawkhurst, Lardner died there on 24 July 1768. He was buried in his family vault in Bunhill Fields, London. His funeral, attended by a number of nonconformist ministers, including Caleb Fleming, Thomas Amory, and Richard Price, was very simple. Lardner had not wanted a funeral sermon, and so Ebenezer Radcliffe, his successor at Poor Jewry Lane, wrote an elogium, which he delivered at the graveside. In 1789 an inscribed marble slab was erected to his memory in Hawkhurst church by his great-nephew David Jennings. His library was sold in December 1768, many books from it eventually finding a home in Dr Williams's Library in London. 


@@@@@


doc= 16070


Larkham, Thomas (1602-1669), Independent minister, was born on 17 August 1602 at Lyme Regis in Dorset, the eldest son of Thomas Larkham, linen draper (died 1639), and his wife, Jane. He matriculated from Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1619 and graduated BA from Trinity Hall in 1622. On 22 June that year at Shobrooke, Devon, he married Patience (died 1677), daughter of George Wilton, schoolmaster, of Crediton. Through his wife Larkham came into property and income which helped to support his unconventional career. Ordained priest in London on 23 May 1624, he became curate at Sandford, Devon, where his son John was baptized on 10 October that year. He proceeded MA in 1626 and on 26 December became vicar of Northam, Devon. He later claimed, in the dedication to his 'The Wedding Supper' (1652), that he endured 'suffering (in the time of the prelacy) in almost all the courts in England', including high commission and Star Chamber. No evidence survives to substantiate this. He left for New England in late 1639 or early 1640, and was deprived in August 1640 for neglect by absence. 
Larkham settled with his family at Dover (Paschataqua), New Hampshire, where Hanserd Knollys (1598-1691) had gathered a church. The inhabitants turned to Larkham because he was laxer about church membership, a reputation at odds with his later notoriety as a congregationalist. In 1641 Larkham opposed Knollys's antinomian preaching: Knollys excommunicated him, and his faction marched towards Larkham's house with a bible on a pole. Knollys soon left Dover. Larkham promised to stay, but in November 1642 suddenly left for England. John Winthrop noted sourly in his journal that Larkham deserted his church, and that a widow later confessed she was carrying his child (rumours of this followed him home) ('Journal of John Winthrop', 421). In his diary, begun about 1648, Larkham noted with pleasure for many years the anniversary of setting sail from New England. 
On his return Larkham went to Kent, then became a parliamentary chaplain. In 1645 the committee for plundered ministers supported his right to preach in the parish of East Greenwich. Thomas Edwards in his 'Gangraena' (1646) branded him a fierce Independent. In February 1647 Larkham went to Ireland as chaplain to Sir Hardress Waller's regiment. 
Larkham went to the west country with Waller at the start of the second civil war, and to Tavistock in April 1648. He preached publicly in the town, which had lost its vicar in 1643 when George Hughes (died 1677) left for Plymouth. The patron, the earl of Bedford, had agreed to let the inhabitants select the incumbent. Larkham claimed he was the parishioners' choice. He left the army after a court martial for inciting disorder, his opponents alleged, though Larkham referred only to disagreements over soldiers' irreligious behaviour. It is not clear whether he gathered a church in the parish immediately, but he quickly caused offence by excluding from communion those he judged ungodly. He alienated trustees of the Lamerton tithe, who withheld a $50 augmentation due to the vicar of Tavistock: Larkham's diary records his dismay. In protest, he went north in August 1651. He joined his son George (1629/30-1700), who had graduated BA from Exeter College, Oxford, the previous year and gone to Cumberland earlier that year. Both were attracted by calls for preachers from the commissioners for the four northern counties. 
Larkham preached in itinerant fashion near Cockermouth, Cumberland, at Cross Canonby, Dearham, and Flimby, and may have been attached to troops in the area. During the autumn he instigated a gathered church at Cockermouth, its members drawn from parishes in the neighbourhood. He held no formal office, but the church book shows he played a critical role. George Larkham, who had been ordained by his father and others on 28 January 1652, became curate of Cockermouth and pastor to the church. In both Tavistock and Cockermouth, father and son combined parish livings with ministry to gathered churches -- an unusual style of ministry, though possible in the interregnum. 
Larkham stayed in Cumberland until April 1652, but set off for Tavistock in response to pleas from supporters. Anticipating more controversy, he went to London to secure support from the committee for advance of money in the Lamerton dispute, and to print his 'The Wedding Supper' (issued in a new edition in 1656) to defend his ministry. When he reached Tavistock his enemies locked the parish church to keep him out. If Larkham had not formally gathered a church before, he soon did so. He distinguished between duties to parish and church: as he revealed in his 'A Discourse of Paying Tithes' (1656), 'I teach all in the publike meeting-house, but do only baptize the children of such as are received and allowed members of the Church, and admitted to the Lords Table' (Larkham, 'Discourse', 25). His 'The Attributes of God Unfolded, and Applied' (1656) reveals an active preaching ministry, but parish records suggest half those born between 1653 and 1660 went unbaptized. What perhaps began as an attempt to refuse sacraments to the ignorant or immoral became a church defined ever more tightly, by written covenant and pastoral inquiry. By 1658 the gathered church paid Larkham to use a meeting-chamber in his house, and allied itself with Lewis Stucley's congregationalist church in Exeter. Larkham's opponents tried to persuade the authorities to remove him: those with a stake in the Lamerton dispute, such as Walter Godbeare, John Pointer, and Francis Glanville, were to the fore, with disenchanted church members like Nicholas Watts and William Hore, and ministers excluded by Larkham from Tavistock's pulpit, such as Digory Polewhele of Whitchurch and Andrew Gove of Peter Tavy. When appeals to the Devon commissioners for sequestrations, the commission for plundered ministers, and the commission for the ejection of scandalous ministers came to nothing, Glanville, Polewhele, Godbeare, Watts, and Hore produced 'The Tavistock Naboth Proved Nabal' (1658), the only tract now extant from a fierce exchange of pamphlets between Larkham and his critics. Their campaign, constructed to fit the expectations of interregnum religious policy, focused on Larkham's unfit conduct as a public preacher, not on his right to gather a church. They glossed his experiments in church discipline as a way to exclude those who had preferred George Hughes's ministry, 'for... he hath often said there were two parties in the Church, the Hugonites and the Larkamites' (F. G. and others, 67). The existence of this rift is confirmed by Watts's connections with Hughes's ministerial circle (which helped Watts to establish a rival lecture-day in Tavistock in 1659), and by Larkham's isolation from the Devon association formed by Hughes. However, the vehemence of 'The Tavistock Naboth''s polemic should not obscure the poor success of the crusade to evict Larkham. Nor should evidence of local support be overlooked: his diary lists those to whom he gave or sold his printed sermons, and notes a stream of gifts from almost eighty donors, many among the town's poorer citizens. Family names that recur in the diary before and after 1660 give a sense of the loyalty to Larkham that carried Tavistock's gathered church into nonconformity. 
On 21 October 1660 Larkham resigned as vicar at the patron's request, but stayed in or near Tavistock, preaching when he could. He fled to Cumberland for six months in 1663-4 to escape charges of nonconformity, but he was excommunicated in 1665. He drew up his will, as of Tavistock, on 1 June 1668, mentioning his wife, son George, daughters Patience and Jane, and grandson Thomas. He died in 1669 and was buried on 23 December in Tavistock. 


@@@@@


doc= 16071


Larking, Lambert Blackwell (1797-1868), antiquary, was born at his father's house, Clare House, East Malling, Kent, on 2 February 1797, the eldest son of John Larking, sheriff of Kent in 1808, and Dorothy, daughter of Sir Charles Style, bt, of Wateringbury Place. He was educated at Eton College and at Brasenose College, Oxford, where he graduated BA in 1820, proceeding MA in 1823. While at Oxford he founded the university lodge of freemasons, Lodge Apollo, in 1819. In 1820, after making a grand tour of Europe with a Mr Lowther, Larking was ordained deacon and licensed to the curacy of East Peckham, near Tonbridge, Kent; he became vicar of Ryarsh, near Maidstone, in 1830, and of Burham, near Rochester, in 1837. He was also chaplain to Viscountess Falmouth, of Mereworth Castle. He married, on 20 July 1831, Frances (died 1873), eldest daughter of Sir William Jervis Twysden (died 1834), bt, of Roydon Hall, East Peckham, and his wife, Frances Lynch; the couple had no children. He remained vicar of Ryarsh and Burham until his death. 
For many years Larking collaborated with the Revd Thomas Streatfeild (1777-1848) of Chart's Edge, Westerham, in the collection and compilation of materials for a new history of the county of Kent. When Streatfeild died in 1848 the materials were left in Larking's hands; he felt that it would be possible to do no more than revise and update the 'History and Topographical Survey' of the county which had been published by Edward Hasted at the end of the eighteenth century. But although he continued to collect material for the project up until the time of his death, ill health compelled Larking to do little more than devote himself to his clerical duties, and it was not until nearly twenty years after his death that his brother John Wingfield Larking was able to arrange for the publication of part of the work under the editorship of Dr Henry H. Drake. 'Hasted's History of Kent: Corrected, Enlarged, and Continued to the Present Time', part 1, 'The Hundred of Blackheath', appeared in a folio edition in 1886. It was the only part ever published. 
A further project very dear to Larking, an edition of 'The Domesday Book of Kent', in facsimile, with transcription, translation, notes, and appendix by him, was completed shortly before his death, when it was in process of being printed. The handsome folio edition which he had planned appeared in 1869. 
Larking was a founder member of the Kent Archaeological Society in 1857, and was its honorary secretary until 1860, when he was elected a vice-president, and he contributed many articles to 'Archaeologia Cantiana', the society's transactions. For the Camden Society, of which he was a member of the council for many years, Larking edited three volumes of records, in 1849, 1857, and 1861; the second of these, 'The Knights Hospitallers in England... 1338', was taken from a document shown to him in the public library of Valletta when ill health caused him to pass the winter of 1838-9 in Malta. Larking died on 2 August 1868 at Ryarsh vicarage. 


@@@@@


doc= 16072


Laroche, James (c.1688-1710?), singer, although active in London was possibly of French origin or birth. He first came to notice as a little boy of about seven in late December 1695 in George Granville's 'The She-Gallants' at the Lincoln's Inn Fields Theatre singing 'So well Corinna likes the joy' to music by John Eccles. He may well have been 'the Boy' who was 'sometimes cited in printed songs in 1696' (Highfill, Burnim & Langhans, 'BDA', 155). He sang in 'The City Bride' in March of that year, and from 14 November 'Jemmy Laroche' appeared as Cupid in Peter Anthony Motteux's 'The Loves of Mars and Venus', a musical entr'acte to Edward Ravenscroft's 'The Anatomist' with music by John Eccles and Gottfried Finger. Appearances as the Child of Hercules in 'Hercules' (June 1697) and as a Savoyard in 'Europe's Revels' (4 November 1697) followed, in the latter of which (according to Highfill, Burnim & Langhans, 'BDA') he sang 'The Raree-Show'. This was the source of his subsequent fame and popularity. Laroche's raree-show was given in London and the provinces about 1710. The claim that the 'Raree show', as depicted in a print in the Harvard Theatre Collection, was played at the theatre in Little Lincoln's Inn Fields in April 1713 is doubtful, as the new theatre was not opened until December 1714. 
There appears to be no record of Laroche's activities after 1710. He may have been the James 'La Roach' buried at St Paul's, Covent Garden, on 4 July 1710 (Highfill, Burnim & Langhans, 'BDA'). 


@@@@@


doc= 16073


Marcellus Laroon the elder (1648/9-1702), painter, was born at The Hague in the Netherlands, the son of Marcel Lauron, a French painter of portraits and landscapes. Lauron apprenticed his son to a history painter before taking him (after 1660) to London, where Laroon trained until about 1670 with 'La Zoon' (perhaps Hendrick Sonnius, Lely's assistant), and with Balthazar Flesshier, a painter of seascapes and portraits. He then became a portrait painter in Yorkshire (where, he told George Vertue, he met Rembrandt at Hull). After returning to London, Laroon joined the Company of Painter-Stainers in 1674. In 1675 he married Elizabeth Keene, daughter of Jeremiah Keen, a rich builder of Little Sutton, near Chiswick. Elizabeth's wealth probably enabled the Laroons to live from 1680 at 4 Bow Street, in fashionable Covent Garden. They had six children. Their three surviving sons (including Marcellus Laroon the younger) were trained by their father as painters, and received a liberal education. 


@@@@@


doc= 16074


Laroon, Marcellus, the younger (1679-1772), painter, was born on 2 April 1679 in London, the second son of the painter Marcellus Laroon the elder ['see below'] and Elizabeth Keene. Though baptized Marcellus Lauron, he always used the name Laroon. He was trained with his brothers by his father as a painter, but also learned fencing, dancing, French, and music. 
At eighteen, in 1697, Laroon attended the peace conference at Rijswijk (Ryswick) in Holland as a page before visiting Venice with Charles Montagu, fourth earl of Manchester. After returning to London in 1698, Laroon worked briefly with his father before embarking on a career as an independent painter. He was soon obliged to find other work, as a singer for Colley Cibber at the Drury Lane Theatre, where he remained until 1706. 
In 1707 Laroon joined the 1st regiment of foot guards, beginning an army career described in his autobiography (which tells little of his artistic life). His earliest attributed drawings, for example, 'A Market Tent in Camp: Soldiers Making Merry' (1707; Courtauld Inst.), record army life in Flanders. On campaign in Spain in 1709-11, Laroon was imprisoned. Ransomed after two years, he resumed civilian life (on half pay) in Covent Garden; he worked at Kneller's academy of painting from 1712 to 1715, and socialized with the painter Samuel Scott at the Rose and Crown Club. In 1715 Laroon returned to soldiering, and he served in Scotland before retiring from the army, aged fifty-three, on a captain's full pay, free from reliance on art commissions. 
Laroon interpreted eighteenth-century English life with sympathetic humour and refinement in paintings and drawings. Most of his conversation pieces, like 'The Dinner Party', given by Laroon to George I (1725; Royal Collection), resemble scenes from plays, often incorporating a few apparent portraits and details such as Venetian furniture and music-making which reflect Laroon's personal interests and experience. The actions of minor figures often serve as commentaries on the central action. For example, in 'A Nobleman's Levee' ('c'.1740; priv. coll.), the boy grooming a dog in the foreground parodies the relationship between the nobleman and the valet tending his wig. Laroon's individualized treatment of servants and his gentle mockery of aristocratic pride may derive from his period as a page. 
Laroon's works reveal his Franco-Netherlandish artistic heritage and his interest in contemporary French art, filtered through English cultural attitudes, as in 'The Village Wedding' (1735; priv. coll.) and 'Tavern Interior with Peasants' (1742; priv. coll.), which includes details reminiscent of works by Teniers and Watteau. The jolly server leaning forward at the left in 'The Dinner Party' is a miniature version of a Dutch 'merry toper'. The cello propped against a stool in 'A Musical Assembly' (1720) is a quotation from Watteau. (Laroon, himself a cellist, was certainly familiar with musical instruments.) 
Laroon's finished drawings include a group of 'music party' scenes intended as gifts for friends. Into old age Laroon continued to compose lively crowd scenes. In his 'A Fight' (1770; AM Oxf.); Laroon depicts a battle between rival serenading parties with the expertise of an army veteran. 
Preliminary sketches survive for some of Laroon's finished drawings, but few for his paintings. He worked out details of individual figures on the final canvas, outlining them in brown on a greyish ground and filling them in with oil colour, which he increasingly used like watercolour wash. From the 1760s he relied on white highlights rather than chiaroscuro to create depth. 
Laroon also collected art. His sale (17 March 1775) included works by Cuyp, Hobbema, Ostade, Kneller, Bril, Teniers, Van de Velde, and (allegedly) Watteau. According to Vertue, Laroon possessed portraits by Frans Hals of the portrait painter Thomas Wyck and his wife. 
Laroon was high-spirited and good-humoured, judging from his writings, for example his farewell letter written on the eve of the battle of Schellenberg (Raines, 1996, 44; Weyerman, appx 4, p. 102), and from his challenge in 1729 to friends at London's Tavern Club who criticized his advice to Sir Robert Walpole on buying art. In old age, Laroon moved to Oxford. He died there on 1 June 1772 in the parish of St Mary Magdalen. 
Laroon's father, 
Laroon's most famous works were his drawings of London street traders and entertainers. Examples are at Blenheim Palace, Oxfordshire. Engraved by different hands, these were published in 1687 as 'The Cryes of the City of London Drawne after the Life' (also known as 'Tempest's Cryes of London', after its publisher Pierce Tempest). They inspired copies, children's books, and a set of Meissen porcelain figurines by Johann Kaendler (1706-1775). The final edition from the original copperplates was printed in 1821. Laroon also provided twenty-four illustrations for 'The Art of Defence' (1699), a book about fencing, and erotic engravings (with titles like 'The Brothel' and 'A Fryer's Civil Chastisement'), for sale in 1691 at Will's Coffee House, Bow Street. Vertue recorded a 'Coronation Procession of William III and Mary II' by Laroon the elder. 
Laroon's masterpiece was his 'Charles II' (1684) for Christ's Hospital (it measured 15 feet by 10 feet). He also produced portraits of John, Lord Lovelace (1689; Wadham College, Oxford), William Savery (1690; City Art Gallery, Plymouth), and Caius Gabriel Cibber, the sculptor. His 'Deliverance of Andromeda' was engraved by John Smith. A versatile painter, Laroon also worked as a copyist, notably of the Dutch architectural artist Bartholomeus van Bassen, and painted animals (including the lost 'Spaniel' and 'Sparrowhawk'), small conversation pieces, 'drolls' (comic paintings), and 'fancy' paintings. He excelled in drapery painting, and became a studio assistant to Kneller. 
Laroon commemorated his combative personality in a lost self-portrait showing sword-fighting scars. (He appears unmarked in portrait prints by William Humphrey and G. P. Harding.) He died of consumption aged fifty-three on 11 March 1702 at Richmond, Surrey, and was buried there, bequeathing his art collection to his three sons. 


@@@@@


doc= 16075


Larpent, Francis Seymour (1776-1845), civil servant, was born on 15 September 1776, the eldest son of John Larpent (1741-1824), inspector of plays, and his first wife, Frances (died 1777), daughter of Maximilian Western of Cokethorpe Park, Oxfordshire. Sir George Gerard Larpent was his half-brother. He was educated at Cheam School under William Gilpin. He graduated BA from St John's College, Cambridge, as sixth wrangler in 1799, was elected fellow, and proceeded MA in 1802. In 1799 he was admitted at Lincoln's Inn, and studied for some time under John Bayley, the eminent special pleader, before being called to the bar (1803). He went the western circuit but did little business, though he made some useful friendships. Charles Manners Sutton, judge-advocate-general, selected him in 1812 to go as deputy judge-advocate-general to the forces engaged in the Peninsular War, where his task was to make the procedure of the courts martial more efficient. He remained until 1814 at headquarters with Wellington, who thought highly of his services ('The Dispatches of Field Marshal the Duke of Wellington', ed. J. Gurwood, 6, 1836, 360). In August 1813 he was taken prisoner, but was exchanged almost immediately (ibid., 737, 761). 
In 1814 Larpent was made a commissioner of customs. About the same time he was appointed civil and Admiralty judge for Gibraltar, where a new code was being prepared. He took part in arranging the court martial on General Sir John Murray at Winchester and was a member of the commission which investigated the escape of American prisoners from Dartmoor. He married on 15 March 1815 Catherine Elizabeth (died 1822), second daughter of Frederick Reeves of East Sheen, Surrey. 
In the spring of 1815 Larpent was invited by the prince regent to inquire into the improprieties that the Princess Caroline was alleged to have committed abroad, but he wisely insisted that his appointment should proceed from the government directly, and that he should be employed to sift the facts rather than gather partisan evidence. Although he nominally set out to take up his work at Gibraltar, he went to Vienna, where he was accredited to Count Munster, and began his investigations into the princess's conduct, with the result that he dissuaded the prince regent's advisers from bringing her to public trial. He travelled from there to Gibraltar, where he remained until 1820, when he was again employed in secret service inquiries into Princess Caroline. 
In 1821 Lord Liverpool made Larpent one of the commissioners of the board of audit of the public accounts. In 1826 he became its chairman, and in 1843 he retired. Following the death of his first wife, he married secondly, on 10 December 1829, Charlotte Rosamund (died 1879), daughter of George Arnold Arnold of Halstead Place, Kent. Both marriages were childless. Larpent died at Holmwood, near Dorking, Surrey, on 21 May 1845, and was buried in the family vault there. When in the Peninsula, Larpent wrote descriptive letters to his stepmother, Anna Margaretta Larpent. Publication of this important first-hand account of Wellington's headquarters was deferred until after Wellington's death. The letters were edited, with a biographical preface by Larpent's half-brother, Sir George Larpent, first baronet (1786-1855), in 1853 and passed through three editions in the same year. A facsimile reprint of the third, one-volume, edition, with a new introduction, appeared in 2000. 


@@@@@


doc= 16076


Larpent, Sir George Gerard, first baronet, and Baron de Hochepied in the Hungarian nobility (1786-1855), politician, was born in London on 16 February 1786, the younger son of John Larpent (1741-1824), inspector of plays, and his second wife, Anna Margaretta Larpent (1758-1832), daughter of Sir James Porter, diplomatist. On 13 October 1813 he married Charlotte (1792-1851), third daughter of William Cracroft of the exchequer office. In 1819 he was granted permission to assume the Hungarian title of Baron de Hochepied, which came through his mother's line. 
Larpent entered the East India house of Cockerell and Larpent at an early age, became chairman of the Oriental and China Association, and deputy chairman of the St Katharine's Dock Company. Through his role in Cockerell and Larpent he became a major recipient of slave compensation. The firm acted as commission agents in both the West India and East India trades and held mortgages in Mauritius in particular. Larpent (and other partners in Cockerell and Larpent) were awarded compensation for ownership of 509 enslaved people following the 'Emancipation Act' of 1833. In 1847-8 Cockerell, Larpent & Co. had '$200,000 of their $900,000 assets locked up in Mauritius sugar estates and extensive interests in indigo and sugar plantations and a teak forest in India' (Chapman, 112-13). 
In May 1840 Larpent unsuccessfully stood for parliament at Ludlow as a whig, and in April 1841, at Nottingham; but in June 1841 he was returned at the head of the poll for Nottingham with Sir John Cam Hobhouse. On 23 August 1841 he was created a baronet. He retired from parliament in August 1842, pending the result of a petition presented against his return. In 1847 he unsuccessfully contested the City of London. He gave evidence in 1848 to the select committee or sugar and coffee planting. He wrote two pamphlets on trade and edited the descriptive journals written home by his half-brother, the lawyer Francis Seymour Larpent (1776-1845); he also edited the history of Turkey written by his grandfather, Sir James Porter, continuing it and adding a memoir (1854). 
Larpent's first wife died on 18 February 1851 at Bath, leaving two sons and a daughter; he married, secondly on 17 July 1852, Louisa Martha, daughter of George Bailey of Lincolnshire; she died at Marseilles on 23 March 1856. They had a son, Seymour George Larpent. Sir George Larpent died at Conduit Street, Mayfair, London, on 8 March 1855. 


@@@@@


doc= 16077


Larpent, John (1741-1824), examiner of plays, was born on 14 November 1741, the second son of John Larpent (1710-1797), later chief clerk to the Foreign Office, and his wife, Mary Ann, the daughter of James Pazant, of a refugee Norman family. Larpent was educated at Westminster School and entered the Foreign Office. He was secretary to John Russell, fourth duke of Bedford, at the treaty of Paris in 1763 and to Francis Seymour Conway, first marquess of Hertford, when the latter was lord lieutenant of Ireland. He remained Hertford's secretary, and followed him to the lord chamberlain's department. By 1777 he had become a groom of the privy chamber. In November 1778 he was appointed examiner of plays by Hertford, to succeed William Chetwynd, who had held the post since its inception in 1738. 
Larpent had married Frances, the daughter of Maximilian Western of Cokethorpe Park, Oxfordshire, on 12 or 14 August 1773. They had two sons before Frances died on 9 November 1777. The influence of Larpent's second wife, Anna Margaretta Porter (1758-1832) ['see 'Larpent, Anna Margaretta], helped shape his role as examiner. She was a sharply observant diarist and enthusiastic follower of the theatre, whom Larpent married on 25 April 1782, and who was soon acting as his deputy. 
Larpent's policy as examiner reflected the times. Before 1789 he was tolerant of generalized political satire, but in the heightened climate of the revolutionary and Napoleonic wars he became more sensitive, ordering revisions even to pro-government plays should they inadvertently encourage sedition. However, he was conscientious and a polite and sensitive negotiator, on several occasions successfully working with playwrights and managers to render rejected plays suitable for performance. Episodes such as Theodore Hook's attack on Larpent, which followed the suppression of his play 'Killing No Murder' in 1819 on the grounds that it was excessively insulting to Methodists, were the exception rather than the rule. Larpent considered Hook's subsequent claim that he was a Methodist libellous. 
Larpent died at his home in East Sheen, Surrey, on 18 January 1824. He was survived by Anna Larpent, by the elder son of his first marriage, Francis Seymour Larpent, and by the sons of his second (there seem to have been no daughters), John James Larpent (1783-1860) and George Gerard Larpent. He also left behind him the collection of plays built by successive examiners since the licensing act of 1737, which he and his wife had carefully maintained. The collection was not passed on to his successor, George Colman the younger, and ownership was assumed by Anna Larpent, who sold the plays to John Payne Collier and Thomas Amyot. It was acquired in 1853 by Francis Egerton, first earl of Ellesmere, and in 1917 by Henry E. Huntington, and thence passed to the Huntington Library, California. 


@@@@@


doc= 16078


Lascelles, Henry, second earl of Harewood (1767-1841), politician, was born at Stapleton, Yorkshire, on 25 December 1767, the second son of Edward Lascelles, first earl of Harewood (1740-1820), and his wife, Anne (died 1805), daughter of William Chaloner. He was a descendant of Henry Lascelles (bap. 1690, d. 1753), who had established the family's wealth, partly as a slave trader in Barbados. On 2 September 1794 he married Henrietta (1770-1840), eldest daughter of Sir John Saunders Sebright. Queen Charlotte wrote, on his engagement: 'the gay Lothario is to wed the sedate and retired wife... beauty there is none nor fortune on the female side' (Harcourt, 6.44). Of their seven sons and four daughters, the eldest boy, Edward, died in 1839 and the second, Henry, succeeded to the title. 
In 1796 Lascelles was elected unopposed as MP for Yorkshire, standing as a Pittite. He was re-elected in 1802, but did not stand in 1806, knowing that he would be opposed for his hostility to restrictions on woollen manufacturing. In 1807 he was again a candidate for Yorkshire in the first contested election which had occurred for sixty-six years. The struggle was also memorable on account of the vast expense that Lascelles incurred: nearly $100,000. William Wilberforce, whose party almost entirely lacked organization, was head of the poll. Lascelles, who was opposed by clothiers threatered by the removal of protection for their trade, and subjected to polemic about his family's slavery interests, was beaten by Lord Milton; he sat instead for Westbury (bought by his father). On 6 October 1812 he was returned for Pontefract; but Wilberforce having retired from the representation of the county, Lascelles came in as his substitute on 16 October. Probably in consequence of the enormous sums he had expended in electioneering in the county, he chose to sit for the family borough of Northallerton in 1818. In the House of Commons he voted as a moderate tory and spoke fairly often. On 13 February 1800 he supported the 'Habeas Corpus Suspension Bill', and on 3 November 1801 voted for the preliminaries for peace with France. He seconded the appointment of Charles Abbot (afterwards first Baron Colchester) as speaker on 11 February 1802, and took the moderate side in the debate on the prince of Wales's debts on 4 March 1803. He moved the second reading of the 'Woollen Manufacturers Bill' on 13 June 1804, the first of a series of efforts to liberalize the trade. The whigs tested him 'against the Opposition' and he opposed parliamentary reform and, once in the Lords, Catholic emancipation. He supported modest change to the 1815 corn laws and was a moderate supporter of retrenchment. After the death of his elder brother in 1814 he was styled Viscount Lascelles, and when, in 1819, Earl Fitzwilliam was removed on political grounds from the lord lieutenancy of the West Riding, Lascelles was appointed in his place. On 3 April 1820 -- while seeking a coronation peerage -- he succeeded his father in the earldom. He took little part in the debates in the House of Lords. He was opposed to the bill of pains and penalties against Queen Caroline. On 7 October 1831 he declared himself a moderate reformer, and favoured the extension of representation, but opposed the 'Reform Bill'. In the Lords he was of 'the middle or moderate party', a designation which reflected his general political posture. 
Lascelles's chief interest lay in country life. He maintained the Harewood hunt and died, on 24 November 1841, at Bramham in Yorkshire, just after returning from a run with the hounds. 


@@@@@


doc= 16079


Lascelles, Rowley (1771-1841), antiquary and archivist, was born in Westminster, the eldest son of Rowley Lascelles, a merchant, of Little Ealing, Middlesex, and his wife, Ann Dunn. He was educated from 1785 at Harrow School, and was admitted to the Middle Temple in 1788 and to the King's Inns in 1806. He practised for about twenty years at the Irish bar. 
In 1813 the record commissioners for Ireland selected Lascelles as successor to Bartholomew Thomas Duhigg to edit lists of all public officers recorded in the Irish court of chancery from 1540 to 1774. The lists formed part of the extensive manuscript collections concerning the history of Ireland made by John Lodge (1692-1774), deputy keeper of the rolls in Ireland. These collections had been purchased after Lodge's death from his widow by the Irish government, and were deposited in Dublin Castle. Lascelles quarrelled with the commissioners, but having gained the favour of Lord Redesdale, he was authorized by Henry Goulburn, then chief secretary for Ireland, to carry on the work in London. It was printed, financed by the Treasury, in two volumes in 1824 and 1830. The partisan tone of this book gave so much offence that, although copies were distributed to public libraries, it was practically suppressed, and Lascelles's employment ceased. Henry Cotton commented that the work contained 'a great mass of curious information carelessly put together, and disfigured by flippant and impertinent remarks of the compiler, most unbefitting a government employe' ('Fasti ecclesiae Hibernicae', 2nd edn, 1851, 1, preface). Almost inevitably, a financial dispute between Lascelles and the Treasury followed: Lascelles maintained before a select committee of the House of Commons in 1836 that he was entitled to be paid $500 a year until the completion of the work, and he received $200 in 1832, and $300 in 1834. The two petitions which he addressed to the House of Commons on the subject produced no result. He died on 19 March 1841 at 22 Newland Street, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 16080


Lascelles, Thomas (1669/70-1751), military engineer, was probably the Thomas Lascelles baptized at Leake, Yorkshire, on 16 May 1670, the son of Thomas Lascelles. He seems to have been a member of the Lascelles family who owned the small estate of Ganthorne in the North Riding of Yorkshire, but it is unclear whether he inherited any property. He served as a volunteer in Ireland from 1689 to 1691 and distinguished himself at the battle of the Boyne. He also served in the expedition led by Sir George Rooke in 1702 to Cadiz and the destruction of the plate fleet in Vigo, as a gentleman of the 2nd troop of guards volunteers. He obtained his first commission in the regular army in 1704, sharing the pay of an engineer ($100 p.a.) with John Armstrong. He served throughout Marlborough's campaigns in the Low Countries, being present at nearly all the battles and sieges. Lascelles was seriously wounded at the battle of Blenheim in 1704. When Queen Anne distributed $65,000 to the members of Marlborough's army, in recognition of their gallant services, Lascelles received $33 as his share. 
Following the treaty of Utrecht in 1713 Thomas Lascelles and John Armstrong were appointed to superintend the demolition of fortifications and the razing of the harbour works at Dunkirk. Lascelles remained on this duty until 1716. He and Armstrong were initially paid 20's'. per day, which was double the ordinary allowance. Later the Board of Ordnance had this sum increased by 10's'. per day. Having been appointed deputy quartermaster-general in 1715, Lascelles was re-employed at Dunkirk between 1718 and 1725. Lascelles's mission (shared with Armstrong for the early part of 1718) was as much diplomatic as technical. The scheme agreed at the treaty of Utrecht was opposed by the inhabitants, who considered the closed-off old harbour a health risk, and by the merchant interest more specifically, who consistently sought ways of opening up the waterways around Dunkirk to restore their trade. Lascelles sympathized with the aspirations of the merchants and did not object to their being allowed an indirect connection with the English Channel by canal. However, his mission required him to ensure that the direct route to the sea, the old harbour, remained closed to commercial and military traffic while allowing sufficient water to pass through the barrier to prevent the harbour becoming stagnant. The situation demanded constant scrutiny of local politics as well as continual reassessment of the engineering practicalities. Exhausted, Lascelles returned to Britain in 1725. 
Lascelles had been promoted director of engineers on 1 April 1722, following the death of Lewis Petit des Etans in 1720, and deputized for Armstrong as surveyor of the ordnance during Armstrong's absences abroad. Lascelles was ordered to return to Dunkirk in March 1730, where he found repairs to the port and fortifications well advanced. Sustained pressure from Lascelles and from the British embassy at Paris achieved the reduction of the new quays and jetties to ground level, but this time local grievances were more closely aligned with the aspiration of the French government to strengthen its offensive capability on its northern coast. Following a series of fruitless negotiations on this issue Lascelles left for Britain in May 1733, leaving the affair in the hands of his nephew and deputy, Joseph Day. 
Britain's return to European conflict placed further pressure upon Lascelles. In 1740 he was appointed chief engineer of the train of artillery in the expedition to Cartagena led by Charles, eighth Lord Cathcart; however, by then his services were in such great demand at home that Jonas Moore had to be substituted for him. As a consequence in November 1741 Lascelles was directed to fill the office of surveyor-general of the ordnance during the illness of Major-General John Armstrong. In April 1742 he was directed to become master-surveyor of the ordnance at the Tower of London. Lascelles was further appointed assistant and deputy to the lieutenant-general of the ordnance in May 1742 and to perform the duties of that office for as long as the post remained vacant. On 1 July 1742, following Armstrong's death, he was appointed chief engineer. Lascelles visited Ostend in 1744 to report on the armament and ammunition which was to be sent there and to arrange for the repair and augmentation of the fortifications. He was further promoted inspector-general of artillery and represented the British government at The Hague for the purpose of carrying out the terms of a convention, dated 5 May 1745, between the states general of the United Provinces and George II. Lascelles was further able to determine the balance due from Great Britain to the states general for artillery and ammunition which was required to be supplied by Great Britain in the Low Countries. 
Lascelles resigned from the service on 1 March 1750. In April he was granted $200 per annum for life for his long and faithful services. The same year he retired on a pension of $200 per annum; it is unclear whether or not this was an additional sum. Lascelles moved back to his native Yorkshire; in his will, dated 23 November 1750, he is described as 'of Pontefract' and possessed estates at Hunton and Scotton, which he left to his nephew Francis Lascelles, in addition to $10,000 p.a. Further legacies were distributed to other members of his family. He died on 1 November 1751, aged eighty-one; he had served through twenty-one campaigns and been present in thirty-six engagements. 


@@@@@


doc= 16081


A Lasco, John (1499-1560), evangelical reformer, was born in Lask, Poland, the second of three sons and brother to four daughters of Jarslov Laski (died 1521?), voivode of Sieradz, and Susanna Bak ('fl'. 1484-1510), daughter of the Bakova-Gora councilman Zbigniew Bak. His birth coincided with a rise in the family's fortune. His uncle Jan Laski (died 1531) rose quickly in the ranks of the Polish nobility, becoming royal secretary, chancellor, and finally, in 1510, archbishop of Gnesen and primate of the Polish Roman Catholic church. In that same year Jan Laski brought his three nephews to Cracow to provide for their education. 
In March 1513 the primate travelled to Rome to participate in the fifth Lateran Council. His two older nephews, Jerome and John, accompanied him on this journey, and were joined the following year by their youngest brother, Stanislaw. While the primate engaged in ecclesiastical and diplomatic discussions, the three young men continued their education under the watchful eye of their tutor, Jan Branicki. Early in 1515 they took up residence in Bologna, along with other Polish students. They pursued a private course of study, focusing on Latin, Italian, ecclesiastical law, and history. Apparently they were not enrolled in the university. According to his tutor, John was an exemplary student, 'in whom there is virtue that I have before never seen in a boy' (Dalton, 63). While in Bologna, a Lasco became acquainted with Reginald Pole, who later led the Catholic reformation in England. He just missed the German humanist Ulrich von Hutten, who probably left Bologna a few months before a Lasco's arrival. 
In 1518 a Lasco moved to Padua, where for a short time he took on a diplomatic role as counsellor for the Polish nation. In March 1519 he went back to Poland. At some point during this period, a Lasco suffered the embarrassment of excommunication when his cousin defaulted on a loan that he had secured with John's name. The archbishop, however, made good the debt, and John was reconciled with the church. Meanwhile the primate had begun to advance the career of his protege, who on 30 November 1517 was summarily named custodian of Leczyca, a canon of Plock, and coadjutor to the deacon of Gnesen. The following month he became deacon of Gnesen, and in May 1518 was appointed a canon of Cracow. In 1521 he was ordained to the priesthood, appointed dean of Gnesen, and named royal secretary. In 1525 he became provost of Leczyca, that is, head of the cathedral chapter, and in the following year was appointed to the same office for Gnesen. 
In 1524 a Lasco accompanied his older brother, Jerome, on a diplomatic mission to France. Jerome had been introduced earlier to the French court during his student days in Bologna. 'En route' they stopped briefly in Basel, where a Lasco first met Erasmus. He was immediately drawn to the humanist and would later return for a more extended visit. The brothers pushed on to Paris where a Lasco met some of the leading French humanists, including Marguerite de Valois, sister of Francois I, and Faber Staupulenses (Lefevre d'Etaples). He may also have attended lectures at the Sorbonne. 
In the spring of 1525 a Lasco returned to Basel, where he lodged with Erasmus in quarters provided by the publisher Johann Froben. During his stay he also met Beatus Rhenanus, the publisher Oporin, Heinrich Glarenius, Zwingli, Guillaume Farel, and Conrad Pellican, with the last of whom he briefly studied Hebrew. Funds supplied from Poland supported Erasmus's household during this period. A Lasco even purchased the master's library for 300 gulden, allowing Erasmus to use it until his death. Later Erasmus tried to terminate the agreement when a Lasco failed to make a second payment on time, and the dispute continued until Erasmus's death in 1536. Then in the following spring a Lasco made a final payment to the executor of Erasmus's estate through his messenger, Boniface Amerbach. He began to receive books in April 1537, but eventually sold most of them and virtually dissolved the collection. 
In June 1525 the primate, Jan Laski, summoned a Lasco back to Poland by way of Italy. John spent a few months in Padua and Venice, where he called upon the doge, Andrea Gritti, who would later be an important diplomatic ally. Then, after requesting additional funds from Poland, he continued his trip home, arriving in Poznan in April 1526. He spent the next several years immersed in the affairs of Poland's political and ecclesiastical hierarchy, while lamenting the loss of his student days in Basel. 
From 1527 the Laski family was plunged into a complicated and ominous political intrigue. After the death of Lajos II Jagiellon in 1526, a bitter dispute arose over succession to the Hungarian throne. Ferdinand von Habsburg was perhaps the strongest contender, but Janos Zapolya was the local favourite. Jerome a Lasco secretly committed himself and his family to Zapolya's cause, continuing the anti-Habsburg policies of his uncle. Meanwhile the Polish king remained officially neutral in the affair. In 1528 Jerome travelled to Istanbul where, misrepresenting himself as an official ambassador, he concluded a treaty between Zapolya and Sultan Suleiman the Magnificent. The Turkish forces then attacked Hungary and in 1529 laid siege to Vienna. John a Lasco's role in this agreement is not clear, but he was often called upon to raise financial support. As a reward for his efforts, Zapolya named him bishop of Veszprem in 1529, a post in which he was never confirmed by the papacy. In March 1530 he delivered a speech before a Polish council of nobles, defending both his brother and Zapolya. This blatant opposition to the Habsburgs and the papacy, and the unpopular alliance with non-Christian Turks, brought ecclesiastical censure to the aged primate in Poland. He escaped further torment only through his death on 19 May 1531 in Kalisz; John a Lasco accompanied his uncle's body to Gnesen for burial. 
The conflict over Hungary continued, with neither side gaining a decisive victory. In October 1530 the claimants met with other interested leaders in order to resolve the issue diplomatically. They agreed to a year-long armistice but found no permanent resolution. When conflict broke out again, Ferdinand gradually gained the upper hand. Suspicious and desperate, Zapolya turned on his former ally, Jerome a Lasco, who may have been asking for repayment of his debts. When Zapolya threw Jerome into prison, John immediately went to Kasemark in Hungary in order to secure his release. He sought support from important acquaintances, including the king of Poland, the king of France, and the duke of Prussia. Eventually Jan Tarnowski, a nobleman and confidant of Zapolya, took matters into his own hands and secured Jerome's release. Jerome immediately switched his allegiance to Ferdinand and sent his brother John to make the humiliating request for reconciliation. The entire affair plunged the Laski family deeply into debt and effectively ended its short-lived political power. 
After this debacle, a Lasco withdrew for a time from public life, often residing with his sister-in-law, Anna von Kurozaek, in Rytwiany, Poland. Although he frequently complained of poverty he managed to support a young pupil, Nikolaus Anian Burgonius, sending him to Wittenburg in 1534 to study with Melanchthon. The two men were devastated when Burgonius died in Leipzig the following year. During the same period, a Lasco retained Andreas Frycz Modrzewski as his personal secretary. Modrzewski too resided for a time with Melanchthon and later contributed significantly to the protestant movement in Poland. These connections with Melanchthon are remarkable at a time when a Lasco had not yet declared himself for the protestant reformation. 
After the death of his uncle a Lasco's place in the ecclesiastical hierarchy diminished rapidly. Several attempts to have him appointed to a bishop's see came to nothing. Declining career prospects and increasing contact with reforming impulses on the continent brought a Lasco closer to a momentous decision, one which would change his life. In April 1537 he travelled briefly to Frankfurt am Main, probably to test his prospects abroad. During this trip Duke Georg of Saxony imprisoned him briefly in Leipzig, on charges stemming from the Hungarian affair, regarding him as an enemy of Ferdinand von Habsburg. When a letter from the Habsburgs testified to John's new allegiance to Ferdinand, the duke released him. He spent a few days with Melanchthon and then visited the home of the noted German theologian and statesman Julius Pflug. In 1538 he returned to Poland where King Sigismund offered him the small bishopric of Kujawien. A Lasco politely refused; apparently he had already decided to emigrate. 
In 1539 a Lasco set out for western Europe with his brother Jerome. He first returned to Frankfurt where he met Albrecht Hardenburg. He then accompanied his friend to Mainz and to Louvain, where Hardenburg served on the theological faculty. In Louvain he joined a small group devoted to biblical study that had its roots in the 'devotio moderna', a late medieval pietistic movement most famously represented by the 'Imitatio Christi' of Thomas a Kempis. There he met the daughter of a Louvain weaver, whom he married in the spring of 1540; her name remains unknown. He defends his decision in a letter to a Polish bishop, citing the scriptural injunction ('1 Corinthians' 7: 9) to marry if one cannot remain chaste. To avoid possible persecution, the couple moved a few months later to Emden in East Friesland. Meanwhile Jerome returned to Poland and took to what proved to be his deathbed near the end of 1541. A Lasco quickly returned home and was with his brother when he died in December. When word of his homecoming spread abroad, a Lasco's enemies seized their opportunity. Using reports of his recent marriage, he was challenged to sign an oath testifying his allegiance to the Roman Catholic church. An archivist's note states that a Lasco actually signed the oath to deny that he had taken a wife and declared that he had not abandoned the doctrine of the gospel, but the oath itself makes no mention of the marriage. Nevertheless the sincerity of his religious allegiance had been called into question, and he was officially deprived of his benefices. 
Returning to Emden, a Lasco now moved more decidedly into the protestant camp. In 1543 he accepted an invitation from Countess Anna of Oldenburg to be pastor of the Emden church and superintendent of all East Friesian churches. He followed the Swiss models for reform laid out by John Calvin and Heinrich Bullinger, although he repeatedly emphasized his independence from these leaders. He soon denied the physical presence of Christ's body and blood in the Lord's supper and stressed the importance of rigorous ecclesiastical discipline within the life of the church. He instituted a 'coetus', or synod of pastors and lay elders, to assist in church government. He hammered out his theology in the context of disputation, including dialogues with the Anabaptist leaders Menno Simons and David Joris. In 1549 East Friesland came under pressure to accept the Augsburg interim, the religious agreement forced by the emperor Charles V on the protestant princes of Germany in the previous year. For East Friesland this meant the danger of a return to Roman Catholic rule, and ultimately led to a Lasco's expulsion from Emden. He had anticipated this fate, however, and crossed to England to make arrangements for his being sheltered there. Ostensibly he made the journey to participate in a doctrinal colloquy summoned by Archbishop Thomas Cranmer as part of his programme of religious reform. Cranmer had written at least three times to a Lasco, inviting him to this conference, while a Lasco himself corresponded at intervals with Bullinger, Bucer, Melanchthon, and Calvin, all key components in Cranmer's plan. Cranmer even wrote to a Lasco urging him to bring Melanchthon to the conference. The invitation would also have had the support of William Turner, the king's physician and Protector Somerset's confidant, who had spent some time in Emden under a Lasco's spiritual direction. As nephew of the late archbishop of Gnesen, moreover, and an acquaintance of the duke of Prussia, a Lasco was also well known in English political circles, and he was later accused of having used this trip to negotiate a treaty between England and Prussia against Charles V, a charge he consistently denied. 
A Lasco arrived in England in September 1548 and departed in late February or early March 1549. In the event the colloquy never took place, but this brief visit was none the less beneficial, for he had secured a place of refuge for his East Friesian congregations, should they be forced to leave the continent. On his return to Emden his earlier fears were realized. The countess had accepted a version of the interim and she asked a Lasco to resign. He rebuked her for a lack of courage but consented to depart. After a tearful farewell, he left Emden and set out for Bremen, where Hardenburg was serving as pastor. In April 1550 he continued his journey, arriving in England the following month. For a short time he resided with Cranmer in Lambeth but soon purchased his own home on Bow Lane, in the city of London. In June he, his wife, and his children (John, Jerome, and Barbara) were made English denizens. 
In England, a Lasco served as superintendent of the Strangers' Church of London, which was officially incorporated by letters patent on 24 July 1550. The royal charter, still preserved in London's Guildhall, grants to the strangers the old church of the Austin friars off Threadneedle Street, which was renamed the 'Temple of the Lord Jesus'. A Lasco is named as superintendent, along with four additional pastors; two of these would oversee the Dutch church, which to this day continues to meet in Austin Friars, and two would direct the French/Walloon church, which would meet in St Anthony's Chapel on Threadneedle Street. The charter granted them freedom to use their own rites and ceremonies, 'not withstanding that they do not conform with the rites and ceremonies used in our Kingdom' (Lindeboom, 202). This was an extraordinary privilege, especially given the fact that a religious 'Act of Uniformity' had just been passed the previous year. In his most famous work, 'Forma ac ratio' (1555), a Lasco gives an account of the 'Form and Rationale' of the ceremonies used by these immigrants, which may have had some influence upon the 1552 'Book of Common Prayer', especially on penitential rites associated with the morning and evening prayer services. More direct lines of influence can be traced to John Knox's Scottish order (1560-61) and to the Middleburg ordinal (1602), later used by English puritans. On the continent traces of the Strangers' Church's order can be found in the 1563 German Palatinate order and in the 'forms and prayers' attached to Pieter Dathenus's 1566 psalter, which in turn influenced liturgies in the Dutch reformed churches. 
Opposition to these novel rites came almost immediately, most notably from Nicholas Ridley, bishop of London, in whose diocese the churches were established and who endeavoured to limit the independence of their congregations. This opposition was no doubt linked to the controversy over John Hooper's refusal to wear the requisite ecclesiastical vestments to his consecration as bishop of Gloucester. A Lasco took an active role in this controversy, vocally supporting Hooper in his opposition to the vestments. He was quite disappointed when Martin Bucer and Pietro Martire Vermigli finally persuaded Hooper that he should accept the prescribed ecclesiastical garb and be consecrated bishop. 
At the same time there were disputes between the Dutch and the French congregations as to the ownership of property and the diversity of rites. When accused of departing from Calvin's example, a Lasco wrote directly to the Genevan reformer, asking for his assistance in the dispute. Meanwhile, a small Italian congregation joined the stranger group. Its minister charged a Lasco with departing from Calvin's teaching on predestination, but the superintendent responded simply that Calvin had spoken 'too harshly' in this matter (A Lasco, 'Opera', 2.676). In addition to professional struggles, a Lasco also experienced personal tragedy. His three-month-old son Paul died in November 1550, and in 1552 he lost his wife to the sweating sickness. He himself contracted the sickness and suffered from chronic headaches thereafter. In 1553, however, he announced plans to remarry. His second wife, Katherina, accompanied him for the rest of his life and with her he had five more children, one of whom, Samuel, gained some notoriety as a soldier. 
When Queen Mary ascended the English throne in 1553, a Lasco and most of his associates were forced to find refuge elsewhere. At first they sought a home in Denmark, but they were soon turned away, ostensibly because of their Zwinglian views on the sacraments. Late in 1553 a Lasco returned to Emden, where he found it necessary to rebuke a former colleague, Gellius Faber, for publishing a catechism that was too Lutheran in its content. He also began a literary war against the Lutheran theologian Joachim Westphal over sacramental issues. In the meantime he continued to involve himself in the affairs of returning exiles, advising congregations in both Wesel and Frankfurt am Main. In both cases he consulted Calvin. In April 1555 a Lasco went to Frankfurt, where he finally met Calvin personally. There he drew the fire of another Lutheran theologian, Johann Timann. In his response a Lasco argued unpersuasively that he agreed in substance with the standard Lutheran confession, the 'confessio Augustana'. 
In 1556 a Lasco's career came full circle, and he was allowed to return to Poland. He immediately came under attack for his sacramental teaching, most notably from a former colleague, Bishop Hosius. In 1557 he addressed a defence of his doctrine to the Polish king and appended a copy of the 'confessio Augustana'. As the king read the confession, a Lasco's defence fell on the floor where a dog started to devour it. A sympathetic servant rescued the document and transcribed it for the king's reading. 
During his final years a Lasco attended numerous meetings and synods aimed at achieving a religious consensus among the Polish people, and especially among Polish protestants. His efforts failed in 1558, when the Prussian Lutherans refused to sign a common confession at a conference in Konigsberg. In the autumn of 1559 he fell sick, and by Christmas he was desperately ill. On 8 January 1560 he died at Pinczow in the presence of his wife and children. The funeral was held on 29 January, and his body was buried at the high altar in the church at Pinczow; the site of the grave was destroyed in 1884 by the bishop of Cracow. Soon after his death a certain Grzegorz Orszak began to circulate rumours that the lips on a Lasco's corpse had fused together, in divine judgment upon his heresy. The synod decided to reopen the grave to dispel the rumour. A Lasco left his family in relative poverty, though the local nobility granted them a gift of 289 gulden. In 1564 his wife wrote a touching letter to Duke Albrecht of east Prussia, requesting further support. The Laski family as a whole soon reverted to Roman Catholicism, before disappearing from the historical record. 
Throughout his career John a Lasco demonstrated a curious mixture of ecumenism and fierce independence. As an ecclesiastical diplomat he believed strongly that for protestantism to succeed upon the continent it was essential for the various evangelical factions to unite. The means to this end was a common confession of eucharistic doctrine. Hitherto the debate had centred upon the presence of Christ's body and blood in the elements of bread and wine. On this point a Lasco was decidedly Zwinglian, believing that Christ's body remained in heaven. However, he cleverly, though unsuccessfully, tried to refocus the discussion, drawing attention to the entire action of the ceremony rather than viewing the elements as the focal point. In this perspective the benefit of the eucharist does not lie in the bread and wine alone, but rather it depends upon participation in the rite as a whole. By such participation believers are 'sealed' by the Holy Spirit in the spiritual communion with Christ. They should therefore remain seated while receiving communion, because in this way the sacrament testifies to 'our Sabbath rest in Christ' (A Lasco, 'Opera', 2.658). As a seal, this rite carries divine authority, causing a Lasco to reject the Zwinglian analogy for the eucharist, as a soldier's oath of allegiance. He likewise opposed what he understood of Calvin's position, that Christ was somehow spiritually present in the elements. 
A Lasco also made notable contributions to the formation of church polities. As superintendent of churches in East Friesland he was instrumental in establishing the 'coetus', the governing body consisting of ministers and lay elders, and perhaps more than any other leading reformer he insisted that both groups formed a single 'order', albeit with the important distinction that only ministers could teach and administer the sacraments. When he moved to England he instituted something like a synod, in which ministers and elders from the various stranger congregations supervised the entire organization of their churches. These incipient forms of presbyterianism would not be unknown to later Elizabethan puritans. Nor did they forget that the crown had once granted to these immigrants a right of legal nonconformity, something which in their own time it would not grant to England's own citizens. 


@@@@@


doc= 16082


Lassell, William (1799-1880), astronomer, was born on 18 June 1799 in Bolton, Lancashire, where his father, Nathaniel (died 'c'.1812), was in business as a timber merchant and builder with James Gregson, a brother-in-law. Lassell's mother, Hannah, came from a Liverpool business family. The religious backgrounds of his family were Congregationalist and Independent, and William (who until the late 1840s was often known as William Lassell junior) completed his education at the Rochdale dissenting academy. He maintained religious interests throughout his life. 
Although no record seems to have survived of the trade he entered, Lassell became an apprentice in Liverpool about 1815. By 1825 he was being listed in a Liverpool directory as a brewer. Two years later, on 8 May 1827, he married Maria King, 'nee' Gregson, in Toxteth, Liverpool. Maria and at least three daughters survived him. The success of Lassell's brewing business, in which he sometimes traded with various partners, enabled him to lavish many thousands of pounds on his astronomical endeavours. Even so, at his death his estate was valued at almost $70,000. 
Lassell early developed strong scientific interests. These interests were linked to his fascination with machinery through the construction, as well as the use, of reflecting telescopes, a hobby he began no later than 1821. By 1837 he had completed an excellent reflecting telescope with a speculum metal main mirror 9 inches in diameter. This, his first major instrument, was followed by two much more powerful telescopes, the first a 24 inch reflector completed in 1845 (which followed an identical design to the 9 inch). A huge 48 inch that required two assistants for its operation went into service in 1861. 
An innovative telescope builder, Lassell, along with Lord Rosse, was instrumental in pushing reflectors well beyond the state of the art as defined in the late eighteenth century by William Herschel. Lassell's tenacity and mechanical skills were evidenced by his mastery of the making and use of such awkward instruments (when the 24 inch was erected at the Royal Greenwich Observatory after his death, it was not a success in other hands). His main contributions were to apply equatorial mountings to large reflectors and to develop steam-driven machines for grinding and polishing big telescope mirrors in which the movements closely matched those used in polishing mirrors by hand. 
Lassell was closely and directly involved in the construction of his telescopes, only some larger pieces of metalwork being contracted out. However, he was aided in his undertakings by his close friend James Nasmyth, one of the most skilled and versatile engineers of his generation, as well as an avid amateur astronomer. It was Nasmyth, for example, who built, from Lassell's design, Lassell's first successful polishing machine. Another intimate friend was William Rutter Dawes. For many years a dissenting minister at Ormskirk, Dawes was a renowned astronomical observer, and he eased Lassell's access to wider scientific circles. 
The 24 inch telescope was built by Lassell while at Starfield, his first suburban mansion in Liverpool. In 1855 he moved 2 miles further from the centre of the city, to Bradstones. Here the 48 inch was assembled between 1858 and 1860. But in 1861, in order to escape the ever troublesome Liverpool atmosphere, as well as to observe from a more southerly latitude, Lassell, as he had done with the 24 inch in 1852, shipped the 48 inch to Valletta, Malta, where it served him for three years. As this was a far better site than that of Lord Rosse's 72 inch reflector, the more famous 'Leviathan of Parsonstown', in Ireland, Lassell's telescope was arguably the most powerful in the world. 
When Lassell returned to England (taking up residence at Ray Lodge in Maidenhead, Berkshire), he did not re-erect the 48 inch, preferring to observe with his smaller but easier to manage 24 inch. In 1864 he offered the 48 inch as a gift to the Melbourne observatory in Australia. The Royal Society committee then charged with securing a large telescope for the observatory declined, preferring to start from scratch with a design for a new reflector by the Dublin maker Thomas Grubb, a choice with which the Melbourne authorities agreed. Eventually, in 1877, nearly all of the 48 inch was consigned to scrap. 
As an observer, Lassell was little interested in the sort of painstaking positional astronomy pursued by professionals, nor did he possess the mathematical training and skills to engage in debates in theoretical astronomy. Although he did spend some time observing nebulae, he was most enthusiastic about examining the planets of the solar system (especially Saturn) and in searching for new satellites orbiting around them. His first major find was that of Triton, Neptune's largest satellite, which he first glimpsed within weeks of the discovery of Neptune itself in September 1846. In 1848 he found (almost simultaneously with W. C. Bond at Harvard) Hyperion, a satellite of Saturn, and in 1851 he detected Ariel and Umbriel, two faint satellites of Uranus. A catalogue of some 600 new nebulae was the work of his assistant, Albert Marth, an accomplished positional astronomer, whom he hired for the second stay at Malta. When Lassell engaged him, in 1862, Marth had published on, among other things, the planetary satellites of Saturn, Uranus, and Neptune, interests very much in line with Lassell's keen pursuit of new satellites. It also says much for Lassell's independence of mind that he ignored the strident advice of the then astronomer royal, George Biddell Airy, not to employ Marth. 
Lassell was awarded the gold medal of the Royal Astronomical Society in 1849, and in 1858 he was one of the Royal Society's royal medallists. Active in a variety of scientific societies, he was president of the Royal Astronomical Society from 1870 to 1872. Lassell was an administrator, not a reformer who sought to take the society in a radical new direction. He died in his sleep at his home, Ray Lodge, Maidenhead, on 5 October 1880. 


@@@@@


doc= 16083


Lassels, Richard (c.1603-1668), Roman Catholic priest and travel writer, was the younger son of a Catholic gentleman, William Lascelles of Brackenborough in Yorkshire, and grandson of Sir Thomas Lascelles, a member of the council of the north; his mother was Elizabeth Tunstall, youngest daughter of Sir Francis Tunstall of Thurland Castle, Lancashire, and Anne Bold (from whom Richard and his brothers derived their religious alias 'Bolds'). About 1623, Lassels followed two of his brothers abroad to be educated in the Southern Netherlands at Douai College; Thomas and John Lassels had both been there since 1618 and were ordained as priests in 1624 and 1625 respectively. In May 1626 Richard was sent with a group of students to Paris, probably because of the plague. According to Anthony Wood he was 'an hospes for some time' at Oxford, 'as those of his persuasion have told me, but whether before or after he left England they could not tell' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 3.818). Back at Douai he was teaching grammar in 1629 (the year when a third brother, Ralph Lassels, also arrived at the college) and syntax a year later. Richard was ordained priest there on 6 March 1632. Almost certainly he was the author (under his alias of Richard Bolds) of 'The Conviction of Noveltie, and Defense of Antiquitie' (1633), a slim duodecimo by 'R.B. Roman Catholicke, and one of the English Clergie, and Mission'. It is likely that he returned to England briefly, on the mission to reconvert his compatriots, after his ordination. 
In 1633 Lassels returned to Paris, however, where he was employed first by the Catholic bishop in exile, Richard Smith, and then by Smith's patron, Cardinal Richelieu, as Latin secretary. In 1637 he saw through the press at Paris his Latin translation, 'Epistola historica de mutuis officiis' (dedicated to Charles I), of Smith's work, then visited Rome, probably on clergy business, and stayed there with Peter Fitton, a fellow priest and scholar. Something of a connoisseur, and a friend of Bellori, Fitton may have introduced Lassels to Italian art and fellow scholars in this field. Lassels became familiar with the works of Vasari, Carlo Rifoldi, and Bellori, and may indeed have met the last as well as artists such as Francois du Quesnoy and Gianlorenzo Bernini. He also refers in his writings to the great collector the earl of Arundel, another acquaintance of Fitton's. During this time he translated the twelfth volume of Cardinal Caesar Baronius's 'Annales', which was published in Paris in 1639 as 'The Life or the Ecclesiasticall Historie of S. Thomas Archbishope of Canterbury'. The civil war confirmed Lassels's residence abroad, and by 1644 he was apparently chaplain to the self-exiled Lady Anne Brudenell, in Paris. This was where he published 'The Way how to Heare Masse with Profit and Devotion' (1644, with a dedication to Lady Anne) though historical knowledge of this edition depends upon a later manuscript transcript and published versions. 
Having already acted as travelling tutor, in the jubilee year of 1650 Lassels was asked to accompany a daughter of the earl of Shrewsbury, the Lady Catherine Whetenhall, to Rome. At her death in childbirth in Padua her husband asked Lassels to write an account of their journey together (now BL, Add. MS 4217). This was the first in what became a series of continuously revised manuscript accounts of Italy based on his experience of several tours with young royalist and Catholic exiles: 'The Description of Italy' of 1654, written for David Murray, Lord Balvaird, whom he was unable to accompany in person (now NL Scot., Adv. MS 15.2.15); 'The Voyage of Italy' of about 1663 (now at North Yorkshire County Record Office); and 'The Voyage of Italy' of 1664 (now at Yale University, Beinecke Library). 
During the late 1650s and 1660s Lassels was cited in correspondence now in the Westminster Cathedral Archives as a candidate to be Richard Smith's successor as bishop of Chalcedon. But Lassels died in September 1668 in Montpellier in his capacity as travelling tutor, during what would have been his sixth voyage to Italy, accompanying Richard, Lord Lumley, and Ralph Sheldon. He was buried in the church of the Discalced Carmelites, Montpellier, and left 100 florins to Douai College. His fellow priest Simon Wilson obtained the latest version of his 'Voyage' manuscript, edited it (apparently omitting those passages likely to offend protestant taste), and published it in Paris in 1670. A still more censored version was published in London the same year. 
Lassels's 'Voyage of Italy' became the most influential English guidebook of the period, conditioning the first impressions of many a tourist to that country. It also provided the basis for subsequent guidebooks as well as manuscript accounts such as the Italian sections of John Evelyn's diary. The unprecedented attention it paid to art and architecture encouraged the phenomenon of the eighteenth-century style 'grand tour' (a term coined by Lassels) according to which art prevailed over all other subjects, religious or secular. It was translated and published in French and German and was still being reprinted in the early eighteenth century. Aside from Lassels's published works, notes and two or three completed pietistic manuscripts ('Collections... out of Baronius' and the two-volume 'Apologie for the Roman Catholicks') in his fine, distinctive hand survive at Oscott College. 


@@@@@


doc= 16084


Charles Lates (1770/71-c.1810) was born at Oxford, and was a pupil of the university professor of music, Philip Hayes. He matriculated at Magdalen College on 4 November 1793, aged twenty-two, and graduated MusB the following year, when he described himself as 'organist of Gainsborough'. His exercise for the degree, an anthem, 'The Lord is my light', was performed on 7 November 1793. He subsequently published a set of sonatas for the piano and various songs. A Charles James Lates, son of Charles and Elizabeth Lates, was baptized in Gainsborough on 4 October 1796. 


@@@@@


doc= 16085


Lates, James (c.1740-1777), composer, was the son of David Francisco Lates or Lattes (died 1777), of Turin, a teacher of Hebrew, music, and modern languages at Oxford. He is sometimes mistakenly called John James Lates. He became a notable violinist at Oxford, playing there in the music-room orchestra from about 1759 until his death. He also seems to have been organist of St John's College. The duke of Marlborough was his patron, and he played for him for many years at Blenheim. Five works have been published, including sets of duets for violins and for German flutes, and 'Six Solos for a Violin and Violoncello' (op. 3), which Stanley Sadie described as 'among the most interesting English violin solos of the period' ('New Grove'). He died at Oxford on 21 November 1777. His son 


@@@@@


doc= 16086


Latewar, Richard (1559/60-1601), Church of England clergyman and poet, was the son of Thomas Latewar, a successful clothworker of London. He entered Merchant Taylors' School in 1571 and proceeded to St John's College, Oxford, on a scholarship in 1580. Latewar soon gained a high reputation as an orator, preacher, and poet. One auditor praised him as a 'poet lawreat' as early as January 1582 (Donno, 73). He became a fellow of St John's in 1583 and graduated BA on 28 November 1584. In 1586 he composed a Latin poem in commemoration of Sir Thomas White, founder of St John's, which the college paid to have printed in gold letters for display, and the next year he made substantial contributions to Oxford's 'Exequiae' for Sir Philip Sidney, edited by his friend William Gager. Latewar also contributed verses to three books of commentary on Aristotle by John Case and wrote a play, 'Philotas', which (according to Samuel Daniel) won much praise when it was performed at St John's. On 23 May 1588 he proceeded MA. When Queen Elizabeth visited Oxford in September 1592 Latewar was apparently one of the scholars chosen for a public disputation of moral philosophy. 
Having served as a university proctor in 1593/4 and proceeded BD on 2 July 1594, Latewar joined his friend John Buckeridge in preaching away from Oxford. The two men later incepted as DD on the same day, 5 February 1597, and the books which Latewar gave to his college suggest that he shared similar theological views to Buckeridge. As a theologian Latewar was sufficiently well regarded for Oxford to nominate him (unsuccessfully) for the inaugural divinity lectureship at Gresham College in February 1597. By 1595 Buckeridge was a chaplain to the earl of Essex and Latewar himself was clearly associated with those scholars at Oxford who looked to the earl's patronage. One of his few surviving poems in English is a riposte to 'The Lie', a poem written by Essex's sometime rival Sir Walter Ralegh. Latewar apparently became a chaplain to Essex's friend, Lord Mountjoy, by August 1596, when Mountjoy secured him the rectory of Hopton, Suffolk. Three years later Mountjoy helped him win the richer living of Finchley, Middlesex. 
Latewar served as vice-president of his college in 1597/8 but left Oxford in December 1599 when Mountjoy was appointed lord deputy of Ireland and given the task of crushing Tyrone's rebellion. His colleagues at St John's voted him 20 marks 'with a fellow feeling much tendering the state of our said fellow drawen by his love and dewtye to his L[ord] into so daingerouse and yet necessary service' (Costin, 14). Mountjoy and his entourage arrived in Ireland to begin their long campaign two months later. On 16 July 1601, during a minor skirmish at Benburb, Latewar ventured too close to the action and received a mortal gunshot wound to his head. He died the next day, aged forty-one, and was buried on 20 July at Armagh Cathedral. A monument for him was erected by his father in the chapel of St John's in 1604, for which the college paid the costs of installation. The inscription, punning on his name, memorializes Latewar's renown as a scholar and poet. 


@@@@@


doc= 16087


Latey, Gilbert (1626-1705), Quaker activist, was born at St Issey, Cornwall, in February 1626, and was baptized there on 20 March. He was the youngest son of John Latey, a prosperous yeoman, maltster, and innkeeper. His mother, whose maiden name was Hocking, was 'a gentlewoman born' and came 'of the best family then in the parish' (Hawkins, 2); her brother married a sister of Charles I's attorney-general Sir William Noy. Latey served his apprenticeship to a tailor and then worked in Plymouth but left his employment owing to doubts about his master's religious sincerity. In November 1648 he arrived in London and soon set up business as a tailor in the Strand. His nephew and biographer, Richard Hawkins, noted that 'he grew into great reputation in the world... being employed and respected by persons of the first rank and quality' (ibid., 4). 
In 1654 Latey was attending four sermons a day but was disturbed by religious doubts, for 'his mind and desires were still to find peace with the Lord' and so he remained in a 'seeking condition' (Hawkins, 4). He was convinced of the Quaker message at the house of Sarah Matthews, a widow in Whitecross Street, after hearing Edward Burrough speak. He at once joined the movement and shortly became one of its most influential members in London, testifying about 1659 against the schismatic John Perrot. As a result of his new beliefs he refused to make coats superfluously adorned with lace and ribbon and 'came under a conscientious concern not to meddle therein... which made some say he was mad' (Hawkins, 19). Latey discussed his objections in the tract 'To All You Taylors and Brokers who Lyes in Wickedness' (1660) in which he remarked that 'people look like apes and fools' rather than 'sober men and women' and deprecated such practices as the bedecking of servants in liveries (ibid., 45-6). As a consequence most of his wealthy customers left him, and his trade, which had been prosperous, for a time declined, so that he had to release his servants and go and 'work at day labour for his bread' (ibid., 20). 
In 1659 Latey went to St Dunstan's Church, Fleet Street, and after the sermon openly charged the preacher, the presbyterian Thomas Manton, to prove his doctrine. As the congregation came to 'a fermentation' a constable was sent for and Latey was taken before a magistrate. The latter told him that Manton was a very learned man and could doubtless give scriptural proof for what he said; according to his nephew, Latey replied 'that was all he desired, but could not obtain' (Hawkins, 24-5). The magistrate then dismissed him with the remark that he had understood the Quakers to be 'mad, whimsical folks' but that Latey seemed rational enough (ibid., 26). Soon afterwards Latey and about sixteen others were thrown into a small dungeon at the Gatehouse, Westminster, for meeting together. The cell was dark and only 10 feet by 11, which meant that they had to take turns to lie down. Latey afterwards succeeded in proving charges of cruelty and extortion against Wickes, the master of the prison. 
Following his release Latey signed the petition of 600 Friends, presented through Sir John Glanville, that they might lie body for body in place of those already in prison, though the request was refused. About 1660 Latey and George Fox attempted to arrange the release of two female Quakers from prison in Malta and the former took the matter up with Lord d'Aubigny, lord almoner to the queen mother. On one visit he was invited to her chapel and 'the power of the Lord worked so much on Gilbert, that he stepped up on... a private altar, and the word of the Lord came to him to preach truth' (Hawkins, 54). He continued to visit d'Aubigny who eventually secured the women's release. 
Latey constantly visited the numerous meetings in and around London, at Kingston, Hammersmith, Barking, and Greenwich. While riding to Greenwich on one occasion he was stoned by a mob. In 1661 he was taken by a party of the King's foot guards from a meeting in Palace Yard, Westminster, and confined under the Banqueting House in Whitehall. He was again arrested at the end of 1662 for being present at a meeting in the home of Elizabeth Trot in Pall Mall, where the Quakers continued to meet until 1666 when they moved to Westminster. 
By the 1660s it would appear that Latey was taking an important role in the affairs of the central Quaker meetings. In 1668 he was one of the keepers of the society's national stock and remained so until 1682. He was frequently chosen to represent the society regarding sufferings and often did so with George Whitehead, who described Latey as his 'true companion in laborious solicitations' on behalf of Friends (George Whitehead's testimony concerning Gilbert Latey, in Hawkins, sig. A5). In 1663, for example, Whitehead procured, after a personal appeal to Charles II, the release of sixty-three Quakers imprisoned at Norwich and the remission of their fines. During the plague of 1665 Latey was in constant attendance on the sick, distributing money collected among the Friends, particularly to those confined to houses in the parishes outside Temple Bar. He caught the infection himself in October but, as he told Margaret Fell, 'the Lord was good unto him, and, having further service for him to do, raised him up again' (Braithwaite, 'Second', 48). In September 1670 he held meetings in Somerset, Devon, and Cornwall, but on learning that Sir John Robinson, governor of the Tower of London, had given orders for the pulling down of several meeting-houses in London, Latey hurried back and managed to prevent the demolition of the one in Wheeler Street to which he held the title. In 1671 Latey was arrested and fined for preaching at Hammersmith in spite of the warning of his patron, Sir William Sawkell, that he had orders to arrest all who should be present. 
On 23 March 1674 Latey married Mary Fielder (died 1714), only daughter of John and Ann Fielder of Kingston upon Thames, Surrey. They had eleven children, most of whom died at an early age; certainly only their daughters Sarah and Mary appear as beneficiaries in Latey's will of 1705. Mary Latey gave a picture of her husband's character in a testimony to him, writing that 'he was a man given up to serve God, and his people, never sparing himself to do what good he could' (M. Latey, 'A testimony concerning my dear and well-beloved husband Gilbert Latey', in Hawkins, sig. A). 
Latey was a key member of the meeting for sufferings, which met weekly from 1676. In 1679 he again went by Bath and Bristol to Cornwall where he visited Thomas Lamplugh, bishop of Exeter, hoping to moderate the persecution of Friends in the west country, a venture which, judging by a letter from the bishop of March 1684, appears to have been successful. On behalf of the meeting for sufferings Latey attended Charles II on many occasions, for example at Hampton Court in 1683, where he discussed the plight of prisoners in Norwich as well as Quaker customs such as the refusal of hat honour. Soon after the accession of James II, Latey and Whitehead, who had always been well received at court under his brother, induced the new king after long attendance at Whitehall to order the release from prison of 1500 Friends and to remit their fines of $20 a month for non-attendance at church. Subsequent interviews with James led to the discharging of other Friends in Bristol and elsewhere and, in 1686, to the restoration of meeting-houses at the Savoy and at Southwark which had been seized as guardhouses for the king. Latey's house at the Savoy communicated with the meeting-house by a stone passage and flight of steps. In December 1687 a third visit paid by Latey and Whitehead to the king was followed by another proclamation of pardon. With William and Mary, Latey's personal influence was exerted no less successfully. On their accession he presented an address on behalf of a hundred Quakers, most of whom were in prison for refusing the oath of allegiance, and was successful in securing their release. It was owing to Latey's and Whitehead's personal and persistent applications at court that parliament passed the act in 1696 by which the Quaker affirmation became acceptable instead of an oath, an act which was made perpetual in 1715. 
A number of character testimonies exist for Latey, including that from his nephew and biographer, Richard Hawkins, who wrote that 'His parts were quick, and his apprehension lively; his memory good, and his judgement sound and strong; his example shining in self-denial; yet he was of a generous and free spirit' (R. Hawkins, 'The testimony of Richard Hawkins concerning... Gilbert Latey', in Hawkins, unpaginated). An unnamed 'very eminent Friend' said of Latey that 'of all the men, among Friends, that he ever knew or heard of, he never followed a man that had a sweeter character' (Hawkins, 154). Being mostly involved in organizational affairs, Latey apparently had little time for writing. Apart from his tract of 1660 he contributed to 'A Salutation or Testimony of True and Brotherly Love' (1672) and was a signatory to Edward Burrough's 'A Declaration from the People called Quakers' (1659). 
Latey continued to preach at Hammersmith and elsewhere until his death there from consumption on 15 November 1705; he was buried at Kingston upon Thames on 20 November. His widow died eight years later, on 18 February 1714. 


@@@@@


doc= 16088


Henry Latham (1794-1866), poet, third son of John Latham, was born in London on 4 November 1794. From Manchester grammar school he entered Brasenose College, Oxford, in 1812, and there obtained a prize for Latin verse. He graduated in 1815 and was admitted a barrister of Lincoln's Inn in 1820. The three brothers went to Paris and the Low Countries in 1820, and Henry later visited North America. He subsequently entered the church; he was vicar successively of Selmeston with Alciston and of Fittleworth, Sussex. He retained a taste for classical studies, and published in 1863 a collection of translated and original Latin poems. He died of cholera on 6 September 1866, at Boulogne. He was twice married. 


@@@@@


doc= 16089


Latham, James (1696-1746), portrait painter, born in co. Tipperary, was a member of a Tipperary family living near Cashel. The head of the family, Oliver Latham of Meldrum, was appointed commissioner of oaths by the second duke of Ormond in 1695, a fact which leads to the earliest attributable portraits by Latham -- of James Butler of Ballyricken, then the head of the Ormond family in Ireland, and his brother Christopher, Roman Catholic archbishop of Cashel (both 'c'.1718- 'c'.1720, Kilkenny Castle, co. Kilkenny). No evidence exists of Latham's early education but these portraits, if somewhat crude, show many of the qualities which were to make him a most distinguished painter. In the Ormond collection of paintings in Kilkenny Castle he had an important source for study and in 1724 he is recorded as visiting Antwerp, studying for one term in the Guild of St Luke and becoming a master of the guild. Whether he went via Paris or London is not certainly known, but it is likely that he visited both cities. He settled in Dublin in 1725. 
Despite his merits Latham's work was quickly forgotten, and the oval head and shoulders of Bishop Berkeley (Trinity College, Dublin) was until recently his only remembered work. It was engraved by John Brooks without a publication date. Several other works were engraved, including the whole-length portrait of Eaton Stannard and that of Charles Tottenham (both National Gallery of Ireland, Dublin), as well as likenesses of Sir John Ligonier (mezzotint by J. Brooks) and Patrick Quin (mezzotint by Andrew Miller). 'Colonel Charles Janure de la Bouchtiere' (Ulster Museum, Belfast), a portrait of a Huguenot officer, must date before the sitter's death in 1731 and is a splendid character study of this soldier. Latham's finest portraits were done for the Cosby family, who owned four three-quarter lengths: of Pole Cosby and his daughter Sarah, his wife with their son Dudley, another of Sarah as a child, and one of her with her parrot after her marriage. There were a further two pictures of Dudley Cosby: one, much damaged, as a baby; and another as a child, which has been cut at the bottom edge and shows a strong French influence (all ex Sothebys, 11 July 1984, lot 38; 20 November 1985, lots 36, 85, 39; and 14 March 1990, lot 49). These pictures must have been painted over a ten-year period and show that love of children revealed in all Latham's child portraits, including the one of Bishop Berkeley's son (ex Sothebys, 2 June 1995, lot 201). They are delightful character studies; Pole Cosby's gesture, for instance, holding his daughter's hand, shows how much she meant to him. Latham put on his paint with firm direct strokes; his flair for colour is displayed in Sarah Cosby's beautiful pink dress as she offers her parrot cherries, or in the magnificent waistcoats of such sitters in the 1740s as Sir Capel Molyneux (Tate collection), but he is equally at home with the silvery tones in the portrait of the fourth earl of Inchiquin (priv. coll.), in which the sitter is wearing the insignia and ribbon of the Order of the Bath. Besides the Cosby groups Latham painted a number of double portraits, including the Leslie sisters playing the harpsichord (priv. coll.) and Bishop Clayton and his wife (National Gallery of Ireland, Dublin). His beautiful brushwork with its contrasting delicacy and breadth, seen in his rendering of sparkling braids or the soft density of a powdered wig, lifts Latham above the level of more humdrum contemporaries. 
According to his will, dated 1 January 1746, Latham was married to a woman named Joane and had four daughters, Elinor, Margaret, Anne, and Mary, and one son, James. He was living in Trinity Lane, Dublin, when he died in 1746. 


@@@@@


doc= 16090


Latham, John (1740-1837), naturalist, was born on 27 June 1740 at Eltham, Kent, the eldest son of John Latham (died 1788), a surgeon and apothecary. He was educated at Merchant Taylors' School, London, until the age of fifteen. He attended the London Hospital medical school, and studied anatomy under William Hunter (1718-1783). In 1763 he moved to Dartford, in Kent, where he began practising medicine, probably from a Spital Street address. In the same year, he married Ann Porter, with whom he had at least one son, John (1769-1843), and three daughters, including Ann ('b'. 1772). Latham practised medicine in Dartford for some thirty-five years, and served as doctor to the Dartford poorhouse on a number of occasions. 
Once established in medical practice, Latham could begin to spend more time pursuing his interests in natural history. Ornithology and comparative anatomy were his favourite subjects (although he was also interested in archaeology). He assembled a fine collection of birds and established a museum which attracted many visitors and was of great use to fellow naturalists and artists. In 1770 his first published work appeared in the Royal Society's 'Philosophical Transactions'. As early as 1771 Latham entered into correspondence with the ornithologist Thomas Pennant (1726-1798), which lasted until the latter's death. Latham also corresponded with most of the important naturalists of his time. As a result, he had access to the major collections in the country and, in time, he became an important member of the scientific community, and the leading English ornithologist of his day. In 1772 he met the natural history collector Sir Ashton Lever (1729-1788); the two men subsequently entered into friendly competition over their collections of specimens. In 1773 Latham discovered the Dartford warbler. In 1788 Lever was forced to sell part of his collections by lottery, and when in 1806, Lever's museum was sold, Latham was able to acquire some specimens for his own collection. 
Latham's works depended heavily on personal observation of the collections of specimens accessible to him; his connections were such that he was in an excellent position to study both native and foreign birds. His works featured a large number of exotic birds from all over the world, including specimens from India, Australia, and the Pacific. On 25 May 1775 Latham was elected FRS, at which time Sir Joseph Banks (1743-1820), was president of the society. Banks provided Latham with a further supply of specimens and material, indeed some of the collection housed at the Royal Society's museum was gathered during Banks's voyage with Captain James Cook (1728-1779). Banks also allowed Latham access to the various paintings made during the Cook voyages (1768-71, 1772-5, 1776-80). Moreover, Latham was often given the first opportunity to view new specimens and information. His sources included the Indian bird material in the collections of Major-General Thomas Hardwicke, Lady Mary Impey (died 1818), and Sir John Anstruther (1753-1811); specimens from Barbados were also sent by the earl of Seaforth, and Abyssinian birds were presented to him by the collector Henry Salt (1780-1827); and he made use of illustrations of Australian birds in the 'Lambert drawings' acquired by Aylmer Bourke Lambert (1761-1842), from Surgeon-General John White (1756-1832), and the notes made by the botanist Daniel Solander (1733-1782) and (Johann) Reinhold Forster (1729-1798) on Cook's voyages. It is not surprising, therefore, that he became known as the 'grandfather' of Australian ornithology, since he was the first to describe and classify a number of Australian birds, including the emu. 
In 1778 Latham became a corresponding member of the Medical Society of London. It has been suggested that about 1788 or 1789, through his association either with the botanist James Edward Smith (1759-1828), who had purchased Linnaeus's library, or with Banks, Latham proposed the founding of the Linnean Society of London. In 1793 he was elected FSA and in 1794 was nominated a member of the Natural History Society of Berlin. In 1795 he received the degree of MD from the University of Erlangen in Germany and in 1812 received the diploma of the Royal Academy of Sciences, Stockholm. In 1796, having amassed a considerable fortune, he retired from practice and settled in a large house in Middlebridge Street, Romsey, to be near his son, John, a common brewer (and JP). In 1798 Latham married his second wife, Ann Delamott, of Ealing. 
During the period 1780-90, Latham's objective appears to have been the publication of a complete work of all known bird species, including an update of existing ornithological knowledge and a consideration of all new information as it occurred. In his work, he generally adopted a classification system dependent on 'Ray for his basic divisions and on Linnaeus for lower divisions'. His published works included 'A General Synopsis of Birds' (1781-5), containing many new genera and species, which was followed by supplements in 1787 and 1801. In this and future works Latham, like many of his peers, drew, etched, and coloured his own plates. In the preface he wrote: 'The intent of the following sheets is to give, as far as may be, a concise account of all the Birds hitherto known; nothing having been done in this way, as a general work, in the English Language, of late years.' By publishing this work in English, rather than Latin, he provided Johann Friedrich Gmelin with the opportunity to take the credit for translating his work and allocating scientific names to his specimens. 
Latham did not repeat this oversight in his next major work, 'Index ornithologicus, sive, Systema ornithologiae', which attempted to describe the known birds of his time and their habitats. This work was issued in parts between 1790 and 1801, no doubt owing to the countless new specimens that were appearing (especially from Australia and the Pacific islands). The projected second edition to his 'Index ornithologicus' never materialized, probably because of the increasing volume of new material. However, the work was reissued, with additions, in Paris in 1809. 
Besides papers in the 'Philosophical Transactions' and the 'Transactions of the Linnean Society', Latham (helped by his daughter Ann) contributed the descriptions of a number of new birds in 'The Voyage of Governor Philip to Botany Bay' (1789). He also helped to revise the part on insects for the second edition of Thomas Pennant's 'Indian Zoology' in 1793. Two years later, Latham's contribution on the subject reappeared in 'Faunula Indica, concinnata a Joanne Latham et Hugone Davies', which was edited by Reinhold Forster in 1795. In 1811 Latham's revision of Pennant's 'British Zoology' was published. From 1796 to 1819, while living at Romsey, he became interested in local antiquities, and wrote accounts of 'Ancient sculptures in the abbey church of Romsey' in 'Archaeologia' (vol. 14, 1801) and of an engraved brass plate from Netley Abbey, which also appeared in 'Archaeologia' (vol. 15, 1804). 
In 1809 Latham had mentioned to Colonel George Montagu the possibility of a second edition of his 'General Synopsis of Birds', and in 1821 he embarked on this task. The enlargement of his earlier work appeared in ten volumes between 1821 and 1828, under the title 'A General History of Birds', and incorporated new information and both new and improved illustrations (designed, etched, and coloured by himself); it was dedicated to George IV, and considered his greatest work. 
Pecuniary losses in Latham's old age forced him to sell a great part of his library and museum -- in 1819 his son John became bankrupt and Latham endeavoured to help cover his son's debts by selling his own possessions. In the same year Latham moved to Winchester, to live with his daughter and her husband, William N. Wickham, a surgeon. In the autumn of 1836 Lord Palmerston visited Latham (then ninety-six), and described him as 'well, hearty, and cheerful, eating a good dinner at five' ('DNB'), but adds that he could no longer see to read. The ornithologist Alfred Newton (1829-1907) remarked of Latham that 'his defects as a compiler, which had been manifest before, rather increased with age, and the consequences were not happy' (ibid.). While there is a consensus of opinion that Latham was essentially a compiler whose work was not always of a high standard, his industry won him an international reputation and he dominated his field for fifty years. He died on 4 February 1837 at Winchester and was buried in Romsey Abbey, beside his first wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 16091


Latham, John (1761-1843), physician, was born on 29 December 1761 at Gawsworth, Cheshire, the eldest son of John Latham of Oriel College, Oxford, vicar of Siddington, Cheshire, and his wife, Sarah, formerly Podmore, of Sandbach, Cheshire. After education at Manchester grammar school he entered Brasenose College, Oxford, in 1778, graduated BA on 9 February 1782, MA on 15 October 1784, MB on 3 May 1786, and DM on 3 April 1788. From 1782 to 1784 he studied medicine at St Bartholomew's Hospital, London. 
On 12 April 1784 Latham married Mary, daughter of Peter Mere, vicar of Prestbury. They had three sons: John (1787-1853) ['see below'], Peter Mere Latham (1789-1875), and Henry (1794-1866) ['see below']. Latham began to practise medicine in Manchester, and was honorary physician to Manchester Infirmary, but he soon moved to Oxford, where, on 11 July 1787, he became physician to the Radcliffe Infirmary. In 1788 he moved to London, and was elected fellow of the Royal College of Physicians on 30 September 1789. He was elected physician to the Middlesex Hospital on 15 October 1789, and resigned on his election to the same office at St Bartholomew's Hospital on 17 January 1793, which he held in 1802. He had a large practice at his house in Bedford Row, regularly attended the Royal College of Physicians, where he was censor the year after his election as fellow, and delivered the Harveian oration in 1794. He delivered the Goulstonian lectures in 1793, and the Croonian in 1795. He was president from 1813 to 1819 inclusive. In 1795 Latham became physician-extraordinary to the prince of Wales. He published 'A Plan of a Charitable Institution to be Established on the Sea Coast' in 1791, and in 1796 'On Rheumatism and Gout: a Letter Addressed to Sir George Baker, Bart', where he stated his opinion that neither acute rheumatism nor gout should be classed among inflammations, and that the seat of both was the radicles of the lymphatic vessels. He denied that gout was inherited, and that attacks were ever beneficial, and advocated a very elaborate system of treatment. 
Latham had made a fortune and bought an estate at Sandbach before 1807. In that year he showed symptoms of advanced consumption. Dr David Pitcairn cured him, and he retired for rest to his estate for two years, but he grew tired of country life and returned to London, where he took a house in Harley Street. While continuing to practise he wrote prolifically during the years before his second retirement. 
Latham's 'Facts and Opinions Concerning Diabetes' (1811) consisted of long extracts from the Greek writers and from Francis Willis on the subject, followed by recorded cases. He favoured a dietetic treatment and supported the views of Dr John Rollo. Ten papers on a wide variety of topics were published in 'Medical Transactions' between 1806 and 1819. Besides his printed works he wrote an elaborate 'Dissertation on asthma'. His writings show that he excelled in clinical observation and acquaintance with the materia medica. 
Latham moved in 1829 to Bradwall Hall in Cheshire, where he died of stone in the bladder on 20 April 1843. He set aside a portion of his income for charity, and called this (by a term derived from Hebrew) his corban fund. 






@@@@@


doc= 16092


John Latham (1787-1853), poet, was born at Oxford on 18 March 1787. He was sent to Macclesfield grammar school when five years old, and to Brasenose College, Oxford, in 1803, where Reginald Heber was his contemporary and friend. Latham was a dedicated and methodical student, and thus had time to indulge his love of sports. In 1806 he won the university prize for Latin verse with a poem on Trafalgar, and in that year, while still an undergraduate, was elected a fellow of All Souls. In December 1806 he entered Lincoln's Inn, graduating BCL in 1810 and DCL in 1815. Soon afterwards he was attacked by ophthalmia, and lost all but residual sight. For fourteen years he spent several months of each year at All Souls, the rest of the time living with his father, until 24 May 1821, when he married Anne (died 1839), daughter of Sir Henry Dampier; they took a house at Somerset Street, Portman Square, London. Their eldest son, John Henry Latham (1823-1843), an accomplished scholar, died while an undergraduate at Oxford; two sons and a daughter survived him. In 1829 he settled in Cheshire, near his father, whom he succeeded as squire in 1843. He died at Bradwall on 30 January 1853 and was buried on 4 February at Sandbach. Latham published anonymously a volume of poems (1836), and a volume of his 'English and Latin Poems, Original and Translated', was printed in 1853. 


@@@@@


doc= 16093


Latham, Peter Mere (1789-1875), physician, was born on 1 July 1789 in Fenchurch Buildings, London, the second son of John Latham (1761-1843), physician, and Mary, daughter of Peter Mere, vicar of Prestbury, Cheshire. His early education was at the free school at Sandbach in Cheshire and, from 1797, at Macclesfield grammar school. In 1806 he went to Brasenose College, Oxford, where he won a prize for Latin verse, as did both his brothers, and graduated BA in 1810. He began his medical studies at St Bartholomew's Hospital and at the Public Dispensary in Carey Street, London, under Thomas Bateman; here a fellow student was Richard Bright, who became a lifelong friend. Latham obtained his BM degree in 1814 and his DM in 1816. 
Latham began practice in a house in Gower Street and in 1815 was appointed physician to the Middlesex Hospital. Three years later he was elected fellow of the Royal College of Physicians and began a distinguished career in the college. During the next twenty years he was censor at various times, gave the Goulstonian and Lumleian lectures and, in 1839, demonstrated that he had not lost his youthful touch by delivering the Harveian oration in better Latin than most orators of his generation. In 1837 he was appointed physician-extraordinary to the queen and he retained that appointment until his death. 
In 1823 Latham and Peter Mark Roget were asked by the government to investigate an epidemic of scurvy and dysentery among the prisoners at Millbank penitentiary. They concluded that it was due to an inadequate diet; however, it is more likely to have been cholera. In 1824, like his father before him, Latham resigned from the Middlesex Hospital and was appointed physician to St Bartholomew's Hospital. In the same year he married Diana Clarissa Chetwynd Stapleton, but she died in the following year. On 14 February 1833 he married Grace Mary Chambers (died 1868); there were four children of this marriage. At St Bartholomew's Latham devoted himself to improving the quality of the clinical teaching, which had been deteriorating for several years. He quickly acquired the reputation of being the best clinical teacher in London -- although it was said that his old friend Richard Bright ran him close. In 1836 Latham was appointed lecturer in the theory and practice of medicine in the medical school and in the same year published his 'Lectures on Subjects Connected with Clinical Medicine'. He had developed a special interest in diseases of the heart; his 'Essays on some Diseases of the Heart' (1826) was expanded into the much more substantial 'Lectures on Clinical Medicine, Comprising Diseases of the Heart' (1845). As a result of these publications he acquired the nickname Heart Latham. 
In these publications Latham demonstrated his extensive knowledge and sound judgement, and he was unusually aware of the limitations of the knowledge and practice of his day. His lucid descriptions of heart disease were balanced by the frankness with which he admitted his ignorance and the clarity with which he identified and expounded the problems still awaiting solution. He was an early convert to the use of the stethoscope, first described in 1819, and was teaching on auscultation as early as 1826 -- much earlier than most of his peers and senior colleagues. 
As a teacher Latham was clearly conscientious to a fault; his lectures were much praised by contemporaries but the use of terms such as 'highly finished and exhaustive' to describe lectures delivered in a 'slow and formal style' raises the suspicion that some students may have found them a little tedious. Latham himself was well aware of this risk and, in his writings on medical education, especially a series of papers published in the 'British Medical Journal' in his retirement, he emphasized the inferiority of lectures to the direct study of sick men and women for the aspiring physician. 
Of Latham's physical appearance and character Charles West, one of his most distinguished pupils, wrote a detailed account. He was very short and spare with a slight deformity of the spine; his hair was light brown, thinning as he aged, his eyes were grey and his nose aquiline, 'almost like the great Duke's'. Despite these largely unremarkable features his appearance and demeanour seem to have been striking and, together with his voice, were calculated to command attention. A genial and cultured gentleman and a devout Christian, his sympathy with and compassion for his suffering patients was such that he is recorded as failing to keep appointments with those whose distress he could not relieve. West concluded his word picture of Latham: 'In troublous times he would have been a confessor; he might have lacked the courage to become a martyr' (Watson). 
Latham's health was always delicate and his chronic asthma and emphysema compelled him to resign his appointment at St Bartholomew's at the age of fifty-two in 1841. His father also had retired early due to ill health and, like his father, Peter Latham found that relief from the stresses of hospital practice produced sufficient improvement to allow him to continue in private practice for two more decades. He finally retired in 1865 to Torquay with his wife; after her death in 1868 he was cared for by his two daughters, who never married. He died at Highwood, Torquay, on 20 July 1875. 


@@@@@


doc= 16094


Latham, Robert Gordon (1812-1888), ethnologist and philologist, was born on 24 March 1812 at Billingborough, Lincolnshire, the eldest son of the Revd Thomas Latham (1770/71-1846). Educated at Eton College, and a contemporary of his future brother-in-law Sir Edward Creasy (1812-1878), he entered King's College, Cambridge, as a scholar in 1829 and became a fellow in 1832. He graduated in January 1833 and took his MA in 1836. In 1833 visits to Hamburg and Copenhagen, followed by a year of language studies in Norway, led to his delightful 'Norway and the Norwegians' (1840). With Creasy he had previously translated, in 1838, Esaias Tegner's 'Axel' and 'Frithiofs saga'. 
From 1839 to 1845 Latham was professor of English language and literature at University College, London, but he simultaneously developed a medical career, qualifying as a licentiate of the Royal College of Physicians in 1842, taking his Cambridge MD in 1844, and being elected an FRCP in 1846. Initially physician to the St James's and St George's Dispensary, in 1844 he became assistant physician at the Middlesex Hospital, London, where he lectured on forensic medicine and materia medica. He was elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1848. 
Latham's 'The English Language' (1841) became a standard text until the 1870s. He wrote many other grammatical works and advocated spelling reform, but his consuming passion was ethnology -- the study of the varieties of mankind and its languages, and the enigma of human origins. In 'Man and his Migrations' (1851), seven years before the first pronouncement by Darwin and Wallace on evolution by natural selection, Latham speculated on human development from 'some species... lower in the scale of Nature' (p. 50). 
Latham acquired a light-hearted semi-fictional existence in 'Bentley's Miscellany' for 1846 as the Cambridge Travelling Bachelor, in his contributions to the 'Tipperary Papers' with Creasy and John Sheehan. A description of the bachelor ethnologist's 'learnedly and fancifully decorated' lodgings, including the 'hunting dress of an Ojibbeway Indian and the Sunday clothes of a German Professor lying about promiscuously', carries conviction ('Bentley's Miscellany', 19.520). On 19 July 1848 he married Elizabeth, daughter of George Cottam, engineer. As a result of his marriage he gave up his fellowship of King's (only bachelors could hold fellowships for life), and he also gave up his medical practice. 
Latham's first, seminal work in ethnology was 'The Natural History of the Varieties of Man' (1850), followed by other ethnological works, both general and specific, on the colonies, the British Isles, Europe, the Russian empire, and India. He was vice-president of the Ethnological Society, wrote particularly on Native American languages for the Philological Society, and was a member of several other learned societies. He was uniquely qualified for his appointment as director of the ethnological department at the Crystal Palace in 1852. Latham's independence of mind led him in 1862 to question the widely held belief that India was the Aryan motherland, an eccentricity which destroyed his reputation. Only in 1887 did Isaac Taylor, in a paper read to the Royal Anthropological Institute, revive Latham's theory that the Aryans came from south-east of Lithuania, giving impetus to further research into Indo-European origins. 
After 1862 Latham's most significant works were a major new edition (1866-70) of Dr Johnson's 'Dictionary' and, notably, 'The 'Hamlet' of Saxo Grammaticus and of Shakespeare' (1872). By 1863 he was in financial difficulties and was granted a civil-list pension of $100. During the late 1860s and the 1870s he came to know Theodore Watts-Dunton well and introduced him to Thomas Gordon Hake, who in turn introduced them to George Borrow. Hake's 'Memoirs of Eighty Years' (1892) are not kind to Latham in the 1860s, describing a decline in habits and appearance, despite his 'handsome person' and 'kindly nature' -- 'like a clergyman of a less reputable type; his white necktie unlaundressed, his fine chin ill-shaven, his black coat unskilfully brushed, if at all' (Hake, 208-12). Watts-Dunton's comments in Latham's obituary ('The Athenaeum', 17 March 1888) show greater understanding and admiration of his 'brilliance of intellect and encyclopaedic knowledge' (Watts, 340). This brilliance did not, unfortunately, lead to clarity or even accuracy of presentation. His erudite writings remain indigestible despite their historical interest. 
Latham ultimately developed aphasia -- a sad end to a lifetime devoted to language in all its varieties. He died on 9 March 1888 at his home at 156 Upper Richmond Road, Putney, London. He was survived by his wife, and at least one daughter, Clara. 


@@@@@


doc= 16095


Latham, Simon (d. 1649?), writer on falconry, has left virtually no record of his life. Although the precise relationship cannot be established, he may have been the nephew of, and was almost certainly connected with, Lewis Latham of Elveston, Bedfordshire, a professional falconer who rose through the ranks to become serjeant of his majesty's hawks in 1627. Simon Latham dedicated his treatise on falconry to Sir Thomas Monson, master of the king's hawks, but there is no evidence in the state records to support suggestions that he was employed as a royal falconer. He may, however, have been the Simon Latham who received a bequest of 5's'. from his brother, William, in 1632. Although Latham is described as a gentleman in his book, the Lathams are not recorded as gentry in the visitations. It is more probable that he was the Simon Latham, yeoman of Bletsoe, whose will was proved in Bedfordshire in 1649. That would explain why he was not mentioned in the 1655 will of Lewis Latham. 
Latham acknowledged that he was introduced to falconry by Henry Sadleir of Eversley, the third son of Sir Ralph Sadleir of Standon, master of the hawks, and that he wrote about falconry in response to the suggestion of a friend. He claimed no literary skill and indeed the verses which he included in his treatise are somewhat crude. His treatise, 'Latham's Falconry, or, The Faulcons Lure and Cure in Two Books' appeared in two parts in 1614 and 1618 and was subsequently reissued in 1633, 1658, and 1665. Unlike many examples of the genre, it was original, practical, and of lasting value. Although he referred in passing to Geoffrey Turbeville, he claimed correctly that his book did not draw on traditional printed sources. The first part was a highly specialized study of how to train the haggard peregrine, that is, a falcon which has been trapped as an adult as distinct from one taken from the nest before it can fly. This was followed by a more conventional review of methods to prevent and treat disease in hawks and the discussion was extended to include goshawks, sparrowhawks, and lanner falcons. 


@@@@@


doc= 16096


Lathbury, John (d. 1362), Franciscan friar and theologian, was born at Lathbury, Buckinghamshire, probably at the beginning of the fourteenth century; when he died in 1362 he was, according to Bale, 'an old man' (Bale, 'Cat.', 1.532-3). He joined the Franciscan order in his twenties, perhaps in the diocese of Coventry and Lichfield, where he was ordained subdeacon on 22 April 1329. He studied at Oxford during the 1330s and 1340s, and had become regent master by 1350. In Oxford he formed a close friendship with a German friar, Hermann of Cologne; they discussed matters of theology and exchanged stories and moral exempla, many of which Lathbury later included in his commentary on 'Jeremiah'. 
Although a schoolman, Lathbury evidently was also active in pastoral work in the surrounding districts. In 1342 he was licensed to hear confessions in the diocese of Salisbury, and in November 1352 he was given the same licence in the archdeaconry of Buckingham. At the same time he became involved in the government of his order. In 1343 he was present at a meeting of the provincial chapter, and he may have attended others. Lathbury probably remained in Oxford for the greater part of his career, retiring only in late middle age to the Reading Greyfriars, where he died and was probably buried. In 1348 he gave several of his own books to a relative, a younger John Lathbury. The gift may have coincided with the end of his active career in the schools. 
The elder Lathbury was distinguished for his work as a theologian and exegete. His most influential, and probably his only completed work, was a commentary on the 'Lamentations' of Jeremiah. It is a vast text, incorporating a wide range of sources, including notes made by Robert Grosseteste (died 1253), whose books Lathbury had studied at first hand in the library of the Oxford Greyfriars. It is most notable, however, for its use of rare and obscure classical texts to elucidate the darker passages of scripture. Lathbury's interest in classical literature, and his willingness to use it as a tool of exegesis, places him in a tradition of English (and especially fraternal) biblical scholarship which had been inaugurated a generation earlier by the Dominican theologians Robert Holcot (died 1349) and Thomas Waleys. Their work had done much to revive the art of exegesis and promote a 'literal' reading of scripture in the first half of the fourteenth century, but with the exception of Lathbury they had few followers or imitators. Indeed he can be seen as one of the last English scholars to employ these methods. 
The commentary circulated widely in late medieval Europe; it was among the first books to be printed at Oxford in 1482, and one of the seven surviving manuscript copies was brought up from the bottom of the sea, in a fisherman's net, probably in the sixteenth century. Lathbury continually reworked and reorganized his commentary, and the revised version circulated in various different guises as part of an 'Alphabetum morale', a collection of exempla and sermons, and as a series of 'distinctiones'. Lathbury may also have completed a commentary on the 'Psalms' which is now lost. The fifteenth-century bishop Stephen Patrington (died 1417), according to Bale, quoted 'Lathbury on the psalms' in one of his sermons. Bale also suggests Lathbury was the author of a commentary on the 'Acts of the Apostles', and quotes an incipit, but it is not known to survive, and it is possible that in both cases he confused Lathbury with his kinsman, John Lathbury the younger. 


@@@@@


doc= 16097


Lathbury, Thomas (1798-1865), Church of England clergyman and ecclesiastical historian, was born at Brackley, Northamptonshire, the only son of Henry Lathbury. On 7 April 1821 he matriculated at St Edmund Hall, Oxford, graduating BA in 1824 and MA in 1827. Having taken holy orders, he held curacies at Chatteris, Cambridgeshire, Bath, and Wootton, Northamptonshire. In 1831 he was appointed curate at Mangotsfield, Gloucestershire, and in 1838 curate at the abbey church, Bath. In 1848 he was presented by the bishop of Gloucester and Bristol to the perpetual curacy of St Simon and St Jude, Bristol. 
A liturgical scholar and antiquarian collector of printed service books, Lathbury was the author of numerous works of both ecclesiastical and liturgical history and of more popular polemic. Some of his writings were learned treatises or editions of older texts, and reflected his antiquarian and liturgical interests and historical sympathies. This category of his writings included such works as an edition of the nonjuror Jeremy Collier's 'Ecclesiastical History of Great Britain', with a life of the author (1852) and 'A History of the Book of Common Prayer' (1858). Lathbury's more popular works consisted of anti-Catholic polemic, including the best-selling 'Protestantism the Old Religion, Popery the New' (1838), 'Guy Fawkes, or, A Complete History of the Gunpowder Plot' (1839; 2nd edn, 1840), and 'The Spanish armada, AD' 1588, or, The attempt of Philip II and Pope Sixtus V to re-establish popery in England (1840). 
As a writer, Lathbury suffered from apprehensions over defects in his literary skills. He could be meticulous in attention to detail but lacked originality, and a reviewer in the 'British Critic' considered that his 'History of English Episcopacy' (1836), his most significant work, exhibited 'no great power of writing', although he also commended the work as a perspicacious and dispassionate account of its subject. Lathbury's 'History of the Nonjurors: their Controversies and Writings' (1845) represents his most accomplished work. Based on wide reading and knowledge of the sources, its particular value lies in its exposition of nonjuring political thought. It has been considered one of the most accurate and informative histories of the nonjurors. 
Lathbury was a non-party, moderate, and not untypical protestant churchman of his generation. His 'History of English Episcopacy' was praised in the Irish Anglican evangelical journal the 'Christian Examiner' (February 1837, 129) because of its adherence to the 'moderate principles of Ecclesiastical polity... Preserving a due medium between the Latitudinarians on the one side, and the Altitudinarians on the other... and attached to the constitutional doctrines of the old Revolution Whigs'. Suspicious of the Oxford Movement, he in 1838 wrote warmly in defence of the proposed protestant Martyr's Memorial in Oxford against its Tractarian critics. Alarm at what he regarded as the rise of popery in the 1830s prompted his numerous works of anti-Catholic polemic. Although orthodox and not latitudinarian in his churchmanship, Lathbury's 'History of English Episcopacy' was criticized by its high-church 'British Critic' reviewer for exhibiting a 'rationalising' tendency. The features of the work which earned the 'Christian Examiner's' praise, such as his regarding Laud's notions of divine-right episcopacy as a 'novelty' and his apparent over-indulgence of continental protestant churches, caused offence to the high-church reviewer ('British Critic', 1836, 342-3). Lathbury himself offered an article on various works concerning church reform and unity to the then editor of the 'British Critic', J. S. Boone, but it was not published. Despite his misgivings about the Tractarians, Lathbury offered another article, a review of Thomas Price's 'History of Protestant Nonconformity' (1836-8) to J. H. Newman as editor in February 1838. Newman commended the article for its style and learning, but rejected it because of 'the general line of opinion' manifested in it. He explained the main ground of his difference -- that he [Newman] viewed 'the church less in the light of an Establishment' ('Letters and Diaries', 6.199). 
Lathbury's moderate high-church credentials, however, were demonstrated in his cautious sympathy for the nonjurors ('History of the Nonjurors'), and in the attack on the protestant nonconformist attempt to make capital out of the bicentenary of the St Bartholomew's day ejections of nonconformist ministers in 1662 contained in his 'Facts and Fictions of the Bicentenary: a Sketch from 1640 to 1662' (1862). He followed this up with another anti-dissenting polemic, 'Oliver Cromwell, or, The old and new dissenters, with strictures on the lectures of N. Haycroft and H. Quick' (1862). Lathbury's firm churchmanship found its most practical expression in his championship of the church congress held at Bristol in September 1864. 
Lathbury died at his residence, 3 Cave Street, Portland Square, Bristol, on 11 February 1865. His stipend at the time of his death amounted to little more than $150 per annum. He left a widow and four children, three of them sons. The eldest son, Daniel Connor Lathbury, became a barrister and journalist, and was the editor of 'Correspondence on Church and Religion of William Ewart Gladstone' (1910). 


@@@@@


doc= 16345


Francis Legat (1755-1809) can be considered in this company. Born in Edinburgh, he studied at the Trustees' Academy in that city under Alexander Runciman and was a pupil of the engraver Andrew Bell (1726-1810). In 1780 he moved to London, lodging at 22 Charles Street. His first prints for Boydell were 'The Continence of Scipio', after Poussin (published 1784), and 'Mary, Queen of Scots', after Gavin Hamilton (published 1786). Although he produced only four large prints for the 'Shakspeare Gallery', he was among the best paid of the engravers to work on the project. He was rewarded $500 by Boydell for engraving Barry's 'Lear and Cordelia' and $450 for West's 'Hamlet'; only Bartolozzi and Sharp were paid more. By 1790 he had moved to Sloane Square, and in 1797 was living in Pleasant Row, where his mother died in 1799. In 1796 he exhibited at the academy 'A Girl and Pigeons' and in 1800 'Maternal Solicitude', indicating forays into original sentimental imagery. He later lodged with a Mr Proctor at Charles Street, Middlesex Hospital, the address given in the 1800 academy exhibition catalogue; this supports reports of financial difficulties later in life, despite his being appointed historical engraver to the prince of Wales. He died on 7 April 1809, apparently in a state of depression, and was buried at St Pancras Church. 


@@@@@


doc= 16411


Henry Le Keux (1787-1868), engraver, was born on 13 June 1787, and baptized at St Dunstan's, Stepney, the younger brother of John Le Keux. As apprentice to the younger James Basire, Henry Le Keux worked on the 'Oxford Almanack' and on plates for the Society of Antiquaries. Then, about 1808, he established himself as an architectural engraver by contributing to such of Britton's publications as 'The Beauties of England and Wales' (1801-18). Associated with his brother John in some of his architectural work, he contributed to 'Cathedral Antiquities of Great Britain', and produced the famed plate 'The Interior of Henry VII's Chapel' for J. P. Neale's 'Westminster Abbey'. He also collaborated with Edward Blore, engraving several fine plates for his 'Monumental Remains' (1826), of which publication he was part proprietor. 
Henry Le Keux was equally known as an engraver of illustrations to literary works. His work after J. M. W. Turner includes seven plates for Sir Walter Scott's 'Provincial Antiquities' (1826) and two for Scott's 'Poetical Works' (1834), two rare steel plates for Samuel Rogers's 'Italy' (1830), and 'St Herbert's Island' for Rogers's 'Poems' (1834), the last of which he considered his finest achievement. His engravings after John Martin appeared in various of the fashionable annuals, including 'Forget-me-Not' (1829) and 'The Keepsake' (1832). 
As a mature engraver Henry Le Keux returned to work on the 'Oxford Almanack', advising on the change to steel engraving and then engraving five issues (1832-9). In 1838 he was consulted by the Bank of England, together with Henry Corbould and William Wyon, regarding a new design of banknote. He then retired from engraving and moved to Bocking in Essex, where he worked for Samuel Courtauld & Co., crape manufacturers, until a short time before his death. As a member of the Associated Society of Engravers he engraved some paintings by Canaletto and Claude in the National Gallery, his last work being after the latter's 'Embarkation of St Ursula' (1846). He died, apparently unmarried, after a short illness on 11 October 1868, and was buried at Halstead, Essex. While he did not attain quite the same degree of proficiency as his brother, Henry Le Keux engraved the whole of his plates himself, without the assistance of pupils. 



@@@@@


doc= 16412


John Le Keux (1783-1846), engraver, who was born in Sun Street, Bishopsgate, London, on 4 June 1783, and baptized, at St Botolph without Bishopsgate, in September, the son of Anne, 'nee' Dyer, and Peter Le Keux, a wholesale pewter manufacturer who came from a large and flourishing Huguenot family. While apprenticed to his father John Le Keux began experiments in engraving on the quart pots of London publicans and, in 1800, turned his attention to copperplate. Some of his drawings were praised by James Basire II (1769-1822), the engraver to whom his younger brother Henry ['see below'] was already apprenticed, and he was consequently transferred to Basire by his father for the remaining four years of his apprenticeship. Under Basire he acquired that peculiar skill in architectural engraving which characterized his work, developing a very fine yet free style in the linear manner. John Le Keux married Sara Sophia, daughter of John Lingard, on 27 September 1809, at St Mary's, Lambeth; their son John Henry Le Keux ['see below'] inherited his father's skill in engraving. 
The publications of John Britton generated much of John Le Keux's best work from the outset of his career, and it in turn contributed very largely to the success of those volumes. He produced several of the plates for 'Architectural Antiquities of Great Britain' (1807-26), 400 plates for 'Cathedral Antiquities of Great Britain' (1814-35), and an even greater number, after various artists, for 'A Dictionary of the Architecture and Archaeology of the Middle Ages' (1836-9). Of equal importance was his contribution to publications illustrated by A. C. Pugin, including 'Specimens of Gothic Architecture' (1821-3) and 'Examples of Gothic Architecture' (1831-6), both written by E. J. Willson. With his brother Henry he engraved Pugin's illustrations to 'Engraved Specimens of the Architectural Antiquities of Normandy', edited by Britton (1828). Other architectural subjects included engravings after J. P. Neale for 'Abbey Church of St Peter, Westminster' (1818-23), with a text by E. W. Brayley, and for 'Views of the most Interesting Collegiate and Parochial Churches in Great Britain', the first volume of which was co-written by John Le Keux and J. P. Neale (1824-5). His engravings after Frederick Mackenzie for James Ingram's 'Memorials of Oxford' (1837) sparked his own publication 'Memorials of Cambridge', with plates after Mackenzie and J. A. Bell, and a text by Thomas Wright and the Revd Harry Longueville Jones (1841-2); some of these plates were subsequently used for C. H. Cooper's 'Memorials of Cambridge' (1860-66). Of the 'Memorials of Oxford' 'an early reviewer noted approvingly that the publication of views of Oxford's 'halls of learning imposes a check upon future innovators'' ('Hist. U. Oxf.' 6: '19th-cent. Oxf.', xvii). 
Le Keux also engraved two plates after J. M. W. Turner: 'Rome from the Farnese Gardens' for James Hakewill's 'A Picturesque Tour of Italy' (1818-20) and 'St Agatha's Abbey, Easby', for T. D. Whitaker's 'An History of Richmondshire' (1823). 
John Le Keux died on 2 April 1846, and was buried at Bunhill Fields cemetery, London. The poet and humorist Thomas Hood was apprenticed to John Le Keux and his brother Henry. Lionel Cust mentioned that John Le Keux 'may be considered, perhaps, the best engraver of his day in the somewhat mechanical style then in vogue' ('DNB'). Le Keux often worked for up to sixteen hours a day. Nineteenth-century commentators had noted the important contribution his atmospheric architectural engravings made to the revival of Gothic architecture in Britain. These have remained popular and are often reproduced. It is for his fine engravings of Gothic and Gothic revival architecture that John Le Keux is chiefly remembered. 



@@@@@


doc= 16413


John Henry Le Keux (1812-1896), engraver and illustrator, was born in Argyll Street, Euston Road, London, on 23 March 1812, the son of John and Sara Le Keux. He studied under James Basire III (1796-1869) before assisting his father and adopting his style. His first independent plate was engraved in 1832, after Samuel Prout's 'City and Bridge of Prague', for the annual 'Continental'. 
J. H. Le Keux made his name as an architectural engraver during the 1830s on such publications as George Godwin's 'A Short Account of the Temple Church, London' (1837), illustrated by R. W. Billings, and 'The Travellers' Club House' (1839), illustrated by J. Hewitt. However, his most significant achievements in the medium were produced two decades later, when he began to work with John Ruskin on the author's illustrations to 'The Stones of Venice' (1851-3) and 'Modern Painters' (1856-60). Ruskin became friendly with Le Keux and paid him to teach line-engraving to George Allen, his assistant and publisher; in 1890 Allen received Le Keux's engraving tools. During the same period he also engraved plates for C. H. Hartshorne's 'Illustrations of Alnwick, Prudhoe, and Warkworth' (1857), after T. O. S. Jewitt's illustrations, and J. H. Parker's 'Mediaeval Architecture of Chester' (1858). At the close of the decade the Norwegian government employed him to execute thirty-one large plates of Trondheim Cathedral, after illustrations by F. W. Schiertz and H. E. Schirmer; they were published in 1859 with an accompanying text by Peter Andreas Munch. A talented draughtsman, J. H. Le Keux exhibited architectural drawings at the Royal Academy (1853-65) and engraved plates after his own designs for the 'Oxford Almanack' (1855-70). He also wrote several papers on medieval armour and ornamental metalwork, which appeared in the 'Journal of the Archaeological Institute' and the proceedings of other antiquarian societies. 
On 23 June 1841 J. H. Le Keux patented an improvement in line-engraving whereby two steel or copper plates were employed, one carrying the subject, the other a 'ground'. Colour could be used, and two or more plates employed. It is uncertain why he never made use of this commercially, though it has been variously suggested that it was too expensive or time-consuming, and that it would interfere with high-quality engraving. 
On 16 April 1863 Le Keux married Frances Andrews, and a year later he moved to Durham. There he acted as manager to a firm of publishers and booksellers with which his wife was connected. He continued to produce engravings and paint in watercolours for his own amusement into his seventies. He died at his home, 26 Old Elvet, Durham, on 4 February 1896, and was buried in St Nicholas's Church in that city. 


@@@@@


doc= 16457


Malcolm Lennox, fifth earl of Lennox (d. 1333). Having probably succeeded his father and namesake in the early 1290s, the younger Malcolm became a committed supporter of Robert Bruce in his attempt to revive an independent Scottish kingship in the early months of 1306. He attended Robert's enthronement on 25 March and shared fully in the misfortunes of the new king's allies in the years immediately following. The earldom of Lennox was forfeited to Edward I, who assigned it to his principal supporter in the Firth of Clyde, Sir John Menteith. The defeat of Robert's forces at the battles of Methven and Dalry in summer 1306 reduced Malcolm to the status of a fugitive; John Barbour's 'Bruce' preserves a tale of his narrow escape when the Scottish king and his men were being pursued by sea in the Firth of Clyde. However, the earl's fortunes recovered as a result of Robert I's increasingly successful military and political campaigns from 1307 onwards. Lennox was with Robert on campaigns in the west during 1308, and appended his seal to the letter sent by the nobles of Scotland to the king of France in the first parliament of the reign in March 1309. He was similarly one of the signatories of a more famous diplomatic communication, the so-called 'declaration of Arbroath' sent by the Scottish nobility to Pope John XXII in 1320. 
Although never one of the major beneficiaries of Robert I's patronage, Malcolm Lennox received a number of important grants from him, including that of the hereditary sheriffdom of Clackmannan in 1309 and above all the sheriffdom and castle of Dumbarton, the principal stronghold in the area of his earldom, in 1321. After Robert's death in 1329 Malcolm apparently remained loyal to his infant son, David II. On 19 July 1333 pro-Bruce forces attempting to relieve an English siege of Berwick were badly defeated at the battle of Halidon Hill. English chroniclers record the earl of Lennox among the Scottish casualties. 
Malcolm Lennox was succeeded by 


@@@@@


doc= 16472


Leofric (fl. 1070-1071), priest, who should not be confused with Hereward's father, is named by the author of the 'Gesta Herewardi' as Hereward's priest at Bourne and the writer of an Old English life of the rebel which provided much of the information in the first part of the 'Gesta'; authentic detail there may indicate the existence of such a source or a similar one. 


@@@@@


doc= 16478


Daniel Lerpiniere (1745-1785) was born in London. With Fittler, he was Boydell's prime engraver of marines. He was a pupil of Francis Vivares, whose manner he followed in his own line-engravings. He exhibited with the Free Society of Artists between 1773 and 1779 and in 1783, giving addresses in Vauxhall Road and Lambeth. Lerpiniere seems to have worked exclusively for Boydell from the mid-1770s. He collaborated with Fittler on the large plates of the naval engagements of George Farmer and Captain Pearson, after Paton, issued by Boydell in 1780. In a list of plates issued in 1784 Boydell says he paid the engraver as much as 150 guineas for his print of 'The Relief of Gibraltar', after Paton, and 40 guineas each for 'Morning' and 'Evening', after Cuyp and Pynaker respectively. Lerpiniere died at Walcot Place, Lambeth, in 1785. 


@@@@@


doc= 16678


Alexander Lindsay, fourth earl of Crawford (d. 1453), who had been knighted during his father's lifetime, was nicknamed both the Tiger (because of his fierce character) and Beardie (for obvious facial reasons). He had been appointed sheriff of Aberdeenshire by 1450 and as an envoy to England and commissioner of the truce the following year. From 1453 he was also a guardian of the march. Despite his border interests he was also active in the north-east, and probably in the early 1450s entered into a bond with the eighth earl of Douglas and John Macdonald, lord of the Isles. Its terms do not survive, but it was most likely intended to resolve tensions in the region while securing the interests of the subscribers. This alliance of three of the most powerful magnates in the kingdom aroused the suspicion of James II, however, and was the immediate cause of his slaying of Douglas on 22 February 1452. Shortly afterwards, on 18 May, Crawford was defeated by the earl of Huntly at Brechin and fled to Finavon. Although Huntly is said to have 'displayit the kingis banere' (McGladdery, 173), the battle may have been as much an extension of a private feud (Huntly had been involved in the hostilities at Arbroath in which Crawford's father was fatally wounded) as a consequence of James's hostility to Crawford. Crawford was forfeited in the parliament which assembled at Edinburgh on 12 June, but he subsequently reconciled his differences with Huntly and his father's foe Bishop Kennedy and, helped by their intercession on his behalf, had been restored to the king's favour by 23 May 1453, when he was made a conservator of a truce with England. 
Crawford married Margaret (died 1498x1500), daughter and heir of Sir David Dunbar. James II had granted the lands of Auchtermonzie and Cairnie to Dunbar. These estates passed to Margaret and then to her second son, also named Alexander, who ultimately became seventh earl of Crawford. The fourth earl's other children included a daughter, Elizabeth (who married John, first Lord Drummond), and an illegitimate son, yet another Alexander, who became rector of Belhelvie and a canon of Aberdeen Cathedral. The earl died in September 1453 and was buried at the Greyfriars church in Dundee, the resting place of his predecessors. After his death Margaret married Sir William Wallace of Craigie. 
The fourth earl's eldest son, 


@@@@@


doc= 16685


Sir Alexander Lindsay of Barnweill (d. 1309x14), must have been a minor when his father died, for his ward was granted to John Comyn of Badenoch in 1279. His lands were valued at 43 merks yearly. Of age by 1290, when he attended the parliament of Birgham, Lindsay is said to have been knighted by Edward I, and in August 1296 did homage for his Scottish lands to the English king. He is also recorded in that year as holding Luffness and Ballencrief from Henry de Pinkney, the English heir to those Lindsay estates and possibly also to Crawford. 
Despite his early links with Comyn and Edward I, after 1296 Alexander Lindsay is usually found among the adherents of the younger Robert Bruce; his wife was probably a sister of James the Steward, a prominent Bruce supporter. Lindsay refused to participate in Edward I's expedition to Flanders in 1297, and with his younger brother John instead joined Wallace and Bruce in their short-lived rising against the English king in July 1297. Following the Scottish capitulation, Lindsay stood surety for Bruce's handing over of hostages. Lindsay appears to have been briefly in Edward's peace after the battle of Falkirk (22 July 1298), but was forfeited again later that year, and presumably continued to fight against the English until the general surrender of 1304. Recognized as a prominent figure in the Scottish resistance, Lindsay was exiled from Scotland for half a year by Edward's ordinance of September 1305, but he seems to have returned early, in time to be present in Bruce's company when the latter killed John Comyn of Badenoch on 10 February 1306 and declared himself king. Lindsay then remained with King Robert during the difficult months which followed, until he was himself captured at Kildrummy in September and his lands forfeited. However, Lindsay was free again by the summer of 1308, when he was one of the leaders of that year's Galloway campaign. As a prominent Bruce supporter he was a signatory of the letter sent to Philippe IV of France from the St Andrews parliament of 1309. He may have witnessed a royal charter in 1312, but was certainly dead by 10 December 1314. 



@@@@@


doc= 16689


David Lindsay, first earl of Crawford (d. 1407), was the elder son of Sir Alexander Lindsay of Glenesk, third son of Sir David Lindsay of Crawford ['see under 'Lindsay family (per. c.1250-c.1400)], and his first wife, Katherine, daughter of Sir John Stirling of Glenesk. Alexander died in Crete, probably early in 1382, while undertaking a pilgrimage to the Holy Land. Yet it was not before Martinmas 1382, and in some instances not until 1384, that Sir David (who seems to have been knighted by the early 1380s) gained title to his father's legacy. This was composed of various heritable annuities (drawn from the burgh fermes of Aberdeen, Crail, and Forfar) and a disparate collection of lands: Glenesk and Finavon in Angus; Newdosk in Kincardineshire; Cambo in Fife; and possibly also Balindoch and Earl's Ruthven in Perthshire and Inverarity and Ethiebeton in Angus, lands which were certainly in David's possession before his death. By 1381 he also held nominal title to the barony of Strathnairn, Inverness-shire, which may have constituted the dowry of his wife, Elizabeth Stewart, a daughter of King Robert II. The date of their marriage is unknown, though a papal dispensation for it was granted on 22 February 1375. It underlines the extent to which the Lindsays, already influential under David II, were able to consolidate their position in the reign of Robert II. In 1381/2 the income from Strathnairn was granted by the crown to Elizabeth's brother Alexander, earl of Buchan, but Lindsay was compensated from the customs revenues of Dundee. 
Lindsay's income from paternal and perhaps marital sources was substantially augmented following the deaths first of his cousin Sir James Lindsay of Crawford ['see under 'Lindsay family (per. c.1250-c.1400)] between 5 April 1395 and 6 March 1396, and then of his brother, Alexander, between June 1397 and May 1398. From James, in accordance with the terms of an entail confirmed by Robert II in 1384 or 1385, Sir David acquired Crawford in Lanarkshire and Kirkmichael and perhaps also Ewesdale, both in Dumfriesshire. From his brother he probably obtained Baltrody in Perthshire and Downie in Angus, which had both belonged to his father; Alyth in Perthshire, which had previously belonged to his cousin; and Urie in Kincardineshire, which Alexander had obtained in 1390. These multifariously acquired lands and pensions were to form the basis of the earldom of Crawford, to which Sir David was elevated on 21 April 1398. In subsequent years further lands and pensions were to come his way. In 1403 he acquired Megginch in Perthshire and Clova in Angus from the countess of Mar, and the following year William Megill resigned his Perthshire barony of Meigle to the earl. At an unknown date he also obtained Kineff in Kincardineshire, which, although regranted to his half-brother Walter, reverted to the comital line on the death of Walter's son Walter some time after 1438. While the income from the earl's lands remains unquantifiable, annuities which he drew from various towns ensured that he was a wealthy man. These included $66 13's'. 8died, drawn from the Aberdeen customs, in return for service to David, duke of Rothesay, from 1391/2; a further $44 8's'. 11died, drawn from the Dundee customs, inherited from his cousin James from 1396/7, which rose to $66 13's'. 4died from 1403/4, following the death of the latter's wife; and $26 13's'. 4died from 1397/8, drawn from the Montrose customs. 
As the leading magnate in north-east Scotland and also, it would seem, a responsible and diligent nobleman, David Lindsay played a prominent part in regional and local politics. He worked in collaboration with the dukes of both Rothesay (of whose council he was a member) and Albany, guardians of the realm for most of the period between 1388 and 1420, to curtail the recalcitrant earl of Buchan's influence. In 1391 he participated in the highland campaign led by Albany which was directed against Buchan. On or about 18 January 1392 he took part in a skirmish at either Glen Brerachan or Glasclune; his adversaries are variously reported as Buchan's illegitimate sons and members of clan Donnchaidh. During this encounter Walter Ogilvy, sheriff of Angus, was killed and Lindsay was wounded. Further encounters with highland caterans and Buchan's family were to follow. Lindsay was involved in arranging the famous judicial combat between members of clan Quhele and clan Kay which was staged before King Robert III at Perth on 28 September 1396. His promotion to the rank of earl in 1398 should probably be regarded as part of the crown's programme of strengthening its position in the north at this time. By November 1400 he had aligned himself with the Erskine family in its claim to the earldom of Mar, advanced in anticipation of the death of Countess Isabella. In 1402, following the death of Isabella's second husband, Sir Malcolm Drummond, Crawford became a member of the countess's council, but his plans for an Erskine succession were thwarted two years later by Isabella's unexpected third marriage to Buchan's son Alexander. Crawford was, however, instrumental in brokering a deal between the new earl and Erskine's principal supporter, Albany, at Kildrummy on 1 December 1404, which left Alexander in possession of Mar for life. 
Well before he became an earl Lindsay had acquired an international reputation, one secured during a visit in 1390 to London, where on 4 or 6 May he defeated Lord Welles in a tournament, to be rewarded with gifts from Richard II. Chivalric interests and a family tradition of crusading probably explain why he and his brother, Alexander, enrolled in the order of the Passion, a crusading order established by Philippe de Mezieres in 1395, though neither is known to have engaged the infidel. Instead Lindsay became increasingly involved in governmental matters. Although he was appointed deputy chamberlain north of the Forth in 1405, his chief responsibility concerned foreign affairs. In March 1394 he was named a conservator of the Anglo-Scottish truce and he participated in further Anglo-Scottish truce negotiations between 1397 and 1400. Probably in 1401 and certainly by 1403 he had been made admiral. In December 1401, in the hope of winning French military assistance for Scottish campaigns against England, Crawford arrived in Paris, apparently spreading the falsehood that the by now deposed Richard II was alive and well in Scotland, and on 3 January 1402 he entered the service of Louis, duc d'Orleans, the leader of the French war party. By 22 March Crawford was at Harfleur, in command of a predominantly French fleet, which in the subsequent four months captured at least twenty-five English merchant vessels in the channel. Some of the spoils were taken to Corunna in Spain, where Crawford donated an anchor and a boat to Jean de Bethencourt, seigneur de Grainville, in furtherance of the latter's attempt to conquer the Canary Islands. As the fleet reached Scotland only late in July, Crawford was absent during the time of the removal from power and subsequent death of Rothesay, his former patron, though his half-brother Sir William Lindsay of Rossie had been one of the duke's captors. Nor is he recorded as having fought at Homildon Hill on 14 September following. 
Crawford died in 1407, probably in February, and was reportedly buried in the Franciscan church in Dundee. He was succeeded by his eldest son, 


@@@@@


doc= 16690


David Lindsay, fifth earl of Crawford and duke of Montrose (1440-1495), was still a minor at the time of his father's death. His great-uncle Walter, the third earl's brother, was appointed as his tutor and also acted, along with John Lindsay, Lord Lindsay of the Byres ['see under 'Lindsay family of the Byres], as sheriff of Aberdeenshire. David's ward and marriage were granted to James, Lord Hamilton, in 1459. Perhaps aged about eighteen, David married Hamilton's daughter, Elizabeth. His minority came to an end in 1462. In January 1464 he granted his mother the barony of Kirkmichael for life and in 1466 he became hereditary sheriff of Angus, following the resignation from that position of Alexander Ogilvy of Auchterhouse, nephew of the third earl's wife. 
Politically the fifth earl was closely associated with James III. He may have been in England on diplomatic business in 1466, when members of the Boyd family abducted the king. He remained aloof from the Boyd regime and in 1469 headed the assize which sentenced Sir Alexander Boyd to death for his role in the royal kidnapping. Thereafter he was a regular witness of royal charters and frequently attended parliament. The earl's attachment to James III was further demonstrated by his endowment in 1474 of a perpetual chaplaincy for the king's soul, and that of Queen Margaret, at the church of Meigle. By then the king had already shown him considerable favour. In 1473 he was granted the lordship of Brechin and made keeper of Berwick, a position which he held for three years. In 1474 he was involved in the unsuccessful negotiations for the king's marriage to Cecilia, daughter of Edward IV of England. By 1482 Crawford was master of the royal household and the following year he was appointed royal chamberlain and, together with the second earl of Huntly, justiciar of the north. Loyal service to the crown was rewarded on 18 May 1488, when he was created duke of Montrose. This was the first instance of ducal rank accorded to a man who was not a member of the royal family and it was accompanied by the award of additional lands, including the castle and burgh of Montrose and the lordship of Kinclaven in Perthshire, to be held in full regality. The new duke's fortunes declined temporarily after the defeat of James III at the battle of Sauchieburn on 11 June; he was imprisoned and removed from public office, resigning the sheriffdom of Angus. He was not, however, charged with treason and was soon pardoned by the new king, James IV. His ducal title was confirmed, but only for life, by royal charter of 19 September 1489. Appointment to the privy council in 1490 appeared to confirm his rehabilitation. 
Crawford and his first wife, Elizabeth, who was the only child of James, first Lord Hamilton, and his first wife, Euphemia, daughter of Patrick Graham, earl of Strathearn, had four children. The elder son, Alexander, quarrelled with and was killed by the younger son, John (died 1513), who succeeded as sixth earl. One daughter, Margaret, was married to John Blair of Balmyle, while the other, Elizabeth, married David Lyon of Baky. By 1484 the earl's first marriage had been dissolved on the grounds of consanguinity, and he then married Margaret Carmichael of Meadowflat, who was later styled duchess of Montrose. In 1488 she was granted the lands of Cockburn in Berwickshire, previously held by James III's brother Alexander, duke of Albany. The duke of Montrose died at Finavon Castle on Christmas day 1495 and was buried in the church of the Dundee Greyfriars. The dowager duchess later endowed a mass for her husband's soul at Brechin Cathedral; she died in 1534. 


@@@@@


doc= 16692


David Lindsay, tenth earl of Crawford (1526/7-1574), and Margaret (died in or after 1574), eldest daughter of David Beaton (1494?-1546), cardinal and archbishop of St Andrews, and Marion Ogilvy (d. 1575); his parents married at Finavon in April 1546, his mother bringing a substantial dowry. His paternal grandfather, Alexander Lindsay (died 1542), usually known as 'the wicked master', had forfeited the Crawford title following his murder of a servant of Lord Glamis; this began a feud with the Lyon family that was to erupt at intervals for the remainder of the century. However, his first marriage being childless, David Lindsay of Edzell (died 1558), who had become ninth earl of Crawford, adopted as his heir David son of Alexander, who in due course became tenth earl. This earl acted as cupbearer to Queen Mary at her marriage to Lord Darnley in July 1565 and took his seat as a privy councillor the following October. He supported the queen at the battle of Langside in 1568, but submitted to the new regime in 1570. He died at Finavon or Cairnie, Fife, shortly before 1 November 1574, when his son David was recorded as eleventh earl; the tenth earl was buried at Dundee. 


@@@@@


doc= 16693


Lindsay, David, eleventh earl of Crawford (d. 1607), nobleman, was the eldest son of 
The eleventh earl had married at Perth on 12 February 1573 Lilias, daughter of David Drummond, second Lord Drummond, and his wife, Lilias Ruthven. Lilias brought a portion of 10,000 marks, but the couple soon separated. Crawford continued the conservative political and religious traditions of the family, being regarded as a 'convert' of the Jesuit William Crichton, and he was a supporter of the imprisoned Queen Mary. He is recorded as a member of the privy council in 1575, but in March 1578 an encounter in School House Wynd in Stirling between John Lyon, eighth Lord Glamis, the chancellor, and Crawford, together with their respective retinues, culminated in the shooting of the chancellor. Glamis had been a prominent member of King James's party and a supporter of the recently deposed regent, James Douglas, fourth earl of Morton. Crawford, who had a reputation as a marksman, was held responsible for the murder and was temporarily imprisoned in Edinburgh Castle before being allowed to return to his house at Cairnie. Further trouble followed with the master of Glamis and the Lyon family. In September 1579 Crawford was summoned to answer on 3 November for various crimes in the Tolbooth of Edinburgh. Lord Lindsay of the Byres and David Lindsay of Edzell stood caution for him. On 7 November Crawford signed a bond valid until 1 May 1579 undertaking not to molest the master of Glamis any further. In December he was given licence to go abroad for three years, with a group of Lindsays and Gordons standing surety for him. 
The arrival in September 1579, at the invitation of James VI, of Esme Stewart, later duke of Lennox, prompted a resurgence of the minority pro-Marian interest within the country and the final eclipse of the earl of Morton, along with the increase in power and influence of a Stewart faction. A distinct, but secret, foreign policy developed, Francophile in character, sympathetic to the exiled Queen Mary, and with vague and half-hearted aspirations for the restoration of Roman Catholicism. Contacts were fostered between James VI, Lennox, Catholic exiles in France, English and Scottish Jesuits, and seminary priests. Crawford was part of this network. He was at the French court in February 1580, and was reported to have left in May for Orleans with a view to travelling to Italy. By October he had apparently departed Orleans for Rome, with David Graham of Fintry, an important Marian and member of the Catholic party. On 22 July 1581 Crawford returned from France with George Gordon, sixth earl of Huntly, a prominent conservative who had been in exile at Orleans, and from this time was to be associated with him and with the policies of Lennox, especially in his confrontation with the presbyterian party in the reformed kirk. Having divorced his first wife, in December Crawford married Lady Grizel Stewart, daughter of John Stewart, fourth earl of Atholl (d. 1579), and his wife, Margaret Fleming. 
In August 1582 an Anglophile party of disaffected nobles and lairds united around a platform of militant protestantism, and seized the king in a coup -- the Ruthven raid -- which forced the exile of Lennox. During the king's captivity Crawford several times asked for leave to go to France, but was not granted a safe conduct by the English. In June 1583, when James escaped from the government of the Ruthven raiders, Crawford and the conservative, Francophile, and Marian party rallied to his support. A new favourite emerged, James Stewart, fifth earl of Arran, who consolidated his authority by intruding royal agents into positions of power. In September 1583 Crawford was made provost of Dundee, against the will of the burgesses. James demonstrated his favour by spending two days with the earl at Cairnie, continuing to urge reconciliation between Crawford and the master of Glamis. James displayed his confidence in Crawford and cultivated the Catholic party, which was useful to him for its cosmopolitan contacts and as an alternative to an increasingly aggressive kirk. Crawford was a consistent opponent of the Melvillian party in the kirk; he was a lord of the articles at the parliament of May 1584, which drew up the 'black acts' and which reasserted the authority of bishops and denounced the new presbyteries. In 1587 he protested against an act of parliament appropriating ecclesiastical revenues to the crown, displaying his innate religious conservatism but also arguing for the right of noble patronage and the continuance of the manipulation of ecclesiastical revenues which had been customary for centuries. 
During the ascendancy of Arran the English government worked with Scottish dissidents to undermine his position. Arran's fall in November 1587, engineered by a coalition of nobles including some Ruthven raiders, caused a reversal of Crawford's fortunes. Crawford continued to manoeuvre to regain access to the king and to promote pro-Marian and anti-English policies. He was imprisoned from November 1585 to March 1586 by the new government because of his French and Catholic sympathies. On his release he joined his former confederate the earl of Huntly. The emergence of John Maitland of Thirlestane as chancellor in 1587 signalled for Crawford another unwelcome development in Scottish politics. As well as sealing an alliance with England, Maitland promoted greater participation by the lairds in parliament as shire commissioners, and co-operated with the radical presbyterians in the general assembly of the kirk, using them as a counterweight to the influence of the Catholic earls. Crawford rightly saw this as a challenge to the traditional privileges of the nobility and opposed it. 
Scottish political society became increasingly polarized in the late 1580s, reflecting the unresolved tensions of the Lennox years. Each faction attempted to increase its power at home through winning foreign support. Throughout 1588 the earls conspired to destabilize the king's government by ejecting Maitland from the chancellorship and Crawford's old enemy, the master of Glamis, from the treasurership. The king retained his chancellor while urging reconciliation between Crawford and Glamis and showing personal favour and patronage to Huntly. A precarious balance between the factions was thus maintained. Although Crawford was suspected of disaffection and of links with Spain he was still given charge of the defence of Forfarshire and the neighbouring coast against the threat of the Spanish Armada. 
Despite its defeat, the Armada showed that Spain retained considerable power. Huntly, Crawford, and their confederates, advised by the duke of Guise, had been trying to tap into this source of power since 1586. The nature of their correspondence with Spain was revealed to James VI by the English ambassador in February 1589. It is likely that James had been aware of these contacts for some time and may even have encouraged them. Huntly, the emerging leader of the Roman Catholic anti-Maitland and pro-Spanish party, was imprisoned for a week on easy terms in Edinburgh Castle. On his release he made for the north-east, where he began an insurrection designed to win the king to his cause and eradicate Maitland; he was joined by Francis Hay, ninth earl of Erroll, and Crawford, and later by Francis Stewart, fifth earl of Bothwell. 
On 10 April Crawford, with Huntly and Erroll, captured the master of Glamis in Perth, thereby striking at a reported plot against them by Maitland, John Stewart, twenty-fourth earl of Atholl, and Morton. The Catholic earls declared that their grievance was solely against Maitland, while religious concerns were added to their manifesto to encourage further support from Spain, whose considerable subsidies enabled them to maintain their forces in the field. The earls took possession of Aberdeen, from where they issued proclamations in the king's name stating that he was held captive and forced against his will to treat the nobles with more rigour than he desired. The king adhered to Maitland and the English alliance and marched north to confront the earls at the Brig O'Dee outside Aberdeen in April 1589. Despite their superior force, 3000 men to the king's 1000, the earls did not give battle but surrendered. Crawford confessed his crime and was imprisoned briefly in Edinburgh before being warded in St Andrews, nearer his own power base. He was released in September 1589. 
Crawford's public involvement with the Catholic party diminished after 1589. He attended the privy council in 1591, and his religious opinions were still causing concern in 1593 when the provincial synod of Fife advised Andrew Melville to confer with him and the earl of Rothes. He maintained his attachment to the Huntly faction since in October 1593 he was on the assize which acquitted Huntly, Erroll, and Angus for the murder of the earl of Moray. Crawford was present at the parliament of May 1594 but did not play a prominent role. By 1595 he was observed attending protestant sermons and religious exercises. In 1596 the king was still trying to achieve the final reconciliation of Crawford and the master of Glamis. In March that year Crawford sought a safe conduct to go abroad; it was also reported that he was a possible ambassador to France. In April a further opportunity arose for him to serve as envoy, to Denmark. The safe conduct was granted since the English government believed that careful handling might win Crawford to their cause but already he was politically a spent force. He found himself more isolated, with his own former allies on the defensive. 
Crawford's last years were marked by the resurgence of a feud. In October 1605 his eldest son, 


@@@@@


doc= 16694


Lindsay, David, Lord Edzell (1551?-1610), judge, was the eldest son of David Lindsay, ninth earl of Crawford, and his second wife, Katherine (died 1578), daughter of Sir John Campbell of Calder. His father had become ninth earl of Crawford in 1542 as a result of the disinheritance five years earlier of the eighth earl's only son. But when the ninth earl died on 20 September 1558 the earldom passed to the grandson of the eighth earl, another David Lindsay, while the latter's cousin and namesake inherited the Edzell estates. His mother was responsible for bringing up and educating her children and for managing the family estates. Together with his younger brother, John Lindsay, later Lord Menmuir, David Lindsay of Edzell was educated on the continent and at Cambridge by James Lawson, a future colleague at St Giles, Edinburgh, of John Knox. On a contract dated 1 and 2 March 1570 Edzell married Lady Helen Lindsay (died 1579), daughter of David Lindsay, tenth earl of Crawford. They had four children, David, who succeeded to Edzell, John, Alexander of Canterland, and Margaret, who married David Carnegie, first earl of Southesk. Edzell was among those who, on 3 May 1578, signed a band in favour of the earl of Mar as guardian of James VI, and he was knighted when Esme Stewart was created duke of Lennox on 5 August 1581. In 1586 Edzell was appointed an extraordinary lord of session. His participation in national affairs increased considerably after his brother, Lord Menmuir, became incapacitated and then died. Shortly before his death Menmuir had resigned his position as an ordinary lord of session to Edzell, who successfully passed the trial of his abilities and was admitted a judge on 2 March 1598 under the title of Lord Edzell. He also stepped into two other of his brother's offices, that of privy councillor (his first appearance was on 16 November 1598), and master of the metals. Between 13 May 1597 and 7 June 1605 Lord Edzell attended six conventions of the estates, a more informal, less authoritative alternative to a parliament. He was also a commissioner for the summoning of parliament. 
Edzell combined a wide variety of talents and interests. '[H]e was learned and accomplished -- the sword, the pen, and pruninghook were equally familiar to him; he even anticipated the geologist's hammer, and had at least a taste for architecture and design' (Crawford, 1.339). He devoted much attention to the utilization of the minerals on his estate, agricultural improvements, building, and planting trees. The walled garden which he built at Edzell is the finest surviving example of its kind produced by the Scottish Renaissance. It is decorated on three sides with relief panels on which are carved the liberal arts, the planetary gods, and the cardinal virtues, and its walls are also pierced with small rectangular holes arranged to represent the fess chequy of his family's arms. At his death he had a library of 144 books. Edzell and his family were, however, both victims of, and participants in, the endemic violence that plagued Scottish society at this time. Two of his brothers, Robert Lindsay of Balhall and Sir Walter Lindsay of Balgavie, were murdered. On 27 October 1583 Edzell and twenty-one others were granted a remission for the murder of John Campbell of Lundie. For his negligence in failing to prevent a fray between his son Alexander and the young laird of Pitarrow in the high street of Edinburgh on 17 June 1605 he was briefly warded first in Dumbarton, then in Stirling Castle. On 5 June 1607 his eldest son and heir, David, mortally wounded Alexander Lindsay, Lord Spynie, in Edinburgh in a quarrel arising from the murder of his uncle, Sir Walter. The earl of Crawford blamed Lord Edzell himself for this act, but did not appear to prosecute on 19 September 1609, the date set for his trial. Edzell's second marriage, to Isobel Forbes, on a contract dated 1 December 1585, was childless, and she survived him. He had an illegitimate son, Thomas Lindsay, who was also implicated in Lord Spynie's death. Lord Edzell died on 15 December 1610 at Edzell Castle. 


@@@@@


doc= 16695


Lindsay, David (1531-1613), bishop of Ross, belonged to the family of Lindsay of Edzell and was a nephew of David Lindsay, ninth earl of Crawford. His pedigree is not well authenticated and he has been identified as son variously of Robert Lindsay of Kirkton and of Alexander Lindsay of Haltoun and Rachael Barclay of Mathers. He is said to have been a student at St Andrews University, though his name does not appear in the matriculation and graduation lists, and to have travelled in France and Switzerland. Certainly the name David Lindsay occurs at Geneva associated with the congregation to which John Knox ministered. Lindsay became minister in Leith by 1560, a strategic town as the port of Edinburgh where reforming opinions had spread in the decades before the Reformation. His services were sought by the general assembly, which frequently appointed him its commissioner and temporary visitor to oversee such areas as Kyle, Carrick and Cunningham, Moray, Lothian, Galloway, Teviotdale, Tweeddale, Angus (Forfarshire), and Clydesdale. 
Nominated by the assembly in 1562 to preach in churches lacking ministers in the Merse (Berwickshire), Lindsay rose to prominence in the work of the assembly's committees and in discussions with government. On six occasions he was elected moderator of the general assembly: February 1569, October 1577, October 1582, May 1586 (when the king, voting first, chose him), April 1593, and March 1597. Earlier, he had been appointed to the convention of Leith in 1572 which secured a compromise between church and crown on the thorny subject of ecclesiastical endowment leading to the introduction of protestant bishops. When John Knox refused to inaugurate John Douglas as archbishop of St Andrews, Lindsay was one of three ministers who laid hands on the new archbishop and embraced him as a sign of his admission. He visited Knox on his deathbed in November 1572 and at Knox's request, though he 'thought the message hard', went to Edinburgh Castle to warn William Kirkcaldy of Grange that unless he surrendered the castle, which he held for Mary, he would 'be brought down over the walls of it with shame and hang against the sun' (Calderwood, 3.234; 'Works of John Knox', 6.657). Lindsay visited Kirkcaldy after his condemnation and was sent by him to the Regent Morton to intercede for his life, being empowered to offer Kirkcaldy's whole estate as a ransom. But his intercession failed and Lindsay, at Kirkcaldy's request, attended his execution in 1573. 
Lindsay participated in the preparation of the 'Second Book of Discipline', completed in 1578 with its endorsement of a presbyterian constitution for the church, and in 1580 helped prepare a plan for establishing presbyteries. Yet Lindsay himself was ever inclined to moderation. He was apt to be dubbed a 'court minister', though as late as 1592 he reiterated the opinion he held with other ministers that King James was not exempt from the censure of excommunication if he disobeyed God's will. That 'not a little offended' the king (Calderwood, 5.162). Even when elevated to the episcopate, he spoke out in the privy council against the king's treatment of the presbyterian ministers banished for defying the king's wishes in 1605 by holding a general assembly at Aberdeen -- a punishment which he considered harsher than that accorded to Jesuits or murderers. Much earlier, in 1579, he was selected to instruct King James's French cousin, Esme Stewart, who professed a willingness to convert to protestantism but whose arrival at court had aroused fears that he was the agent of a Catholic plot. Distrustful of Esme's influence, he welcomed the Ruthven lords' palace revolution in 1582. At the same time, he sought to reduce antagonisms among political factions: not only had he tried to mediate between the Regent Morton and earls of Atholl and Argyll who had dislodged him from power in 1578, but in 1583 he sought to enlist the support of the English ambassador as mediator between the ultra-protestant Ruthven lords, who fled to England, and the earl of Arran, who headed a conservative, anti-presbyterian administration. When he attempted to delay the application of the reactionary 'Black acts' passed by parliament in 1584, he found himself imprisoned in Blackness Castle for forty-seven weeks. 
Lindsay's moderate counsels gradually gained the king's support. He stood out as the only minister -- with the exception of the king's own minister -- who was willing to comply with James's request that ministers pray for his mother before her execution in 1587. He accompanied James as chaplain in October 1589 when the king set sail for Norway to bring home his bride, Anne of Denmark, and married James and Anne at Oslo on 23 November, conducting the ceremony in French. Thereafter, on their return to Edinburgh, he officiated at the queen's coronation at Holyrood in May. He was present, too, at the baptisms of Prince Henry in the Chapel Royal at Stirling in August 1594, when he delivered an address in French, of Princess Margaret in April 1599, and of Prince Charles in November 1600. He went to Edinburgh from Falkland Palace in an effort to persuade ministers of the veracity of the king's version of the Gowrie conspiracy in August 1600, and when they declined to approve a general service of thanksgiving for the king's safety, he conducted a service at the market cross, and preached a sermon in his own church in the king's presence. As James began the task in 1597 of reviving episcopacy by approving 'parliamentary bishops' who would sit and vote as bishops in parliament but were not then accorded any special jurisdiction within the church, Lindsay was one of the first three ministers selected for appointment. He became titular bishop of Ross in November 1600 when almost seventy years old and by 1609 was accounted infirm through age. After episcopal succession was restored in 1610 when three Scottish bishops were consecrated in England, Lindsay duly received consecration in Scotland on 24 February 1611. 
Although Lindsay survived until his eighty-third year, when he died at Leith on 14 August 1613, there is little sign of his activity in his northern diocese. For the most part his continuing work as parish minister in Leith, his attendance at parliament and general assembly, and his seat on the privy council kept him outside his diocese. His son-in-law, Archbishop John Spottiswoode, depicted him as a man 'of a peaceable nature, and greatly favoured of the king, to whom he performed divers good services, especially in the troubles he had with the Church: a man universally beloved and well-esteemed of by all wise men'. He was buried in Leith (at South Leith parish church) 'by his own direction, as desiring to rest with the people on whom he had taken great pains in his life' ('History of the Church', 3.220). His first wife was Janet or Jonet Ramsay, daughter of George Ramsay of Clattie; his second, Helen Harrison. His elder son became Sir Jerome Lindsay of Annatland, Lyon king of arms; his second son, David Lindsay, served as rector of St Olave's, Southwark, and then succeeded his father in the ministry at South Leith; his daughter, Rachel, married Archbishop Spottiswoode. 


@@@@@


doc= 16696


David Lindsay, master of Crawford (bap. 1576, d. 1620), baptized at Perth on 8 March 1576, murdered and mutilated David Lindsay of Balgavie, a Roman Catholic convert of William Crichton and deeply implicated in traffic with Spain and Rome. Despite his conviction and outlawry the master remained at large and appeared in Edinburgh in June 1607. On 5 June David Lindsay of Edzell, son of Walter Lindsay of Balgavie, lay in wait for the master, and in the resulting ambush the master's uncle and the earl of Crawford's brother, Alexander Lindsay, Lord Spynie, were killed. Spynie was a friend of Walter and his murder split the Lindsay family more deeply. Crawford himself died either early in October that year or on 22 November, at Cupar, Fife. He was buried at Dundee. His son David, who succeeded as twelfth earl, married some time between 4 March 1606 and 16 April 1610 Lady Jane (Joan) Kerr, daughter of Mark Kerr, first earl of Lothian and widow of Robert Boyd, master of Boyd (died 1597); the couple later divorced. The twelfth earl died in June 1620 at Edinburgh Castle and was buried in the Canongate. His former countess had married before 16 February 1618 Thomas Hamilton of Robertoun; she died before 1633. 


@@@@@


doc= 16697


Lindsay, David (c.1566-1627), Church of Scotland minister and religious writer, was probably the son of David Lindsay (1531-1613), later bishop of Ross, and his first wife, Janet or Jonet Ramsay. He graduated MA from St Andrews University in 1586 and entered the ministry at Forfar in 1590. In August 1597 he was translated to St Andrews by the crown to replace Robert Wallace, removed for opposition to the crown's ecclesiastical policies. Between 1606 and 1609 he served the parish of Forgan in Fife and in 1609 he was translated to the second charge at South Leith near Edinburgh, where he replaced John Moray, deposed from the ministry for having preached against bishops. Lindsay's appointment was on the recommendation of Archbishop Spottiswoode, who had described him to James VI as a minister 'for whom the people is earnest' (Laing, 1068), although Calderwood suggested that he was appointed 'notwistanding of the protestation of the parochiners made in contrare' (Calderwood, 7.20). Lindsay thereby seems to have become assistant to his ageing father and, in 1613 on the death of Bishop Lindsay, he succeeded to the first charge. Three years later he too received the help of an assistant because of failing health, but in the event he lived another decade and published two devotional works, 'The Heavenly Chariot Laid Open' (St Andrews, 1622) and 'The Godly Man's Journey to Heaven' (London, 1625). He died in Leith in January 1627 and was survived by his wife, Margaret Hepburn (died 1635); he is believed to have been married previously. In all, he is known to have had two sons and five daughters, two of whom married ministers. 


@@@@@


doc= 16698


Lindsay, David (c.1575-1639/40), bishop of Edinburgh, was the son of John Lindsay of Edzell, and graduated as master of arts at St Andrews University in 1593. He became master of the grammar school of Montrose before moving to be master at Dundee in 1597. He was minister of Dundee from about 1604 to 1618, a parish conveniently close to the estate he owned at Dunkenny in Forfarshire. By 1603 he was married to Christian Rutherford, widow of the former master of Dundee School, and after her death he married Katherine, daughter of Gilbert Ramsay of Banff. 
Lindsay was appointed to the Scottish court of high commission in 1616. On 12 July 1617 he proposed and defended theses on the power of princes in a public disputation in St Andrews before James VI. His theses, published as 'De potestate principis aphorisme' (1617), argued that the king was 'summus gubernator' (supreme governor) of the kirk, able to command all things that were 'not repugnant to the will of God', his powers including the right to determine forms of worship (Mullan, 121). He followed this up by supporting the reforms that became known as the five articles of Perth in the 1618 general assembly, and he was elected bishop of Brechin on 10 April 1619 (consecrated on 23 November). 
Pamphlets of 1619 on communion, and of 1621 defending the articles, confirmed Lindsay as one of the most active supporters of royal policy in the kirk, and he crowned Charles I at his Scottish coronation on 18 June 1633 after a sermon 'wherein he had some good exhortations to his Majestie', an opponent admitted, though they were 'general and ambiguous' (Row, 362-3). On 31 July 1634 he was admitted to the Scottish privy council, and in the same year became a justice of the peace and a commissioner of the exchequer. 
Lindsay was transferred to the bishopric of Edinburgh on 16 September 1634, and in his capacity as bishop was present in St Giles on 23 July 1637 when the dean began to read the new prayer book introduced by Charles I. In the rioting by protesters that followed Lindsay became a prime target as protesters 'beganne to throw at him stooles and ther very bybles... And it is reported, that he hardly escaped the blow of a stoole' (Gordon, 1.7-8). Order was restored and he managed to preach his sermon, though he was assaulted in the streets afterwards and was unable to get into his lodgings, but was rescued by servants of the earl of Wemyss. He ventured out in the afternoon to hold a second service in the church, from which women (who had led the disorders) were excluded. Afterwards he had to be protected by footmen with drawn swords as he drove to Holyroodhouse with the earl of Roxburghe in the latter's coach, harassed by a stone-throwing mob shouting 'Kill the traitour' (Lippe, 174). Hostile accounts of his absurd 'crying to the people, That he had no wyt [knowledge] of the matter' (Row, 409) and that 'his greatnesse' displayed physical symptoms of extreme terror (J. Leslie, 'True Relation', 1830, 199-200) are doubtless exaggerated propaganda. 
After refusing to submit to the authority of the covenanters' general assembly in 1638 Lindsay prepared for the dangers ahead by making his will, on 2 December. He was deprived of office and excommunicated on 13 December. Like the other Scottish bishops he then fled to England, where he died in 1639 or 1640. The date of the death of his wife, who was alive in December 1638, is unknown. 
Lindsay had proved 'A tough opponent' (Mullan, 155) in debate with those resisting James VI's reforms of worship. His resolutions in favour of the Perth articles earned him -- from an opponent -- the nickname Dr Resolutus (Calderwood, 7.396). He took little part in the formulation of religious policies under Charles I, and the rumour that he tried to get some of the 'trashe' of the English liturgy left out of the new Scottish prayer book ('The Letters and Journals of Robert Baillie', ed. D. Laing, 3 vols., 1841-2, 1.4) may indicate that he was not entirely happy with the king's reforms, though his obedience remained unswerving. 


@@@@@


doc= 16699


Lindsay, George, third Lord Spynie (d. 1671), nobleman, was the second child, and second son, of Alexander Lindsay, second Lord Spynie (d. 1646), and his second wife, Lady Margaret, only daughter of George Hay, first earl of Kinnoull and lord chancellor of Scotland (1622-34). He was served heir to his father in 1646. Like his father he was a staunch supporter of Charles I. He opposed the surrender of the king to the English parliament in 1647 and, as colonel of the Stirling and Clackmannan horse, supported the engagement negotiated with him in December 1647. In December 1650 the Scottish parliament, then reconciling a number of former engagers, appointed him colonel of foot for Angus (Forfarshire), though he did not make his peace with the kirk until early 1651. He was among the former engagers admitted to the committee for regulating the army in March 1651, and led his regiment into England in Charles II's 1651 campaign. Captured at the battle of Worcester, he was imprisoned in the Tower of London on 16 September 1651. His estates were forfeited on the proclamation of the Cromwellian act of grace and pardon, from which he was excepted, at the Mercat Cross of Edinburgh on 5 May 1654. The forfeiture was later changed to a heavy fine which, with other financial obligations apparently incurred in the royal cause, left him greatly in debt. With the death of Ludovic Lindsay, sixteenth earl of Crawford, in November 1652, he was served his heir, although he did not inherit the earldom. 
Following the Restoration Spynie's losses were placed before a commission of enquiry, in 1661, and he secured royal protection from arrest for debt. He sat in parliament in 1663, 1669, and 1670. He died insolvent and without heirs in January 1671, and was buried in Holyrood on 21 January. 


@@@@@


doc= 16700


Sir James Lindsay of Crawford (d. 1395/6) was a charter witness for Robert II, but his closest links were with John Stewart, earl of Carrick, the heir to the throne. He acquired the barony of Kirkmichael in Dumfriesshire in 1377 and received royal patronage elsewhere, including the old thanage of Alyth in Perthshire. Thanks to his connection with Carrick, and with the first earl of Douglas, he was prominent in Anglo-Scottish diplomacy, receiving numerous English safe conducts between 1374 and 1395. He helped to shelter John of Gaunt in Scotland during the peasants' revolt, took part in a raid into England in 1384, and in August 1388 was captured by the bishop of Durham while pursuing an English knight from the battlefield of Otterburn, though he was released in the following summer. In 1373-4 he acted as justiciar north of Forth with his uncle, and from 1378 is recorded as sheriff of Lanark. Following Alexander Lindsay's death in 1382, James Lindsay failed to secure the justiciarship for himself. In the same year the title of earl of Buchan, to which James had a remote claim, was given to Alexander Stewart, the king's youngest son. Possibly it was his failure to secure these dignities which on 4 November 1382 caused Lindsay to assassinate Sir John Lyon, the king's son-in-law and chamberlain. Lindsay had perhaps befriended Lyon (one chronicler asserts that he had concealed Lyon's liaison with Robert II's daughter Jean, whom he subsequently married), and he may have been disappointed that Lyon, who could also have been a territorial rival, did not sufficiently use his influence with the king to promote Lindsay's claims. 
Following the death of his uncle in 1382, Sir James Lindsay (as lord of Crawford head of the senior line of the family) became the effective leader of a powerful Lindsay-Leslie northern affinity which had probably originated in the marriage of his grandfather, Sir David Lindsay. After the murder of Lyon he withdrew briefly to England, but had returned by November 1384, when he used his affinity to support Carrick when the latter grasped power and marginalized Robert II. He then litigated for Buchan, and styled himself 'lord of Crawford and Buchan' for the rest of his life. His hopes of restricting Alexander Stewart's power were not realized, but he remained loyal to Carrick, supporting his accession as Robert III in 1390. He then became a close associate of the new king's eldest son, David, earl of Carrick, and was probably the leading member of the latter's household. He was also much involved in government. An exchequer auditor in 1391, he stood surety for an extension of the truce of Leulighem in 1392, and was a conservator of the Anglo-Scottish truce in 1394, when he was also one of the commissioners appointed to negotiate a permanent peace with England. 
Sir James Lindsay married Margaret, daughter of Sir William Keith, a union which did not prevent Lindsay from becoming embroiled in a serious inheritance dispute with his wife's family in 1395. They had two daughters, Margaret and Euphemia, but lacking male heirs he obtained mutual charters of entail with his cousin, David Lindsay of Glenesk ['see under 'Lindsay family, earls of Crawford (per. c.1380-1495)], the son of Alexander, about 1384. Consequently the bulk of his estates (but not Barnweill) passed to the collateral line when Sir James died, between 5 April 1395 and 6 March 1396. The steady rise of the Lindsays, which was made possible by marriages and royal patronage for both the main branches of the family, achieved its appropriate culmination when David Lindsay, who united in his person the Crawford and Glenesk inheritances, was created earl of Crawford in 1398. 


@@@@@


doc= 16701


James Lindsay (1554-1601), courtier and royal administrator, succeeded as seventh Lord Lindsay of the Byres, and by a contract dated 9 May 1573 had married Euphemia (died in or after 1605), daughter of Andrew Leslie, fifth earl of Rothes. No doubt the union was intended to help resolve the dispute between their two families over the sheriffdom of Fife. They had two sons and four daughters. James Lindsay was appointed a gentleman of the bedchamber in September 1580, during his father's period in Lennox's circle. On 18 January 1594 he was made a privy councillor. He died on 5 November 1601, when his heir was his elder son, John. 


@@@@@


doc= 16702


Lindsay, James Bowman (1799-1862), experimenter with electricity and writer on theology, was born on 8 September 1799 at Cotton of West Hills, Carmyllie, Arbroath, the eldest son of John Lindsay, tailor then farmer, and his wife, Elizabeth Bowman. He was apprenticed as a weaver but, persuaded by his love of learning, his parents sent him to St Andrews University in 1821. After completing the general curriculum he read theology, possibly intending to be ordained, but in 1829 he was appointed science and mathematics lecturer at the Watt Institute, Dundee. He also taught private classes. After a period of teaching abroad he settled in Dundee in 1834 and resumed his science classes. 
Electrical technology was in its infancy, but in his classes Lindsay demonstrated its possibilities, including telegraphy and power from batteries. In an advertisement in the 'Dundee Advertiser' of 11 April 1834, he proclaimed that 'houses and towns will in a short time be lit by electricity instead of gas, and heated by it instead of coal; and machinery will be worked by it instead of steam'. He claimed in 1835 to have developed a continuously burning electric light, probably based on Humphry Davy's observations of the electric arc. Few details survive, and its potential was almost certainly exaggerated. In 1845 he sent a proposal to the 'Dundee Advertiser' for an autograph telegraph, which used vibrating needles to etch messages into pith balls. When the 'Dundee Advertiser' carried a suggestion for a submarine Atlantic telegraph cable, Lindsay responded with a letter detailing how a cable might be constructed, using uninsulated copper wire with joints welded by electricity. This was probably the first suggestion of the use of electricity for welding. Also in 1845 he proposed a telegraphic dictionary -- combinations of signals to represent words. 
1853 saw the first demonstration of Lindsay's underwater wireless telegraph. This involved instruments and batteries connected to metal plates submerged in the water. Lindsay persevered in publicizing his system through several demonstrations in Scotland and England between 1853 and 1860. He took out a patent in 1854 and demonstrated it to the Electric Telegraph Company in London. He also presented a paper and demonstrations to the British Association in 1859. That such a method could send signals through water had already been observed, most notably by Samuel Morse, but it had not been adopted practically, and, while Lindsay's telegraph drew some favourable comment, it was never taken up, since there was no use for it over short distances, and over long distances it was unworkable. 
Theological research, using philology and astronomy to investigate the historical accuracy of the 'Bible', was Lindsay's overriding passion. In 1828 he had begun his 'Pentecontaglossal Dictionary', a comparison of fifty languages. Through this he hoped to shed light on human origins, and prove the 'Bible's' accuracy. He never completed this massive work, but in 1846 he published the 'Pentecontaglossal Paternoster', a comparison of the Lord's prayer in fifty languages, as an introduction. 'The Chrono-Astrolabe' (1858) had the same aim. Through study of astronomy and careful dating of phenomena such as eclipses mentioned in ancient Greek, Roman, Hebrew, and Chinese texts, he hoped to establish an accurate chronology of ancient history, including the 'Bible'. This painstaking project was begun in 1849. A devout Christian, he was a member of the Presbyterian church until 1843 when that movement disrupted, and he joined the new St Paul's Free Church. In 1861 he became a Baptist, arguing from his studies of early Christian history and the use of the term 'bapto' in ancient Greek that adult immersion was the apostolic form of baptism, and that infant baptism and sprinkling were human inventions. He published these arguments in his 'Treatise on the Mode and Subjects of Baptism' (1861). 
Lindsay never married, and spent most of his earnings on books and apparatus, which he crammed into his house at 11 Union Street. He reputedly had little mechanical skill, so commissioned apparatus from a local instrument maker, George Lowdon. In 1841 he was appointed as a teacher in Dundee prison, a post he held until 1858, when the award of an annual civil-list pension of $100 allowed him to resign. 
Lindsay was entirely devoted to his research. His theological work was as important to him as electricity, but it was in the latter that he displayed striking foresight. He realized that electricity could be applied to lighting, heating, power, and communication, and he experimented with it as much as possible, on limited resources, away from the mainstream of the scientific world. He pursued his research to the detriment of his health, which began to fail in 1860. He died at his home, Beach Land, Blackness Road, Dundee, on 30 June 1862, after a prolonged attack of diarrhoea. He was buried on 2 July in Dundee's western cemetery; in 1901 a monument, paid for by public subscription, was erected by his grave. 


@@@@@


doc= 16703


Lindsay, John (d. 1334x6), bishop of Glasgow, may have been the youngest son of John Lindsay, chamberlain of Alexander III. He was certainly closely related to that family, for he inherited the barony of Staplegordon, Dumfriesshire, as heir of Philip Lindsay, who was probably his elder brother. John held the church of Ratho in the diocese of St Andrews by early in the fourteenth century and, having received a university education before 1309, was also a canon of Glasgow for an unknown period of time. Although while he served in the St Andrews diocese Lindsay was used by Bishop William Lamberton for diplomatic and other duties, it seems that he probably supported the English king against Robert I before Bannockburn, suggesting that he had belonged to the Balliol-Comyn faction. His brother Simon was captured by the Scots at Bannockburn, and John came to Scotland with an English safe conduct to arrange Simon's ransom. 
Lindsay must have changed his allegiance soon afterwards, since King Robert chose him for the vacant see of Glasgow after the death of Stephen Dunnideer in 1317. The choice of Lindsay may represent Robert I's wish to indicate his willingness to promote such members of this influential family as would come to his peace. Lindsay's election was not approved by the pope, however, and his journey to the curia for consecration was futile. The papal choice of John Eglescliffe, an Englishman, was designed to satisfy Edward II. But Eglescliffe never gained possession of the see, and in 1323 was translated first to Connor in Ireland and then to Llandaff. (It seems that the Scottish king regarded the Glasgow see as being in his own hands during this period -- in effect vacant, if not technically so.) Thereafter Lindsay was accepted by the pope and was consecrated during the summer or autumn of that year. His canonry was then given to Walter Twynham, a favourite clerk of the king, who later became chancellor. 
Lindsay's name is found regularly in the witness lists of the later acts of Robert I and, as a senior bishop, he appears at significant state events, such as the signing of the treaty of Edinburgh in 1328. Yet after Robert I's death he supported the kingship of Edward Balliol, and is last recorded as attending the parliament held by Balliol in February 1334. Lindsay's see was vacant by February 1336 and he must therefore have died before that date. There is no evidence to substantiate claims either that his allegiance reverted to the Bruce kingship before his death or that he died as a result of an attack by English pirates on the ship that was bringing him back to Scotland from Flanders. It was his successor at Glasgow, John Wishart, who perished thus in 1337. According to John Spotswood, Bishop Lindsay was buried in the lower church of his cathedral. 


@@@@@


doc= 16704


Lindsay, John, fifth Lord Lindsay of the Byres (d. 1563), nobleman, was the eldest son of John, master of Lindsay (styled Sir John Lindsay of Pitcruvie), and Elizabeth Lundie, eldest daughter of Sir John Lundie of Balgonie. He had a charter in liferent from his grandfather Patrick, fourth Lord Lindsay, to the lordship and barony of Byres on 30 March 1524, and on 8 March 1526 was served heir to his father, who had died the previous year. On the death of his grandfather shortly afterwards, John was entered fifth Lord Lindsay of the Byres. In addition to the lands and title, he inherited the sheriffship of Fife, granted to his grandfather by parliament in July 1525. He married Helen, second daughter of John Stewart, second earl of Atholl, and they had ten children -- three sons and seven daughters, their eldest child being born in 1521. 
In September 1526 Lord Lindsay was among those lords who attempted to rescue the young King James V from the Douglases. As a result he found himself imprisoned and his goods forfeited and gifted to Archibald Douglas. When King James escaped in 1528 Lord Lindsay was among those whom he summoned to support him as he established his personal rule. 
In June 1529, following allegations that he had been negligent and abusive in the exercise of the office, Lindsay lost his position as sheriff of Fife to the fourth earl of Rothes. In June 1538 King James considered reappointing Lindsay and even drew up a letter to that effect, but it was never acted on, and in 1540 Rothes and his heirs were confirmed in the office. Lindsay resented the loss, which for some time remained a bone of contention between his family and the Leslies. When the master of Rothes was forfeited in 1563, Queen Mary reinstated Lindsay in the sheriffship. The dispute was finally settled in 1573, when the sixth Lord Lindsay was bought out by the fifth earl of Rothes. 
Lindsay was made an extraordinary lord of session in 1532, and in 1540 sat on the assizes that tried and condemned Sir James Hamilton of Finnart for treason, and Sir John Borthwick for heresy. He may have hoped that service on these assizes would help him to recover the sheriffship of Fife. 
Pitscottie reports that Lindsay was present at the death of James V at Falkland on 14 December 1542. On account of his presumed neutrality between the competing factions, Lindsay was appointed one of the custodians of the infant Queen Mary. However, the English ambassador Sir Ralph Sadler recorded that Lindsay would gladly have left the queen's household for the party of the earl of Arran, the governor of Scotland, in August 1543, but that the queen mother, Mary of Guise, halted the removal of his baggage in order to stay his departure. He was one of the commanders of the Scottish army which defeated the English at Ancrum Moor on 27 February 1545, and about that time was acting as curator to David Lindsay, master and later tenth earl of Crawford (the so-called 'wicked master's' son). 
In June 1545 Lord Lindsay sat with the privy council. He served regularly until May 1547, but then his attendance ended abruptly, and his career in public life seems to have ceased. Perhaps because he 'favoured religious reform from an early date' (Lord Lindsay, 1.267), he found it safer to maintain a low profile. His daughter Isobel had married Norman Leslie, master of Rothes, in 1541, and the latter's association with other known advocates of protestantism, not to mention his part in the murder of Cardinal David Beaton in 1546, may have brought Lindsay under suspicion at court. 
Although no longer active in public life, Lindsay continued to take part in litigation, pursuing his adversaries and ensuring the maintenance of his children. By June 1559 he was described as being 'a very aged man' (Lord Lindsay, 1.269), but despite his age it was he who negotiated a compromise between the regent, as Mary of Guise now was, and the lords of the congregation, which averted a pitched battle at Cupar Muir. 
Lindsay was present at the Reformation Parliament in August 1560 and gave his approval to the change of religion. A sympathetic eyewitness, who described him as 'as grave and goodly a man as ever I sawe', recorded his speech: 'I have lyved maynie yeres, I am the eldest in thys compagnie of my sorte, nowe that yt hathe pleased God to lett me see thys daye wher so maynie nobles and other have allowed so worthie a work, I will say with Simion, 'Nunc dimittis'. ('CSP Scot. ser.', '1509-89', 467)' Lindsay also served as a lord of the articles, but although Knox claims that the fifth lord was present to subscribe the 'Book of Discipline' in January 1561, he does not appear among the signatories. 
Lord Lindsay's last public act, early in 1562, was to sign a letter to Queen Elizabeth requesting safe passage through England for Lord James Stewart, going to meet his half-sister Queen Mary in France. Randolph noted in a letter to Cecil of 21 December 1563 that Lord Lindsay had died within the last four days, while the precept of 'clare constat' recognizing his eldest son Patrick Lindsay as his father's heir, dated 13 March 1564, records that the fifth lord had died three months previously. He is reported to have died at Struthers in Fife. His widow lived until May 1577. 


@@@@@


doc= 16705


Lindsay, John, of Balcarres, Lord Menmuir (1552-1598), administrator, was the second son of David Lindsay of Edzell (died 1558), ninth earl of Crawford, and his wife, Katherine Campbell (died 1578). When John was a child his father gave him the benefices of Menmuir, Lethnot, and Lochlee in Angus (Forfarshire), of which he was patron. John Lindsay was thus commonly known as 'Parson of Menmuir', though he was never ordained. On 29 November 1581 he married Marion Guthrie (died 1592), widow of David Borthwick of Lochhill and daughter of a burgess of Edinburgh. She was to be the mother of all seven of his children. 
John Lindsay's early years were spent being privately educated at the family seat at Edzell. About the year 1570, however, he and his elder brother David Lindsay (1551?-1610) went to the continent to be educated under the care of James Lawson, later minister of Edinburgh. They took up residence in Paris but fled to England because of trouble between Huguenots and Roman Catholics in the French capital. The brothers proceeded to Cambridge; David soon returned home but John, 'able to come to great understanding of letters', according to Lawson, stayed on (Lindsay, 1.332). On his return to Scotland he devoted himself to legal studies and became an advocate. Perhaps with the help of his kinsman the earl of Argyll, he was presented to the lords of session by the king on 5 July 1581 as John Lindsay of Drumcairne. He was recommended as 'a man that fears God, of good literature, practice, judgement and understanding of the lawes, of good fame, haiffing sufficient leiving of his awin, and quha can mak gud expedition and despatche of materis tueching the leiges' (Brunton and Haig, 177). Lindsay thus became an ordinary lord of session, taking the title Lord Menmuir, and began a relatively short but influential career as a statesman. 
Menmuir's involvement in parliamentary affairs began in October 1583 when he was recorded as one of the king's commissioners for holding parliament. From 1587 onwards he was appointed to numerous parliamentary commissions concerning such matters as taxation, coinage, the publication of statutes, and ecclesiastical finance. He was also involved in drafting a number of significant acts, most notably that of 1587 for the representation of the shires in parliament (though his draft of this was not used). In the later 1580s he was appointed to two privy council commissions for visitation of the University of St Andrews, of which he was to be appointed chancellor in 1587. As Menmuir his name is found on privy council sederunts after November 1589 and he attended frequently for the next eight years. In 1586 he bought Balcarres and other lands in eastern Fife, all of which in June 1592 were united and erected into the barony of Balcarres in a great seal charter. These lands would form the basis of the estates of his successors. Menmuir made his principal residence there, and in 1595 embellished the existing tower house with the addition of a substantial stair tower on the east and further accommodation on the south. 
Menmuir's accumulation of public offices continued in May 1592 with his appointment as master of the metals, with responsibility for regulating all mining of ore and manufacture of metals. In January 1594 he acted in this capacity when approving a tack of mines to Thomas Foulis, an Edinburgh goldsmith. He also attempted to use this position to his own advantage, and in partnership with his brother David attempted to mine lead ore on the family estates in Angus. They imported German and Dutch expert labour but it is unclear how successful the venture proved. 
Menmuir became prominent in financial affairs when in July 1593 he was appointed to a council for managing the income from the property of Queen Anne. The council was so successful that the queen is said to have goaded her husband about the greater ease with which she could obtain cash. James reacted almost immediately, in January 1596 appointing her financial commissioners and four others to an exchequer commission which became known as the Octavians. They took over all responsibility for royal finance, while the treasurer, comptroller, and collector lost their positions, Menmuir being appointed to the two latter posts. No alienation of royal property was to take place, nor any disbursement of money even by the king, without the consent of five commissioners. Menmuir was also appointed keeper of the privy seal in March and secretary in May 1596. The power of the Octavians was immense and caused widespread resentment. Coupled with their lack of success in rectifying the dire financial situation of the crown, this was enough to force them to demit office after a year. 
The Octavians were particularly unpopular with the kirk, largely because of the Roman Catholicism, or suspected Roman Catholic sympathies, of some of them. Menmuir seems initially, however, to have had honourable intentions for the kirk. In the summer of 1596 he drafted a putative act of parliament presenting a sensible solution to two long-standing problems. His own 'Act of Annexation' of 1587 had taken the revenues of the prelacies into crown hands and dealt what seemed at the time a death blow to episcopacy. Nine years later he suggested a permanent financial settlement for the kirk from these revenues; each of Scotland's fifty presbyteries would also send a commissioner to parliament. James Melville described this scheme as 'the best and maist exact that ever was devysit... and wald, sum litle things amendit, haiff bein glaidlie receavit be the breithring of the best judgment' ('The Autobiography and Diary', 345). It was never implemented, however, for a breakdown in relations between James VI and the kirk in the later months of 1596 caused the plans to be scrapped. At the beginning of 1597 James decided to assert royal supremacy over the kirk, and he enlisted the forensic mind of Menmuir to draw up a list of fifty-five penetrating questions concerning ecclesiastical polity and authority to be presented to the general assembly. This apparent volte-face by Menmuir led to a serious clash with the presbytery of St Andrews when he was sent by the king to complain about the political content of a minister's sermons. Things became very personal; the royal secretary was described as 'a plaine mocker of religioun' (Calderwood, 548), and the lavishness of his recently built house was cast up against him. 
By this time, however, Menmuir was gravely ill, having suffered for some time from 'the stone'. His attendances at meetings of the privy council became less frequent and he planned in March 1597 to go to Paris for surgery, combining the visit with an embassy to the French court. He did not leave Scotland, however. In June his 'lang absence fra court' (Lindsay, 1.371) was commented upon, and in December he made his final appearance on the privy council and resigned as a lord of session and as secretary, comptroller, and collector. In the spring of 1598 he again planned to travel to France but again did not go. He died on 3 September at Balcarres House and was buried in the nearby parish church of Kilconquhar. He was survived by his second wife, Jane Lauder, who had already been twice widowed after marriages to Sir James Forrester of Corstorphine and John Campbell of Cawdor, and who went on to marry for a fourth time. His heir was his eldest surviving son, David, through whom he was the ancestor of the earls of Balcarres. 


@@@@@


doc= 16706


Lindsay, John, seventeenth earl of Crawford and first earl of Lindsay (1596-1678), politician, was the son of Robert, ninth Lord Lindsay of the Byres (died 1616), and Lady Christian Hamilton (died 1646), eldest daughter of Thomas, first earl of Haddington. He is said to have received 'a noble education both at home and in foreign parts' (Lindsay). He was served heir to his father on 1 October 1616. By 1630 he had married Lady Margaret Hamilton, daughter of James Hamilton, second marquess of Hamilton. Their first daughter was baptized on 1 September 1631; they had four other daughters and five sons. 
On 8 May 1633 Lindsay was created earl of Lindsay and Lord Parbroath, but the patent was held back until 1641 due to his opposition to the policies of the Caroline administration of Scotland. He made his objections to the king's ecclesiastical policy clear as early as in the 1633 parliament, and he was prominent in the opposition to the introduction of the Scottish prayer book in 1637, being one of the noblemen who protected the conventicles that had sprung up in Fife. In the 1638 parliament he became a member of the Tables, the provisional government in Edinburgh, and was one of only four nobles appointed to decide on the measures to be taken against the prayer book; at that time he was described as one of the 'cheife Covenanter lords' (Gordon, 1.68) and of the 'professed Covenanters' (ibid., 1.109). On 24 September 1638 he was appointed a commissioner to oversee the subscription in Fife of the 1580 confession and the 1589 general band. On 3 October 1638 he presented a complaint of the presbyterian nobles to James Hamilton, third marquess of Hamilton, which protested against the attempts to force the people to subscribe the king's covenant. His high-profile role at the 1638 general assembly in Glasgow was reflected in his appointment on 27 November to the committee which met beforehand in private with the moderator, Alexander Henderson, to discuss the order of proceedings. He was also involved in an assembly committee which discussed the rivalry between the towns of Ayr and St Andrews for the appointment of Robert Blair as minister. 
Lindsay attended the 1639 parliament and on 31 August he was elected to be one of the lords of the articles. On 28 September he was appointed to a subcommittee which was to inquire about the condition of the University of St Andrews and then report back to the articles; four weeks later he was made responsible for drafting an act of visitation. In the June 1640 parliamentary session Lindsay was a member of the session committee for furnishing provisions for the army (3 June) and the committee of estates (8 June). Meanwhile he witnessed military action in the first and second bishops' wars. He raised a regiment in 1639 and his foot regiment of 1000 men took part in the battle of Newburn in August 1640. 
Lindsay maintained a high parliamentary profile throughout 1640-41. In April and May 1641 he was a member of the delegation of the committee of estates which was to consider the continuation and prorogation of parliament. He was appointed to several important committees in the session of 15 July - 17 November 1641. On 28 August he was selected to be one of the Scottish diplomatic commissioners to negotiate with representatives of the English parliament concerning the ratification of the articles of the peace treaty following the second bishops' war. On 8 October he was included on the committee to consider the petition of General Major Monro and his regiment, who were seeking approval of their military service. He was also involved in the parliamentary investigation into the 'Incident', the plot by royalists to murder the leading proponents of the new order, Argyll, Hamilton, and Lanark, and was instructed on 30 October to attend the king to hear the reading of a letter from the earl of Montrose concerning these events. On 11 November he was a member of the session committee to consider which acts were to be passed in parliament, while on 13 November he was appointed a treasury commissioner and was included on the new privy council, as well as being appointed as an extraordinary lord of session. He was placed on interval committees for the plantation of kirks and valuation of teinds, for the visitation of St Andrews University, and (the most important for the conduct of covenanting diplomacy) the committee anent the articles referred to consideration by the treaty and the committee for conserving the articles of the treaty (conservators of the peace). It was as part of the king's attempt to conciliate leading covenanters that he received the grant of his earldom from Charles I during the king's visit to Scotland. 
At the first meeting of the new privy council on 18 November 1641 Lindsay was commissioned with the earl of Lothian to proceed to London to discuss the recent Irish rising with the English parliament, and the decision of the covenanters to offer 10,000 men to help suppress it. They were also instructed to act as peacemakers between the king and the English parliament. On 11 March 1642 Lindsay was given the command of a regiment in the covenanting army which was being sent to serve in Ulster, although he never took up the commission personally. Early in March 1643 he contributed two sums of $500 Scots (3 March) and $6000 Scots (7 March) for the maintenance of the Scottish army in Ulster. As a privy councillor he was appointed on 5 July 1642 to be a commissioner for Fife for the apprehension of Jesuits, priests, and those undertaking pilgrimages to chapels and wells, and on 8 June 1643 to be one of the commissioners to take depositions concerning the murder of one Alexander Stuart, a former student of St Andrews University. 
Lindsay played an important role in the 1643 convention of estates (22 June - 26 August) and the securing of the solemn league and covenant. He was a member of a number of committees, including those concerned with the trial of the earls of Traquair and Carnwath, remedies of the dangers of religion (11 July), and the army (4 August), meeting with the English commissioners (9 and 10 August), and he was at the heart of the negotiations which led to the solemn league and covenant, not only as a parliamentary representative, but also as a ruling elder of the general assembly. Indeed, he was a member of the general assembly's commission of the kirk in 1643, 1644, 1645, and 1647. On 17 August Lindsay produced the solemn league and covenant before the assembled convention. On 26 August he was appointed to the new committee of estates and was a member of the shire committee of war for Fife and Kinross. He signed the treaty of military assistance with the English parliament as one of the Scottish diplomatic representatives on 29 November 1643. On 1 December Lindsay was included in the section of the committee of estates which was to accompany the covenanting army into England in January, although he stayed in Edinburgh to attend the opening diets of the convention between 3 and 11 January. 
The presbyteries of Cupar and St Andrews raised ten companies of men for Lindsay in the army. He distinguished himself in action at the battle of Marston Moor on 2 July 1644. According to Robert Baillie, he incurred 'the greatest hazard of any' ('Letters and Journals of Robert Baillie', 2.204) when he charged and dislodged four brigades of royalist troops. In the aftermath of the battle he wrote to the estates suggesting a general thanksgiving for the victory. 
On the expiry of the Scottish Treasury commission, Lindsay was on 23 July appointed treasurer by parliament and the next day he was included on the renewed commission for the plantation of kirks and valuation of teinds. Following the forfeiture of Ludovic, earl of Crawford, on 26 July, the titles and dignities of the earl of Crawford were ratified to Lindsay and he became known as the earl of Crawford-Lindsay. That day he was also included on the army section of the committee of estates. 
Owing to the ill health of the president of parliament, John Maitland, earl of Lauderdale, on 11 January 1645 Crawford-Lindsay was appointed vice-president and then on 20 January, following Lauderdale's death, president. Since as president he had access to and an entitlement to preside over all parliamentary committees, he played a key constitutional and political role; in the event he presided in all the remaining sessions of the first triennial parliament until it concluded its business on 27 March 1647. He was a member of the committee appointed on 10 January for managing the war within and without the country, which dealt with the Montrose rebellion and covenanting military commitments outside Scotland, and of similar committees established in 1645-6, such as those for managing the war (8 July), for the prosecution of the war (29 July), for dispatches (1 December 1645), and for common burdens (10 November 1646). On 8 March 1645 he was included on the section of the committee of estates which was to accompany the covenanting army in Scotland against Montrose and, in the absence of Chancellor Loudoun, he was to preside over it. He was also involved in the ensuing military operations and was a member of the covenanting committee advising General Baillie on strategy. In this capacity he must bear the partial burden of responsibility for the covenanting defeat at Kilsyth on 17 August 1645 when he, and other leading covenanters, persuaded a reluctant General Baillie to abandon his superior position and attack Montrose's forces. Crawford-Lindsay's own regiment suffered heavily at Kilsyth and according to Robert Blair the 'whole regiment was cut off almost wholly' (Lindsay, 2.73). Indeed, it was one of the few regular units of the army of the solemn league and covenant to be destroyed in battle. 
In May 1646 Crawford-Lindsay was appointed temporary president of the privy council in the absence of Chancellor Loudoun. On 10 December he received a formal ratification from the king of his previous appointment as treasurer and he was one of the Scottish deputies sent to England following the capture of the king to try and persuade Charles to agree to the Newcastle propositions. He protested against the parliamentary decision of 16 January 1647 to withdraw the covenanting army from England and hand Charles over to the jurisdiction of the English parliament in return for arrears of pay. He did sign the act for the surrender of the king, but he only agreed to do so in the constitutional capacity of president and not of his own personal accord. On 19 January an act was passed in his favour for reimbursement of $23,799 14's'. Scots which he had previously lent for the public service. 
Crawford-Lindsay was closely involved with the engagement following the king's imprisonment at Carisbrooke. He was present in the Engagement Parliament of 1648, although Chancellor Loudoun was elected as president. He served on committees for the garrisoning of Berwick and Carlisle and for war in Fife and Kinross, as well as those of estates on 11 May and 9 June. In March he became involved in a dispute in parliament with Archibald Campbell, eighth earl of Argyll, over whether or not Crawford-Lindsay had said that he was a 'better man' than Argyll, and over the former's response that he 'would not make accompt to Argyle what he said; but whatever it was, he would make it good with his sword' ('Letters and Journals of Robert Baillie', 3.36). A duel was arranged for seven o'clock on a Sunday morning at Musselburgh Links. Both parties kept the appointment, but the duel did not take place. According to Henry Guthrie this was due to the reluctance of both men to fight, despite being at the scene for over an hour 'so that they had leisure enough to have fought if they had been willing' ('The Memoirs', 261), but Baillie's explanation focused on the intervention of outside parties; 'by God's providence, before they began their pley, some fell on them, and made them part without a stroke' ('Letters and Journals of Robert Baillie', 3.36). Furthermore, the privy council, 'with much adoe, gott them to a professed coldryse friendship' (ibid.). Both men faced the wrath of the commission of the kirk and on 22 March they 'professed their sorrow for any scandall they had given by the late combat' (Mitchell and Christie, 1646-7, 405-6). Argyll adhered to repentance before the commission, but Crawford-Lindsay refused to do so and the commission was still urging him to repent for the combat as late as 8 June. 
Following the battle of Preston in August 1648 and the installation of a political regime of radical covenanters in Edinburgh, backed by Oliver Cromwell, Crawford-Lindsay was deprived of his offices, including on 13 February 1649 that of treasurer, because of his involvement with the engagement. He also came under the scope of the 1649 'Act of Classes'. In December that year he refused to subscribe a band acknowledging the legality of the current parliament and he was apprehended at Elie, Fife, on the point of departure for the Netherlands. He was returned to his own home, although no further action was taken against him. In January 1650, however, he subscribed a band for the peace of the country. As events unfolded in Scotland in 1650-51 he returned to political life, joining the patriotic accommodation against the Cromwellian advance. In December 1650 he was appointed as a colonel of foot in Fife and he carried the sceptre at the coronation of Charles II at Scone on 1 January 1651. He also entertained the king at his house of the Struthers between 15 and 17 February 1651. He was a member of the committee for managing the affairs of the army of 28 March, playing an important role liaising with the commission of the kirk, and of the committee of estates of 3 June. 
When the king marched into England in the summer of 1651, Crawford-Lindsay was appointed lieutenant-general under the earl of Leven. By 18 July 1651 his regiment of foot consisted of 1045 men, and following Charles II's invasion of England by the army of the kingdom Crawford-Lindsay became 'the effective commander-in-chief of forces in Scotland' (Furgol, 367). He was later captured along with other members of the committee of estates at Alyth on 28 August. He was initially imprisoned in the Tower of London and then Sandown Castle, but on 27 November 1656 he was transferred to Windsor Castle, where he was to remain until the end of his captivity. He was excepted from Cromwell's 'Act of Grace' and he was forfeited at Edinburgh Cross on 5 May 1654. 
At the Restoration Crawford-Lindsay was freed from imprisonment and in December 1660 he returned to Scotland. He was present at the parliament in Scotland which met on 1 January 1661, and he was included in the membership of commissions to the lords of articles and processes (8 January), for trade and complaints (8 January), and for plantation of kirks and valuation of teinds (6 March). On 29 January parliament confirmed a patent issued by the king making Crawford-Lindsay treasurer for life and an act of 13 February exonerated his role in the decision of 16 January 1647 to leave Charles I in England. He was appointed on 29 March an excise commissioner for Fife and Kinross and on 5 April an extraordinary lord of session. Nevertheless, he opposed the rescissory act of 28 March and was against the restoration of episcopacy in Scotland. He was a member of the new privy council, over which he was to preside in the absence of Chancellor Glencairn. He did not attend the parliamentary sessions of 1662 and 1663 and he resigned all his offices in 1663 and withdrew from public life rather than accept the revival of episcopacy. As a committed presbyterian, he is often mentioned in the parish register of Ceres. Although on 20 May 1663 he became one of the original members of the Royal Society, he took up residence at his estate of Struthers and died at Tynninghame there in 1678. His wife was living in 1666, but the date of her death is unknown. William Lindsay (1644-1698), their eldest surviving son, succeeded to the earldom. 


@@@@@


doc= 16707


Lindsay, John, twentieth earl of Crawford and fourth earl of Lindsay (1702-1749), army officer and politician, was born on 4 October 1702, the son of John, nineteenth earl of Crawford (died 1713/14), and his wife, Emilia (died 1711), daughter of James Stewart, Lord Doune, and widow of Alexander Fraser of Strichen. After the death of his mother he was placed under the care of his great-aunt Elizabeth, dowager duchess of Argyll. He attended the University of Glasgow and later (1721-3) the military academy of Vaudeuil, Paris. Crawford inherited an encumbered estate and was financially insecure throughout his life, receiving a pension from 1714. Like his father he sought a military career; he entered the army in 1726 and was a captain in the 3rd foot guards by the end of 1734. 
During the 1730s Crawford also began to play a visible part in public life. Having been elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1732, the next year he was made a gentleman of the bedchamber to Frederick, prince of Wales. Also in 1732, he was elected a representative peer. In parliament Crawford took his cue from Archibald Campbell, earl of Ilay, and proved a loyal supporter of Sir Robert Walpole. He was one of the seven representative peers who stuck by Walpole during the excise crisis in 1733, and he helped to frustrate an attempt to elect an opposition slate of Scottish peers in 1734. In the upper house Crawford was a fairly attentive member when in London, though he made no reputation as a speaker; in the debates over Edinburgh's handling of the Porteous riots Lord Hervey commented that Crawford and Lord Findlater made 'so many long, dull, absurd speeches in broad Scotch... that they fretted everybody who was of their side' (Hervey, 3.712). 
Crawford began to establish a reputation for military prowess and bravery after joining the Austrian army under Prince Eugene as a volunteer in 1735 and distinguishing himself at the battle of Claussen (17 October 1735). He embarked on a lengthier tour of foreign service in 1738 when he arrived in St Petersburg. After declining the Empress Anna's offer of a regiment of horse and the rank of lieutenant-general he joined the army of Marshal Munnich on its march to the Dniester and saw action against the Turks and Tartars. His skilled horsemanship and his prowess with the sword won him great admiration. Crawford then rejoined the Austrians, serving under Marshal Wallis at the battle of Krotzka (22 July 1739), where he was severely wounded in the left thigh. In 1741, after a lengthy convalescence, he returned to England. The wound proved a constant source of pain and difficulty. According to the 'Gentleman's Magazine' it opened twenty-nine times before complications from it eventually proved fatal in 1749. 
Meanwhile Crawford had been made in October 1739 colonel of the highland regiment that became the Black Watch, and in December 1740 colonel of the horse Grenadier Guards. In May 1743 he joined the Pragmatic army under John Dalrymple, second earl of Stair, in Germany. At the battle of Dettingen (16 June) he commanded a brigade of cavalry with credit, and after the battle he was one of sixteen officers created knights banneret by George II. Promoted brigadier-general in 1744 he next served under William, duke of Cumberland, in the Southern Netherlands. At the battle of Fontenoy (30 April 1745) he unsuccessfully urged on Cumberland the need to occupy the strategic wood of Barry, and later covered the army's retreat with skill and coolness. On 30 May 1745 Crawford was made a major-general. After the Jacobite rising in Scotland he was appointed to the command of 6000 Hessian troops brought from the continent. He occupied Perth as Cumberland's army proceeded northwards. 
However, when the Jacobites captured a series of posts in Perthshire, Crawford and the Hessians began a retreat to Stirling, threatening Cumberland's communications with Edinburgh. The duke curtly ordered them to move in the opposite direction and raise the siege of Blair Castle. When Crawford joined others in urging more lenient treatment towards the highlanders after Culloden, the duke described them as 'arrant Highland mad' (Yorke, 1.534). Both men agreed that Crawford would be better posted outside Scotland. 
After rejoining the army in the Southern Netherlands Crawford fought at Roucoux (5 October 1746), where he evaded capture by impersonating a French general. Colonelcies and promotion followed: the 25th foot (December 1746), the Scots Greys (May 1747), and on 20 September 1747 he was made lieutenant-general. On service in Scotland, Crawford had met Lady Jane Murray (1730-1747), sixteen-year-old daughter of James, second duke of Atholl. The couple eloped and were married on 3 March 1747. The countess accompanied Crawford back to the continent but was seized with fever and died on 10 October 1747 at Aix-la-Chapelle. 
Crawford remained on active service until the conclusion of peace in 1748. In 1749 he returned to his home at Upper Brook Street, London, where he died on 24 December 1749. His body was brought to Scotland, and buried on 18 January 1750 by the side of that of his wife in the family vault at Ceres, Fife. 
Horace Walpole told the story that Crawford died from taking 'a large quantity of laudanum, under impatience at the badness of his circumstances, and at the seventeenth opening of the wound' (Walpole to Horace Mann, 10 Jan 1750, Walpole, 'Corr.', 20.109-10). He left his estate of Struthers in Fife heavily indebted, and administration was granted to a creditor. He had no children, and was succeeded as earl of Crawford and Lindsay by his kinsman George Lindsay, fourth Viscount Garnock. 
Undoubted bravery, far-flung service, generosity of spirit, and courageous persistence in living with a painful wound made 'the gallant earl' a hero to his contemporaries. Crawford's posthumous reputation was further enhanced by Richard Rolt's celebratory biography, published in 1753 and reprinted in 1769. Although his one independent command provoked a sharp rebuke from Cumberland, the duke also remarked: 'If his head was as good as his heart, His Majesty would not have a better officer in his whole army' (Charteris, 258). 


@@@@@


doc= 16708


John Lindsay (fl. 1758-1759), naval chaplain and writer, who served as the chaplain in the 'Forgueux' during Augustus Keppel's attack on Goree in September 1758. In the following year he published 'A Voyage to the Coast of Africa' with details of this engagement; other works attributed to him are 'A Voyage to Senegal' and 'Sir John Tostle, a Poem'. This John Lindsay's brother, William, served as a brigade major in Lord Ancrum's dragoons and was killed in action during the Seven Years' War. 


@@@@@


doc= 16709


Lindsay, John (1685/6-1768), nonjuring Church of England clergyman and writer, was probably a kinsman of Robert Lindsey, father of the Unitarian minister Theophilus Lindsey of Middlewich in Cheshire. Although he is described in his epitaph as an alumnus of Oxford, his name does not appear in the records of the university. After acting as attorney-at-law in Cheshire, he was admitted into holy orders among the nonjurors, although the date of his admission is unknown. In 1727 he was living in Islington, and appears to have acted as chaplain to Lady Fanshaw at her house in Little Ormond Street, about 1728. In 1741 he moved to Pear Tree Street, near St Luke's, Old Street, where he lived quietly, dividing his time between study and gardening. He officiated in London for many years as minister of the nonjuring society in Trinity Chapel, Aldersgate Street, and was reputedly their last minister, and among the last of the nonjurors. He is also said to have acted as corrector of the press for the printer William Bowyer the younger. Lindsay was married, although the date of his marriage is unknown. His wife's name was Mary, and she predeceased him by over forty years, dying in 1727 at the age of forty-three. 
As a nonjuror Lindsay was involved in controversy with the mainstream Church of England, and his various works tend to reflect this, dealing with subjects such as episcopal and royal succession. Also typical of nonjuring sympathies was his account of the character of the 'Royal Martyr' Charles I, in reply to attacks on that monarch made in the 'Monthly Review' (February 1758). Like most nonjurors Lindsay was often accused of being partial to Catholicism, but his 'Seasonable Anecdote Against Apostasy' (1758), which is strongly anti-Catholic, seems to disprove this. 
Lindsay's translation of Thomas Mason's 'Vindicatio ecclesiae Anglicanae' (1728) was valued for the preface he added, which contains a comprehensive account of the episcopal succession in all the English bishoprics, as well as an early sermon by Mason. Other works by Lindsay include a history of England, two parallel dialogues in support of the nonjuring position, and works of biblical commentary. Lindsay died on 21 June 1768, aged eighty-two, and was buried in St Mary's churchyard, Islington, alongside his wife; they were together commemorated in a Latin epitaph. 
The 'Dictionary of National Biography' article on John Lindsay concluded with a brief memoir of his namesake, but apparently no relation, 


@@@@@


doc= 16710


Lindsay, Sir John (1737-1788), naval officer, was the younger son of Sir Alexander Lindsay of Evelix, near Dorloch in Easter Ross, and Emilia, daughter of David Murray, fifth Viscount Stormont, and sister of William Murray, first earl of Mansfield. Lindsay was made a lieutenant in 1756 commanding the fireship 'Pluto', which in 1757 was attached to the fleet under Sir Edward Hawke in the Rochefort expedition. On 29 September 1757 he was posted to the frigate 'Trent', in which he served during the war, on the home and West Indian stations. 
In 1762 the 'Trent' was part of the fleet under Sir George Pocock in the expedition against Havana; and on the death of Captain Goostrey of the 'Cambridge' in action with the Moro Fort on 1 July, Lindsay was sent to fill his place, in which he 'gave many strong proofs of his valour' (Beatson, 2.550). Pocock afterwards offered him the command of the 'Cambridge' or one of the other ships of the line, but he was still in the 'Trent' in December 1763. On returning to England he was knighted on 10 February 1764 in reward for his gallantry; Lindsay went to the West Indies again in the 'Tartar', and returned in 1765. He married on 19 September 1768 Mary, daughter of Sir William Milner, and was MP for Aberdeen burghs from 1767 to 1768. His illegitimate daughter Dido Elizabeth Belle (1761?-1804), whose mother was a black slave captured from a Spanish ship, became a protegee of his uncle, William Murray. Lindsay is thought to have had two more illegitimate children, John and Elizabeth ('b. c'.1765), while in Scotland; both are mentioned in his will, each receiving $1000 in trust. 
From August 1769 to March 1772 Lindsay was commodore and commander-in-chief in the East Indies, with his broad pennant in the frigate 'Stag'. He was appointed a knight of the Bath (28 June 1770), a remarkable honour for a not very senior sea officer. He was later recalled from the East Indies apparently due to the hostility of the East India Company. In March 1778 he was appointed to the 'Victory', but on Admiral Keppel's selecting her for his flagship he was moved to the 'Prince George' (90 guns), which he commanded in the engagement off Ushant on 27 July. His evidence before the subsequent courts martial was adverse to Sir Hugh Palliser; and on Keppel's resignation of the command, Lindsay also resigned, and refused all employment under Lord Sandwich, who none the less thought highly of Lindsay's ability. He was an Admiralty commissioner between April and December 1783, and then commodore and commander-in-chief in the Mediterranean. 
With his broad pennant in the 'Trusty' Lindsay was at Naples in June 1784; and on June 24 he had the honour of entertaining the king and queen on his ship. Not long afterwards his health broke down, and he was obliged to return to England. He was promoted rear-admiral on 24 September 1787, and died at Marlborough, on his way from Bath, on 4 June 1788, aged fifty-one. His body was brought to London and buried in Westminster Abbey. 


@@@@@


doc= 16711


Lindsay, Ludovic, sixteenth earl of Crawford (d. 1652), royalist army officer, was the third son of Henry Lindsay, thirteenth earl of Crawford (died 1620x23), and Margaret, sister of Sir James Schaw of Sauchie. Ludovic Lindsay sought a career as a mercenary officer, and is said to have 'gained honour abroad in the Swedish, Austrian, and Spanish services' (G. Wishart, 'Memoirs of James, Marquis of Montrose', 1893, 132). He was a colonel in Swedish employment in 1632, and later in the 1630s he levied a regiment of 3000 for the Spanish service through a commission from the Spanish ambassador in Vienna. After two years' service the regiment, then reduced to about 300 men, was disbanded in Burgundy. Lindsay subsequently spent six months in Madrid in an unsuccessful effort to get payment of his arrears. On 4 January 1639 he was in Vienna and, having newly inherited the earldom of Crawford from his elder brother, was intending to return to Britain and seek employment from Charles I. He took his seat in the Scottish parliament on 31 August 1639, but spent most of the bishops' wars of 1639-40 in England, and evidently commanded a unit of Scots who had enlisted to fight for the king. 
Crawford was with Charles I in Edinburgh when the king sought a compromise settlement with the covenanters in 1641, being one of a group of ardently royalist but ill disciplined and loud-mouthed nobles and officers whose threats of violence seriously embarrassed the king. They were convinced that the marquess of Hamilton, the king's leading adviser, was betraying his interests, and in September Lord Kerr, when drunk, dispatched Crawford, 'his no less furious and drunken second' ('Letters and Journals of Robert Baillie', 1.391), to accuse Hamilton of being a traitor. In October he attained further notoriety for his part in the obscure plot against Hamilton and the earl of Argyll known as 'the Incident'. Crawford confessed that he had said of Hamilton 'if he wes ane traittor, I wish he hed the reward of ane traittor' ('Fourth Report', HMC, appx, 167) and other witnesses attested that while it was planned to arrest the two nobles, Crawford favoured their assassination. Apart from a few days under arrest Crawford escaped punishment for his follies, both king and covenanters deeming it inexpedient that the Incident be investigated too closely for fear that evidence revealed might disrupt the settlement being negotiated. 
At this point Crawford decided that there was no future for him in Scotland. His title of earl had brought him no lands or other property, and he may have planned to return to the life of a mercenary officer on the continent. Whatever his motivation he agreed to a regrant of his earldom (15 January 1642) on new terms, whereby if he died without leaving a legitimate son to succeed him the title earl of Crawford would pass to John Lindsay, first earl of Lindsay, a distant kinsman. John Lindsay coveted the title of Crawford as it was the senior title of the Lindsay kin, of which he was the most prosperous and powerful member, and Crawford was willing to give him (perhaps in return for financial help) a chance of gaining it. That Lindsay thought the deal worthwhile strongly suggests that Crawford was unmarried at this point and appeared unlikely to have a son, but in or before October 1643 Crawford married Margaret Graham, daughter of the earl of Airth and Menteith and widow of Alexander Stewart, Lord Garlies. Moreover Crawford remained in Britain, for the English civil war brought him opportunities for employment and a chance to redeem his reputation. He fought for the king at the battle of Edgehill (23 October 1642), and served under Sir Ralph Hopton against Sir William Waller in central southern England in 1643. He contributed to Waller's defeat at Lansdown (5 July), but on 13 December he was surprised by Waller at Alton, near Farnham, and escaped with only a few men, nearly 1000 being captured. 
In April 1644 Crawford took part in Montrose's attempt to provoke a royalist rising in Scotland, and with him was forced back into England after the initial capture of Dumfries. He was with Montrose at the siege of Morpeth in May, but was captured in Newcastle when it fell to the Scottish army on 19 October. Crawford was sent to Edinburgh and imprisoned, having already been excommunicated by the church and forfaulted (deprived of his title and property) by the Scottish parliament (26 July). In royalist eyes he remained earl of Crawford until his death, but the covenanters declared that the title had passed to the earl of Lindsay (now Crawford-Lindsay). The sixteenth earl and other royalists were freed after Montrose's victory at Kilsyth on 15 August 1645 had temporarily destroyed the covenanting regime. When Montrose was routed at Philiphaugh on 13 September and forced to flee to the highlands, Crawford took command of his remaining cavalry, and in the months that followed aided his efforts to rebuild a royalist army. On 3 June 1646 he wrote to Charles I of his determination to fight on with Montrose: 'I could wish that the litell drops of blood which remains in my bodie unspent might be shede to make your Majestie a glorious and happie prince' ('Hamilton MSS', 1.110), but in August he, like Montrose, was forced to flee abroad. He reached Paris by way of Ireland, and there on 9 October he laid before Queen Henrietta Maria a plan by Montrose to raise 30,000 men to conquer Scotland, invade England, and free Charles I from imprisonment. The grandiose scheme came to nothing, but Crawford did not give up. In May 1647 he was in Ireland, and converted to Roman Catholicism before leaving to make another attempt to get help to revive the war in Scotland ('Commentarius Rinuccinianus', ed. S. Kavanagh, 1932-49, 2.753). However, by April 1648 he was in the service of Spain, and landed in Ireland to seek to recruit troops for the Spanish service. He is said subsequently to have commanded an Irish regiment in Spain, and at the end of 1649 a report reached Scotland that he was living in Spain, being 'in great honor and credit', and having a 'very great deall of money' ('Various Collections', 5.250). However, he is said to have left Spain in poverty in 1651 -- though, mysteriously, also to have had a frigate operating from St Malo which had taken one or two prizes ('CSP dom.', '1651-2', 3). The following year he led fifty Scottish officers who had served under Montrose in guarding the cardinal de Retz during the Fronde. He died in October or November 1652 in The Hague 'of an ague and fever' ('Nicholas Papers', 319). 
Virtually nothing is recorded of Crawford's character or personal life. In seeking to serve Charles I his intemperate antics in 1641 were damaging, but his services in the English civil war, his tenacity in adversity alongside Montrose in 1645-6, and his efforts to renew the war thereafter reveal more solid military virtues. His wife, Margaret, joined him in exile, and was with him in Spain in 1649, when she 'also turned Catholicke Romane' ('Various Collections', 5.250). Their only known child, Henry, was aged twelve in 1657 when he was expelled from the Scots College at Douai since (for reasons unknown) he was deemed illegitimate. 


@@@@@


doc= 16712


Lindsay, Patrick, sixth Lord Lindsay of the Byres (1521?-1589), nobleman, was the eldest son of John Lindsay, fifth Lord Lindsay of the Byres (d. 1563), and his wife, Helen, daughter of John Stewart, third earl of Atholl. By a dispensation dated May 1545 he married his kinswoman Euphemia (died 1580), eldest daughter of Sir Robert Douglas of Lochleven, Fife, and half-sister of James Stewart, earl of Mar and later earl of Moray. In February 1546 he received a charter of the lands of Drem, and in November following his father resigned to him the lands and barony of Byres, Haddingtonshire. However, despite or perhaps because of his father's prominence, Patrick Lindsay was slow to appear on the political scene. 
A supporter of the Reformation, Lindsay joined the lords of the congregation. He was among those who fortified Perth in May 1559 following the town's declaration of its commitment to protestantism, and he answered to the regent, Mary of Guise, for this defiant action. In January 1560, along with Sir William Kirkcaldy of Grange, Lindsay was active in Fife in resisting the French troops called in by the regent. They laid siege to the house of Glamis, which had been fortified by an officer in the French forces named La Bastie, whom Lindsay killed in hand-to-hand combat. It was said that 'if we had lost Lyndsay and Grange, it would have been more hurt to us than 1000 to the French' ('CSP Scot.', '1547-63', 192-3). One of the commissioners who in February 1560 negotiated the treaty of Berwick, thereby securing English aid against the French in Scotland, on 27 April Lindsay was a signatory of the band of Leith, which committed the signatories to advance the reformation of religion, expel the French from Scotland, and support the English alliance. According to John Knox, Lindsay subscribed the first 'Book of Discipline' in December 1560. He was a member of the 1561 general assembly and directed a petition from the assembly to the privy council. 
According to Knox, Lindsay was one of the protesters against the first mass celebrated following Queen Mary's return to Scotland in August 1561. Nevertheless, his relations with the queen were initially cordial. He took part in the campaign against George Gordon, fourth earl of Huntly, in 1562, and was with the queen's forces when they defeated the earl at Corrichie on 28 October 1562. He is recorded in that year as partnering Mary in an archery match against his brother-in-law Mar and one of the queen's ladies. 
Although not a member of Mary's privy council, Lindsay was present on three occasions as one of the additional members of the augmented council which met in the summer of 1565. Said to be a favourer of the Darnley marriage, Lindsay broke from James Stewart, now earl of Moray, as the latter became increasingly hostile to the queen's matrimonial plans and eventually engaged in the overt rebellion known as the chaseabout raid. When the fifth Lord Lindsay died in 1563 his son inherited from him a long-running dispute with Andrew Leslie, fifth earl of Rothes, over the office of sheriff of Fife. This was resolved in Rothes's favour on 13 January 1565 with the proviso that Lindsay and his family were exempted from Rothes's jurisdiction. By October, however, the disturbances of the times had led to Lindsay's being made lieutenant of Fife, and it was alleged that Mary secured Lindsay's loyalty by playing on his resentment towards Rothes, who was a supporter of Moray. Lindsay was present at the meeting of the privy council on 10 October when the order of battle against Moray was laid down, and it was agreed that he was to accompany Darnley's forces in leading the battle. This did not denote any change in his religious position -- he had been one of the nobles who offered to stand surety for the leaders of the Edinburgh protestant activists caught drilling in July 1565 when they were brought before the court of justiciary, and he was a member of that year's general assembly. 
Following Moray's exile in England, Lindsay was said to be one of those friendly to the banished lords. He refused Mary's invitation to attend mass on Candlemas day, 2 February 1566, and shortly afterwards he was one of the leading participants in the murder of David Riccio on 9 March. He then fled from Edinburgh, initially perhaps to Fife, then to England. Summoned with others by the Scottish privy council to appear on 19 March to answer for Riccio's murder, Lindsay was denounced rebel on 1 June, but pardoned in December. 
On 1 May 1567 Lindsay subscribed the Stirling bond undertaking to defend Prince James, the son of Mary and Darnley, against the latter's murderers. Consequently he was discharged from his lieutenancy of Fife eight days later. He was with the confederate lords who opposed the queen at Carberry on 15 June, and when James Hepburn, fourth earl of Bothwell, offered to settle the issue by single combat, Lindsay volunteered to take up the challenge. James Douglas, fourth earl of Morton, lent Lindsay the broadsword which had belonged to his famous ancestor, Archibald Douglas, fifth earl of Angus. However, Mary intervened, refusing to give permission for the encounter and surrendering herself to the confederate lords. 
Having been a signatory of the order committing Mary to Lochleven, Lindsay conveyed her there and was one of her guardians during her imprisonment. On 20 July he subscribed the acts of the general assembly. With William, fourth Lord Ruthven, he was charged with securing the queen's abdication, which they achieved on the 24th. According to the 'Memoirs' of Sir James Melville, it was Lindsay who persuaded Mary to resign the crown, and Mary's supporters later claimed that 'the Lord Lyndsay, he menassit hir grace, that, gif scho wald not subscryve, he had command to putt hir presently in the towre' ('CSP Scot.', '1563-9', 532). Historians have generally accepted the truthfulness of this charge. On 29 July 1567, ostensibly acting on the queen's behalf, Lindsay and Ruthven publicly presented documents declaring that she had abdicated and appointed Moray as regent, and claimed that she had done so voluntarily. Lindsay was present at James's coronation later that day. 
A member of the privy council following Mary's deposition, Lindsay was one of the councillors who witnessed Moray's acceptance of the regency on 22 August 1567, having been present at Lochleven a week earlier when Mary was induced to confirm Moray's appointment. Following Mary's escape from captivity, on 13 May 1568 Lindsay was with the regent's forces at Langside, where he was credited with reinforcing the right wing as it was about to give way. Lindsay accompanied Moray to the conferences held at York and Westminster between October and December 1568 to investigate the charges against Mary, and testified to the authenticity of Mary's handwriting in the casket letters. When John Maxwell, fourth Lord Herries, one of Mary's leading supporters, claimed at Westminster on 1 December that the real murderers of Darnley were the regent and his associates, Lindsay challenged him to maintain the accusation in single combat. In reply, Herries specifically excepted Lindsay from this charge. Lindsay voted against Mary's petition to divorce Bothwell on 30 June 1569. 
In April 1569, after Lord Herries had had an audience with Moray to discuss a possible peace between the supporters of James and Mary, Lindsay and Ruthven took him to be imprisoned in Edinburgh Castle. Following Moray's assassination on 21 January 1570 Lindsay was one of the bearers of the regent's body at his funeral. During the ensuing civil war Lindsay was active on behalf of the king's party, both politically and militarily. In June 1571 forces led by Lindsay and the earl of Morton killed Gavin Hamilton, commendator of Kilwinning, and captured Alexander, fifth Lord Home, and others. Later that month Lindsay intercepted at Wemyss a quantity of gold sent on Mary's orders to the defenders of Edinburgh Castle. In September Lindsay captured George, fifth Lord Seton after a skirmish in the High Street of Edinburgh. That month the house of Byres, with Lindsay's wife inside, was surrounded by Marian troops from Edinburgh Castle, and cattle were taken from his estates by the queen's supporters. In the following year Lindsay was with the king's men at Leith, and as lieutenant repelled an attack by Marian forces. At this time he was said to be one of those most opposed to a peace, at least one on terms the queen's supporters would accept. In October 1572 he was elected provost of Edinburgh, a position which he held until 1576, and on 24 November he voted for Morton at the convention which chose the latter as regent. Lindsay became sheriff of Fife in February 1574, following Rothes's resignation. In September 1575 he was one of the Scottish signatories to an agreement reached at Foulden, Berwickshire, formally resolving the dispute over a fray which had erupted at an Anglo-Scottish day of truce on 7 July, in which Sir George Heron, the deputy warden of the English middle march, along with several other Englishmen, had been killed. 
By 1577 Lindsay's support for Morton was waning -- in July that year Robert Bowes reported that John Stewart, fourth earl of Atholl, Ruthven, Lindsay, and others had confederated themselves by oath for maintenance of the king -- and a year later Lindsay was seen as having 'become colonel of the malcontents' ('CSP Scot.', '1574-81', 295). He was an active supporter of Morton's removal from power, and attended the convention in March 1578 which accepted the latter's resignation as regent. A member of the council appointed to manage affairs until parliament could meet, he signed the order of 3 May 1578 that James should remain in Stirling under the care of the second earl of Mar. On 17 June he opposed the sending of an embassy to England to negotiate an amity and league for mutual defence. In July he protested against Morton's holding of a parliament at Stirling, on the grounds that it was not a free parliament; for this he was warded in Stirling. He was invited to attend the meeting in October of the general assembly, which was unhappy with Morton's handling of ecclesiastical policy. On 1 December 1579 he was appointed a commissioner for the reformation of the University of St Andrews, and on the 9th he was appointed heritable bailie of the regality of the archbishopric. 
During Morton's temporary return to power, Lindsay initially adhered to the opposing faction surrounding the royal favourite Esme Stewart, seigneur d'Aubigny, who was granted the dukedom of Lennox in March 1580. After Morton's arrest that December on charges of complicity in Darnley's murder, and his subsequent execution on 2 June 1581, Lindsay was no happier with the regime which succeeded. In September 1581 he left court, allegedly saying that 'but yet this sworde and buckler hath helped to dryve the Frenche men furthe of Scotland, and I fear yt muste be imployed to that use agagne' ('CSP Scot.', '1581-3', 52). He signed the bond that resulted in the Ruthven raid, the ultra-protestant coup which culminated in the seizure of the king's person in August 1582, and he was part of the administration which followed. On 26 October he was formally nominated a member of the privy council, in place of the eleventh earl of Crawford. After the king's escape from the Ruthven raiders in June 1583, Lindsay fled to England. Subsequently he returned to Scotland and took part in the plotting whereby William Ruthven, now earl of Gowrie, hoped to recover power. Arrested in April 1584 and warded in Blackness Castle, it was rumoured that he would follow Gowrie to the block, but he was released following a further change of regime in November. 
Lindsay died on 11 December 1589 at Struthers Castle, three miles south of Cupar, Fife. His wife had died in June 1580. Their son 


@@@@@


doc= 16713


Lindsay, Patrick (1566-1644), archbishop of Glasgow, was the son of Alexander Lindsay, portioner of Monikie, Forfarshire, and Jean, daughter of Alexander Guthrie the younger of that ilk. After graduating MA from St Andrews University in 1587 he was appointed minister of Guthrie in 1588. He was translated to St Vigeans in the same county in the early 1590s, and although he was appointed bishop of Ross in 1613 (consecrated 1 December) he remained minister of St Vigeans until 1618, and thereafter joint minister of the parish until 1630. At some point early in his career he married Helen, daughter of Patrick Whitelaw of Newgrange. 
Lindsay, who is said to have been 'a very fervent preacher' (Keith and Spottiswoode, 265), had been appointed a member of the new Scottish court of high commission in 1610, and on 31 March 1615 he was admitted to the Scottish privy council. He sat in many general assemblies, actively supporting the five articles of Perth in 1618. On 13 August 1633 he was translated to the archbishopric of Glasgow, and in 1637 appears to have been diligent in trying to gain acceptance for the new Scottish prayer book, contradicting the later report that he had been 'much against the liturgy' (ibid., 265). After open opposition to the new book emerged charges were raised against him in his own presbytery of Glasgow and were referred to the general assembly that sat there in 1638. 
By this time Lindsay was not only demoralized by the collapse of royal authority in church and state in face of the opposition of the covenanters, but was disillusioned by bitter financial disputes with the bullying earl of Traquair, the treasurer: 'Glasgow he abuses pitifullie at his pleasure' it had been reported in 1637 ('Letters and Journals of Robert Baillie', 1.7-8). He therefore wavered, considering escaping the threat of excommunication by accepting the authority of the assembly over him: 'He seemed oft not farre from this course' ('Letters and Journals of Robert Baillie', 1.157). Though living in his house next to the cathedral in which the assembly was being held, he refused to appear before it, but was said to be 'contented verbally' to accept its authority, but would not do so in writing (Gordon, 2.140). The assembly ordered his deprivation from office on 11 December, but allowed him the chance of escaping excommunication if he submitted without reservation by 13 December, the day on which the sentences on all the bishops were formally pronounced. When he failed to do so he was both deprived and excommunicated. 
'Since that time he hes lived verie privatelie, miskent [despised] by all', it was noted late in 1639 ('Letters and Journals of Robert Baillie', 1.157). He was said to have fled to England in January 1639, 'in great seiknes' (J. Spalding, 'Memorialls of the Trubles', 2 vols., 1850-51, 1.244-5). In December 1640 he was one of a number of deposed Scottish bishops in London 'in great povertie' ('Letters and Journals of Robert Baillie', 1.188). He was buried on 2 July 1644 in York, being left 'to be put in the earth by some few poor men' ('Letters and Journals of Robert Baillie', 2.213), the rest of those attending the funeral having departed hastily on news of the battle being fought at Marston Moor. 


@@@@@


doc= 16714


Lindsay, Patrick (bap. 1686, d. 1753), politician, was baptized on 10 March 1686. He was descended from a younger branch of the Lindsays of Kirkforthar, Fife, and was the only surviving son of Patrick Lindsay, rector of St Andrews grammar school, and Janet, only daughter of John Lindsay of Newton. He served with Sir Robert Riche's infantry regiment in Spain until the treaty of Utrecht in 1713. On 22 June 1715 he married Margaret, daughter of David Monteir, an Edinburgh merchant. They had three sons and two daughters: Patrick, appointed deputy secretary at war in 1741; John, a lieutenant-colonel in the army; James, a merchant navy officer; Mary, who was unmarried; and Janet, who married James Anderson of Monthrieve, Fife. 
Lindsay appears to have learned the same trade as his grandfather, a joiner in St Andrews, for after leaving the army he became an upholsterer in Edinburgh. He prospered in his business, and was granted the freedom of the city of St Andrews (10 September 1722) and chosen a magistrate of Edinburgh. He became successively dean of guild and lord provost, holding the latter office twice (1729-31 and 1733-5). During his first term he tried (26 October 1730) and hanged two men who had murdered his apprentice during a burglary at his upholstery shop (15 August 1728). At this time he published 'The Interest of Scotland... with Reference to its Police, Agriculture, Trade, Manufacture and Fishery' (1733). In 1734 he was elected MP for Edinburgh under the patronage of Lord Ilay, and held his seat until 1741. 
During the Porteous riots in 1736 he was charged with passing a request for assistance from the Edinburgh magistrates to the commander of the troops, General Moyle. The request was not met because, in Moyle's opinion, Lindsay was drunk at their meeting. In May 1737 Lindsay spoke against a bill to disfranchise Edinburgh as a result of the riot, but his attack on the local clergy for their part in the disturbances won him few friends in the city. 
In November 1739 Lindsay's second wife, Janet, daughter of James Murray of Polton, died, and on 7 May 1741 he married Lady Catherine Lindsay, daughter of William, eighteenth earl of Crawford; neither marriage produced children. After retiring from the representation of the city he was in 1747 appointed governor of the Isle of Man by the duke of Atholl. On account of indisposition Lindsay resigned the office some time before his death, which took place at the Canongate, Edinburgh, on 20 February 1753. 


