@@@@@


doc= 16715


Lindsay, Robert, of Pitscottie (c.1532-c.1586), historian, was a younger son of William Lindsay of Pyotstoun and Isabella Logan (married 1529), and a cousin of Patrick Lindsay, sixth Lord Lindsay of the Byres (1521?-1589). His date of birth has to be deduced from his first public appearance, in December 1553, when he was granted the escheated goods of Andrew Lindsay, a burgess of Edinburgh and probably a kinsman. In December 1560 he was styled 'of Pitscottie' when he was a member of an assize at Cupar, Fife, and he was associated with it again two years later. He may have held Pitscottie as a tenant. There is no evidence of his education and his date of death is unknown. It was certainly before 1592, when his son Christopher was styled 'of Pitscottie'. His 'History' ends on 1 January 1576; the preface may arguably be no later than 24 April 1579 when one dedicatee, John, fourth earl of Atholl, died, and must certainly be earlier than 29 August 1586 when the other dedicatee, Robert Stewart, bishop of Caithness, died. 
Pitscottie's 'History' is a continuation, from the death of James I in 1437, of John Bellenden's Scots adaptation of Hector Boece's Latin history of Scotland. For events before 'c'.1555 his sources were a mixture of borrowings from Boece, family traditions, personal recollections of Fife men, and general knowledge. An unnamed but likely source is his kinsman the Lyon herald, Sir David Lindsay of the Mount (1486?-1555); some of the latter's verses appear as epigraphs in Pitscottie's work and he is the best candidate for providing information about the reigns of James IV and V and the earliest years of Queen Mary. 
After about 1555 Pitscottie uses contemporary material and his personal bias becomes clearer. His story becomes a protestant chronicle, telling a tale of protestant martyrs (much as John Knox did, but it is highly unlikely that Pitscottie knew Knox's history, which was not printed until 1586-7), of the struggles of the lords of the congregation for their faith, and, later, of the regents for the infant James VI against Queen Mary's men. This latter part is by far the most original and spirited, and Pitscottie clearly sees it as a critical, almost apocalyptic, struggle. 
The climax of the 'History' comes with the attempts of the regents to defeat the queen's men tenaciously holding out in Edinburgh Castle in the early 1570s. Pitscottie never reveals whether he took part in these raids, counter-raids, and artillery duels. If he did not, he nevertheless had excellent sources -- one was probably his kinsman Lindsay of the Byres, a leader of the regent's forces -- and he has left a vivid picture of the changing fortunes of the battle, to say nothing of demands for men and money which must have severely strained the resources of Fife, Forfarshire, and the Lothians. This part ends with the surrender of Edinburgh Castle in 1573 -- thanks largely to the help of English gunners -- and peace between the two main Scottish factions. 
Pitscottie's attention then turns to Scottish soldiers being shipped to the Baltic; he notes other religious struggles in mainland Europe and a series of domestic problems as James Douglas, earl of Morton, tried as regent to restore order. He is now dutifully recording plague, dearth, and high taxation; some of the earlier verve has gone -- except at the end, when he records the happy wedding at Cupar on 25 December 1575 (significantly, he calls it neither Yule nor Christmas) of the earl of Angus and a lady from Fife. 
Although only one manuscript (formerly in the collection of John Scott of Halkshill) preserves the text as Pitscottie probably intended it, much of his work must have soon become known, since at least sixteen manuscripts (and possibly four more) have survived and there are scrappy continuations to 1603. The 'History' was first published, by subscription, at Edinburgh in 1728 by Robert Freebairn, a well-known printer, bookseller, and ardent Jacobite; later editions appeared at Glasgow in 1749, and again at Edinburgh in 1778 and 1814. All were superseded when a full text, based on two of the oldest manuscripts, with extensive introduction, notes, and glossary, was published in three volumes by A. J. G. Mackay for the Scottish Text Society between 1899 and 1911. 
Sir Walter Scott read Pitscottie as a teenager and was carried away by his telling phrases and vivacity; parts of Pitscottie turn up little altered in 'Marmion' and 'Tales of a Grandfather', and shorter quotations appear in the 'Waverley' novels. The mature Scott knew very well that Pitscottie was historically unreliable in the earlier part of his work but recommended him for his language, anecdotes, and knack of presenting a scene -- and as a relief from contemporary dry-as-dust writing, especially John Pinkerton's 'History of Scotland' (1797). Freebairn and Scott together put Pitscottie on the map, and he has been there ever since. 
Modern studies have gone much further than Scott in showing just how garbled, inventive, and biased Pitscottie can be. He is not only pro-protestant; anti-Hamilton and anti-Douglas strains are also evident -- the latter may explain why the work was not printed during the regency of Morton (1572-80) and so confined to manuscript circulation then and, as it turned out, for some 150 years. Whatever the critical historians may say, the romantic view of Scottish history never dies and so the influence of Pitscottie's colourful episodes, such as the death of James III's favourite at Lauder, the same king's fate after the battle of Sauchieburn, the doings of James IV before and at Flodden, and the deathbed of James V, is certain to persist. Yet there may often be a substratum of fact or probability in what he says, usually when the tale can be plausibly traced to one of his known informants, and in the last fifteen years of the narrative what he says is often confirmed elsewhere. 
Like other contemporary diarists, Pitscottie wrote in Scots. Otherwise, his techniques are those of medieval chroniclers; he took material as and when he could find it and is no less episodic and unreflective in the way he uses it. His focus is usually regional, centred especially on the east half of Fife and the Lothians. But he also drew on a unique reservoir of family tradition. Throughout there are stories of Lindsays behaving honourably and loyally. The stories may not always be true, but they entertain at the same time as they record traditional family themes and oral lore. No earlier Scot had written quite like this about his own blood relatives or left such a lively personal view of events. The best verdict on Pitscottie (it is rather like Scott's) was given by W. C. Dickinson in 1949: he is 'to be used with the greatest caution, but to be read with the greatest pleasure' ('Knox's History', 2.347). 


@@@@@


doc= 16716


Lindsay, Sir Walter, of Balgavie (d. 1605), Roman Catholic conspirator, was the third son of Sir David Lindsay of Edzell, afterwards ninth earl of Crawford (died 1558), and his second wife, Katherine (died 1578), daughter of Sir John Campbell of Lorn and Calder. Walter married Margaret, sister of David Campbell of Kethnott; they had a son, David, and a daughter, Margaret, who married Adam Menzies of Boltoquhan. Lindsay became a gentleman of the bedchamber to James VI in 1580 and together with other young men entered into an obligation to serve the king in time of war at his own expense. On 20 February 1584 he acquired the property of Balgavie, Forfarshire. 
In 1583 Lindsay was regarded as an unconvinced protestant, and at some point before 1589 he became a Catholic under the influence of William Crichton and James Gordon, Jesuits working on the Scottish mission. Lindsay claimed that he was one of the first of their converts. He maintained John Ingram -- an English Jesuit martyred at Newcastle upon Tyne on 25 July 1594 -- as his domestic chaplain, and his house became a centre of Catholic life, worship, and intrigue against the protestant party in the country. Lindsay boasted of influencing the earls of Huntly, Erroll, and Angus in their profession of Catholicism, and said that it was at his suggestion that they opened negotiations with Spain in an attempt to secure foreign intervention in Scotland and a possible invasion of England. In subsequent years his fortunes were to be tied to theirs. 
In 1589 Lindsay was imprisoned in Edinburgh Castle, but was conditionally released on 29 November. Francis Stewart, first earl of Bothwell, stood caution for him in the sum of $1000 Scots, that he would on ten days' notice return to custody. At this time Lindsay was acting as an intermediary between the northern Catholic earls and the protestant Bothwell, enlisting his temporary support in their enterprise against the king. Lindsay failed to appear for his trial and on 19 May was proclaimed a rebel. On 11 January 1593 he was ordered to appear before the king on charges of acting against the religious polity of Scotland and in defiance of royal authority. King James marched against the northern earls and their supporters in February, but did not press matters to a conclusion. In May it was reported that Angus, Huntly, and Erroll were meeting in Lindsay's house and attending mass celebrated by an English priest. Lindsay was seen by the English ambassador in Scotland as the 'chief instrument and counsellor' of the earls ('CSP Scot.', '1593-5', 419). After the excommunication and forfeiture of the Catholic earls, the king made an autumn march to the north. On 30 September 1594 Lindsay was denounced as a rebel for his association with the earls and for his religious dissent and in October his house was razed by the king's army. 
The earls again declined to meet the king in the field and in March 1595 Huntly and Erroll agreed to go abroad. Meanwhile Lindsay was understood to have gone to Rome, as an emissary of the Catholic party in Scotland, in search of a subsidy and military support. He was variously reported in different parts of Europe, including the Low Countries, and it was claimed in 1595 that he had been knighted by the king of Spain. In 1596 Spanish sources speak of Lindsay as being in Spain, negotiating with the government under the pseudonym of Don Balthasar. While abroad he composed his 'Account of the present state of the Catholic religion in the realm of Scotland in the year of Our Lord one thousand five hundred and ninety-four'. It was published by Forbes-Leith in 1885. 
Huntly and Erroll returned to Scotland in June 1596 and sought terms with the king and the kirk. In June 1597 they were formally reconciled with the reformed church and their forfeitures were revoked. A month later Lindsay too sought to return to Scotland, promising to reveal to the government various items of secret information relating to Spanish policies. On 27 November Sir Robert Cecil was asked for a passport for Lindsay to return home by way of England where, much to King James's displeasure, he was given a polite reception. On his return to Scotland, Lindsay agreed to a conference with the ministers of the kirk, and to remain within the presbytery of Brechin until he had satisfied them as to his orthodoxy. Alexander Lindsay, Lord Spynie, stood cautioner on 24 May 1599 that Lindsay would satisfy the kirk within forty days or else go into exile. There is no record of his submission, however. He may have been under the king's protection, since it was alleged that his contacts were used by James as a secret channel of communication with foreign powers. George Nicholson, the English agent in Scotland, certainly suspected James of double-dealing with Lindsay. 
As late as 1601 Lindsay was described as 'deep in Papist courses' and of being privy to the earl of Tyrone's rebellion in Ireland ('CSP Scot.', '1600-03', 843). In the last years of his life he also maintained an aggressive local campaign of defence of the Lindsay interests. On 25 October 1605 he was murdered as he rode from Brechin to the Place of Edzell, by a small group of men led by David, master of Crawford and later twelfth earl. The master was a notoriously irresponsible and violent young man, as he showed on this occasion, he and his company giving Sir Walter 'ma nor twenty bludie woundis' and cutting his throat for good measure. He was denounced by the king's advocate as having 'consavit ane lurkand haitrent causeles' against his victim, to whom, indeed, he was 'particularie obleist for his grite kyndnes and beneficiall help... in his distres' ('Reg. PCS', '1604-7', 143-4). The ferocity of the crime may well have reflected the killer's personality, but it also had a wider context, that of the powerful tensions within the Lindsay kindred, and especially between the family of the earls of Crawford and the Lindsays of Edzell, arising from their competition for local power. Sir Walter was succeeded by his son David. 


@@@@@


doc= 16717


Lindsay, William, eighteenth earl of Crawford and second earl of Lindsay (1644-1698), nobleman, was born in April 1644, the eldest surviving son of John Lindsay, seventeenth earl of Crawford and first earl of Lindsay (1596-1678), and Lady Margaret, second daughter of James Hamilton, second marquess of Hamilton. William succeeded to the earldoms on the death of his father in 1678. Described by Burnet as 'passionate in his temper, and... out of measure zealous in his principles' (Burnet, 4.52), Crawford's inflexible presbyterian beliefs largely determined the course of his political career. In the years before the revolution of 1688 his religious nonconformity made him an obvious target for government persecution, and it would appear he had little choice but to live in profound retirement. His problems were compounded by his obvious financial difficulties, resulting from his father's extravagance, and through having made his non-entailed property responsible for payment of the former earl's debts. These circumstances were certainly instrumental in Crawford's decision to leave the country -- even before the death of Charles II -- although ultimately he could not obtain the requisite permission. 
It is hardly surprising that Crawford took a more active role in politics and public life following the accession of William III. He was sworn of the privy council, and regularly attended both council and parliament from 1689, being employed in a number of different capacities. In March he subscribed both the act declaring the Convention a lawful meeting of the estates and the letter of congratulation to King William. The following month he was nominated a commissioner to treat for union with England, and appointed a member of the committee of estates. In June 1689 Crawford was named president of parliament, a position he held in the first four sessions of 1689-93. In a letter to Lord Melville on 22 July 1689 Sir William Lockhart claimed of Crawford 'he means well; but he is not capable to doe the Kings bussines' (Melville, 183). However, on 15 April 1690 he was appointed a commissioner of the treasury, and on 9 May one of the commissioners for settling the government of the church. Clearly this had serious repercussions for the episcopal clergy. Crawford himself affirmed that: 'no Episcopal since the late happy Revolution, whether laic or of the clergy, hath suffered by the council upon account of his opinion in church matters, but allenarly [solely] for their disowning the civil authority and setting up for a cross interest. (ibid., 376)' However, although he may have acknowledged the virtue of moderation, his zeal against the episcopalians was unquestionably excessive. He has subsequently been described as providing 'the personification of official integrity whilst in fact erecting a screen behind which zealous Presbyterians, with his connivance and even active co-operation, purged the Scottish Church' (Riley, 36). But these measures must be moderated by some appreciation of the extremities inflicted on Crawford and his allies by the episcopalians after the Restoration. 
Lindsay had married first, on 8 March 1670 at Leith, Lady Mary (1652-1681), daughter of James Johnstone, earl of Annandale and Hartfell, who died in April 1681. They had three sons -- John, nineteenth earl of Crawford, Colonel James, who was killed in 1707 at the battle of Almanza in Spain, and Patrick, baptized at Ceres in July 1677 -- and two daughters -- Henrietta and Margaret. He married, second, Lady Henrietta, daughter of Charles Seton, earl of Dunfermline, and widow of William Fleming, earl of Wigtown. They had a son, Thomas, and six daughters -- Anne, Christian, Margaret, Helen, Susanna, and Catherine. Crawford died on 6 March 1698, his testament being confirmed at St Andrews in September. 


@@@@@


doc= 16718


Lindsay, William (1802-1866), minister of the United Presbyterian church, was born in Irvine, Ayrshire. He studied at Glasgow University and attended the Relief Theological Hall in Paisley from its opening in 1824, before he was ordained minister of the new East Church, Johnstone, Renfrewshire, on 27 April 1830. He was translated to Dovehill Relief Church, Glasgow, on 22 November 1832, where he served as colleague and successor to John Barr (died 1839), though he was effectively in sole charge from the outset due to Barr's incapacity. At the Relief Synod of 1841 Lindsay was appointed to his church's chair of exegetical theology and biblical criticism. He was honoured with the degree of DD from Glasgow University in 1844 and in December of that year he transferred, with his congregation, to a new building in Cathedral Street, Glasgow. Though seldom prominent in public matters, Lindsay delivered a memorable address at the union of the Relief and United Secession churches in 1847. He became professor of biblical criticism and sacred languages in the new denomination, his duties overlapping with those of John Eadie. After the death of John Brown in 1858 Lindsay held the chair of exegetical theology. 
A contemporary described Lindsay as 'about the middle size and habit. His countenance is fresh and ruddy, and indicates placidity, benevolence and kindness. His small, dark eyes look from beneath a prominent brow, surmounted by a plentiful supply of greyish hair' (Smith, 111). By nature he was sensitive and retiring, living very much in his study. As a professor he was popular, esteemed for his exemplary character and soundness rather than for any brilliance. As a preacher, his sermons were edifying without ever attracting crowds. He published a number of works, including a life of Thomas Gillespie and a small volume on relationships which bar marriage. His most substantial work, 'Lectures on the Epistle to the Hebrews' (1867), was edited by George Brooks, in two volumes, after his death. 
Lindsay appeared to be in normal health, and had preached twice earlier in the day, when he collapsed and died of heart disease at his home, 33 Monteith Row, Glasgow, on 3 June 1866. He was buried in a family grave at Irvine on 7 June. 


@@@@@


doc= 16719


Lindsay, William Lauder (1829-1880), physician and botanist, was born on 19 December 1829 in Edinburgh, the eldest son of James Lindsay of the sasine office, General Register House, Edinburgh, and his wife, Helen, daughter of Captain Lauder. He was educated at the Royal High School, Edinburgh, where he was dux in 1844 and 1845. He then entered the University of Edinburgh, where he studied medicine. His interest in botany was fostered by John Hutton Balfour (1808-1884), who suggested he study lichens, then greatly neglected. Although he worked as a clerk in the register house during the whole of his medical course, Lindsay obtained several university prizes, including the medal and first prizes in botany, and on graduating MD in 1852 he obtained the highest honours (three stars) for his thesis, 'Anatomy, morphology, and physiology of the lichens'. 
In 1854, after serving for a year as resident physician of the City Cholera Hospital, Edinburgh, and subsequently as assistant physician in the Crichton Royal Institution, Dumfries, Lindsay was appointed medical officer to Murray's Royal Institution for the Insane at Perth. There he combined geological with botanical researches, but continued to specialize in lichens, publishing, in 1856, 'A Popular History of British Lichens'. The work contained numerous coloured plates, and was a readable and stimulating account of lichens, which did much to popularize the subject. For his work in this department of botany he received in 1859 the first Neill gold medal from the Royal Society of Edinburgh. In the same year, he had married, on 26 April, Elizabeth, the only daughter of William Paterson Reid, solicitor, of Demerara. They had at least one daughter. 
In 1861-2 Lindsay visited the Otago province, New Zealand, making many observations on the botany and geology of the region, collecting specimens, and later publishing many papers on his work there. He received from the New Zealand Exhibition of 1865 a silver medal in recognition of his botanical researches, which were published in 1868 as 'Contributions to New Zealand Botany'. He also travelled to north Germany, Norway, and Iceland and published on the flora of those countries. In 1870 he published his important 'Memoir on the Spermogones and Pycnides of Lichens', to which is appended a list of his thirty-three contributions to lichenology, which appeared either in the 'Journal of Microscopical Science' or in the transactions of the Linnean and Royal (Edinburgh) societies. Lindsay studied chemical variation in lichens and pioneered new areas of study, including the diversity of lichenicolous fungi, and conidiomata in lichens. He published profusely, illustrating his monographs and papers with his own fine anatomical drawings. 
Besides these botanical papers Lindsay published many pamphlets on mental disease and other medical subjects, on education, and on the place of natural history in colonization. His last work, 'Mind in the Lower Animals in Health and Disease' (1879), which aimed at showing the similarity of mental processes in man and the lower animals, broke new ground. Lindsay was a great and omnivorous reader, and a most energetic worker. He died at his home, 3 Hartington Gardens, Edinburgh, on 24 November 1880. He is commemorated by the fungal genus 'Lauder lindsaya'. 


@@@@@


doc= 16720


Lindsay, William Schaw (1816-1877), shipowner and politician, was born at Ayr. His family details are sketchy, but he was probably the third son of Joseph Lindsay, and his mother's maiden name was Schaw. His will names two sisters, one of whom was married to the prominent United Presbyterian clergyman, John McKerrow. Orphaned early in life Lindsay came under the guardianship of his uncle, William Schaw (died 1847), of Ayr, a minister of the Secession church. After early schooling, at the age of fifteen he ran off to Liverpool, determined to pursue life as a seafarer. After some weeks of destitution he secured a berth as a cabin-boy in the 'Isabella', a West Indiaman, and after three years he became second mate. Shortly afterwards he was shipwrecked, in the course of which he broke both legs and an arm. He recovered to become the chief mate of the 'Olive Branch', owned by a Mr Greenwell of Sunderland, and a year later he was master, at the age of twenty. In 1839 he received a sabre wound from a pirate, whom he then shot dead, in the Persian Gulf. 
In 1840 Lindsay left the sea and Greenwell secured his appointment as fitter for the Castle Eden Coal Company at Hartlepool -- the beginning of Lindsay's career in business. In 1842 he married Helen Stewart of Glasgow; the couple had at least one son. Through his wife Lindsay became connected to the family firm of iron-founders, and when he went to London in 1845 he acted as agent for his brother-in-law, in addition to his coal-fitting and shipbroking activities. W. S. Lindsay & Co., of Austin Friars, in the City of London, rapidly became one of the largest shipowners in the world with, at one stage, 220 vessels in its fleet. The Crimean War offered Lindsay the opportunity to charter steamers to the French government on particularly remunerative terms. 
Lindsay also pursued parliamentary ambitions and, after unsuccessful attempts at Monmouth and Dartmouth in 1852, he was returned as MP for Tynemouth and South Shields in March 1854. At the general election of 1859 he withdrew from the contest in this constituency and was returned instead for Sunderland. As an MP he championed the shipping interest, naturally enough, and took an interest in naval as well as commercial matters. He took an active part in the Administrative Reform Association. However, his support for the Confederate states in the American Civil War, together with other maverick tendencies, caused some consternation among his supporters. 
Lindsay's political and business careers ended in 1864 when he lost the use of his legs. Retiring to the seclusion of his home, Shepperton Manor, Shepperton, Middlesex, he turned his energy to writing. He had already published various pamphlets, as well as more substantial works such as 'Our Navigation and Mercantile Marine Laws' (1853) and 'Our Merchant Shipping' (1860). He fictionalized many of his experiences for the anonymously published 'Log of my Leisure Hours' and the unfinished 'Recollections of a Sailor'. However, his monument as a writer is his authoritative four-volume 'History of Merchant Shipping and Ancient Commerce' (1874-6). He died at Shepperton Manor on 28 August 1877, and was survived by his wife. 
Lindsay's energy and driven personality were evident in all that he undertook. His remarkable career took him from cabin-boy to MP, by way of merchant prince, and when he was incapacitated he was still only in the prime of life. That he provoked strong feelings was inevitable, but the combination of admiration and unease he aroused was best expressed by another shipowner, Alfred Holt, who wrote of him as being 'a strange mixture of energy, industry, self-reliance, egotism and pretence' (Jones, 2.132). 


@@@@@


doc= 16721


Lindsell, Augustine (d. 1634), bishop of Hereford, was born at Steeple Bumpstead, Essex. On 14 April 1592 he was admitted a pensioner of Emmanuel College, Cambridge, but it was from Clare College that he graduated BA in 1596 and proceeded MA in 1599, and where he became a fellow. An Oxford MA by incorporation was bestowed upon him in July 1614. He was instituted rector of Molesworth, Huntingdonshire, in 1606, rector of Wickford, Essex, in March 1610, and granted a prebend of Lincoln Cathedral by Bishop William Barlow in November 1612, a position that he held until 1624. On the appointment of Bishop Richard Neile to Lincoln in 1614, Lindsell acquired a more powerful patron. He followed Neile to Durham and in March 1619 was collated to the tenth stall of that cathedral, which he resigned for the second stall in August 1620. He proceeded DD in 1621 and became a firm -- and resident -- member of the 'Durham House group' located at Neile's diocesan house in the Strand, London. Close friends with other intellectuals of the group like John Cosin and Richard Mountague, Lindsell was one of Neile's chaplains closely involved in the publication of Mountague's controversial 'A New Gagg for an Old Goose' in 1624. He was strongly associated with the ceremonial changes for which Durham Cathedral became infamous in parliamentary circles in 1628-9, when Peter Smart described him as 'the oracle of our Arminian sectaryes' ('Correspondence of John Cosin', 175). 
Lindsell was an unsuccessful candidate for the regius professorship of Greek at Cambridge, vacant by the death of Andrew Downes in 1627, but his clerical career was enhanced when he was installed dean of Lichfield on 15 October 1628. His relatively high profile at Durham ensured that he came under attack when Peter Smart's allegations about ceremonial changes became public, and Neile and William Laud had to intervene to protect Lindsell and Cosin when Durham was presided over by a less sympathetic Bishop John Howson after 1628 ['see 'Durham House group]. Fortunately for Lindsell, Neile and Laud quite clearly had the ear of King Charles by this date. On 10 February 1633 Lindsell was consecrated bishop of Peterborough (to which was attached the rectory of Castor, Northamptonshire), where he sought to effect greater respect for baptism, greater conformity to the rites of the 'Book of Common Prayer', and to suppress nonconformist lecturers. His articles of visitation which survive for 1633 were firmly based on a set devised for Norwich diocese in 1619 by the prominent proto-Arminian Bishop John Overall, and he believed in them so firmly that he applied the same set when he was translated to Hereford in March 1634. According to William Prynne, Lindsell was: 'an earnest promoter of the book of pastimes on the Lord's day, a great champion for the Arminians, and all the late innovations in doctrine, ceremony or worship introduced among us, a bitter enemy to preaching, lecturers, lectures and godly people. (Prynne, chapter 6)' The health of Lindsell, a leading intellectual of the Arminian party, had often been a cause of concern to his friends. If Prynne is to be believed, however, Lindsell died quite suddenly on 6 November 1634 as a result of the stress induced by quarrels with the dean and chapter of Hereford over the position of the altar. He died unmarried and was buried in Hereford Cathedral. In his will he bequeathed Greek books and manuscripts to Clare College; to Sir Robert Cotton he gave a manuscript history in Latin of Ely Cathedral. To his old patron Richard Neile he gave books, and in recognition of the part played by Neile's family in his life he gave Richard's wife, Dorothy, a piece of plate, and his son Paul a copy of John Speed's 'Chronicles'. Laud was also a beneficiary of books from a library which was said at the time to have been worth about $800 -- a rather significant collection. Other gifts went to Sir William Paddy, fellow Durham clergyman Daniel Birkhead, the civil lawyer Edward Lively, and his old pupil from Clare, Nicholas Ferrar. Apart from visitation articles produced for both of his dioceses, together with a set for Hereford Cathedral, Lindsell worked on an edition of Theophylact's commentaries on the epistles of 'St Paul', which was published by his associate in the work, Dr Thomas Baily, subdean of Wells, in 1636; it was aptly dedicated to William Laud. Together with Giles Thompson, Lindsell is one of only two bishops of the period 1559-1660 who does not appear to have been granted a coat of arms. 


@@@@@


doc= 16722


Lindsey, Theophilus (1723-1808), Unitarian minister and theologian, was born at Middlewich, Cheshire, on 20 June 1723, the youngest son of Robert Lindsey (died 1742) and his second wife (died 1747). His father was a mercer who also had interests in the salt trade. His mother, whose maiden name was Spencer, had resided for many years with Frances, countess of Huntingdon, whose son, Theophilus, earl of Huntingdon, was the boy's godfather. 
Lindsey was educated at Middlewich grammar school and at the free grammar school at Leeds, under its celebrated headmaster Thomas Barnard. In 1741 he matriculated at St John's College, Cambridge, and after graduating BA in 1744 was in 1747 elected a fellow of his college. He was ordained deacon in 1746 and priest a year later. He was then presented to a chapel in Spital Square, London on the recommendation of Lady Ann Hastings, who, like her sister, Lady Betty Hastings, had from his earliest years shown him many kindnesses, as did their niece by marriage, the evangelical countess of Huntingdon. Shortly afterwards he became domestic chaplain to Algernon Seymour, seventh duke of Somerset, and after the duke's death in 1750 became tutor to his grandson, Hugh Smithson, afterwards second duke of Northumberland. He accompanied his pupil on a continental tour between 1751 and 1753. On relinquishing this post in the latter year he was presented by the earl of Northumberland (subsequently the first duke) to the valuable rectory of Kirby Wiske, Yorkshire, but he resigned this living in 1756 for that of Piddletown, Dorset, which was in the gift of the earl of Huntingdon. 
On 29 September 1760 Lindsey married Hannah Elsworth (1740-1812), the stepdaughter of his friend Archdeacon Francis Blackburne, and soon afterwards adopted Blackburne's latitudinarian views on subscription to the 'Thirty-Nine Articles'. He declined in 1762 the offer of the chaplaincy made by the duke of Northumberland when appointed lord lieutenant of Ireland. In 1763 he left Piddletown for the vicarage of Catterick in Yorkshire, which though of less value enabled him to see more of Archdeacon Blackburne and other friends. In the controversy that arose on the publication of Blackburne's 'The Confessional' in 1766, Lindsey strongly supported the latitudinarians and advocated a relaxation of the system of clerical subscription to the 'Thirty-Nine Articles'. His own views had become Unitarian, and he helped to organize the Feathers tavern petition in 1771-2, signed by over 200 persons, which was designed to change the laws on subscription ['see also 'Feathers tavern petitioners]. On the rejection of the petition by the House of Commons (6 February 1772) he resigned his living, and on 28 November 1773 he preached his farewell sermon at Catterick. Lindsey had generously assisted his poor parishioners, and he was obliged to sell his plate and part of his library to maintain himself after leaving his rectory. 
Lindsey and his wife arrived in London in the spring of 1774, and with the help of Joseph Priestley, Richard Price, and other prominent Unitarian friends a room was engaged in Essex House, Essex Street, which was fitted as a temporary chapel and opened for public worship in April of that year. He published for his congregation 'A Liturgy, Altered from that of the Church of England, to Suit Unitarian Doctrine', which he amended in later editions. His friends built a chapel for him in Essex Street, which opened on 29 March 1778, and this became the first Unitarian congregation. 
Meanwhile Lindsey had issued an 'Apology' (1774), giving his reasons for leaving the Church of England, and a history of the doctrine of the Trinity and Unitarianism. It reached a fourth edition by 1775, arousing both hostile and friendly criticism, to which he replied in the preface to his next work, 'A Sequel to the 'Apology'' (1776), which was the most elaborate, and in many respects the most valuable, of his contributions to dogmatic theology. Lindsey's Unitarianism was firmly Socinian, involving belief in the divine unity, and the humanity of Christ, together with a denial of Christ's pre-existence and atonement. 
Early in 1783 it was arranged that John Disney, who, like Lindsey, had seceded from the Church of England, and had married Mrs Lindsey's stepsister, should serve as Lindsey's colleague at Essex Street Chapel. He was thus enabled to devote more time to theological writing and to campaigning for dissenting civil liberties. He reported on the moves for the repeal of the 'Test and Corporation Acts' in 1787-90 and organized an unsuccessful petition for the legal toleration of Unitarian worship in 1792. Lindsey was at first a reluctant dissenter: he had hoped to reform the Church of England from within. But subsequently his associates were drawn increasingly from the nonconformist sects. His closest colleague and friend was Priestley, whom he defended in 'Vindiciae Priestleyanae, addressed to the students of Oxford and Cambridge, by a late member of the University of Cambridge' (1784); a second part appeared in 1790. In another work, 'Conversations on Christian Idolatry', issued in the following year, he once more vindicated his theological views. 
In July 1793 Lindsey retired from his ministry at Essex Street, although he continued to reside in the minister's house. He responded to the Priestley riots and the travails of Unitarians in the wake of the French Revolution by reprinting Joseph Priestley's 'Reply to Paine's 'Age of Reason'', with a preface of his own. In 1802 he published 'Conversations on the Divine Government'. In 1800 he inherited considerable property from a member of his congregation, Elizabeth Rayner, and his last years were spent in comparative affluence. He died at his house in Essex Street on 3 November 1808, and was buried in the cemetery at Bunhill Fields, London, on 11 November. 
Lindsey published many occasional sermons and pamphlets. A collection of his sermons, in two volumes, appeared in 1810. He was also a voluminous letter writer, and his correspondence is a valuable source of information for the religious history of the period. 


@@@@@


doc= 16723


Line, Francis (1595-1675), Roman Catholic priest and natural philosopher, was born in London or Buckinghamshire, probably to a recusant family. It is not known where he received his boyhood education; he was already a young man when he arrived at the college of the English Jesuits at St Omer, in Flanders, where, in 1622, he was listed among the top six pupils in the senior class. The following year he entered the noviciate and transferred first to the English Jesuit college at Liege, then to nearby Watten. Having been ordained priest he was appointed professor of mathematics and of Hebrew at Liege by 1632. 
The cosmology taught at Liege broadly followed Aristotle in describing a geocentric universe; this was at odds with the Copernican system, which put the sun at the centre, a system which gained more support with the publication of Galileo's observations. Line was among those who read Galileo's works. Although some Jesuit astronomers were sympathetic to the Copernican system, Galileo was condemned to house arrest in 1633. This event brought to light one of Line's inventions, which was thought by one of Galileo's friends to offer a possible support for the Copernican system. In a book published in 1634 a Jesuit visiting Liege had mentioned Line's water-clock, which consisted of a glass globe filled with water, within which rotated a metal globe, carrying round with it a small 'fish' which pointed to the hours of the day marked on the outer globe. Such a device might, it was proposed, demonstrate the rotation of the earth on its own axis. Although Line never disclosed the secret of his clock, it was probably the same as those previously contrived elsewhere, the inner globe containing clockwork, rotating an arm and magnet to which the 'fish' was attracted. 
The various types of sundial for which Line later became famous show his ingenuity and mathematical competence. When the future Charles II visited Liege he was shown in the college garden a great pyramidal structure bearing several dials, which so impressed him that twenty years later he invited Line to construct a similar one at Whitehall. Line, meanwhile, joined with other famous mathematicians of the day in the debate on squaring the circle. Proponents were searching for an algebraic formula to yield the dimensions of a square which would have the equivalent area to a given circle; opponents, of whom Line was one, denied that such a formula could exist. 
In late 1657 or early 1658 Line left Liege and crossed to England, possibly by the petition of a nobleman who could offer protection. It has been suggested that this was Henry Pierrepoint, marquess of Dorchester and earl of Kingston. Line's first ministry may have been at the College of the Immaculate Conception, Derbyshire. By 1659 he was in London, then, by 1665, in Lancashire. His 'De pseudo-quadratura circuli Dom. Thomas Viti', attacking the proposals of the English secular priest Thomas White, was published in London in 1659, followed the next year by its English translation, 'Refutation of the Attempt to Square the Circle'. He soon became embroiled in other arguments, notably with Robert Boyle. Boyle published in 1660 his 'New Experiments Physico-Mechanical Touching the Spring of Air', which had led him to conclude that the void over the mercury in the closed end of a barometer tube was indeed a vacuum, and that the mercury column was supported by the spring of air -- in modern terms, atmospheric pressure -- bearing down on the open end. This idea was anathema to Line, who responded with 'Tractatus de corporum inseparabilitate in quo experimenta de vacuo' (1661), in which he defended Aristotle's teaching. Irritated by what he saw as a confusion of theological and scientific ideas, Boyle issued his 'Defence Against Franciscus Linus' as an appendix to the second edition of his 'New Experiments'. In addressing 'the learned author, who ever he may be', Boyle may have known Line as Francis Hall, the alias he seems to have used in England. The 'Defence' obliged Boyle to clarify his arguments and to expound the principle now known as Boyle's law; whether or not Line was convinced, he published nothing further on this matter. 
The sundial which had been erected in the privy gardens of Whitehall Palace by the prince of Wales, later Charles I, having been defaced, Charles II decided to replace it and invited Line to design the new dial, a task he undertook 'at my lodging in the country' (F. Line, 'Explication of the Diall Sett up in the King's Garden at London', 1673, 1). Unveiled on 24 July 1669, Line's 'Grande pyramidical multiform diall' (Line, 'Explication') was a large and elaborate structure rising tree-like from its stone pedestal. Comprising altogether more than 250 units, there were six main pieces of the dial in the form of stacked circular tables and large globes supported by iron branches, decreasing in size as they approached the pinnacle, an orb surmounted by a cross. Round the tables were dials showing time according to various historical and foreign forms of reckoning, above them glass plates bearing portraits of the royal family. Three dials consisted of water-filled globes which focused the sun's rays in various ways. One of these was Line's sundial for blind people, an example of which had been installed at Liege in 1635, and was seen there by an English visitor in 1699. It consisted of a 3 inch glass globe filled with water inside a 6 inch sphere consisting of several iron rings representing the hour circles. The sun's rays were brought to a focus on the rings, where it could be felt by hand. Unfortunately no one thought to protect Line's grandiose structure from winter's frost, and it suffered considerable damage. Line wrote his 'Explication of the Diall Sett up in the King's Garden at London', but had returned to Liege before its publication there, in Latin and English versions, with an engraving, in 1673. The structure was still standing in 1674 when the earl of Rochester and his friends passed through the garden in a mood of drunken exuberance and smashed its glass spheres. By 1681 it seems to have been dismantled and taken out of the garden. 
Back in his post as professor of mathematics, Line continued with his earlier experiments in optics, and unwisely took up an argument between the Jesuit Ignace Gaston Pardies and Isaac Newton over the theory of colours as demonstrated with prisms and lenses. Pardies had realized his misunderstanding of Newton's work when he died in 1674, but Line decided to commence battle afresh, which he did in a series of letters to Henry Oldenburg, secretary to the Royal Society. His letters were passed to Newton, and Newton's increasingly exasperated replies were modulated by Oldenburg and sent to Line. Both sides made their experiments again, and still could not agree on the shape of the spectrum displayed by light passing through a prism; it later transpired that the disparity of their results arose largely because they were using prisms of differing density. But amid the argument Line succumbed to an epidemic and died at Liege on 15 November 1675. 


@@@@@


doc= 16724


Lines, Samuel (1778-1863), designer and art teacher, was born at Allesley, near Coventry, on 7 February 1778, the son of John Lines (1746/7-1831) and his wife, Mary, 'nee' Rostill (1739/40-1787). His mother was mistress of a boarding-school in the town. On his mother's death in his boyhood he was placed in the charge of an uncle, a farmer, who employed him in agricultural work. Lines, however, managed to teach himself the rudiments of drawing and painting, and in 1794 he was apprenticed to Mr Keeling, a clock-dial enameller and decorator of Birmingham, for whom he worked as designer. He was employed in a similar capacity by Mr Clay, a papier mache maker, and also by the die-engravers Wyon and Halliday. Among other objects he was frequently employed to design presentation shovels and swords of state, manufactured by Mr Gunby of Birmingham, a great amateur of art, with a fine private collection, and Gunby's gallery was freely open to Lines, as well as to his contemporary David Cox the elder. In 1807 Lines began to teach drawing in Birmingham, using casts to draw from; he set up a school in Newhall Street, met with success, and was able to build himself a house in Temple Row West, where he resided for the remainder of his life. In 1809 Lines, with Moses Haughton the elder, Charles Barber, John Vincent Barber, and other artists established a life academy in Peck Lane, New Street, which moved in 1814 to larger premises in Union Passage. It was in this room that the first exhibition of the works of Birmingham artists was held in 1814. Lines took a large share in the foundation of the Birmingham School of Art in 1821, and on the subsequent foundation of the Birmingham Society of Artists he was elected treasurer and curator, holding those offices until he reached the age of eighty, when he resigned, and was elected an honorary member. Nearly all the artists of the neighbourhood and many from other parts of the country received instruction in drawing at Lines's academy. A good landscape painter himself, he possessed a gift for teaching others, and many of his pupils attained much excellence. A privately printed autobiography, 'A Few Incidents in the Life of Samuel Lines', appeared in 1862. He died at his home in Temple Row West, Birmingham, on 22 November 1863, and was buried at St Philip's churchyard, Birmingham. An oil portrait of him by W. T. Roden and his drawing 'Llyn Idwal', are in Birmingham Museum and Art Gallery. He very rarely exhibited out of Birmingham. 
Lines had five sons, all of whom made careers in art: Henry Harris Lines (1800/1801-1889), a landscape artist who settled at Worcester, where he also pursued antiquarian interests; William Rostill Lines (1802-1846), a modeller; Samuel Rostill Lines ['see below']; Edward Ashcroft Lines (1806-1875), who emigrated to Auckland, New Zealand; and Frederick Thomas Lines (1807-1898), a portraitist. 




@@@@@


doc= 16725


Samuel Rostill Lines (1804-1833), painter, third son of Samuel Lines, was born at Birmingham on 15 January 1804, and was taught drawing and painting by his father. He showed some skill in sketching trees, and was employed to make lithographed drawings for drawing books. He also specialized in views of picturesque buildings such as Haddon Hall. He was an occasional exhibitor at the Royal Academy and with the New Society of Painters in Water Colours and showed much promise. He died at his father's house in Birmingham on 9 November 1833, aged twenty-nine. Examples of his work are in the Victoria and Albert Museum, London, and Maidstone Museum, Kent. Birmingham Museum and Art Gallery holds a small collection of his pencil drawings of regional landscapes. 


@@@@@


doc= 16726


Lingard, Frederick (1811-1847), organist and composer, was born in Manchester, the fifth and youngest son of Thomas Lingard (died 'c'.1844), principal agent for the Mersey and Irwell Navigation Company (also known as the Old Quay Company). He was educated at Manchester grammar school and was intended for the bar, but decided instead to enter the musical profession. He later studied vocal and instrumental church music with Harris, organist of the collegiate church of Manchester. Lingard was for two years organist and choirmaster at St George's Church, Hulme, Lancashire, of which his brother, Joshua Lingard, was at that time incumbent. About 1835 Lingard became a lay vicar of Durham Cathedral, a post he held until his death. He was also a teacher of music and a composer, and published 'Antiphonal Chants for the Psalter' (1842), in the style of Palestrina and Byrd; a 'Series of Anthems' consisting of a compilation from various sources, including the sacred works of Mozart, Haydn, and Beethoven; many anthems and chants, issued individually and frequently used at Durham Cathedral; and many separately published secular songs and duets. He is said to have possessed a melodious and effective bass voice, and was active in the promotion of ecclesiastical music, particularly antiphonal chanting. He died at Durham on 4 July 1847, and was buried there in St Giles's churchyard. 


@@@@@


doc= 16727


Lingard, John (1771-1851), Roman Catholic priest and historian, only son of John Lingard ('c'.1738-1804), a carpenter and builder, and his wife, Elizabeth Reynolds ('c'.1733-1824), was born in Winchester on 5 February 1771. He was one of the last students to study at the English College, Douai, in northern France, caught up as it was in events following the French Revolution. Lingard arrived there at the age of eleven in 1782 and left for Britain a few days after the French 'commissaires' had taken possession of the college in 1793. Eventually he joined the handful of northern exiles which settled at Crook Hall, near Durham. Lingard was ordained deacon there in December 1794, and priest at the Bar Convent in York on 18 April 1795. At Crook he took on various administrative and academic tasks and moved with the community to the new buildings at Ushaw, Durham, in 1808. In 1810 he became acting president but a year of 'anxiety and misery' (Lingard to Bishop Poynter, 26 Feb 1817, CUL, Add. MS 9418), peppered by unnecessary interference from Bishop Gibson, convinced him that college life was not for him; he refused invitations to St Edmund's College, Ware, and to Maynooth. He was grateful for the chance of moving in 1811 to the small Catholic mission in Hornby, Lancashire, where he remained until his death in 1851. 
Here Lingard not only wrote his major 'History of England' (London, 1819-30), a study of English history from the Roman invasion to 1688, but a host of smaller works of history and theology, including a collection of English prayers for the use of his parishioners (1833), an English translation of the gospels (1836), and a volume of catechetical instruction (1840). Lingard's version of the 'Ave maris stella', 'Hail queen of heaven', remains a popular hymn among Roman Catholics. In 1820, out of the profits of the first volumes of his 'History', Lingard built a simple Catholic chapel, adjoining the priest's house in Hornby. He preferred liturgy to be intelligible and attractive both to the Catholic community and to protestant visitors, disliking repetitious litanies and over-fanciful metaphor. He wanted his congregation to understand and follow the priest's prayers at the altar and, in Holy Week, for example, had someone read the 'Passion' clearly in English while he continued quietly in Latin. Above all, he wanted simplicity, and disdained both the medievalism of Pugin's Gothic revival and the unwarranted pomp that often accompanied the opening of churches, with the church being 'turned into an opera house' and 'the bishop performing as the first dancer in the ballet' (Lingard to John Walker, 16 Nov 1843, Ushaw, LL 1361). His vast and delightfully unbuttoned correspondence reveals him as an important commentator on Catholic life during the first half of the nineteenth century. He was a valued adviser to vicars apostolic as well as to laity; his work represented an important contribution to the political programme of the English Catholics petitioning for emancipation. 
To strangers Lingard could be somewhat off-putting but he delighted in his friends. A regular visitor to Hornby in the last years of Lingard's life described him as 'a thin, spare, light-figured, sallow, dark complexioned man, about 5ft 9in, or 5ft 10in in height, with remarkably small feet and small hands, and apparently of delicate constitution... [looking] quite as old at 65 as he did at eighty, with the exception of the whitening ring often seen in the eyes of old people. (Mrs Thomas Lomax, unpublished memoir, priv. coll.)' Everything in the house was 'small and of the neatest' (ibid.). Lingard was a keen gardener, 'a great grafter of pear trees' (ibid.), and was proud of the oaks he grew from acorns gathered once in Italy. He boasted a series of pets, including a tortoise and a guinea fowl. To Mrs Lomax, he was, above all, friend and scholar, 'his sacerdotal character never particularly present[ing] itself to me, unless I happened to be there on a Sunday' (ibid.). 
Lingard rarely travelled, though he went to Rome in 1817, both in search of manuscripts and to assist in negotiations for the reopening of the English College after the devastations of Napoleon. In 1821 Pius VII conferred on him the triple degrees of doctor of divinity and of civil and canon law and gradually he achieved European acclaim, his 'History of England' being published in French, German, and Italian editions. He became an associate of the Royal Society of Literature and in 1839 was elected a corresponding member of the Academie Francaise. Leo XII presented him with a gold medal on a return visit to Rome in 1825, and invited him to stay in the city, but Lingard preferred to return to his historical studies in the seclusion of Hornby. It was rumoured that Leo had created Lingard a cardinal 'in petto' in the consistory of October 1826. This is a secret which died with the pope but, in the more expansive mood of old age, Lingard considered it to have been the case. The issue was raised again after Lingard's death by Mark Tierney (historian and priest of the Southwark diocese, who was Lingard's first memoirist) in a sharp exchange with Cardinal Wiseman, who, though acknowledging himself to be close to Lingard, his old teacher, was anxious to scotch the idea. The same official unease pervades a guarded obituary of Lingard in 'The Tablet' (26 July 1851), written from a decidedly ultramontanist perspective. This is fighting new battles on old ground: Wiseman was not prepared to concede additional ammunition to Tierney's championing of the Cisalpine tradition, for which Tierney claimed Lingard as a leading representative. 
Like many Catholics, Lingard had contact with whig circles, for the whigs had for long espoused the cause of Catholic emancipation. It was Lord Holland who had encouraged Joseph Mawman to publish the first edition of the 'History of England', and Henry Brougham was a welcome visitor to Hornby, when travelling north for the Lancaster assizes. Lord Melbourne made him a grant from the public purse in 1839 of $300, and Lingard forwarded Ullathorne's 'The Catholic Mission in Australia' to a select committee on transportation, resulting in Ullathorne's call to give useful evidence before the committee in 1838. Lingard was no whig, however. The volumes of his 'History' dealing with the Reformation provided material for the blatant anti-Anglican polemic of William Cobbett's 'The Protestant Reformation' (1824-7), which betrays Lingard's subtle undermining of the prevailing protestant interpretation. John Allen, a close associate of the Holland House circle, could only alight on a footnote regarding the St Bartholomew's day massacre as grounds for a vigorous attack on Lingard in the pages of the 'Edinburgh Review', an attack which provoked Lingard to one of his very few public responses, 'A Vindication of Certain Passages in the Fourth and Fifth Volumes of the History of England' (1826). 
Correspondence reveals that Lingard thought little of the whig historians, and described Macaulay's work as 'abound[ing] in claptrap of every description' (Lingard to John Walker, 27 Dec 1848, Ushaw, LL 1296). Lingard set out his programme in the preface to his 'Antiquities of the Anglo-Saxon Church', clearly distancing himself from whig history: 'my object is truth; and in the pursuit of truth I have made it a religious duty to consult the original historians. Who would draw from the troubled stream, when he may drink at the fountainhead?' ('The Antiquities of the Anglo-Saxon Church', 1806, 1.vi). It was a programme he stuck to, searching out manuscripts and relying on colleagues to do the same. Lingard was the first English historian to make serious use of rare printed material and manuscript sources in the Vatican and other Italian libraries, as well as French dispatches, and material from the state papers of Ferdinand and Isabella and Philip II of Spain preserved in an almost inaccessible state in the Spanish castle of Simancas. The pioneering use of such material enabled him to move away from a tendency towards parochialism in English political history, placing it in a more broadly European context. The five editions of the 'History' published during his lifetime allowed him to include new collections of sources as they were brought to his notice and set out a more explicit statement of Catholic revisionism than he had felt to be appropriate in the pre-emancipation years of the 1820s. 
Lingard professed to acknowledge no interpretative scheme of history but sought to let the facts speak for themselves. His was a revisionist history: he considered this dry clarity, with its appearance of impartiality, to be the best way of serving the Catholic cause. This was not always accepted as the case: Bishop Milner, strident ultramontanist and vicar apostolic for the midland district since 1803, was particularly outspoken in his attacks. The pages of the 'Orthodox Journal' chart the progress of this debate, although Rome intervened in April 1820 to demand that Milner sever his connection with the journal. Milner, and Lingard's other Catholic critics, objected to his eirenic approach to non-Catholics: Lingard numbered non-Catholics among his friends and correspondents, and struck up a close friendship with the local Anglican incumbent at Hornby, who, on his death, bequeathed his pets to Lingard's care, and rather unusually the Anglican church at Hornby has a memorial to the Catholic priest whose chapel was across the road. 
Lingard, however, was not averse to formal controversy and published a series of pamphlets initiated by an attack made on Catholicism by Shute Barrington, bishop of Durham ('A collection of tracts on several subjects connected with the civil and religious principles of Catholics', 1826). As in his historical work, Lingard felt the Catholic cause best served by a calm and conscientious statement of facts which would serve to disabuse opponents of misapprehensions. This almost naive, Enlightenment, belief in the power of fact, it must be conceded, was more a matter of Catholic apologetic than ecumenical intent. Lingard never warmed to the Oxford Movement, always remaining suspicious of its converts to Catholicism, and, in a long review of works by William Palmer of Worcester and of the early 'Tracts for the Times', disputed the continuities claimed by these authors, praising the Catholic martyrs who had preserved the tradition handed on by Augustine and his companions ('Dublin Review', May 1842). 
Accusations regarding the illiberality of Roman Catholicism were addressed by Lingard in his first work, 'The Antiquities of the Anglo-Saxon Church' (1806), a work which reveals him to be a moderate upholder of the Catholic cisalpine and Gallican tradition of historical scholarship. In this work he sought to oppose the errors of a generation of protestant Anglo-Saxon scholars who argued for an English church, which was from the beginning independent from Rome. Against these writers Lingard asserts the catholicity of the Anglo-Saxon church, presenting a picture of a national church, guided by regular diocesan and provincial synods, but always absolutely loyal to the representative of St Peter. Lingard was anxious to show how Christianity brings culture and civilization, together with its promise of salvation, and was keen, quietly and subtly, to undermine arguments which suggest an aggressive approach to the English church on the part of Rome. 
Impervious to the wiles of romanticism, Lingard's work belongs to the Enlightenment; his style is akin to that of Gibbon, though his irony is more gentle. As the nineteenth century progressed, Lingard appeared increasingly old-fashioned, though his 'History' remained a standard English text for Catholics into the twentieth century. He disliked innovation, and looked askance at nineteenth-century theories of doctrinal development, and was always to emphasize the permanence and unchanging nature of the doctrine received from Christ by the apostolic community. Lingard's is a political history, cool towards the miraculous, cool towards heroes: his treatment of Thomas Becket was as irritating to Milner as was his treatment of William Wallace to his Scottish critics. His uncomplimentary characterizations of Henry VIII and Elizabeth emerge from the unfolding of events and Mary Tudor is equally disdained, though he does not dwell on her persecutions. Lingard's work looks back to the great tradition of historical scholarship and source criticism established by the Bollandists and Maurists and is consonant with the marked revival of historical study in late eighteenth- and early nineteenth-century Britain. There is nothing more revealing of Lingard's somewhat tetchy eighteenth-century rationalism than a comment on Sharon Turner (1768-1847), perhaps his closest contemporary among the British historians: 'To my surprise he has written to me a congratulatory letter... and has sent me as a present a poem which he has just published. Unfortunately that detracts from the compliment. For he is seventy-seven, and a man who publishes a poem in his seventy-seventh year must be on the high road to a second childhood. (Lingard to John Coulston, 10 June 1845, Ushaw, LL 290)' Lingard outlived Turner, although troubled by worsening eyesight and increasing bouts of ill health. He walked in his garden for the last time on Easter Sunday 1851 and the following day took to his bed. Severe bouts of asthma in the last few weeks of his life made it more convenient to spend his days and nights propped up on the sofa in his library, and there he died just before midnight on 17 July 1851. At Lingard's own request his body was taken to Ushaw College, where he was buried on 22 July. 


@@@@@


doc= 16728


Lingard, Richard (1633/4-1670), dean of Lismore, was probably the son of 
There is uncertainty regarding the elder Lingard's movements after 1641. Some authorities claim he left Ireland in 1645, others that he remained at Athlone until it fell to Ireton in 1651, and it is this uncertainty that has led to the confusion between him and his likely son. Nevertheless, strict contemporaries distinguished between the two men, and it seems probable that the elder Lingard did indeed leave Ireland at some point after 1641 to become the minister of Workington in Cumberland. It was there that he died in 1655, naming a son, Richard, in his will. 
It seems likely that it was the younger Lingard who was admitted, aged fifteen, to Pembroke College, Cambridge, in 1649, graduating BA in 1653. Elected one of five senior fellows of Trinity College, Dublin, and lecturer in divinity in 1661, in the same year he was appointed to recover the library of James Ussher for the college, alongside the vice-chancellor, Jeremy Taylor, and the provost, Thomas Steele. On 4 June 1662 he was made vice-provost, and in the following November became public professor of divinity. On 25 January 1666 the grace of the house was passed for his degree of Doctor of Divinity. Shortly afterwards he was appointed dean of Lismore and designated vicar of the parish of St Andrew's, Dublin. For this reason he resigned his college positions as senior fellow, vice-provost, and senior dean on 6 April 1666. 
Lingard's 'Sermon Preached before the King at Whitehall July 26 1668: in Defence of the Liturgy' (1668) was his first published work. His only other publication, 'A letter of advice to a young gentleman leaving the university concerning the behaviour and conversation in the world' (1670), was written for the benefit of his friend James Lane at the request of the latter's father, Viscount Lanesborough. Lingard may have visited Oxford as a grace of convocation on 15 July 1670, and was passed there for a DD in 1670, though it is not known whether he actually took the degree. A letter from Charles II to the lord lieutenant of Ireland on 3 August 1669 proposed that he be advanced to the bishopric of Raphoe, but he died before this came to pass, on 11 November 1670. He was buried in the college chapel on 13 November. The fact that he left in his will rent from land in Cumberland provides a further telling link of his likely parentage. 'An elegy and funeral oration on the death of the Rev. Dr. R. Lingard, dean of Lismore and public professor of divinity' was published in Dublin in 1671. 


@@@@@


doc= 16729


Lingen, Sir Henry (1612-1661/2), royalist army officer, born at Rotherwas, near Hereford, on 23 October 1612, was the eldest son of Edward Lingen (died 1635), of Freen's Court, in the parish of Sutton St Michael, Herefordshire, and his wife, Blanch Bodenham, daughter of Sir Roger Bodenham of Rotherwas. Lingen's father was twice imprisoned by the council in the marches -- once for refusing to pay alimony to his estranged wife and then on the grounds of insanity -- but he was restored to his property by the privy council. Edward Lingen was a Catholic, but Henry was brought up an Anglican by John Scudamore, first Viscount Scudamore. On 3 April 1626 he married Alice Pye (died 1684), daughter of Sir Walter Pye of the Mynde, Herefordshire, who brought with her a marriage portion of $1000. They had eight daughters and one son, Henry, who was to outlive his father but died a minor in 1670. In 1635 Lingen inherited large estates from his father in Herefordshire, Shropshire, and Gloucestershire. In 1638 he was appointed sheriff of Herefordshire and reported to the privy council the opposition in the county to ship money. 
In April 1642 Lingen was one of the Herefordshire justices who signed a letter defending the Church of England, directed to the county's MPs, declaring their resistance to parliament's orders because they were not sanctioned by the king. In 1643 he was again sheriff and in June he was one of the commissioners of array ordered by the king to assist the local commander, Sir William Vavasour, in raising forces in Herefordshire. He had soon collected 1200 foot and 200 horse and had agreed to raise $1200 per month from the county in local taxes. In July 1643 with Vavasour he was engaged in the siege of Brampton Bryan Castle, Herefordshire, held by Lady Brilliana Harley, and he took sole command when Vavasour was summoned to the siege of Gloucester. News of the royalist defeat there and a lack of ordnance compelled Lingen to raise the siege and he retired to Knighton where he was attacked by Lady Brilliana's forces. Subsequently he withdrew to Hereford, which was garrisoned with 700 troops, and occupied the earl of Kent's property, Goodrich Castle, in order to strengthen the line of the Wye against the parliamentarian forces at Gloucester. 
Early in 1644 Lingen, with the other senior officers at Hereford, wrote to Prince Rupert, saying that he could no longer serve under Vavasour because his command had been incorrectly drawn up. In December Rupert appointed Barnabus Scudamore governor of Hereford and to consolidate his position made him sheriff in Lingen's place. The 'able Lingen' was left in command of Goodrich but he warned Rupert that Herefordshire was 'much ruined by plunder and quarter' through the passing of troops from north Wales to Bristol (Hutton, 136; Herefs. RO, M70). In March 1645 Herefordshire was paralysed by the rising of the Clubmen who resisted the demands made upon them by the royalist garrisons. Lingen's home at Freen's Court was attacked and he was forced to promise $1000 in compensation for the injuries he had inflicted on the county. With Rupert's arrival the rising was suppressed. 
In July 1645 Lingen was knighted when the king visited Hereford and relieved it of the Scottish siege. Lingen was in Hereford when the city was surprised by Colonel Birch on the morning of 18 December 1645. He escaped across the frozen river and shut himself up in Goodrich Castle with 200 'cavaliers' and 'bold riders' (Hutchinson, 72). Birch was granted a pension of $50 by parliament from Sir Henry's estate. The latter maintained his forces by forcibly requisitioning supplies from his neighbours. During the two years in which Lingen garrisoned Goodrich nearly $300 of damage was done to Kent's estate. Birch made an effort to storm Goodrich Castle on the night of 9 March 1646, but succeeded only in burning down the stables and outhouses. During the temporary absence of Birch, Lingen, with a mere handful of comrades, attempted the recovery of Hereford. Finding little support in the city, he returned to Goodrich which was reinvested by Birch. 'The last of the royalist warlords' surrendered on 31 July 1646 only after the walls of the castle had been battered down by a large cannon called Roaring Meg which Birch had had made in the Forest of Dean (Hutton, 199). According to tradition the garrison marched out to a lively tune called, after their leader, 'Sir Harry Lingen's Fancy' or 'Delight', which was 'long used in the neighbourhood in the dances of the peasantry' (Webb, 2.280). 
Lingen spent two months in prison at Hereford, but petitioned on 1 October 1646 to compound for his estate, which was valued at $936 per annum. He was still popular in Hereford and when he reappeared in the city -- contrary to his parole, wearing his sword -- he caused a riot but was considered too dangerous to arrest. In November Lingen was obliged to take the covenant and a few days later the negative oath restraining him from any further attempt against parliament. 
In August 1648, with the outbreak of the second civil war, Lingen received a commission from the prince of Wales to foment a rising in Shropshire, Staffordshire, Worcestershire, and Herefordshire. Several strongholds were to have been seized, but the plot was detected by Andrew Yarranton, governor of Hartlebury in Worcestershire, and measures were taken to suppress it. However, Lingen drew together 400 men and surprised a group of horse under Sir Edward Harley near Leominster in September, taking eighty prisoners, but two or three days later he was overthrown between Radnor and Montgomeryshire by the forces of Harley and Sir Richard Hopton, and all the captives were recovered. Lingen himself, seriously wounded, was captured and confined in Powis Castle, Montgomeryshire. The House of Commons ordered him to be banished on 10 November 1648, but the sentence was revoked on 13 December following. He was ultimately obliged to sell a portion of his estates. The fine levied by parliament upon his property amounted to $6350, and it had been heavily taxed by the maintenance of a regiment of horse. Sir Robert Harley was authorized to recompense himself for his losses out of Lingen's property, but through his son Edward he generously returned the schedule, waiving all right or title to the estates which it had conferred upon him. 
Lingen retired to Stoke Edith, Herefordshire, which became his principal home. He was elected MP for Hereford on 20 November 1660 and again in April 1661. The second election was subject to an inquiry by the committee on elections and privileges, which quashed it, but Lingen was returned again. He was an inactive MP, but in 1661 was appointed to the committees on bills for confirming public acts and restoring advowsons. 
Lingen died of smallpox at Gloucester on his way home from London, and was buried at Stoke Edith on 22 January 1662. In consideration of Lingen's heavy losses his widow was authorized by a royal warrant of November 1663 to receive $10,000, but little of this seems to have materialized. In 1670 Stoke Edith was sold to Paul Foley and the rest of Sir Henry's estate was divided among his daughters and their husbands. 


@@@@@


doc= 16730


Linley, Francis (1770/71-1800), composer and music-seller, was born in Doncaster. Although he was blind from birth, he received a good education, and studied music under Edward Miller, organist of Doncaster parish church from 1756 to 1807. About 1790 Linley held the post of organist at St James's Chapel, Pentonville, London, and about the same time he married a wealthy blind lady. In 1796 they bought the business of Bland, a music-seller in Holborn, but their commercial and domestic affairs did not prosper. His wife left him, and Linley went to America, where he remained for several years; he returned to Doncaster in 1799. 
Linley's compositions and compilations include 'Three Sonatas for Pianoforte and Flute', op. 1; 'Thirty Familiar Airs for Two German Flutes', with prefatory remarks (1791); 'Three Solos for the German Flute, with Accompaniment for Violoncello'; 'Through groves and flowery fields' (1796?), 'When angry nations' (1796?), and other songs; and 'A Practical Introduction to the Organ, in Five Parts', of which the twelfth edition appeared about 1810. The last contained a description of the organ, fifteen preludes, eight voluntaries, eight full pieces, eight fugues, and psalms. 
Linley died at his mother's house in Doncaster on 13 September 1800. Beechey reports that an obituary appeared in the 'Doncaster, Nottingham and Lincoln Gazette' on 19 September 1800 stating that Linley was twenty-nine at the time of his death and a freemason. 


@@@@@


doc= 16731


Linley, George (1798-1865), poet and songwriter, was born at Briggate, Leeds, and baptized on 7 February 1798, at St Peter's Church, Leeds, a younger son of James Linley (1764-1812), a tin plate worker, and his wife, Ann (1769-1839), whose maiden name was possibly Townsley. He was educated first by Joshua Eastburn, a Quaker, then at Leeds grammar school; by the age of sixteen he was an ensign in the 3rd West Yorkshire militia. His service took him to Doncaster and Dublin. He had stirred up antagonistic feelings in Leeds by attacking local dignitaries in lampooning verses in the 'Leeds Intelligencer', and 'bolted to London in a huff' (Spark, 'God bless'). On 4 April 1824, at St Cuthbert's Church in Edinburgh, he married Violet, the youngest daughter of the orientalist Dr John Borthwick Gilchrist (1759-1841). About 1826 he was reported to be a partner in a mercantile firm in Leith, but he soon returned to London. He and his wife had at least four children, three of whom were christened there: Julia ('bap'. 1832), Mary Ann ('bap'. 1834), and Violet Olivia ('bap'. 1837). He also had at least one son, George ['see below']. 
Once established in London, Linley proved that he was, in his own words, 'addicted to poetry' (Spark, 'God bless'), by his prolific outpouring of song lyrics, hymns, ballads, musical arrangements of nursery rhymes and folk-songs, and more ambitiously, operatic works, for which he sometimes wrote both words and music. He wrote the lyrics and/or music of several hundred songs between 1830 and 1865. Many of these had considerable contemporary popularity: his obituarist in the 'Leeds Mercury' (29 September 1865) gives particular mention to 'Thou art gone from my gaze', 'Ever of thee', and 'Little Nell'. These works are marked by a pronounced sentimentality, somewhat at odds with the aggressively satirical tone of Linley's other poetical works, 'Musical Cynics of London' (1862; reprinted 1862) and 'The Modern Hudibras' (1864; enlarged edn, 1864). In the former work he interpolates prose passages among the heroic couplets; a main target of his satire is Henry Fothergill Chorley, music critic of 'The Athenaeum'. Linley was unrepentant that some people had 'hinted at an undue severity' towards Chorley: he refers to the 'malignant ravings' of Chorley, defending his poem as 'retributive justice' (Preface, 2nd edn). 'The Modern Hudibras' is more wide-ranging in its satirical attacks -- including references to his native Yorkshire. Both poems are characterized by awkward rhymes and laboured movement, and Linley's attempts at grander musical forms were no more successful. His first such undertaking was to write the music and songs for 'Francesca Doria' which was produced on 3 March 1849 at the Princess's Theatre, London. This was followed by 'The Toymaker' (1861), an adaptation of Adams' 'La poupee de Nuremberg', performed at Covent Garden Theatre on 19 November. 'Law versus Love', a one-act comedietta, was performed at the Princess's Theatre on 6 December 1862. Linley also wrote a number of librettos, including that for Balfe's 'Catherine Grey', the first English opera without spoken dialogue. Most of this material, however, has been relegated to the realms of musical history. Perhaps the most enduring of Linley's compositions was the song 'God Bless the Prince of Wales'; he is said to have suggested ideas for the musical setting to its composer, Henry Brinley Richards. Richards earned $100 for the composition, from which sum $10 was given to Linley. Linley appears to have had no musical training and thus the limited nature of his achievements may be viewed with greater tolerance. 
Linley died at his home, Alfred Cottage, Victoria Road, Kensington, after prolonged illness, on 10 September 1865 and was buried on 15 September at Kensal Green cemetery. He was survived by his wife. His son 


@@@@@


doc= 16732


George Linley (bap. 1834, d. 1869), poet, was baptized on 29 September 1834 at St Phillip's, Birmingham. He followed in his father's footsteps as an aspiring poet. He published 'The Goldseeker and other Poems' (1860), based on his travels in Australia, and dedicated to the duke of Argyll, and 'Old Saws Newly Set' (1864), a collection of fables. On 4 October 1862 he married Emma, the younger sister of Sims Reeves, singer. He died on 28 April 1869, aged thirty-three. 


@@@@@


doc= 16733


Maria Linley (bap. 1763, d. 1784), singer, was the eighth child of Thomas and Mary Linley, baptized on 10 October 1763 at St James's, Bath. She was evidently prodigiously talented, if Garrick was attempting to engage her at twelve. Sheridan wrote to Linley that Garrick was 'particularly stimulated by the Reputation of what Maria promises to be, in whom He hopes to forestall at least another Mrs. S.' ('Letters of Richard Brinsley Sheridan', 3.295), adding that 'whatever you 'did' get by Betsey -- and what more you 'might' have got... you 'may' get and if you rely only on yourself, certainly 'will' get by Maria' (ibid., 3.303). Maria's sexual orientation is uncertain; Mary's letters seem to suggest that her headstrong sister may have had an affair with 'the well-timber'd [Miss] Troward' (Black, 133), and she occasionally dressed in men's clothing. Maria sang in the Drury Lane oratorios from 1776 to 1783, but in 1784 contracted a fever that led to her death at Bath on 5 September 1784. Her brother William told Michael Kelly that 'After one of the severest paroxysms of the dreadful complaint, she suddenly rose up in her bed, and began the song of 'I know that my Redeemer liveth' in as full and clear a tone as when in perfect health' (Kelly, 238). The 'Gentleman's Magazine''s obituary stated: 'Her death is a loss almost irreparable to the musical world... The union of a sweet voice, correct judgement, extensive compass, and, above all, beauty of mind and person distinguished this much-lamented maid' ('GM', 1st ser., 54/2, 1784, 717). 


@@@@@


doc= 16734


Mary Linley (1758-1787), known as Polly, made her first London stage appearance at Covent Garden in 1769 as Sally in George Colman's 'Man and Wife', playing her part 'with great humour and vivacity' ('Freeholder's Magazine', Oct 1769, quoted in 'A Nest of Nightingales', 79). She was principally a singer, however, and after a brief period at a boarding-school in Bristol or Wells toured with her family, appearing in a variety of oratorios and concerts from 1771. Mary was always overshadowed by Elizabeth: even in looks, Frances Burney exclaimed, she was 'handsome, but 'nothing' near her sister' ('Early Journals and Letters', 3.226). Garrick tried to contract Mary and Maria for Drury Lane theatre in 1775, in exchange for a seven- or fourteen-year contract co-managing the theatre oratorios for Linley: he wrote to Colman from Bath of a secret to 'make your hairs stand on End! -- I believe I may engage the blood of the Linleys!' ('Letters', 3.1003). Although Sheridan agreed with Linley that Mary's 'Talents for the Stage... are undoubted' ('Letters of Richard Brinsley Sheridan', 3.305), he persuaded Linley that acting careers would be improper, especially given his daughters' musical abilities: 'Polly is certainly at present considered 'here' as the best 'Oratorio' Singer there now is, and tho' her Sister Maria may come to surpass her in some things -- She will always be respectable and in the first Line' (ibid., 3.303). Mary sang in her father's Drury Lane oratorios until 1779. The 'Morning Chronicle' for 24 February 1776 reported that 'Miss Linley, last night, in Acis and Galatea, gave every delight that the ear, the heart, or understanding could receive from music... Miss Linley's manner of delivering Recitative is peculiarly distinct and sensible... Her voice is clear and melodious, and capable of the truest expression.' She ceased her singing career when she married, at St Clement Danes on 26 July 1780, Richard Tickell (1751-1793), a sometime playwright and political pamphleteer, and a practical joker suited to her own witty temperament. The Tickells initially lived at Wells, but when Tickell was made a commissioner of the stamp office they moved to rooms in Hampton Court, although they also kept a house in Brook Street and then Queen Anne Street, Westminster. If Tickell and Sheridan were close friends (Mary jokingly accused her husband of 'Sheridanisms'; 'A Nest of Nightingales', 79), Mary and Elizabeth were closer, and supported each other against their husbands' thoughtlessness and irresponsibility. The Tickells had three children, Elizabeth Ann 


@@@@@


doc= 16735


Ozias Thurstan Linley (bap. 1765, d. 1831), composer and Church of England clergyman, was baptized at Bath Abbey on 22 August 1765, the ninth child of Thomas and Mary Linley. He was left in Bath when the Linleys moved to London, as were William and Jane (the only Linley daughter not trained as a professional singer, though she sang very well). He lodged with his paternal grandparents, and was taught music and mathematics by William Herschel. Ozias demonstrated early 'Traits of a strong understanding', though his father was 'apprehensive of his being very deficient in common sense' (Lubbock, 43), and indeed he was later known for his absentmindedness and eccentricity. Although he composed some liturgical pieces (some surviving in the Royal College of Music, London, with work by his brother William), Ozias preferred theoretical to practical music. He matriculated at Corpus Christi College, Oxford, on 19 March 1785 and proceeded BA in 1789. He was made a minor canon of Norwich Cathedral in 1790 through the offices of his beloved sister Elizabeth. In 1807 and 1815 he received two livings from the cathedral, those of Stoke Holy Cross, Norfolk, and Trowse with Lakenham, Norfolk, respectively, but in 1816 moved to Dulwich College, Dulwich, Surrey, where he became junior fellow and organist. He died at Dulwich College on 6 March 1831, and was buried in the college chapel. He was unmarried. 


@@@@@


doc= 16736


Thomas Linley junior (1756-1778), violinist and composer, was born on 5 May 1756, probably at Linley's house on Abbey Green, Bath. Known to his family and friends as Tom, according to Matthew Cooke he had an 'early and strong passion for Music' (Highfill, Burnim & Langhans, 'BDA', 9.316). He was taught the violin by David Richards, of the Bath assembly rooms band, and was already singing and playing the violin in public in 1763. He then went to London to study with William Boyce for five years. In 1767 he made a much praised London stage debut at Covent Garden in Thomas Hull's 'The Fairy Favour'. In 1768 Tom went to Florence to spend three years under Pietro Nardini. There he met and befriended the young Mozart, and Burney said that the two were 'talked of all over Italy, as the most promising geniusses of this age' ('Musical Tour', ed. Scholes, 184). Tom returned to England to act as soloist and leader in his father's concerts, both on the oratorio circuit and, from 1776, in London. His compositions also excited attention: by 1776 about twenty violin concertos were added to six sonatas written in 1768 under Boyce's tutelage. His first anthem, 'Let God arise', written for the 1773 Three Choirs festival in Worcester, achieved particular praise for its technical sophistication. For 'The Duenna' he wrote the overture and several songs, and arranged two-thirds of the music. Once attached to Drury Lane he wrote a 'Lyric Ode' on Shakespeare's supernatural creatures (1776), incidental music for 'The Tempest' (1777), and a comic opera 'The Cady of Bagdad' with a libretto by Abraham Portal (1778). His short oratorio 'The Song of Moses' (1777) was described as one of the 'finest specimens of the Simple, Affecting, Grand and Sublime styles that ever was produced by the pen of a Musician' (Highfill, Burnim & Langhans, 'BDA', 9.317). W. T. Parke nominated Tom Linley to the Royal Society of Musicians in 1777. He seemed to be in the early stages of a brilliant career; but his life was to be dramatically and tragically cut short. In summer 1778 he accepted a position as music teacher to the daughter of Peregrine Bertie, third duke of Ancaster, at Ancaster's country estate of Grimsthorpe in Lincolnshire. On 5 August 1778 he fell in the lake at Grimsthorpe while boating and was drowned. He was buried in the Ancaster family vault at Edenham parish church, Lincolnshire. He was unmarried. 


@@@@@


doc= 16737


Linley, Thomas (1733-1795), impresario and composer, was born at Badminton, Gloucestershire, on 17 January 1733 and baptized at Badminton parish church on 20 January, the eldest child of the carpenter William Linley ('bap'. 1704, died 1792) and his wife, Maria (1701-1792). He was evidently musically precocious, as on the family's move to Bath in 1744 he was apprenticed to the organist of Bath Abbey, Thomas Chilcot. As a child he may have studied in London with Domenico Paradies. 
Linley sang -- in a 'particular natural stile' ('Letters of Richard Brinsley Sheridan', 1.20) -- and played the harpsichord in Bath's Assembly Rooms concerts, directed by Chilcot, from 1755; after Chilcot's death in 1766 he ran the concerts. Linley's income must initially have derived chiefly from his numerous students, either visitors to Bath (such as Frances Sheridan) or young apprentices such as his own children. On 11 May 1752 Linley married Mary Johnson (1729-1820), whose 'natural talents for musick were nearly equal to his own' ('A Nest of Nightingales', 50), according to their lodger, Ozias Humphry. 
All eight Linley children who survived infancy (four did not) proved musically talented, and the three eldest in particular were greatly admired, Thomas (Tom) ['see below'], as a violinist and later a composer, Elizabeth Ann Linley and Mary ['see below'] as singers. The children regularly appeared in Linley's benefit concerts, and he boasted in 1767 that 'to merit their future Favour, it shall be his constant Study, by every Effort in his Power, to promote their Improvement' ('Bath Chronicle', 14 May 1767). Linley was both praised for nurturing his children's abilities and criticized for working them too hard; the flight of his eldest daughter, Elizabeth, to a French convent in 1772 may partly have stemmed from overwork, and on returning to England she spoke of Linley's 'promise' (Rae, 1.191) of fewer engagements. In 1772 Richard Brinsley Sheridan told his father that 'Mr. Linley and his whole family, down to the seven year olds are to support one set [of oratorios] at the new [Assembly] Rooms, and a band and Singers from London another at the old' ('Letters of Richard Brinsley Sheridan', 1.23). 
Other Bath musicians resented Linley's success: in 1771 Francis Fleming wrote that 'by dint of conge's and scrapes, and the plea of a young family to maintain, [Linley] excited the pity and compassion of the company so compleatly, that it became a customary phrase among them to say 'Let us go to poor L -- y's concert;' by this means he 'never failed' filling the concert room' (Fleming, 3.98), while others were effectively put out of business. Linley's appointment in 1771 as director of music at the New Assembly Rooms attracted particular resentment, both as the new rooms openly rivalled the old, and as Linley excluded four of his seven Pump Room players (including Fleming) from the new ten-strong band. Within months, the new band member William Herschel quarrelled with Linley and left the band, ostensibly over the lack of music stands, but actually because Linley refused to allow Elizabeth to sing in Herschel's benefit concert. Herschel, a composer and oboist from Hanover, had gone to Bath in 1767 to act as organist to the newly opened Octagon Chapel, and Linley responded with his own proprietary chapel, St Margaret's, in 1772. Linley was also director for the Long Room at Bristol Hotwells, and the Bath rivalry continued during Bristol's oratorio seasons of 1772-4. Linley eventually triumphed in 1775, winning a monopoly of the oratorio seasons at both the old and the new rooms, his band alternating between the two. 
As the family travelled farther afield -- to perform in Oxford, at the Three Choirs festivals, and in London oratorios -- Linley could use demand for his children, particularly the now famous Elizabeth, to his advantage. In his letter of October 1770 to the Covent Garden theatre manager, George Colman, Linley agreed that a daughter (probably Elizabeth) could sing in the 1771 oratorios (for the very high fee of '200 Guineas, and a clear Benefit'), but: 'It is contrary to my Inclination that my Daughter should sing at either House for the Oratorio's, or anywhere else in London, where I am not myself a Principal in the Undertaking -- for were I properly settled in London, I think I could conduct the Business of Oratorios myself, whenever an opportunity offered for me to attempt it... In regard to engaging her as an Actress, I shall never do that, unless it were to ensure myself and Family a solid Settlement, by being admitted to purchase a share in the Patent on reasonable Terms... wch I perceive no probability of obtaining -- and I shall never lay myself at the mercy of my Children, especially when their very power of being service to me depends so entirely upon Chance. (Colman, 150-1)' In 1773 John Christopher Smith and John Stanley contracted Elizabeth, Mary, and Tom for the Drury Lane season of Lenten oratorios; the 'Bath Chronicle' for 1 April reported that 'The two Linleys carry all before them', estimating receipts at over $500 a night. The sisters' fee for the Foundling Hospital concert that year was an unprecedented $80. The 'Bath Chronicle' for 19 April estimated that Linley had made nearly $10,000 by Elizabeth's voice; Elizabeth, however, had just married Richard Brinsley Sheridan, and he had terminated her singing career. In November 1773 Linley declined the Pantheon's request for Mary to sing (Sheridan having had first refusal for Elizabeth), but told Sheridan that he would have liked to 'make the People here [Bath], sensible, that I am not absolutely dependent upon them, which they seem mightily inclined to believe, as Your Wife is no more to appear in Publick' (Gillaspie, 226). 
In 1774, when Smith retired from co-managing the Drury Lane oratorios, George III recommended Sheridan to succeed him (evidently hoping Elizabeth would sing again); Sheridan declined, but proposed Linley instead, who, he said, had 'twenty Mrs. Sheridans more' ('Letters of Richard Brinsley Sheridan', 1.86). Garrick offered Linley a seven- or fourteen-year contract to co-manage the Drury Lane oratorios, as part of which his daughters Mary and Maria ['see below'] would join the Drury Lane company. Linley rejected this offer, but negotiations were renewed and from 1776 he ran the oratorios with Stanley. The latter retired in 1784; Linley's subsequent colleagues were Samuel Arnold until 1793 and Stephen Storace in 1794. The eleven-night season was generally profitable, and if in 1779 it cleared about $500, in 1794, in a new Drury Lane theatre which opened on the first oratorio night, profits were over $4000. 
On retiring in 1776 David Garrick sold his share of Drury Lane's patent to Linley and Sheridan. Linley was praised as 'an Example of great Merit & Industry' ('Letters', 3.1114), who 'will be of great Service -- Sing Song is much the Fashion, & his knowledge of Musick & preparing fit Subjects for the Stage, will be a Strength, that the Proprietors may depend upon, when the Heroines are prankish' (ibid., 3.1063). Linley for his part wrote to Garrick that he wished to 'remove myself from the place I am in, where I do not see the least chance of being any other than a Servant to ye [Assembly] Rooms' (Highfill, Burnim & Langhans, 'BDA', 9.312). When the contract was signed, Linley and Sheridan paid $10,000 each and Dr Ford, court physician, paid $15,000; Linley's share came from mortgages on his Bath properties and on his share in the theatre. The Linleys moved to Norfolk Street in London, leaving their three youngest children, Ozias Thurstan ['see below'], Jane Nash (1768-1806), and William Linley, in Bath, and when Sheridan took over from Garrick as manager of Drury Lane, Linley became musical director for $500 per annum, and his wife became wardrobe mistress for $1 10's'. a week, in which capacity her parsimony grew legendary. 
Insecurity may have played its part in preventing Linley from taking up Garrick's first offer: in 1775 he claimed he had 'great reason to be diffident of my own abilities and genius' ('Private Correspondence', 2.101). His first venture in theatrical composition, for Thomas Hull's 'The Royal Merchant' at Covent Garden, in 1767, had failed. One diarist noted that 'The music may be good, but the piece is trifling and childish' ('The London Stage, 1660-1800', pt 4, 3.1299). While in the Drury Lane post, Linley composed the music for several dialogue operas, pantomimes, and other pieces. Several of these were works written by his sons-in-law: he composed seven songs for Sheridan's 'The Duenna' (Covent Garden, 1775); wrote one song for Sheridan's 'The School for Scandal' (1777); wrote the music for 'The Camp' (1778, attributed to Sheridan and Richard Tickell), and for Sheridan's 'Monody on the Death of Garrick' (1779); added songs for Sheridan's revision of Henry Woodward's 'Fortunatus' (1780); wrote for Sheridan's 'Robinson Crusoe' (1781), though Watkins attributes the music to Elizabeth Sheridan (Watkins, 2.93); and wrote for Tickell's 'The Carnival of Venice' (1781). He wrote occasional music -- particularly songs -- for a variety of other pieces. 
His post also required him to arrange others' music. Linley arranged, for example, choruses and accompaniments for Matthew Locke's music for 'Macbeth' (1776), for Purcell's and Arne's music for Dryden's 'King Arthur' in John Philip Kemble's 1784 production, 'Arthur and Emmeline', and for Kemble's version of 'The Tempest' (1789). He adapted Andre Gretry's music for Sir George Collier's 'Selima and Azor' (1776) and for John Burgoyne's 'Richard Coeur de Lion' (1786). He compiled and wrote for several of James Cobb's pieces, 'The Strangers at Home' (1785), 'Hurly-Burley' (1785), 'Love in the East' (1788), and 'The Haunted Tower' (1789). Charles Burney said that in his theatrical duties Linley 'gave more satisfaction, and escaped censure, public and private, by his probity and steady conduct, more than is often allowed to the governor of such a numerous and froward family' (Rees), no doubt intending a contrast with Linley's wayward son-in-law Sheridan. Linley was admitted to the Royal Society of Musicians in 1780. 
Linley's forte was vocal music, and the Drury Lane debuts of his singing students, such as Anna Maria Crouch, Ann Field, and Charles Dignum, regularly featured his songs. As well as individual songs, Linley published 'Elegies for Three Voices' ('c'.1770) and 'Twelve Ballads' (1780). In 1800 his widow published 'The posthumous vocal works of Mr. Linley and Mr. T. Linley, consisting of songs, duetts, cantatas, madrigals and glees'. Linley also published a series of letters 'On music' (in fact, on singing) in the 'European Magazine' (1792). Of the 'Elegies' -- of which Linley was so proud that he was painted with a copy -- Burney said that Linley had 'stedfastly adhered to a style of [his] own, which seems to have been formed upon the melodies of our best old English masters, and those of the last age, that were most worthy of being preserved' (Burney, 'Hist. mus.', 2.1016-17). 
Linley was widely respected as a singing teacher. Michael Kelly praised his 'masterly instructions' (Kelly, 164), while William Thomas Parke described his teaching abilities as 'almost unrivalled in England' (Parke, 1.203). No doubt his 'grave' manner contributed to his success: Anna Maria Crouch described him as 'dark, stern, and gigantic; I tremble sometimes when I look at him' (Young, 1.84). At least some of Linley's gravity was due to the deaths of his children, particularly Tom in 1778, Samuel (a talented oboist, who died from a fever caught at sea) in 1781, Maria in 1784, Mary in 1787, and Elizabeth in 1792. Mary Young said that, at a play rehearsal after Tom's death, when one of the characters: 'gave an impressive description of a promising young man... the feelings of Mr. Linley could not be repressed, the tears of mental agony rolled down his cheeks; nor did he weep alone, the cause of his distress was too well known not to obtain the tears of sympathy from many who beheld 'his' flow so fast. (Young, 1.79)' Linley became increasingly melancholy and unwell (suffering from giddiness and loss of memory) in his latter years. He died on 19 November 1795 at 11 Southampton Street, Westminster, and was buried with his daughters Elizabeth and Mary on 29 November 1795 in Wells Cathedral. 
It was reported that Linley left a fortune of $25,000 on his death (Boswell, 'Life', 2.521). In his will, made in 1788, he left to his 'Dear Wife' most of his household possessions and $300 per annum, also making lesser annual financial provision for his surviving children (Elizabeth, Ozias, William, and Jane), and for his grandsons Richard and Samuel Tickell. Elizabeth was left his harpsichord, music books, and manuscripts; his sons Ozias and William his other musical instruments; his estate at Didmarton, Gloucestershire, was left to Ozias; bequests of $100 were made to his grandson Thomas Sheridan, his granddaughter Elizabeth Tickell, and his daughter Jane. The 'Gentleman's Magazine's' obituary gave measured praise: 'His works are not distinguished by any striking marks of original genius, but they uniformly manifest taste, feeling, and a full knowledge of his art. The publick are indebted to him for many beautiful airs; he has harmonized with great judgement the melodies of former writers; and, if it was not in his power to astonish by sublime effects, his compositions always soothe and charm by delicacy, simplicity and tenderness. ('GM', 1st ser., 65/2, 1795, 973)' Linley's eldest son, 


(Betty; 1781-1860)
, Richard Brinsley (1783-1805), and Samuel (1785-1817). When Mary died from tuberculosis at Bristol Hotwells, Gloucestershire, on 27 July 1787, the children were entrusted to Elizabeth's care; Betty became her ward. Mary was buried in Wells Cathedral. 






@@@@@


doc= 16738


Linley, William (1771-1835), composer and author, youngest son of Thomas Linley the elder (1733-1795) and his wife, Mary Johnson (or Johnston), was born on 27 January 1771 in Bath. Five years later his parents moved to London. In 1780 William was sent to school at Harrow (where his sister Elizabeth ['see 'Linley, Elizabeth Ann] and her husband, Richard Brinsley Sheridan, were then living). In February 1785 he was transferred to St Paul's School, and later was sent to C. F. Abel for counterpoint lessons; he also studied, so he himself said, with J. B. Cramer. His father taught him singing, however, and Coleridge, hearing him in a song of Purcell's in 1797, promptly made him the subject of a sonnet. In 1790 (and with the backing, it is said, of Charles James Fox), Linley gained a place as a writer in the East India Company and sailed for Madras, where, in 1791, he was appointed assistant under the collector of Madura and Dindigul, and, two years later, deputy secretary to the military board. His health soon gave way, however, and he was obliged to return to England, where he arrived just in time to witness his father's death in November 1795. 
On 18 January 1796, a pantomime, 'Harlequin Captive, or, The Magick Fire', was successfully produced at Drury Lane, and in April Linley also contributed some incidental music to W. H. Ireland's Shakespearian hoax 'Vortigern'. It was no doubt on the strength of his performance so far that Sheridan made him composer at Drury Lane later that year. But everything else Linley attempted over the next four seasons failed miserably. Among these were a comic opera, 'The Honeymoon' (1797), and an entertainment, 'The Pavilion' (1799) (in which Michael Kelly had a leading role), for both of which Linley wrote not only the music but also the words. Though Sheridan had apparently agreed that he should be paid $7 a week together with 2 per cent of the net profits, it seems that Linley saw very little of this; by 1800 his circumstances were so much reduced that he was more or less forced to return to India. 
Earlier that year Linley's first novel, 'Forbidden Apartments' (in two volumes), had appeared, and shortly after his arrival in Madras he began another, 'The Adventures of Ralph Reybridge', which came out in four volumes in 1809. In 1801 he became paymaster at Vellore, and in 1805 sub-treasurer and mint-master to the presidency at Fort St George -- two posts which were evidently sufficiently lucrative to enable him only a year or so later to return to London, where, with his inherited interest in the Drury Lane Theatre (and other properties left to him by his father), he was able, as a gentleman amateur, to devote himself to writing and composition. During this second spell of Indian service he wrote a fair amount of music, and also a number of 'Sonnets and odes, elegies, ballads, and sketches' which later (in 1819) found their way into print (together with an account of the life and writings of Charles Leftley, a school friend at St Paul's). 
Linley's musical output is almost entirely vocal, and consists mainly of songs and glees, only a relatively small number of which were ever published. Some are settings of his own words, and some of words by Thomas Moore (whose friendship over many years he also enjoyed). First to appear were six glees to words by Leftley, issued under the title 'Flights of Fancy' in 1797, four of which were reprinted in his final set of 'Eight Glees' (1832). A two-volume anthology of Shakespearian songs by Linley and various other composers (1815-16) is by far his most important publication. A good many songs and glees, most of them individually dated, survive in manuscript. His church music was nearly all written for St Margaret's Chapel, Bath (of which he was a proprietor). A proposed book of critical observations on music offered to the publishers Cadell and Davies in 1811 never materialized. 
On his return to London, Linley evidently became a good friend of Samuel Wesley, who later dedicated an organ work to him, although their friendship eventually soured. He resumed his membership of the Concentores Sodales, a vocal club at whose second meeting (on 23 June 1798) he had been present; a mason of several years' standing, he also joined the Catch and Glee clubs, and from 1809 until his death he was a member of the Madrigal Society and the Noblemen and Gentlemen's Catch Club as well. In February 1810 he was elected to the Sublime Society of Beefsteaks. The last of his line, he died unmarried at his chambers at 3 Furnival's Inn, Holborn, London, on 6 May 1835, and was buried in the family vault at St Paul's, Covent Garden. A memorial tablet to him was erected in the church. His property he left to the only daughter of his sister, Mrs Mary Tickell, and several family portraits by Lawrence, Gainsborough, and others he bequeathed to Dulwich College, of which his clergyman brother Ozias had been organist-fellow. 


@@@@@


doc= 16739


Linnecar, Richard (1722-1800), writer, was born at Wakefield and was for some time postmaster there. In 1763 he was elected one of the coroners for the West Riding of Yorkshire. For many years he was a prominent freemason. Linnecar was initiated into the order at Gibraltar in 1743 and then later held the office of master of the lodge of unanimity at Wakefield for twenty-six years. In 1787 his portrait was painted for the lodge by Singleton. It was later engraved by T. Barrow and reproduced on a masonic banner that remains at the Wakefield lodge. 
Linnecar published by subscription in 1789 'Miscellaneous Works', containing two comedies, 'The Lucky Escape' and 'The Plotting Wives', the latter of which was performed at York on 6 February 1769; a tragedy, 'The Generous Moor', 'founded upon a true story' which Linnecar apparently heard in Gibraltar (Linnecar, 105); some prose 'Strictures on Freemasonry' and numerous songs and other trifles in verse. The work was dedicated to John Berkenhout and the author's other 'generous subscribers' (ibid., unpaginated dedication). Linnecar's substantial list of subscribers induced his unenthusiastic anonymous reviewer in the 'Critical Review' 'to suppose that Mr. Linnecar has some other claim on public favour than his literary abilities' (1792, 229). 
Linnecar died while holding an inquest at Swillington, Yorkshire, on 14 March 1800, aged seventy-eight ('GM', 1800, 391). 


@@@@@


doc= 16740


Linnell, John (1792-1882), landscape and portrait painter, was born on 16 June 1792 in Plum Tree Street, Bloomsbury, London, the fourth and youngest child of James Linnell (1759-1836), woodcarver, framemaker, and picture dealer, and his wife, Mary Susannah, 'nee' Welshman (died 1825). Linnell had a long and very successful career as an artist, but modern assessments of his importance centre on his early work, and on his relationships with his fellow artists William Blake and Samuel Palmer, who became his son-in-law in 1837. 
Linnell claimed that he had no formal education, but learned to paint by copying works by George Morland for his father. He was introduced to artists by the latter, and 'c'.1804 made visits to Benjamin West, who looked at his sketches and offered advice. In his diary entries for 9 and 14 November 1806 Farington mentioned that his small-scale oil studies had attracted the attention of David Wilkie, Benjamin Haydon, and Sir George Beaumont. In 1805 Linnell entered the Royal Academy Schools, and at about this time he became a pupil of John Varley. With William Mulready and William Henry Hunt, also pupils of Varley, he made oil sketches from nature along the banks of the Thames, for example, 'Study of Buildings: Sketch from Nature' (1806; Tate collection). He was especially close to Mulready, with whom he was to share lodgings between 1809 and 1811. In the evenings, at this early period, 'c'.1805-6, Linnell copied drawings in the house of the art patron Dr Thomas Monro. From 1807 to 1811 he exhibited oil paintings at the Royal Academy and at the British Institution, mainly genre scenes and landscapes which show the influence of seventeenth-century Dutch art, for example, 'The Quoit Players', 1810, which was bought by Sir Thomas Baring for 75 guineas. At the British Institution Linnell won a premium of 50 guineas in 1809 for 'Removing Timber in Autumn'. 
During this period Linnell was apprenticed to his father, having signed an indenture for seven years in 1806. 
In 1811 Linnell left the Academy Schools. His friendship with Cornelius Varley, brother of John, seems to have stimulated both a religious conversion and a new approach to landscape painting in this year. He joined the Baptist church in January 1812, becoming a member of the chapel at Keppel Street, Bloomsbury, and bought drawing instruments which would enable him to transcribe what he saw with scientific accuracy. He read the writings of William Paley, whose natural theology encouraged Linnell, like many other artists of his time, to regard the study of landscape as a valuable response to the work of God. In his subject matter a new interest in working figures is evident, especially in 'Kensington Gravel Pits' (1812; Tate collection). Many of his watercolour studies in this decade adopt unconventional compositions, suggesting a self-consciously haphazard, informal method of constructing landscape, such as 'Brick Kiln, Kensington, 1811-12' (priv. coll.). When the Society of Painters in Water Colours changed its name to the Society of Painters in Oil and Water Colours in 1813, Linnell was a founding member, and contributed fifty-two works (probably all oils) to its exhibitions between 1813 and 1820. Many of these were based on sketching trips made in 1813, 1814, and 1815. In 1813, with George Robert Lewis, he visited north Wales, where he was impressed by the wild scenery, writing many years later, 'I could almost fancy myself living in the times of Jacob and Esau and might expect to meet their flocks' (Linnell, autobiography, 45-6). In 1814 he was in Derbyshire, making drawings for an edition of I. Walton and C. Cotton's 'Compleat Angler', commissioned by the Baptist publisher Samuel Bagster; in 1815 he went to Southampton and the Isle of Wight. The watercolour sketches of this period are remarkably fresh and have been the basis for the reassessment of Linnell's work from the 1970s onwards. Linnell himself, however, seems not to have exhibited them, regarding them as raw material for landscapes in oil. Exhibited landscapes of this time, such as 'The River Kennet Near Newbury' (1815; FM Cam.), follow the sketches closely, implying a commitment to naturalism on Linnell's part. In 1818 he exhibited his first religious painting, 'St John Preaching in the Wilderness'. 
This period of Linnell's life came to an end with his marriage to Mary Ann Palmer (1796-1865, no relation to the artist Samuel Palmer) in 1817. The couple travelled to Scotland for a civil ceremony, Linnell believing that the Church of England one was blasphemous. He had taught himself Greek and Hebrew so that he could read the 'Bible' in the original, since he held that the Authorized Version was corrupt. Just as he went to the fountainhead of nature in his landscape studies, so he felt that he should go to the works of God rather than man in his religious studies. 
In 1818 Linnell was introduced, by George Cumberland junior, to William Blake. Their shared attitudes to art and religion brought about a strong rapport, and Linnell played an important role in Blake's last years. He commissioned the engravings for the 'Book of Job' (1825) in 1823 and the watercolour illustrations to Dante's 'Divine Comedy' (1827) in 1824. He gave Blake, who was often unable to work through illness, a regular income, and arranged his funeral when he died in 1827. Both men were part of a circle of collectors, artists, and writers, which included Mr and Mrs Charles Aders and Henry Crabb Robinson, who were interested in early Renaissance art. Linnell himself bought early paintings in this period of his life, including one attributed to Lucas van Leyden in 1822. Linnell also introduced Blake to Dr Thornton, the Linnell family doctor, in 1819; it was Thornton who commissioned the woodcut illustrations for his translation of Virgil's 'Eclogues', which were to be so much admired by Samuel Palmer. 
Linnell met Palmer in 1822 and introduced him to Blake in 1824. In his notebooks Palmer recorded the advice of both men, which led him away from the conventional watercolour style of his day into a more intense and visionary engagement with landscape. It was Palmer's opinion at this time that 'it pleased God to send Mr Linnell as a good angel from Heaven to pluck me from the pit of modern art' (Palmer, 'Life and Letters', 14). After Blake's death, Linnell made visits to Palmer at Shoreham (August and September 1828 and June 1829) and encouraged him to make studies from nature. Surviving correspondence reveals a stimulating relationship, not without its tensions as Palmer feared naturalism was a diversion from his real mission, which was to paint his inner visions in keeping with the ideas of Blake. However, Linnell commissioned studies from Palmer, thus helping to support him when the younger artist was selling very few pictures. Religious beliefs were to be a growing source of disagreement: Palmer was drawn to high Anglicanism, while Linnell became increasingly low church, breaking with the Baptists in the 1820s, considering membership of the Society of Friends in 1830, and eventually joining the Plymouth Brethren in 1843. In 1848 he left the Plymouth Brethren when his son John was accused by them of heresy, and henceforth belonged to no established religious group. His faith remained strong, however, grounded in his conviction of the necessity of going directly to the source of divine revelation. In later life he published pamphlets expounding his views on the corrupt nature of existing translations of the 'Bible': 'Diatheekee, Covenant not Testament' (1856) and 'Burnt offering not in the Hebrew Bible: shown by a revised version of the first part of Leviticus' (1864). 
Following his marriage in 1817, Linnell's first child, Hannah (who married Samuel Palmer), was born in 1818; by 1835 he had nine children. The need to earn a steady income led him to concentrate on portrait commissions. In 1820, when the Society of Painters in Oil and Water Colours resumed its original title and reverted to showing watercolours only, Linnell resigned and began exhibiting once again at the Royal Academy, where he had pictures almost every year from 1821 to 1881. Between 1824 and 1846 nearly all his exhibits were portraits. His first portrait had been of John Martin, pastor of the Keppel Street Chapel, in 1812: Linnell made and published an engraving, copies of which found a ready market among members of the Baptist church. In the 1820s, however, he acquired royal and aristocratic patronage and painted miniatures, including one of Princess Sophia Matilda (1821; Royal Collection), the daughter of William Henry, duke of Gloucester. Other sitters included the earl of Denbigh (1823), Lady Lyndhurst (1830), the Revd Thomas Malthus (1833), the marquess of Bristol (1835), the marquess of Lansdowne (1840), and Thomas Carlyle (1844). His portraits of William Mulready (1833) and Sir Robert Peel (1838) are in the National Portrait Gallery, London, which also holds a 'Self-Portrait' ('c'.1860). Linnell's portraits show the influence of Renaissance prototypes, as well as that of contemporaries such as Sir Thomas Lawrence: a notable example is the group portrait of 'Lady Torrens and her Family' (1820; Elvehjem Museum of Art, University of Wisconsin, Madison, USA). In addition to commissioned portraits, Linnell made many informal studies of his friends, family, and fellow artists, including Blake and Palmer. There are also portraits of obscure sitters, made in part payment to the craftsmen who worked on the house he had built at 38 Porchester Terrace, Bayswater, in the late 1820s and early 1830s. 
In addition to his work in portraiture and landscape, Linnell was an accomplished copyist and printmaker. Between 1828 and 1834 he executed watercolour drawings of pictures in the National Gallery which were engraved by John Pye and published in 'The British Gallery'. He made several finished copies in oil of works by the old masters, including Titian, Rembrandt, and Raphael, some for his own use, others on commission. In 1834 he published 'Michelangelo's Frescoes in the Sistine Chapel', a series of mezzotints made from drawings in Samuel Rogers's collection which Linnell considered to be Michelangelo's working drawings for the chapel. He also made etchings, engravings, and mezzotints after his own portraits, and mezzotints after paintings by his friends William Collins and John Varley. Linnell acquired a large collection of old master prints, including works by Durer, Holbein, Marcantonio Raimondi, Bonasone, Rembrandt, and Claude. 
In 1821 Linnell put his name down for an associateship of the Royal Academy, and continued trying to get elected until 1842, when he withdrew his name. He suspected that malicious gossip, for which he held John Constable partly to blame, had prevented his election: Linnell and his family had stayed with Constable's friend D. C. Read at Southampton in 1819, Read had accused Linnell of meanness, and Linnell believed that Constable had talked about the matter to academicians. Much later on, in 1867 Linnell was asked if he would agree to his name being put down for an associateship, but refused. By this time Linnell's continued exclusion from membership of the academy was perceived as scandalous: Millais and Eastlake had cited him as an artist who should have been elected, at a government inquiry into the Royal Academy in 1863. Following a further dispute with the academy over their failure to hang a painting in 1867, Linnell wrote a pamphlet, 'The Royal Academy, a National Institution' (1869), which was highly critical of the exclusiveness of the main body of academicians. 
Linnell claimed that he painted portraits to live, but he lived to paint poetical landscapes (Linnell, autobiography, 16); thus, as soon as his finances permitted he moved out into the country and concentrated on landscape painting. 
From 1847 onwards almost all Linnell's exhibits at the Royal Academy were landscapes. Like other successful Victorian artists, he was able to buy land and have a substantial house built: the site he chose was at Redstone Wood, Redhill, in Surrey. Here he painted landscapes which were sold to north of England merchants and industrialists, often through the London dealers Agnews who also had a saleroom in Manchester. His professed ambition was to paint biblical scenes, such as 'The Eve of the Deluge' (1848; Cleveland Museum of Art), which was bought by Joseph Gillott, Birmingham pen manufacturer, for $1000. But most of his patrons preferred pastoral landscapes, especially the harvest scenes, peopled by cheerful, ruddy-cheeked, smock-frocked labourers, which he made his speciality, such as 'Harvest Home, Sunset, the Last Load' (1854; Tate collection). Linnell owned arable fields around his house, which he let out to farmers, and he appreciated the paradox that by painting a scene in one of these fields he could make more money than the farmer would get for his crop (Story, 2.33). As well as being accessible, the subject of harvest was full of symbolic meaning for Linnell, as a demonstration of divine benevolence. 
While Linnell continued to sketch from nature, and to use sketches as the basis for his exhibited pictures, such as 'The Noonday Rest' (1865; Tate collection), his later landscapes are more conventional and idealized than his earlier work. Their Claudian compositions and sketchy handling were somewhat out of step with the tastes of the 1850s, influenced by the Pre-Raphaelites, and dealers repeatedly urged him to give more finish to his paintings. However, his works sold so readily that he had little incentive to change his style: his landscape sketchbook (BM) records that his last landscape was sold 'off the easel' (that is, before being sent to exhibition) for $1000 in 1879, when he was eighty-seven. 
At Redstone Wood, Linnell lived like a patriarch, surrounded by his large family, all of whom painted, James (1823-1905) and William (1826-1906) being important artists in their own right. Linnell baked his own bread and brewed his own beer, and educated the children himself, teaching them to read and write, draw and paint, grind corn and bake bread. In 1865 his first wife died and in 1866 he married Mary Ann (Marion) Budden (died 1886), who survived him. 
In his lifetime Linnell was a successful and much admired artist. However, his strongly held views and his legalistic approach to business and family transactions caused difficulties with some of his relatives and acquaintances. He operated strict business terms, requesting deposits in advance and payment in full on delivery, and insisted on decisions being recorded in writing and signed by all the relevant parties. His relationship with Samuel Palmer, who married his daughter Hannah in 1837, cooled during their Italian honeymoon, and remained problematic. Initially there were tensions because the Palmers stayed away longer than they had planned, and because of the pressures induced by Linnell's commission for them to colour his set of mezzotints of the Sistine Chapel frescoes. Later on, their religious disagreements surfaced, and Palmer came to resent Linnell's interference in the lives of the couple, which was exacerbated by Palmer's failure to earn much through his art. In their lifetimes it was Palmer who struggled while Linnell enjoyed success; in their posthumous reputations, positions have been reversed, and Palmer is now seen as the more original and important of the two artists. 
Like that of many successful Victorian artists, Linnell's reputation has suffered because of new developments in the art of the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, and because of his tendency to repeat a selling formula in his landscapes, the style of which remained very similar from the 1840s to the 1880s. Reassessment of his work since the 1970s has centred on his early landscapes, and especially on the studies from nature shown at the exhibition at Colnaghis in 1973. 
In the literature on Palmer, Linnell often appears as a villain rather than 'a good angel'. Palmer's son, A. H. Palmer, compiled his father's 'Life and Letters' in 1892, and also copied out Linnell's journals, with the intention of writing a biography of Linnell. However, his judgement of Linnell, whom he blamed for his own father's lack of worldly success, became increasingly bitter and has affected subsequent writers on Palmer. In recent years writers on both artists have tried to correct this imbalance and reach a fairer assessment of Linnell's character and achievement. 
John Linnell died at Redstone Wood on 20 January 1882 and was buried at Redhill, Surrey. 


@@@@@


doc= 16741


Linskill, Mary Jane (1840-1891), novelist, born in Blackburns Yard, Whitby, Yorkshire, on 13 December 1840, was the eldest child of Thomas Henry Linskill (1809-1874), watchmaker and constable of the town, and his wife, Mary Ann Tireman (1814-1903). Mary Linskill attended a private school in Bagdale, Whitby. She was apprenticed to a milliner and later worked in shops in the midlands. She then became a governess, and while so employed in Leeds her first work, 'Tales of the North Riding' (1871), written under the pseudonym Stephen Yorke, was published. On the death of her father she returned to Whitby and tried to establish herself as a writer in order to maintain her mother and younger siblings who had been left impoverished. By her own efforts she raised herself out of the unproductive, non-creative, inarticulate majority which surrounded her. The noisy ebb and flow of communal life in a Whitby yard was torture to her sensitive nature, and only in the very early hours of the day would the isolation and peace of silence envelop and enrich her. But if the life of the yard gave no support to the creative mood, it did supply the turbulent background against which her spirit enacted its essential creative role. Unsupported by a husband or a father, she managed to produce three major novels ('Between the Heather and the Northern Sea' in 1884, 'The Haven under the Hill' in 1886, and 'In Exchange for a Soul' in 1887) and a score of lesser tales over a period of twenty years. Mary Linskill was deeply religious and her writing reflects the monastic and maritime influence of the old seaport of Whitby. Much of her fiction was published by the SPCK. She made short-lived efforts to get away from the yard, moving to nearby Ruswarp and Newholm, but was forced by poverty to return to Whitby. Eventually she and her mother moved to a pleasant house in Spring Vale, in the town, a few years before she died, of apoplexy, on 9 April 1891 at the age of fifty. She was buried in Whitby cemetery. The greater part of Mary Linskill's writing was published in 'Good Words', and it was one of its sub-editors, John Hutton, who wrote a eulogistic, if inaccurate, memoir in the 1891 edition, on which the 'Dictionary of National Biography' entry was based. 


@@@@@


doc= 16742


Linton, Elizabeth Lynn (1822-1898), writer, was born on 10 February 1822 at Crosthwaite vicarage in Keswick, Cumberland, the twelfth and youngest child of the Revd James Lynn (1776-1855), vicar of Crosthwaite, and his first wife, Charlotte Alicia (1782/3-1822), daughter of the Revd Samuel Goodenough, bishop of Carlisle. Eliza Lynn's mother died shortly after her birth. Raised in the Lake District and in Kent, she received no formal schooling but pursued a course of rigorous self-education. She later recounted the unhappiness of her motherless childhood, accentuated by her conflicts with her tory clergyman father over her radical political views and loss of faith in Christianity. Eager for attention and approval, she determined early in her youth to achieve fame as an author. 
At the age of twenty-three, encouraged by the publication of two of her poems in 'Ainsworth's Magazine', Eliza Lynn left her family home in Keswick and went to London to make her way as a writer. Describing herself as 'one of the vanguard of independent women' (Linton, 'Christopher Kirkland', 1.253), she succeeded in publishing two well-reviewed historical novels, 'Azeth, the Egyptian' (1847) and 'Amymone: A Romance in the Days of Pericles' (1848), the latter a passionate appeal for women's rights. She also joined the staff of the whig newspaper the 'Morning Chronicle' in 1848, becoming the first woman journalist in England to draw a fixed salary. 
Seeking fame, Eliza Lynn instead achieved notoriety with the publication in 1851 of her third novel, 'Realities', which was a fiery attack on Victorian respectability. Even with the expurgation of certain sexually suggestive passages the novel received damning reviews, and it established the young Eliza Lynn's reputation as a person of questionable moral character. Also in 1851 she argued with John Douglas Cook, her employer on the 'Morning Chronicle', and for three years (1851-4) worked as a foreign correspondent in Paris. She did not publish another novel for fourteen years after 'Realities', concentrating instead on contributions to such respectable periodicals as Charles Dickens's 'Household Words'. Dickens valued her work and considered her 'good for anything, and thoroughly reliable', though he did caution his sub-editor that she 'gets so near the sexual side of things as to be a little dangerous to us at times' (Anderson, 66). 
On 24 March 1858 the 36-year-old Eliza Lynn married the engraver and radical republican William James Linton (1812-1897), a widower with seven young children. Described by a colleague as 'a tall, stately, handsome young woman' (Layard, 91), always wearing spectacles because of her severe near-sightedness, she attributed her decision to marry Linton to her desire to help his motherless children. A union of two discordant personalities, the marriage was a disaster. The increasingly conservative Eliza, hoping to make their London home a social and literary centre, was frustrated by her husband's lack of personal ambition and his preoccupation with continental revolutionary causes. She also had the responsibility of supporting the family with her writings. Styling herself E. Lynn Linton, thereby keeping her birth-name in equal prominence with her married name as a means, she said, of maintaining 'cherished individualism' (Anderson, 86), she published mainly potboiler articles in popular periodicals such as the 'Literary Gazette' and the 'National Magazine', as well as continuing her contributions to 'Household Words' and its successor, 'All the Year Round'. 
In 1864, recognizing that the marriage was a failure, William James Linton moved with his children back to Brantwood, his house in the Lake District. Although spending the summers at Brantwood, Eliza Lynn Linton lived the rest of the year in London, concentrating, as she told the publisher John Blackwood, on fulfilling her ambition to 'get out of periodical literature and to succeed as a writer of good novels' (Anderson, 99). Ever one to achieve her goals, she did publish during that time three reasonably successful novels, 'Grasp your Nettle' (1865), 'Lizzie Lorton of Greyrigg' (1866), and 'Sowing the Wind' (1867). The marriage reached a final end in 1867 when William moved to the United States, where he was joined by his children. Although he returned several times to England, they did not see each other again. They never divorced, perhaps because there were no legal grounds. 
Despite her concern to succeed as a novelist, it was Linton's sensational articles in the conservative and prestigious 'Saturday Review' in the late 1860s and the 1870s that made her reputation in Victorian England. Taking on the role of critic of women, the once-impassioned defender of women's rights became its most ardent opponent. She damned the 'shrieking sisterhood' ('Saturday Review', 12 May 1870) who sought the right to vote, even as she criticized the 'modern mother' ('Saturday Review', 29 Feb 1868) whose aspirations for ladyhood caused her to neglect her maternal duties. Her most controversial article was 'The girl of the period', published on 14 March 1868, in which Linton shockingly accused young women who flirted and wore make-up of envying and imitating the 'demi-monde'. Called 'perhaps the most sensational middle article the 'Saturday Review' ever published' (Bevington, 110), this anonymous essay was soon identified as authored by Linton, and thereafter she was usually described with reference to it. In 1883 her articles in the 'Saturday Review' were collected and published in two volumes as ''The Girl of the Period' and other Social Essays'. 
Linton became an even more controversial figure when she, a self-styled agnostic, published in 1872 the novel 'The True History of Joshua Davidson, Christian and Communist', in which she severely criticized the Church of England for what she saw as its hypocrisies and abuses. Creating the fantasy of Jesus (Joshua Davidson) returning to Victorian England, she argued that he would be a communist who would advocate the sharing of wealth and the end of class inequalities. The novel ends with Joshua Davidson kicked to death by the leaders of the Church of England. An immediate best-seller, 'Joshua Davidson' was Linton's most widely sold book. 
Hard-working and rigorously self-disciplined, Linton enjoyed a profitable, even though controversial, literary career. Continuing the success of her 'Saturday Review' articles, she wrote primarily on women's role in society, with her arguments becoming increasingly strident as women gained more rights and freedoms in late Victorian England. Although criticized for what many saw as her exaggerated and hysterical views, she found a forum in a wide range of respected Victorian periodicals, including the 'National Review', 'Belgravia', the 'New Review', 'Temple Bar', and 'The Queen'. Her many novels published in the 1870s and 1880s were generally successful. Her later novels, however, most notably 'The One too Many' (1894) and 'In Haste and at Leisure' (1895), which were harsh though ambiguous denunciations of the 'new woman', received bad reviews and had poor sales. In 1885 she published her psychologically revealing but financially unsuccessful fictionalized autobiography, 'The Autobiography of Christopher Kirkland', in which she wrote of herself in the persona of a male. 
Ridiculed by many, Eliza Lynn Linton remained a respected woman of letters who counted among her friends and admirers such diverse persons as Walter Savage Landor, Algernon Charles Swinburne, Herbert Spencer, and Thomas Hardy. She detailed many of these friendships in 'My Literary Life', published posthumously in 1899. In her older years a stout, bespectacled woman with grey hair, usually photographed wearing a severe black gown and a white lace cap, she was fierce to her enemies and loving to her friends. She was especially supportive of aspiring young authors, including, anomalously, the progressive author Beatrice Harraden. Linton also travelled a great deal, particularly between 1876 and 1884, when she often visited Italy. She moved to Malvern in 1895, and it was during a London visit to a friend that she died at her former residence, Queen Anne's Mansions, Westminster, London, of bronchial pneumonia on 14 July 1898, aged seventy-six. She was cremated, and her ashes were buried on 30 September in the cemetery of Crosthwaite church in Cumberland. She left to her relatives and friends an estate of $16,574, which was the fruit of her labour and a testament to her hard-won success. 


@@@@@


doc= 16743


Linton, William (1791-1876), landscape painter, was born at Liverpool on 22 April 1791, the son of William Linton and Sarah Brockbank, and was probably the child baptized on 6 May at Benn's Garden Unitarian Chapel, the son of William Linton, mariner, and his wife, Sarah, of Park Lane. His mother married Thomas Eskrigge in Lancaster on 11 August 1796. Linton grew up at Lancaster and Cartmel. After schooling at Windermere, he went on to Rochdale, Lancashire, where he spent six years studying the classics, mathematics, and drawing. Holidays were spent in Windermere, where his mother's family had an estate, and his days rambling and drawing in the mountains made him long to be a landscape painter. There, he came under the influence of the self-taught landscape painter William Havell (1872-1857). 
However, at sixteen, Linton's artistic aspirations were thwarted when his family placed him in a merchant's office at Liverpool, where he was articled for five years. He still managed to make truant visits to the Lake District, where he painted landscapes and carried out some hasty commissions of local views, and nourished his love of painting by visiting at Mold the tomb of Richard Wilson, whose Italianate classical landscapes he saw and copied at Ince Blundell Hall and at Wynnstay. His enthusiasm for the genre was strengthened by the Claudes he saw at Holker Hall, near Windermere. Yet it was not until he had completed four more years of classical and mathematical study at Windermere that, aged about twenty-four, he was finally allowed to attempt life as a painter in London. 
Despite early disappointments, Linton soon made his mark. He began sketching in oils from nature during visits to Hampstead Heath and the countryside around London. In 1817, living at 34 Duke Street, Manchester Square, he first succeeded in getting his work exhibited, showing three landscapes at the Royal Academy, and another at the British Institution. At these two venues, he continued to exhibit annually for more than forty years, sending fifty-seven works to the former and seventy-eight to the latter. From 1830 to 1865 he also exhibited regularly at the Liverpool Academy, though he continued to live in London, by 1822 at 19 Blenheim Street. 

'Morning after a Storm' (exh. British Institution, 1823), painted near Lynton, Devon, was his first work to obtain notice. 'Delos' (exh. Society of British Artists (SBA), 1825; possibly the version in Wolverhampton Art Gallery) was purchased on the advice of Turner and led to the sixth duke of Bedford's commissioning 'An Italian Scene, Evening' (exh. British Institution, 1826) for Woburn Abbey. Linton was among the artists and art-lovers who met regularly at the Bull and Bush tavern at North End. Their discussions led in 1823 to the founding of the Society of British Artists, to provide greater possibility for artists to exhibit their work. Its first secretary, Linton became its vice-president in 1836 and its president in 1837. In 1824 he sent eleven British landscapes, including 'The Vale of Lonsdale', to its opening exhibition, and a seascape to the Paris Salon. Between 1824 and 1869 he exhibited over a hundred works at the society's galleries in Suffolk Street. 
As well as painting all over England, Scotland, and Wales and particularly in his native Lancashire, Linton produced large idealized classical paintings, like 'Aeneas and Achates' (exh. SBA, 1828) and 'Caius Marius amid Ruins of Carthage' (exh. SBA, 1834). These were done from his imagination, and from his wide knowledge of classical literature and archaeology, without his ever having left England. With these works, considered his greatest achievements by his contemporaries, Linton's reputation was established. In 1828 he embarked on a tour of France, Belgium, Germany, Switzerland, and Italy, when he made over 500 sketches from nature. Many of these formed the basis of later studio paintings, but even these more realistic landscapes were often chosen for their classical or literary associations. His catalogue descriptions of his paintings were heavily annotated with quotations from the classics or the works of classical scholars. His British landscapes were also often annotated from literary sources. On this trip Linton spent fifteen months in Italy and the winter of 1828 in Rome, where he daily met other English artists, including Turner. For his two-volume 'Sketches in Italy', published in 1832, Linton wrote the descriptive texts and supplied lithographs based on his work. After returning to England he married Julia Adeline, daughter of the Revd Thomas Swettenham, rector of Swettenham, and of Anna Antonia Hayes, at Shillinglee, Sussex, on 27 October 1831. On marrying, he acquired a second address, Downshire Hill Cottage, Hampstead. 
Linton's large 'Ancient Jerusalem, during the approach of the miraculous darkness which attended the crucifixion' (exh. SBA, 1836) was awarded a case of silver medals by Pope Gregory XVI; when it was reproduced in a mezzotint by Thomas Lupton, the first subscriber was the archbishop of Canterbury. One of his most celebrated paintings, 'Embarkation of the Greeks for the Trojan War' (exh. SBA, 1839), was another large imaginative construction. After a fifteen-month tour of Greece, Sicily, and Calabria, he exhibited nearly 300 sketches from his trip at the New Society of Painters in Water Colours in 1842, and held further exhibitions at his home at 7 Lodge Place, Hanover Gate, where he had moved by 1837, and at Lancaster, Manchester, and Liverpool. These sketches formed the basis of his 'The Scenery of Greece and its Islands', published privately in 1856, with fifty steel engravings by himself; a second commercial edition followed in 1869. His last European trip, a twelve-month exploration of the Mediterranean coast from Nice to Spezia, was made in 1843-4. His large 'Temple of Paestum' (Tate Collection), shown at the Westminster exhibition in 1847 and, as he noted in his will, 'reputed my best work', was bequeathed by him to the National Gallery, London. Another Italian scene, 'A Festa Day at Venice -- the Grand Canal' (exh. RA, 1851), was awarded a 50 guinea prize at the Royal Institute of Manchester. Despite his large output of Greek and Italian subjects, Linton continued to paint his beloved native countryside. One of several depictions of his home town of Lancaster (on loan to Lancaster City Museum) was lithographed and dedicated (by permission) to Queen Victoria in honour of the royal visit to the city in 1851. 
Linton's interest in the technical and archaeological basis of his painting resulted in two more publications. In 1851 Prince Albert presented him with two bronze medals for being an associate juror in the chemical class at the Great Exhibition. He soon published 'Ancient and Modern Colours' (1852), which records his studies of the artistic and chemical properties of pigments used by ancient and modern painters. This was later published privately in tabular form ('c'.1859). His last publication, 'Colossal Vestiges of the Older Nations' (1862), which surveys ruins throughout the world, reflects his interest in archaeology and the scholarship that underlay his landscapes. 
In his last years Linton's work fell out of fashion. It had always been eclipsed by that of Turner, who had influenced some of his paintings. Yet, after Turner, he was the best practitioner of landscape in the classical tradition of his day. Large two-day sales of the 'Entire collection' of his works were held at Christies in 1860 and 1865, as well as a posthumous studio sale in 1877. He died at his house at 7 Lodge Place on 18 August 1876, his wife having predeceased him. In his will -- written on 15 September 1874 and proved on 21 August 1877 -- his principal heirs were his sister, Frances Eskrigge of Morecambe, and his Eskrigge nephews. Examples of his paintings are held in Lancaster City Museum and Wolverhampton Art Gallery. 


@@@@@


doc= 16744


Linton, Sir William (1801-1880), military physician, eldest son of Jabez Linton of Hardrigg Lodge, Dumfriesshire, and Jane, daughter of William Crocket of Grahamshill in the same county, was born at Kirkpatrick Fleming, Dumfriesshire. He was educated at Edinburgh University, and became LCS in 1826. While at university he spent four of his summer vacations working as a surgeon on a whaling ship in the Arctic regions. He entered the army medical department in 1826, and graduated MD at Glasgow University in 1834. He became staff surgeon of the first class in 1848. 
After serving in Canada, the Mediterranean, and the West Indies, Linton was appointed deputy inspector-general of hospitals of the first division of the army in the Crimea. He was present at every action until the fall of Sevastopol and had care of the barrack hospital in Scutari shortly after its establishment in 1854 until the British forces came home. On his return in 1856 he was created CB. In 1857 he was appointed inspector-general of hospitals, and shortly afterwards he proceeded to India to assume the post of principal medical officer of the European army. He held these offices throughout the Indian mutiny. 
In 1859, as a reward for his services, Linton was appointed an honorary physician to Queen Victoria. He retired from active service in 1863, and was advanced to KCB in 1865. Linton never married, and after a short illness he died of apoplexy, on 9 October 1880, at his home in Skairfield, near Lockerbie, Dumfriesshire. 


@@@@@


doc= 16745


Linton, William James (1812-1897), wood-engraver, polemicist, and poet, was born on 7 December 1812 in Ireland's Row at Mile End in London, probably the second among four children of William Linton, a provision broker in the London docks, and his second wife, Mary ('nee' Stephenson), apparently of a 'superior' shopkeeping background. The family moved to the village of Stratford, Essex, in 1818, and the young William was sent to the grammar school in Chigwell, a distinguished early seventeenth-century foundation attended by sons of the Essex and City of London middle classes. With the advantage of a rounded education, William seemed destined for the world of London commerce, but persuaded his father to pay for drawing lessons, and in 1828 was bound apprentice to the engraver George Wilmot Bonner (1796-1836) in Kennington in south London. With this declaration of Romantic belief in the superiority of a life of art over that of the counting-house, Linton signalled the future direction of his whole career: a life driven by the conviction that he had much to tell the world, yet held back by his unworldliness. Not that the decision to become an engraver was itself unworldly: engraving was the principal means of mass visual communication in the early nineteenth century and, for a young man without capital, could promise good wages and the possibility of an independent establishment in a market certain to expand. This was doubtless why William Linton senior allowed his younger son, Henry Duff Linton (1816-1899), to enter the same trade -- and Henry, less prudent even than his brother, also found the mobility of his trade a valuable resource in later life. 
On 21 October 1837 Linton married Laura Wade (1809-1838), who was well educated and freethinking and belonged to a family of independent (though insufficient) means. Fulfilling another Romantic stereotype, she had been a governess, and died of consumption six months after her marriage. Linton never ceased to mourn for her, and some of his late poems ('Love-lore', 1887) look back to this tragic moment. By about 1839 he was living with Laura's sister Emily, and a child registered later as William Wade Linton (died 1892), known as Willie, was evidently born soon afterwards. At this time Linton publicly advocated an end to all state interference in marriage, with partners associating as consenting equals, free if they wished to use contraception. Since 1835 the biblical prohibition against marrying a deceased wife's sister had been incorporated into English law, so there was never a formal marriage, and Emily simply assumed the name Linton, bearing some seven children: three boys (Willie, Lancelot, who died in December 1863, and Edmund) and four girls (Emily, Margaret, Ellen, and Eliza, who died in December 1857), the youngest of whom was born in July 1854. Emily died, also of consumption, in December 1856. On 24 March 1858 at St Pancras Church, Linton married Eliza Lynn (1822-1898) ['see 'Linton, Elizabeth Lynn], the writer and moralist. His marriage to Eliza was childless and unhappy. She soon began to dislike his distinctive clothing, the peculiar cut of his long-waisted coat, which lacked the two buttons at the junction of the skirts at the back -- Linton seeing these, according to Walter Crane, as 'superfluous reminders of gentlemanly, militaristic dress' (Smith, 142). She found him 'ungraceful -- careless in the matter of dress and generally unkempt -- with unstarched collars and long hair', adding: 'I could not convince him of the need of method, regularity, foresight, or any other economic virtue. He was sweet in word and acquiescent in manner; smiled, promised compliance -- and indeed did much that I wished because I wished it. But I never touched the core. (Layard, 97-8)' The couple grew steadily apart during the early 1860s, separating informally but finally in 1867 when he emigrated to the United States. 
The craft that Linton learned from George Bonner was not that of the woodcut, which had been historically the cheapest means of image-making and the mainstay of popular religious and topical publications well into the eighteenth century. Linton was a wood-engraver, and his was the craft which, more than any other nineteenth-century printmaking technique, pushed forward the illustration of books, periodicals, newspapers, and ephemeral publications, and transformed visual awareness in all advanced societies. Wood-engraving was the first of the major printmaking media to exploit photography, and it was partly as a reaction against the effects of lithography and photo-mechanical printing that the so-called original printmaking media of etching and engraving were re-invented in the second half of the nineteenth century as a major vehicle of artistic expression. Linton's career spans these developments, in craft terms linking Thomas Bewick (1753-1828) to Walter Crane (1845)-1915 -- Crane being Linton's apprentice from 1858 to 1862 -- and linking the world of art to that of the 'Illustrated London News' and the pictorial advertisement boom of the last quarter of the century. In his own practice Linton increasingly found the personal independence and control over the means of production associated with the ideology of the arts and crafts movement by operating his own small private press. 
No one was more aware than Linton of the large professional and social issues involved in these developments. He wrote extensively on the technical aspects of his craft ('Specimens of a New Process of Engraving for Surface Printing', 1861), on the inherent tension between the artistic and the artisanal aspects of printmaking ('Art in engraving on wood', 'Atlantic Monthly', 43, June 1879), on the history of the craft in Britain and America ('History of Wood Engraving in America', 1882; 'Masters of Wood Engraving', 1889), and on his own life ('Three Score and Ten Years?', New York, 1894; published in London as 'Memories', 1895). As a reproductive engraver he participated in many of the most important publishing projects of the epoch, including Moxon's edition of Tennyson and George Eliot's 'Romola', on which he and his brother worked after designs by Frederic Leighton. Beyond his vast output of relatively ephemeral material, Linton's most important works are the botanical studies for his own 'Ferns of the Lake District' (1864), and the views and other subjects for Eliza Lynn Linton's 'The Lake Country' (1864) and for Harriet Martineau's 'The English Lakes' (1858). A considerable group of his flower drawings, probably intended for another botanical work on the Lake District, was presented by Kineton Parkes to the Victoria and Albert Museum in 1938. They are of beautiful quality. 
Linton 'discovered' the Lake District during a walking tour of 1846. He acquired the lease of a house at Miteside in Eskdale, where he installed his family in April 1849. In March 1852 they moved to Brantwood, on Coniston, which Linton then managed to buy outright by means of mortgages. At Brantwood he set up his first private press, using it with help from a group of intense young radical printers to produce a stream of pamphlets on English and European politics, mostly written by himself. (A small collection of Linton's publications and wood-engraving materials is held at Brantwood.) 
From his earliest years in London, Linton had been heavily involved in fringe republican and Liberal nationalist circles, becoming acquainted with Giuseppe Mazzini about 1842, and regarding himself as the leading English agent and interpreter of the master's views. Within the Chartist movement Linton tended to take his own line. He strongly opposed O'Connor and in 1848 backed the People's Charter Union, which favoured collaboration between middle and working classes. In the 1840s he had regularly composed anti-odes on royal birthdays, and he now proposed the sovereignty of a single legislative chamber, elected by universal adult suffrage, its laws subject to referendum. At the general election of 1852, however, he toyed with the idea of standing as a Chartist candidate at Carlisle, but found that he lacked adequate support. 
The Chartist failure in 1848 led Linton and other radicals increasingly to find their inspiration in European nationalism: 'for true civilization, for the free growth of national peculiarities of character; for the unlimited development of the boundless resources of varied clime and country... that every man may have the opportunity of placing himself in that sphere to which his energies may be turned in the best account for the public service... We claim for every People the right to choose their own constitutions, to determine their own way of life. (Mazzini, partly re-drafted by Linton, address published by the People's International League, 1848, quoted in Smith, 60-61)' Italy, Poland, Switzerland, France, and Ireland successively and simultaneously aroused Linton's journalistic intervention during the 1850s and 1860s, and it was in this cause that he launched his own most important contribution to this ferment of constitutionalist debate in early January 1851. This was the 'English Republic', published weekly and monthly until April 1855, virtually all of whose copy and illustrations Linton himself supplied. The 'English Republic''s programme involved individual self-realization under the law providing 'opportunity for growth even for the least and weakest'. A leading function of the state was to provide education for all, to cultivate the 'perceptive faculties' of children, and to teach the 'broad facts of Nature and God in relation to [their] position in the Universe' (Smith, 103). Later the curriculum would include geology and botany, with gardening as the principal out-of-school activity. This was the curriculum experienced by his own children at Brantwood, the family being packed into the house together with Emily's mother, four bachelor printing assistants, the Polish carbonaro Karl Stolzman (1793-1854) and his wife, and Agnes, the servant. The children were all dressed in shifts of blue flannel, and all had shoulder-length hair and wide hats. Their food was home-grown by Linton, and in winter consisted largely of porridge. 
Emily's death at the end of 1856 signalled the beginning of the difficult but, in terms of literary stimulus, not unfruitful relationship with Eliza Lynn. In 1865 Linton published 'Claribel and other Poems', illustrated with engravings after his own designs. They reflect his stoical acceptance of private adversity, and their lyrical style shows the influence of Tennyson's 'In Memoriam'. But his financial circumstances reached a decisive crisis, and in November 1866 he set off to reconnoitre prospects in New York. Armed with introductions from Mazzini to the American enthusiasts for European national self-determination, he quickly made contact with the Cooper Union and the Society of Wood Engravers of New York, and secured a salaried appointment as artistic director of the local equivalent of the 'Illustrated London News'. This enabled him briefly to return early in 1867 to London, where he began collecting material for his history of wood-engraving, gathered up his younger son Edmund, and (his wife having declined to accompany him) set sail again for the New World. Linton's old Micawberish life of financial deficits now achieved an equally Micawberish transformation into one of surplus and social acceptance in the liberal republic of the United States. His artistic and literary reputation secured election to the Century Club, the self-electing elite of artistic New York, and he was honoured by the high-minded liberal intellectuals of New England society as an authentic voice of European radicalism. Not that this stopped him, as a journalist, from castigating various aspects of American life, social organization, and foreign policy -- including the sentimental Fenianism of the New England Irish and the Monroe doctrine's implementation in Spanish America -- nor from maintaining his voice in European affairs with a passionate but un-American advocacy of the Paris communards in 1870-71. 
In 1870 Linton moved out of New York and acquired a farmstead at Hamden, near New Haven, Connecticut, which became his home for the rest of his life. Threatened with bankruptcy proceedings in the English courts, he suggested to Willie, who was looking after the house at Brantwood, that he should contact Ruskin and offer him the property at a nominal discount, for $1500. The sale was completed in May 1871, and was in many ways a serendipitous event, for the characteristic Ruskin works of the Brantwood years, apart from his own increasing interest in fine printing and book illustration, were the radical 'Fors Clavigera' addressed to the workmen of Britain, 'Deucalion', and 'Proserpina', the last two respectively his reformulations of field geology and botany for the education of the young. Linton invested proceeds from the Brantwood sale in a new press for the house at Hamden, named Appledore, and again the tireless voice rang out, identifying significant long-term issues such as the corruptions of Tammany Hall politics and the anti-competitive practices of big business and finance. The family was now more or less gathered round him at Appledore, with the exception of his wife, Willie -- who worked as a printer in London -- and his eldest daughter, Emily, who was partially paralysed and was looked after in an asylum in Dumfries, Scotland. Margaret, the second daughter, was married locally to an engineer at Yale, Thomas Mather, and Ellen helped her father as amanuensis and typesetter. Edmund helped his father in growing vegetables for the house and, again as at Brantwood, in botanizing. 
Proximity to Yale's libraries as well as his literary acquaintances encouraged Linton to publish in 1878 a volume of selected American verse, 'Poetry of America', followed by a limited edition of an anthology of English verses showing an exceptional knowledge for this period of the metaphysical poets, 'The Golden Apples of Hesperus' (1882); another limited edition, 'Rare Poems of the Seventeenth Century' (1882); and, with R. H. Stoddard, the five volumes of 'English Verse' (1884). Alongside his genuine editorializing of early seventeenth-century verse, there is evidence that he flirted with producing forged pamphlets -- probably, like some art forgers, to mock the scholarship of 'experts'. But he himself was now an increasingly respected figure in the English-speaking world of art and letters. In 1882 he was elected to the American National Academy of Arts, and on his occasional trips to England he became a figure more familiar in the libraries and print rooms of London than on the radical fringes of politics. He particularly loathed W. E. Gladstone, however, regarding him as the betrayer of the old radical vision of land reform and universal suffrage, and he backed Disraeli during the Bulgarian atrocities controversy of 1876. On the last of his English trips in 1889 he brought his 'magnum opus' -- 'Masters of Wood Engraving', printed by hand at Appledore in only three copies -- for reproduction in two limited folio editions at the Chiswick Press. In 1891 he was awarded an honorary MA degree of Yale University. Linton's late books are mostly memoirs: 'European Republicans: Recollections of Mazzini and his Friends' (1893), a 'Life of Whittier' (1893), and his own 'Memories' (1895). A further volume of his own verses, 'Poems', was published in the same year. 
During the 1890s Linton's prodigious energies declined, and by autumn 1897 he was unable to continue to operate the press at Appledore. He died at his daughter's house in New Haven on 29 December 1897, and was survived briefly by Eliza Lynn, who died in July 1898. His papers, the basis for F. B. Smith's scholarly biography 'Radical Artisan: William James Linton, 1812-97' (1973), are preserved in three main collections: the Istituto Giangiacomo Feltrinelli in Milan, the National Library of Australia in Canberra, and the Beinecke Rare Book and Manuscript Library at Yale University. Smith reproduces photographs of him in his forties as international agitator with long brown hair, and in his eighties as the benign Morrisite patriarch, with a cloud of white hair and deep smile-lines around his eyes. The modern view, largely influenced by Smith, is increasingly to see Linton as a significant figure in the non-socialist tradition of European radicalism. He has benefited also from art historians' changed valuation of 'reproductive' printmaking, and from the recognition of his own 'original' work as a designer of images, illustrator, and poet. His integrity, courage, and moral stature are beyond doubt. 


@@@@@


doc= 16746


Lintot, (Barnaby) Bernard (1675-1736), bookseller, was born on 1 December 1675 at Southwater, near Horsham, Sussex, the son of John Lintott, yeoman. He was bound apprentice to the bookseller Thomas Lingard on 1 December 1690, but was turned over to John Harding before being freed on 18 March 1700. At this time he usually spelt his name with a double 't' (the decided preference for only one dates from around 1716), but he may have been related to Joshua Lintot, printer to the House of Commons between 1708 and 1710, whose son John he took as his apprentice on 4 February 1724. Bernard began to trade independently, at the Cross Keys in St Martin's Lane, London, before the official end of his apprenticeship, his name appearing on the title-pages of six plays in 1698. He married Catherine Langley (1664-1748), widow, at St Bartholomew's, Smithfield, on 13 October 1700, and that same year he moved premises, to the Post Office or Post House in the Middle Temple Gate in Fleet Street, where he remained until 1705. He then moved to the Cross Keys (sometimes 'and Crown' or 'Cushion'), between the two Temple Gates in Fleet Street or next to Nandy's Coffee House at Temple Bar, the first house east of Inner Temple Lane. 
Lintot, in conscious rivalry with Jacob Tonson, rapidly became the premier literary bookseller of the first third of the eighteenth century. By investing first in plays and later in translations and poetry he secured a significant role in the development of English literature. In the first decade of the century his name is found in the imprints of plays by Farquhar, Dryden, Congreve, Steele, Baker, Centlivre, Cibber, and lesser figures. Between 1705 and 1712 he regularly published the plays performed at Drury Lane, and on 16 February 1718 he agreed with Tonson that they should in future share all the plays they purchased. Publications also included practical, especially legal, guides, Dennis's criticism, and works by the deists Toland and Wollaston. The major playwrights were regularly reprinted, with editions continuing to be issued well into the 1750s. 
In 1712 Lintot published 'Miscellaneous Poems and Translations', which contained the first version of Pope's 'Rape of the Lock'. The collection was designed to rival Tonson's series of 'Poetical Miscellanies', edited by Dryden, with Pope taking Dryden's role. Pope and Gay humorously compared Lintot to the great humanist printers of the Renaissance, with Pope exalting Lintot over his great predecessors: '
Others with 'Aldus' would besot us; 

I, for my part, admire 'Lintottus'. 
('Twickenham Edition', 6.83)' In the following two decades Lintot published first editions of important works by Pope, Gay, and their friend Rowe: 'Windsor Forest', 'Temple of Fame', 'Eloisa to Abelard', 'Three Hours after Marriage', 'Trivia', 'The What d'ye Call it', 'Jane Shore', and 'Lady Jane Grey', as well as Pope's 'Works' (1717), Gay's 'Poems on Several Occasions' (1720), and Rowe's posthumous 'Works' (1728). 
Nichols's extracts from Lintot's accounts show he was generous to successful authors. Farquhar received $15 for the 'Twin Rivals', but $30 for the 'Beaux' Stratagem'; Rowe was paid $50 15's.' for 'Jane Shore' and $75 for 'Jane Grey'; Gay earned $43 from the copyright of 'Trivia' and $75 from the 'Revival of the Wife of Bath'. For Urry's Chaucer, Lintot agreed to pay all the cost of publication but to take only one-third of the subscription. Shrewdly he paid Cibber $105 for the 'Nonjuror'; inexplicably he paid the same to James Moore Smythe for 'The Rival Modes'. But the contracts with Pope were the most generous. For his six-volume translation of the 'Iliad' (issued in instalments, 1715-20) Pope was given $2201 by Lintot: $1275 in copy money and $926 in books. Lintot hoped to make a complementary profit of $2200 himself by selling 250 illustrated large folios and 1750 plain small ones to the public, but he miscalculated and for the second volume reduced his print run of small folios to 1000. Moreover, a Dutch duodecimo piracy in 1720 undercut his folios and forced him immediately into his own duodecimo edition. Nevertheless, he probably made over $600 profit on the first edition, and over $2000 on the duodecimos in 1720. For the 'Odyssey' translation that followed, Pope tried to win Tonson as publisher by agreeing to edit an edition of Shakespeare for only $100; but he failed. Fenton reported to Broome, on 9 January 1724, 'Tonson does not care to contract for the copy, and application has been made to Lintot, upon which he exerts the true spirit of a scoundrel, believing that he has Pope entirely at his mercy' ('Correspondence of Alexander Pope', 2.214). The terms of the contract were less generous than for the 'Iliad'. For five volumes, Pope was given $367 10's.' in copy money and $673 14's.' 71/2 died in books (worth, as it turned out, $5,549 5's.' in subscriptions). Lintot's profits again amounted to over $600 on the folios, with about $1500 from the duodecimos, but this time the poet and bookseller quarrelled. When Tonson advertised the Shakespeare subscription for his own benefit (23 January 1725), Lintot became infuriated at the contrast between his own position and Tonson's and retaliated with 'Proposals by Bernard Lintot, for his own Benefit' offering the equivalent folios for a guinea less than Pope's quartos. Pope declared Lintot a scoundrel and resolved never to employ him again, but Lintot held the copyright to the majority of Pope's early poems and continued to reprint them at regular intervals. 
Lintot figures as a minor character in Pope's 'Narrative of Dr Norris' and 'Full and True Account' of the poisoning of Curll, and he laments his treatment by Pope in Oldmixon's 'The Catholick Poet'. In the 'Dunciad' Pope mocks Lintot's fondness for the red and black title-pages he liked to post outside his shop, and then compares him to a dabchick in his race against Curll. Lintot was large, clumsy, and choleric; Young described him to Spence as 'a great sputtering fellow' (Spence, 848). Pope comically describes a ride in Lintot's company, marked by the bookseller's profanity and callousness but revealing his ingenuity in using gentlemen to check the work of his translators. Lintot had better relations with the trade than with Pope; his accounts list many arrangements with other booksellers, including thirteen agreements with the Tonsons. He was also a pioneer in book advertising, and established the 'Monthy Catalogue' (1714-16), the first regular listing of books. After the accession of George I he became one of the printers of the parliamentary votes and retained the office until 1727. In 1708 he was called to the livery of the Stationers' Company, in 1715 he was renter warden, in 1722-3 he joined the court of assistants, and in 1729 and 1730 he was under-warden. 
From 1730 Bernard Lintot shared the business with his son Henry ['see below'], buying land near his father's holding in Sussex and becoming semi-retired. In November 1735 he was nominated high sheriff for Sussex, but did not live to enjoy the office. Pope reported him ill of an asthma on 12 January 1736 and he died in London on 3 February. He was buried in St Dunstan-in-the-West, Fleet Street, London, on 9 February. His will, made on 17 December 1730, was proved on 14 February 1736 by his son Henry. 


Henry Lintot retained his father's literary copyrights and issued regular editions of major writers, but he made little attempt to develop that side of the firm's list. He did, however, buy the copyright to the 'Dunciad' when it became available, resisted Pope's threats of litigation, and secured his share of profits in editions of Pope's works. He built up the firm's interest in law books and became law printer to the king on 10 March 1749. Lintot's first wife died on 21 January 1734 and he married his second wife, Philadelphia, daughter of John Gurr of Fulham (and possibly the sister of two of his apprentices) on 29 December 1752. They had no children. Henry Lintot died on 10 December 1758 and was buried at the Temple Church on 17 December. Philadelphia Lintot died in 1763. 




@@@@@


doc= 16747


Henry Lintot (bap. 1703, d. 1758), bookseller, son of Bernard and Catherine Lintot, was baptized at St Clement Danes, London, on 6 August 1703. He was educated at Westminster School. In 1730 he married Elizabeth (died 1734), daughter of Sir John Aubrey, bt, of Llantrithyd House, Glamorgan, and Boarstall, Buckinghamshire, and his father made a settlement, providing for an estate in land of $200 a year. Henry became a freeman of the Stationers' Company by patrimony on 1 September 1730, and joined his father in business. He inherited the business and estates in 1736, when he was also appointed high sheriff for Sussex in place of his father. Humfrey Wanley reports a visit by Lintot to the Harleian Library on 31 January 1726 in search of family arms, and Bugden's unofficial heraldic visitation of Sussex, 1724, lists the arms of Henry Lintot of Southwater, who must be either the bookseller or a near relation. Lintot also had a town house, Broome House, Fulham. 


@@@@@


doc= 16748


Linwood, Mary (1755-1845), artist in needlework, was born in Birmingham, where she was baptized at St Martin's on 18 July 1755, the daughter of Matthew Linwood and his wife, Hannah, 'nee' Turner (died 1804), who had married at St Philip's, Birmingham, on 19 March 1753. Following her father's bankruptcy in 1764, the family moved to Leicester where her mother opened a boarding-school for young ladies at Belgrave Gate. By the age of twenty Mary was working in needlework, for both she and her mother exhibited needlework pictures with the Society of Artists in London in 1776. Mary Linwood exhibited with the society again, a 'Landscape in Needlework', in 1778. An example of her work in that medium was sent to Catherine the Great of Russia in 1783. A series of puffs in the 'Morning Post' (April-June 1787) records her introduction to Queen Charlotte and the opening of a temporary exhibition of her work in the Pantheon, Oxford Street. In 1789 she copied the 'Salvator mundi' by Carlo Dolci in the collection of the ninth earl of Exeter, and was reputedly offered 3000 guineas for the work. In 1794 she designed and executed an embroidered banner for the Leicestershire volunteer cavalry, said to be the first instance of such a patriotic act. 
By the end of 1796 Linwood was preparing a large exhibition of her needlework pictures; Farington noted that she 'is preparing an Exhibition of needlework as an extraordinary instance of industry. It is calculated that she has worked 1500 square feet of needlework' (Farington, 'Diary', 9 Dec 1796). Having hired rooms in Hanover Square for three years, the exhibition opened in April 1798, to immediate public applause. With the death of her mother in 1804, Linwood took over the boarding-school in Leicester. The exhibition continued, however, now in Leicester Square, and between 1804 and 1809 the collection went on tour, being shown in Edinburgh, Glasgow, Belfast, Limerick, and Cork. In March 1809 it reopened in Leicester Square, where it was to remain for more than forty years. 
Although her art has been slighted by modern commentators, Mary Linwood was considered 'one of the most gifted and remarkable women of the age' ('The Times'). Moreover, in an era of great commercial exhibitions, Linwood's deserved to be distinguished for its longevity. A watercolour of 'c'.1820 in the Victoria and Albert Museum, London, records the appearance of the interior of the gallery, which was richly attired in red and furnished in the latest fashions. Her needlework was executed on tammy cloth specially woven for her, with woollen 'crewels' dyed to her specifications; by abandoning conventional needleworking techniques and using a wide range of stitch lengths she achieved eminently painterly effects. Examples of her work are to be found in the Royal Collection, Leicestershire museums, and at the Victoria and Albert Museum. 
From 1818 until her death Mary Linwood was implicated (apparently unjustly) in a complex chancery suit regarding her rooms in Leicester Square. She offered her collection of needlework pictures to the British Museum and to the House of Lords, but these offers were refused. By 1830 her health had declined and she was forced to give up needlework. However, the exhibition remained open, and it was on a visit to her London gallery in 1844 that she fell terminally ill. On 27 September 1844 she returned to Belgrave Gate, where she died, unmarried, on 2 March 1845. She was buried with her parents in St Margaret's Church, Leicester. The exhibition in Leicester Square stayed open for a short period, before her collection was sold for less than $1000. By the terms of her will her copy of Dolci's 'Salvator mundi' was left to Queen Victoria. The gallery continued to bear her name for some years and served as an exhibition hall. 
In modern times Mary Linwood has often been confused with her niece, also Mary Linwood, who was a musical composer and author of 'Leicestershire Tales' (1808) and other works of literature. 


@@@@@


doc= 16749


Linwood, William (1817-1878), classical scholar, was born in Birmingham, and baptized there on 29 December 1818, the only son of William Linwood (1780/81-1853), merchant, and his wife, Mary Iliffe (1795-1869). He was a nephew of the needlework artist Mary Linwood. Educated at King Edward's School, Birmingham, during the headmasterships of John Cooke and Francis Jeune, he was admitted to Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1834, but matriculated at Oxford in December 1835 as a member of Christ Church, where he was nominated by Thomas Gaisford to a studentship in 1837. His university career was remarkable. In 1836 he gained the Hertford, Ireland, and Craven scholarships, and in 1839 obtained the Boden Sanskrit scholarship. Graduating BA in 1839 with first-class honours in classics, he proceeded MA in 1842. He was briefly a master at Shrewsbury School in 1841, and he also took private pupils at Oxford on the strength of his achievements as an undergraduate, but he never held an official tutorial position in the university. Two contemporaries, William Gregory and William Tuckwell, left unfavourable accounts of his shabby appearance and uncouth manner, which perhaps explain his failure to gain further advancement as a teacher. He did, however, serve as an examiner in classics at Oxford during 1850-51, startling his fellow examiners by proposing that in deciding the candidates' merits they should 'throw into the fire all that other rubbish, and go by the Greek Prose' (Tuckwell, 150). 
Sermons delivered by Linwood as assistant curate at St Chad's, Shrewsbury, on the Catholic church (1841) and baptismal regeneration (1842) indicated a sympathy with the Tractarian movement. He took deacon's orders in 1843 but never proceeded to the priesthood, and on his failure to do so was obliged to relinquish his studentship at Christ Church in June 1851. He appears thereafter to have lived on private means. 
Linwood was described as using ancient Greek like a vernacular tongue, and as showing an extraordinary readiness at Greek versification. His scholarship was hardly reflected in his publications, which were more or less intended for elementary students. His 'Lexicon to Aeschylus' (1843) was regarded as clearly arranged and serviceable. Although his edition of Sophocles (1846; 4th edn, 1877) was widely used in schools, two later editors, F. H. M. Blaydes and F. A. Paley, had occasion to comment on his notes as being hurriedly compiled. He became best known as editor and contributor to 'Anthologia Oxoniensis' (1845), a collection of verse in Greek, Latin, and English which became a model for subsequent compilations. Latterly, he turned his attention to conjectural emendation of the 'New Testament'. He married, on 12 August 1857, Isabella (died 1863), daughter of William Andrews, solicitor. They had a son, born in 1861. A widower, on 2 July 1870 he married Emma, daughter of Benjamin Tonks, wholesale jeweller. Linwood, whose achievements never lived up to his promise as a student, died at his home, Birchfield, Handsworth, Staffordshire, on 7 September 1878. He is to be distinguished from William Linwood, the former Unitarian minister from Brixton, who, in 1850, edited the 'Eclectic Review' ('Victorian Periodicals Review', 27, 1994, 183). 


@@@@@


doc= 16750


Lionel, duke of Clarence (1338-1368), prince, was the third (but second surviving) son of Edward III (1312-1377) and Philippa of Hainault (1310x15?-1369). He was born at St Michael's Abbey, Antwerp, on 29 November 1338 during his parents' period of residence in the Low Countries at the start of the Hundred Years' War. Master Giles de Monte, a physician from Hainault, was later given $15 as a gift for the thirteen weeks during which he cared for the infant prince. The unusual name given to the child is often supposed to have been a reference to the lion of Brabant, the duke of Brabant being one of Edward III's allies at the time of the prince's birth. But Edward had already specifically identified himself with the mythological and chivalric figure of Lionel -- one of the knights of Arthur's round table and cousin of Lancelot -- in a tournament held at Dunstable in 1334. Furthermore, the name carried obvious associations with the heraldic lions (more properly leopards) on the royal arms of England. The prince's personal heraldic repertoire was expanded in 1339 when William Montagu, first earl of Salisbury, to whom the king had earlier granted the right to bear the royal crest of an eagle, passed on the privilege to Lionel in his capacity as the child's godfather. 
On 9 September 1342, at the Tower of London, Lionel was married to Elizabeth de Burgh ('b'. 6 July 1332), the daughter and sole heir of the deceased William de Burgh, third earl of Ulster. The marriage was consummated in 1352 and produced only one recorded child, Philippa Lionel, who married Edmund (III) Mortimer, earl of March: the house of York descended from this union. Lionel was recognized as earl of Ulster in the right of his wife at the latest by 26 January 1347. In organizing the marriage to Elizabeth de Burgh, Edward III evidently intended to set up Prince Lionel as the principal magnate in Ireland. However, the increasing power of the Gaelic tribal chiefs and the competing claims of the heirs male to the earldom of Ulster meant that Lionel's agents had effective control over only a comparatively small part of the landed estate associated with the title. In order to rectify this situation, a marriage was arranged between Lionel's widowed mother-in-law, Maud, daughter of Henry, earl of Lancaster, and Ralph Ufford, younger brother of the king's friend Robert Ufford, earl of Suffolk; Ralph was then appointed justiciar of Ireland in 1345 and given the task of re-establishing the earldom of Ulster. In fact, these plans came to little since Ufford died in 1346, and Lionel's destined career in Ireland was put off for some fifteen years. 
Not the least of the reasons for this delay was the king's preoccupation with the wars in France. Lionel was appointed regent of England during his father's absence in Flanders from 3 to 26 July 1345, and again from 11 July 1346 to 12 October 1347 during the lengthy Crecy-Calais campaign. The prince was obviously not old enough to exercise authority in person, and the task of government was fulfilled by the council; nevertheless, on the latter occasion the regent was provided, at the king's expense, with a personal seal in order to authorize the limited range of administrative responsibilities technically reserved to him. The surviving warrants under this seal indicate that during 1346-7 Lionel's household was based successively at the Tower of London, Windsor, Reading (for much of 1347), and Bristol. 
Lionel's own military career began in 1355 when he was knighted and he accompanied the king to Calais to take part in an inconclusive foray into enemy territory. He also participated in the invasion of Scotland in the winter of 1355-6 and headed the list of witnesses to the official instrument by which Edward Balliol renounced his claim to the Scottish throne in favour of Edward III. In May 1359 he took part in a tournament at Smithfield, London, and was in France from October 1359 to May 1360, being present both at the siege of Rheims and at the peace negotiations held at Bretigny. He was nominated a knight of the Garter to fill the stall vacated by John, Lord Beauchamp of Warwick, who had died on 2 December 1360, and first received robes from the king for the Garter ceremonies of April 1361. 
The Anglo-French peace of 1360-69 offered an opportunity for Lionel to take up his long-awaited role in Ireland. In July 1360 the Anglo-Irish political community had begged the king to send them a leader with the authority and resources necessary to re-establish order in the troubled lordship. Late in 1360, furthermore, the Countess Elizabeth's grandmother, Elizabeth de Clare, died, and Lionel came into possession not only of her share of the Clare estates in England and Wales but also of the Irish lands of the earldom of Ulster in which she had enjoyed a life interest. Edward III announced his intention to dispatch Prince Lionel to the lordship on 15 March 1361 and on 1 July created him royal lieutenant in Ireland. Lionel's elevation to the title of duke of Clarence (meaning the town, castle, and honour of Clare) in parliament on 13 November 1362 also had the effect of making him the senior Irish peer. 
In the mid-fourteenth century the English colony in Ireland was on the defensive. Theoretically Edward III claimed lordship of the whole island, but in practice the native clans enjoyed a great deal of independence. Beyond the Bann and the Shannon there lay large areas in which English lordship was exercised only fleetingly and with difficulty, and even the heart of the English colony immediately around Dublin was threatened from time to time by Gaelic Irishmen such as the O Broin, O Tuathail, and Mac Murchadha tribes. Within the areas controlled by the English, royal authority was only ultimately effective if it met with the acquiescence of the resident aristocracy, in particular the earls of Desmond, Ormond, Louth, and Kildare. These and other members of the colonial aristocracy were highly critical of Edward III's neglect of the lordship: in 1346 it was alleged that the earl of Desmond had even sent messengers to the pope asking the latter to take Ireland under his special jurisdiction and appoint Desmond his vicar there. Consequently, although they regularly demanded royal intervention in the lordship, it was apparent even before Clarence's arrival that the 'English born in Ireland' (as the resident Anglo-Norman lords were often called) had a very different political perspective from the 'English born in England' (the description used for viceroys and other ministers sent into Ireland by the Westminster government). This was to be the great dilemma of Clarence's lieutenancy. 
Lionel's task was to repair the ruinous state of the English colony by a demonstration of military might: he was equipped with a force of approximately 50 knights, 300 men-at-arms, and 540 mounted archers, and provided with ample financial resources to raise additional troops within Ireland (the original scheme to raise 800 foot archers in Wales and the west of England appears to have foundered). Almost as soon as he landed, the prince made a foray into Wicklow against the Gaelic forces that were challenging the English settlements around Dublin. In order to provide a more effective base for a military-style administration, some of the government was moved to Carlow, although Lionel himself continued to use Dublin as his personal headquarters and had the royal castle there renovated. He appears to have been diligent in his duties: early in 1362 he was at Drogheda and later that year he campaigned in Meath. On 22 April 1364 the earl of Ormond was appointed keeper of the lordship and Clarence returned to England to consult with the king and council; but Lionel was reappointed lieutenant on 24 September 1364 and took up residence in Ireland again in December, when he began a progress which took him from Cork via Trim to Drogheda. After a further visit to England in 1365, he held a parliament at Kilkenny in February 1366 which produced the most lasting of his legacies to Irish government. The statute of Kilkenny aimed to prevent the process of political and cultural 'degeneracy' among the English born in Ireland by forbidding the subjects of the king from using the Irish tongue, marrying Irish wives, or observing Irish law. There was little that was new about these rules, but their codification in 1366 meant that the statute of Kilkenny became regarded as the definitive statement on the subject down to the early seventeenth century. 
Lionel was replaced as lieutenant on 7 November 1366 and left Ireland, vowing (according to the author of the 'Eulogium historiarum') never to return. His contribution to the English regime in the lordship was mixed. On the one hand, his period as lieutenant witnessed the first sustained attempt to force absentee landholders to contribute to the defence of the colony. Nor was it devoid of military success: the capture of Art Mor Mac Murchadha and the latter's subsequent death while in Lionel's custody removed the most troublesome of the Gaelic chieftains. On the other hand, Clarence's lieutenancy demonstrated that the colony was no longer self-supporting and that English authority could only be maintained with regular support, both military and financial, from the English government at Westminster; when the crown's interest and determination waned, such resources could all too easily disappear. The political rhetoric of the Irish parliaments of this period certainly does not suggest that the resident aristocracy perceived any appreciable improvement in the state of the Plantagenet regime. Above all, the statute of Kilkenny demonstrated the conflict between official government policy and the reality of Anglo-Irish political culture. 
Even before Lionel left Ireland, the king appears to have had a new career marked out for him. Clarence's first wife had died in Dublin in 1363; her body had been transported back to England, at the crown's expense, and buried in her family mausoleum at Clare Priory in Suffolk. On 30 July 1366 a diplomatic mission was sent to Italy to discuss the possibility of a marriage between Violante Visconti, daughter of Galeazzo Visconti, lord of Pavia, and either Prince Lionel or his younger brother Edmund of Langley. Lionel quickly emerged as the preferred candidate. The initiative for this alliance came from Violante's uncle, Bernabo Visconti, lord of Milan, who was prepared to pay dearly for the prestige of a Plantagenet alliance. It also complemented the anti-papal stance adopted by the English crown in the mid-1360s. Otherwise, it is difficult to see how the marriage offered any particular advantages to Edward III, whose dynastic strategy was focused very much on the British Isles and France. The terms were settled at Westminster in May 1367 and the prince and his entourage began to make plans for their departure in February 1368. Lionel was accompanied across the channel by an entourage of 457 men, together with no fewer than 1280 horses. The wedding took place before the door of Milan Cathedral on 28 May or 5 June 1368 and was celebrated with great pomp; the aged poet Petrarch was said to have dined with the wedding party during the sumptuous celebrations that followed. 
Violante brought with her a marriage portion of 2 million gold florins and a string of towns and castles in Piedmont; English chroniclers, playing on the apparent success of Edward III's family policy in the 1360s, believed that Galeazzo had surrendered half his lands to his new son-in-law. In the event, the marriage was brief and fruitless: Clarence died at Alba, in Piedmont, on 17 October 1368 and was initially buried at Pavia. By his will, dated at Alba on 3 October 1368 and proved at Lambeth on 8 June 1369, he expressed the wish to be buried at Clare, and his body was later removed to England and interred with that of his first wife. Violante subsequently married Ottone Palaeologo, marquess of Monferrato (died 1378), and finally Ludovico Visconti, lord of Lodi (died 1381); she died in 1382. 
In contrast to his brothers, Edward, prince of Wales (the Black Prince), John of Gaunt, and Thomas of Woodstock, Lionel of Antwerp had only a minor role to play in English political life and made very little impression upon contemporary chroniclers and commentators. Perhaps, like his other brother, Edmund of Langley, he was not instinctively drawn to the world of high politics; more likely, his careers in Ireland and Italy and his early death, shortly before his thirtieth birthday, deprived his English contemporaries of any real knowledge of the prince's personal attributes and worth. In the fifteenth century, however, he achieved posthumous fame as one of the two sons of Edward III through whom the house of York claimed its right to the throne of England: this dynastic link undoubtedly explains, for instance, why the chronicler John Hardyng not only concocted an idealized physical description of the duke but also speculated that the Visconti marriage might, in the fullness of time, have made Clarence king of Italy and even emperor. 


@@@@@


doc= 16751


Christopher Lipscomb (1781-1843), who was baptized on 20 November 1781 at Staindrop, Durham. He matriculated at New College, Oxford, on 12 July 1800 at the age of eighteen. He graduated BA in 1804, MA in 1811, and BD and DD in 1825. He was vicar of Sutton Benger, Wiltshire, from 1818, and was appointed the first bishop of Jamaica in 1824, a post which he took up in 1825, and the duties of which he pursued with vigour, 'always bearing in mind that the object, as he said, of his mission was to improve the spiritual condition of the slave population' (Ellis, 65). He was the author of 'Church Societies: a Blessing to the Colonies' (1840). He died on 4 April 1843, and was buried at St Andrew's Church, in Jamaica. He was survived by at least three sons, Cyril William ('b'. 1831), Edward Webber ('b'. 1832), and Arthur Morton ('b'. 1841). 


@@@@@


doc= 16752


Lipscomb, George (1773-1846), antiquary, was born on 4 January 1773 at Quainton, Buckinghamshire, the son of James Lipscomb (1730-1794), a former naval surgeon from Hampshire, and his wife, Mary (1745-1828), daughter of Jonathan George, farmer, of Grendon Underwood, Buckinghamshire. After attending schools at Quainton and Aylesbury and receiving some medical instruction from his father, he studied surgery in London under Sir James Earle. In 1792 he was appointed house surgeon of St Bartholomew's Hospital and became a member of the Lyceum Medicum Londinense. He obtained the degree of MD from Marischal College, Aberdeen, in 1806. 
In 1794 Lipscomb became lieutenant of the North Hampshire militia and in 1798 captain commandant of the Warwickshire volunteer infantry, for whom he wrote an 'Address to the Volunteers on their Duty to their King and Country'. Also in 1798 he was chosen deputy recorder of Warwick. At this period Lipscomb was practising as a surgeon in Warwick and he drew on his experience there in 'An Essay on the Nature and Treatment of a Putrid Malignant Fever which Prevailed at Warwick' (1799). Later he moved to Birmingham, where he practised as a chemist and surgeon, and then to Coleshill, Warwickshire. He was declared bankrupt in 1805, but reached agreement with his creditors. In the same year he left Warwickshire for London and afterwards moved to Whitchurch, Buckinghamshire, where he was practising medicine by 1819. After leaving Whitchurch in 1832, he spent the rest of his life at various addresses in London. 
As an author, Lipscomb displayed a wide range of interests. In addition to medical writings on subjects including asthma, hydrophobia, and vaccination, of which he was a staunch opponent, he published five topographical works between 1799 and 1823, one of which, 'A Journey into South Wales' (1802), contains a section on Buckinghamshire. He wrote three novels published between 1809 and 1812, two of them anonymously and one under the pseudonym John English. He contributed numerous articles to the 'Gentleman's Magazine', usually signed Viator, and various essays on subjects connected with political economy, statistics, and general literature to the 'Literary Panorama' and other periodicals. He suggested in an essay the plan of the Society for the Encouragement of Agricultural Industry. In 1832 Lipscomb delivered in London a series of lectures on cholera, which he afterwards published in the form of a treatise, accompanied by his correspondence on the subject with Lord Melbourne. Lipscomb also published sermons, edited the 'Clerical Guide' for 1821, and composed hymns and anthems for charity schools. 
On 16 January 1803 at St Martin's, Birmingham, Lipscomb married Elizabeth (1760-1834), the widow of Richard Hopkins of Stratford upon Avon, Warwickshire, and third daughter of Thomas Wells, also of Stratford. They had no children. On his wife's death in 1834 her whole fortune, on which he chiefly depended, passed to her own family. 
Lipscomb's great work, 'The History and Antiquities of the County of Buckingham', was based chiefly on his own collections, which he spent over twenty-five years in acquiring, and on those which he received on the death of the Revd Edward Cooke (1772-1824), rector of Haversham, Buckinghamshire, of whose will he was executor. The first part of the 'History' was published in 1831 by John Bowyer Nichols, but despite extensive subscriptions it created such financial difficulties for Lipscomb that publication of the succeeding parts had to be suspended. He expected to acquire considerable property from Cooke's estate, but the inheritance was contested and after many years in chancery the case was decided against him in 1831. 
The remainder of the work was published between 1838 and 1847 by J. and W. Robins, and before Lipscomb died he had the satisfaction of knowing that the eighth and final part was in the press. The complete 'History' filled four quarto volumes with title-pages dated 1847. The book, considering the difficulties of its publication, is very creditable, although Lipscomb lacked the means to make full use of his materials. 'The Victoria History of the County of Buckingham' (1905), in its preface, described Lipscomb's 'History' as 'the only serious attempt to compile a complete history of the county' and gave the opinion that 'Perhaps not quite equal to our best county histories, it is yet a work of great value' (1.xxiii). Lipscomb died at home at 1 Merrow Street, Walworth, London, on 9 November 1846 and, as his wife had been, was buried in the graveyard of St George the Martyr, Southwark. 


@@@@@


doc= 16753


Lipscomb, William (1754-1842), writer, was baptized on 9 July 1754 at St Thomas, Winchester, the son of Thomas Lipscomb, surgeon, of Winchester, and his wife, Sarah. He entered Winchester College in 1765, and matriculated at Oxford as a scholar of Corpus Christi College on 6 July 1770. In 1772 he won the prize for English verse, the subject being the beneficial effects of inoculation, and the poem appeared as a pamphlet that year. It was reprinted in 1793, and in the 'Oxford Prize Poems' in 1807 and 1810. He graduated BA in 1774, and MA in 1784. On 19 August 1780 he married Margaret, second daughter of Francis Cooke of Gower Street, cashier of the navy; they had a large family. For some years he was private tutor and subsequently chaplain to the earl of Darlington at Raby Castle, Durham. From 1789 to 1832 he was the rector of Welbury in the north riding of Yorkshire, which he was allowed to hand over to his son Francis in 1832. He was also master of St John's Hospital, Barnard Castle, Durham. 
Lipscomb, a frequent contributor to the 'Gentleman's Magazine', wrote: 'Poems... to which are Added Translations of Select Italian Sonnets' (1784) and 'The Canterbury Tales of Chaucer Completed in a Modern Version' (3 vols., 1795). This publication was a compilation of the work of several translators, with which Lipscomb combined his own. George Lipscomb MD was his cousin. 
Lipscomb died at Brompton, London, on 25 May 1842. He was survived by ten of his children, including 


@@@@@


doc= 16754


Lisle, Lady Alice (c.1614-1685), supposed traitor, was born at Moyles Court, Ellingham, Hampshire, the second daughter of Sir White Beconshaw 
(or Beconsawe; died 1638)
, a local landowner and ship money sheriff for Hampshire. Her mother's identity is unknown. Alice was reared and educated in Hampshire. In 1636 she became the second wife of John Lisle (1609/10-1664), MP for Winchester in the Short and Long parliaments, and a regicide who was elevated to Cromwell's upper house in 1657. From that point until her death she was usually referred to as Lady Alice. 
Little is known of Alice Lisle's roles as wife and mother. She was in exile with her husband at Lausanne in 1664 when two Irish royalists, Thomas MacDonnell and James Cotter, murdered him. John Lisle had fled to Switzerland after the Restoration with Edmund Ludlow and other regicides rather than stand trial in England. He was on his way to church when he was spotted and shot at such close range that all three bullets passed through his body and powder burns covered his clothing (Marshall, 296). After her husband's burial in Lausanne, Alice returned to Moyles Court, on the outskirts of the New Forest, a property she had inherited from her father. She was a pious woman who sympathized with dissenters but was not an active sectarian (Bruce, 124). For the next twenty years, her peaceful Hampshire lifestyle was interrupted only by occasional trips to London. She had three children: a son, William, a royalist, who married Lady Katherine Hyde; and two daughters, Triphena Lloyd and Bridget Usher. Both daughters married twice: nothing is known of Triphena's husbands; however, Bridget married Leonard Hoar, president of Harvard University, and after his death wed Hezekiah Usher of Boston. 
Alice Lisle's quiet life ended abruptly with Monmouth's rebellion. On 25 July 1685 James Dunne, a nonconformist baker from Warminster, came to Moyles Court bearing a note from John Hickes, who was seeking shelter for himself and Richard Nelthorp. Dunne had been hiding the fugitives since the battle of Sedgemoor and seems to have been part of a network of dissenters across the region. Lisle knew Hickes as a presbyterian minister and readily consented to his plea for sanctuary. Hickes and Nelthorp dined with her, then hid in the malt house. Alerted by John Barter, a local labourer, that rebels had taken refuge at Moyles Court, Colonel Thomas Penruddock and his men searched the property and arrested Hickes and Nelthorp on the morning of the 26th. Lady Alice was also taken into custody, transferred to Winchester, and charged with treason for harbouring Hickes. 
Brought before a special commission at Winchester on 27 August 1685, Lady Alice was the first person tried before Lord Chief Justice George Jeffreys in what was subsequently labelled the 'bloody assizes'. To drive home the serious consequences of harbouring fugitives, the government clearly wished to make an example of her (Earle, 169-71). Aged, infirm, and nearly deaf, she asked that a friend, Matthew Brown, be designated to stand by her in court and repeat all that was said to her. Throughout the ordeal she proclaimed her innocence. A version of the trial record survives ('State trials', 11.298-382); however, according to Muddiman, its veracity is open to question. First printed in 1719, long after all who could check the transcript for accuracy were deceased, the proceedings seem to have been prepared from trial notes (Muddiman, 27-8). What makes the document suspect is the vitriolic language and court demeanour attributed to Jeffreys. Its excessiveness differs from any other extant trial record involving the chief justice (Keeton, 314). 
The case against Alice Lisle hinged on proving that she knew Hickes and Nelthorp were fugitive rebels. As the trial progressed, with Jeffreys apparently badgering witnesses sympathetic to Alice Lisle, Dunne, the key witness, found his testimony contradicted by Barter. Under blistering examination, and fearing that he might also be charged, he recanted and implicated her. Lady Lisle acknowledged hiding Hickes but steadfastly rejected the charge of treason. Replying directly to Jeffreys, she stated, 'And I beseech your lordship to believe I had no intention to harbour him but as a Nonconformist; and that, I knew, was no treason' (Bruce, 136). Because of her age and deafness, Alice Lisle proved no match for her determined accuser. After a gruelling six-hour trial, she was convicted and condemned by a reluctant jury to be burned alive. According to Jeffreys, 'I would have condemned her had she been my mother' (Chenevix Trench, 237). Her appeal to King James for clemency modified the sentence only slightly, and she was beheaded in the Market Square, Winchester, on 2 September 1685. In her dying speech, she reiterated that her only crime was 'Entertaining a Non-Conformist Minister' ('Last Speech'). The body was returned to her family for burial at Ellingham, and her small estate was transferred to Louis Duras, second earl of Feversham. Her attainder was reversed in 1689 after a petition from her daughters. 
Popular opinion overwhelmingly supported Alice Lisle, portraying her as a protestant martyr, a victim of royal vindictiveness. Many were shocked that a woman of her age and social standing should be executed, while others, more fully implicated in the actual rising, received lesser sentences or pardons. Only one contemporary elegy suggested her guilt and sanctioned the punishment. Penning her epitaph, its misogynist author wrote: '
Here Lies Madam Lisle Dead, 

Which for Treason lost her Head, 

She Patroniz'd the Cause, The Cause, 

Against the Church and stablish'd Laws, 

Let all her sex both Great and small, 

Take here Example by her Fall, 

And henceforth ever shun to be 

Entangled by Presbi ery. 
('Elegy on Mrs. Alicia Lisle')' While Jeffreys was probably technically correct in his decision, the excessive sentence cast a pall over the remaining trials and lent credence to the charge that she was the victim of judicial murder. 


@@@@@


doc= 16755


Lisle, Sir George (d. 1648), royalist army officer, was the son of Lawrence Lisle, who had the monopoly of viewing and repairing arms in England and a lease of the right to collect the imposts on tobacco and tobacco pipes; he married a near relation of George Villiers, duke of Buckingham, and was said to have lost $12,000 in the royalist cause. 
George Lisle had his military training in the Netherlands, and was a captain in the army against the Scots of 1640. After joining the royalist cause early in the civil war, he served in Lord Grandison's regiment of foot, and, already a lieutenant-colonel of dragoons, at Edgehill (23 October 1642) he cleared the hedges on the royalist left. After fighting at Chalgrove (18 June 1643), Lisle bravely led a 'forlorn hope' of musketeers at the first battle of Newbury (20 September), and was wounded. He was commissioned to raise a foot regiment in November, and on the death of Colonel Richard Bolles at Alton, Hampshire, in December, Lisle took over the latter's much depleted regiment in Reading. On the eve of the battle of Cheriton (29 March 1644) Lisle was posted with 1000 musketeers and 500 horse on an eminence between the two battle-lines, close enough to hear the chatter of the enemy's sentinels; but next day, the parliamentarian capture of Cheriton Wood forced him to retire. 
After participating in the relief of Dudley Castle in June 1644 and the drawn battle of Cropredy Bridge, Lisle commanded one of the three royalist infantry divisions in the king's campaign in Devon and Cornwall in July and August. He signed the letter to the parliamentarian commander the earl of Essex on 8 August, in which Charles I offered somewhat hazy peace terms in return for an understanding. At the second battle of Newbury on 27 October Lisle commanded the second tertia of foot under Sir Jacob Astley which bore the brunt of the earl of Manchester's attack. Holding the royalist centre at Shaw House, he led three gallant charges and 'did all things with so much courage, cheerfulness, and present dispatch, as had special influence on every common soldier, taking particular care of all except himself' ('Mercurius Aulicus', 28 Oct 1644). His troops scattered Manchester's infantry 'like spray before some storm-driven ship' (ibid.), and, as the twilight deepened, Lisle, who seldom wore defensive armour, threw off his buff coat, so that the white glimmer of his holland shirt was distinguishable to his men: '
From whence the frighted Rebels gave it out 

That a white witch was seen to fly about 

The Royal Army scouring to and fro, 

Where'er the Contest did the hottest grow. 
(Money, 173)' Sir Samuel Luke, the parliamentarian scoutmaster-general, reported on 10 November that at a rendezvous near Oxford the previous month the king, who had closely witnessed Lisle's bravery at Newbury, intended to knight him. But Lisle declined, saying 'he would not be knighted or receive any honour till he was sure to keep it and then doubted not but he should as well deserve to be a Lord as many that were near his Majesty' (Newman, 'Royalist Officers', 235). If accurately reported, Lisle's disclaimer may have arisen from his fear of becoming entangled in the disgrace of his superior Henry Wilmot, Baron Wilmot, earlier in 1644, on suspicion of treating with parliament. 
During the winter of 1644-5 Lisle became governor of Faringdon, Berkshire, and complained to Prince Rupert that it was only one-third fortified and entirely unprovisioned. On 16 April 1645 he was created an honorary DCL by Oxford University. He commanded a tertia of foot at the storming of Leicester on 30 May, and on 1 June he was appointed lieutenant-general in Leicestershire under Lord Loughborough. At Naseby on 14 June 1645 the tertia of foot he commanded in the left centre bore the brunt of Cromwell's charge; Joshua Sprigg, Sir Thomas Fairfax's retainer, said they fought 'with incredible courage and resolution' (Young, 268). Although wounded, Lisle escaped to Leicester. He seems already to have been replaced as governor of Faringdon, and Loughborough recommended him for the post of deputy governor of Lichfield. He was knighted by the king at Oxford on 21 December 1645, when he was, apparently, master of the royal household. 
In the winter of 1647 Lisle was in London, compounding for his estate. But he was soon busily occupied in getting together troops for a new rising. He was a ringleader of the insurrection in Kent in May 1648, which Fairfax suppressed after bitter street fighting in Maidstone. Lisle led the survivors to join the earl of Norwich's forces, which crossed the Thames into Essex, made a rendezvous with Sir Charles Lucas at Chelmsford, and, after a circuitous march, occupied Colchester. During the ensuing siege Lisle commanded the foot. On 6 July he and Lucas led a large raiding party across the River Colne, to recapture the parliamentarian stronghold at East Mill. Sallying forth 'as if it had been a sporting skirmish amongst tame soldiers in a general muster' (Carlton, 322), they pitched the two enemy cannon into the river before withdrawing with dignity. Lisle, captured during the raid, was soon rescued. But the garrison and citizens were reduced to a diet of horse, dog, and cat, occasionally sweetened with prunes; when even this food supply ran out, the royalists accepted Fairfax's terms of surrender on 27 August. 
Senior officers were put at the lord-general's mercy: peers were reserved for the judgment of parliament, but Lisle, considered a mere soldier of fortune, was dealt with by a council of war. By 2 p.m. on 28 August he and Lucas had been condemned to death, probably through the influence of Henry Ireton, appointed commissioner for the surrender of Colchester, and to make a vindictive example of the leaders of such a lengthy and obstinate siege. Lisle was refused time to write to his parents, and at 7 p.m., with Lucas and Sir Bernard Gascoigne (a Florentine who was reprieved), he was brought out to the castle courtyard to face three files of musketeers. As Lucas's body fell, Lisle ran forward to catch it and tenderly kissed his face. When his turn came, he extracted from his pocket a gold piece for the executioners and four others for friends in London, and suggested the dragoons came nearer. One said, 'I'll warrant you, sir, we'll hit you'; Lisle replied, 'Friends, I have been nearer you when you have missed me' (Clarendon, 'Hist. rebellion', 4.388). 
The pair quickly became martyrs; it was said that the grass on the spot where they fell never grew again, and within a few days eight pamphlets appeared condemning this 'most barbarous, unsoldierly murder' (Carlton, 228). Lisle and Lucas were buried obscurely, but in 1661 were reinterred in the Lucas family vault in St Giles's Church, Colchester. Above their tomb a black marble slab inscription said they had been 'in cold blood barbarously murdered' (Warburton, 3.407) at the command of Fairfax. There is a tradition that when, after the Restoration, the second duke of Buckingham, who married Fairfax's daughter, asked for the inscription to be erased, Charles II had it cut more deeply. In January 1662 Lisle's sister Mary petitioned the king for a pension (she had also lost another brother, Francis, at Marston Moor); she was granted $2000 on 31 January but seven years later had only received $1100 and was destitute. 
Lisle was one of the more attractive commanders thrown up by the civil war. Clarendon's relatively succinct panegyric remarks that he led his men into battle: 'with such an alacrity that no man was ever better followed, his soldiers never forsaking him; and the tertia which he commanded never left anything undone which he had led them upon. But... to this fierceness of courage, he had the softest and most gentle nature imaginable; loved all, and beloved of all, and without a capacity to have an enemy. (Clarendon, 'Hist. rebellion', 4.389)' 



@@@@@


doc= 16756


Lisle, John, appointed Lord Lisle under the protectorate (1609/10-1664), regicide, was the second, but eldest surviving, son of Sir William Lisle (died 1648) of Wootton, Isle of Wight, and Bridget, daughter of Sir John Hungerford of Down Ampney, Gloucestershire. On 25 January 1626 he matriculated at Magdalen Hall, Oxford, graduated BA in February, and proceeded to the Middle Temple in May, aged sixteen. He was called to the bar in 1633, becoming a bencher of the Middle Temple in 1649. On 15 February 1632 he married Elizabeth Mary Hobart (died 1633), daughter of Sir Henry Hobart, lord chief justice, with a massive dowry of $4000. An anonymous poet wrote that Elizabeth was: '
Neither well-proportioned, fair nor wise 

All these defects four thousand pounds supplies. 

' The dowry, said to have been the largest ever in the Isle of Wight, helped to offset Sir William's feckless extravagance, and after Elizabeth died in childbirth Lisle acquired another heiress, Alice Beconshaw ('c'.1614-1685) ['see 'Lisle, Lady Alice], daughter of Sir White Beconshaw of Moyle's Court near Fordingbridge, whom he married in 1636. According to the arrangements Lisle took over his father's estate at this juncture, giving him $150 p.a. allowance; on Beconshaw's death Alice brought him Moyle's Court and half the estate of Ellingham. 
Lisle was chosen as MP for Winchester in March and October 1640, and as an energetic civil war parliamentarian took a leading role on county committees to fund the war effort and defend Hampshire, Portsmouth, and Wight. On the eviction of Dr William Lewis in November 1644 he was made master of St Cross Hospital, Winchester. In parliament he chaired the committee investigating Cromwell's allegations against the earl of Manchester in December 1644, and that in January 1645 appointed to frame the ordinance creating the New Model Army. He displayed hostility to the king right from 1642, condemning him in a 1645 speech to the lord mayor and citizens of London after the capture of royal correspondence at the battle of Naseby. He was one of the parliamentary commissioners chosen to take Charles the four bills, parliament's latest terms for a settlement, in December 1647. His growing national prominence was offset by local concern at his niggardly treatment of his father. Lisle's godfather, Sir John Oglander, who claimed that Lisle had grown up with maternal neglect and paternal alcoholic excess, complained that Sir William was allowed but 'one nasty chamber' for all his possessions and animals. Sir William's extravagance may have made his son over concerned to protect his inheritance. When Sir William died in 1648, refusing to see his children, Lisle arranged a cheap evening funeral. 
Voting against negotiations with Charles in November to December 1648, Lisle was selected as a commissioner for his trial and took a leading role, sitting next to the president to advise him on legal matters. He helped to draw up the sentence, along with the new republican form of the constitution and legal procedure, and had his reward with his appointment as commissioner of the great seal from 8 February 1649 at a salary of $1000 p.a ['see also 'Regicides]. He was one of the committee of five trusted to select councillors of state and vet MPs, and pressed for legal reform particularly of chancery. He was, however, keen to acquire the fruits of office, leasing Beaufort House, Chelsea, and persuading his fellow commissioner Bulstrode Whitelocke to join him there to seem less ostentatious. Whitelocke accused him of fixing their lots for which lodgings to occupy to avoid those needing repair, further indication of miserliness. When the commissioners borrowed Sion House in August 1649 Lisle invited the earl of Mulgrave to move in without asking Whitelocke. 
Despite his republicanism Lisle had no hesitation in retaining office under Cromwell, to whom he administered the oath of office. Elected to parliament on 12 July 1654 for Southampton, where he was recorder from 1651-9, and the Isle of Wight, he chose to sit for the former. He presided over the high court trying royalist plotters in 1654, 1655, and 1658, became a commissioner of the exchequer in 1655, and was retained as commissioner of the great seal when his colleagues were dismissed on 15 June 1655. He supported Cromwell's becoming king, and took a seat in the other house in December 1657. He was eventually dismissed by the restored Rump on 14 May 1659, but unlike most Cromwellians he was sufficiently trusted to become a commissioner for the admiralty and navy in January 1660 and a local militia commissioner. 
Lisle was a prime target at the Restoration for his role in the king's trial, and fled abroad just before a parliamentary vote on 6 June 1660 exempting him from pardon and requiring his surrender. His lands were seized. His exiled younger brother, Sir William, a royalist, regained Wootton; Alice retained Moyle's Court but not Ellingham. Lisle's younger son William's mother-in-law, Lady Katherine Hyde, petitioned for land to support William, disinherited for his royalist sympathies. Lisle settled by May 1663 in Lausanne with other republicans including Ludlow, Whalley, and Goffe, and was said to 'much charm' the Swiss with his religious devotion. Already fearing assassination, he was shot at a church door in Lausanne by an Irish royalist known as Thomas Macdonnell (allegedly shouting 'Vive le roi') on 11 August 1664 and was buried in the church; the murder was greeted with pleasure in London. His fellow exile Edmund Ludlow incorporated some of his papers into his MS, 'Voyce from the watch tower'. 
Lisle's second wife, Alice, was executed by Judge Jeffreys in 1685. As well as two sons, John (died 1709) of Dibden, Hampshire, and William, he had at least three daughters, including Bridget (died 1723), who married Leonard Hoar. An efficient constitutional lawyer and genuine reformer capable of putting principle above safety, he cannot be dismissed as just a Cromwellian timeserver. But his ability was countered by acquisitiveness, a reputation for intrigue, a personal harshness, and resort to sharp practice. Loathed by royalists, as the events of 1664 showed, harsh criticism came too from among family and friends. 


@@@@@


doc= 16757


Lisle, Samuel (1683-1749), bishop of St Asaph and of Norwich, was born in Blandford, Dorset, the son of Richard Lisle, a landowner. He was educated first at the grammar school in Blandford, which he entered about 1688, and then at Salisbury grammar school under the eminent teacher Edward Hardwick. On 4 March 1700 he entered Wadham College, Oxford. Having been elected to a scholarship in 1701, he graduated BA in 1703 and proceeded MA in 1706. He was elected to a Goodridge scholarship and a fellowship of Wadham in 1707. In 1710 he became chaplain to the Levant Company in Smyrna, and in 1716 he accepted a similar chaplaincy at Aleppo, Syria. During this time he visited Constantinople and much of Asia Minor and mastered a number of oriental languages. In 1728 Lisle was to contribute some inscriptions to Edmund Chishull's 'Antiquitates Asiaticae'. After returning to England in 1719 he was appointed bursar of Wadham. In 1720 he was appointed chaplain to Lord Onslow and thereafter he quickly accumulated the rectories of Holwell in Bedfordshire, Tooting in Surrey, and St Mary le Bow, London. Technically he held the last position while an incumbent also of the ancient London livings of St Pancras, Soper Lane, and All Hallows, Honey Lane. 
In 1721 Lisle was created a Lambeth DD by Archbishop Wake, who also appointed him his domestic chaplain. Lisle attracted much patronage from Wake: in 1724 he was appointed archdeacon of Canterbury; in 1726 he became rector of Fetcham, Surrey; in 1728 he was appointed to a canonry of Canterbury; and in 1729 he became vicar of Northolt. Although he was among those members of the chapter censured for poor residence at the cathedral, he was also a member of a corps of able and energetic administrators who helped Archbishop Wake superintend his diocese. His high standing among the clergy was affirmed by his election as deputy prolocutor in the lower house of convocation in 1726 and as prolocutor in 1734. As prolocutor he preached a sermon entitled 'Concio ad synodum' at the commencement of the convocation. 
Lisle's character and integrity were such that he was chosen to succeed Robert Thistlethwayte in 1738 when the latter fled the country and abandoned the wardenship of Wadham in the wake of a homosexual scandal. Lisle, it was felt, would repair the college's reputation; by way of reward he was awarded a BD and DD by diploma on 10 April 1739. 
In 1737 Lisle had refused the poorly endowed bishopric of Oxford, having been denied commendams which would have enabled him to have sufficient income. In 1744 he accepted appointment to the see of St Asaph, and on 1 April he was consecrated at Lambeth; he retained the archdeaconry of Canterbury and vicarage of Northolt 'in commendam' with the bishopric. When, in 1748, he asked to be translated to the vacant see of Norwich, he was permitted it on the grounds of his age and labours in north Wales. He was to hold the bishopric for just eighteen months. 
Though he was a regular attender in the House of Lords Lisle was not an actively political bishop; he rarely spoke or voted. In 1748 he was, however, active, with Bishop Sherlock and Archbishop Herring, in discussions with Samuel Chandler to achieve a comprehension of dissenters within the Church of England, and while they reached agreements over matters of doctrine, their divisions over oaths and reordination prevented any union. 
Lisle died, apparently unmarried, in Lisle Street, Leicester Fields, London, on 3 October 1749, and was buried in the churchyard of his former parish of Northolt. His will directed that his papers, including his manuscript notes of his journeys in Asia Minor, be burnt by his executor. 


@@@@@


doc= 16758


Lisle, Thomas (c.1298-1361), bishop of Ely, probably came from Kent. He may have been a kinsman of the Thomas Lisle (Thomas de Insula) associated with collectors of customs at Sandwich in 1292, while his nephews Thomas, Robert, and William Michel came from Canterbury diocese. According to the antiquary William Cole (died 1782), the coat of arms adopted by the future bishop was 'a chevron between three trefoils slipped', suggesting that he claimed a relationship with a branch of the Hampshire Lisles. It has been assumed since the sixteenth century that Lisle studied at Cambridge (of which he was to become a notable benefactor), entering the Dominican house there and incepting as doctor of theology. Closer investigation of the evidence has cast doubt on these claims, and it is possible that Lisle was not even a graduate; it is certainly hard, if not impossible, to find a reference to him as 'magister'. 
Probably born about 1298, Lisle was ordained priest on 18 December 1322 by Rigaud d'Assier, bishop of Winchester. He was then a member of the Dominican convent at Winchester. By 1340 he was prior -- an office he probably held until his promotion as bishop. In that year he was at Avignon on royal business, seeking a dispensation for the marriage of Hugh Despenser and Elizabeth, daughter of William Montagu, earl of Salisbury (died 1344). The bull was issued on 27 April 1341, but already in March the same envoys had been deputed to oppose William Zouche's election as archbishop of York and to press the claims of William Kilsby (died 1346), the king's secretary, who at the time was in conflict with Archbishop John Stratford (died 1348) in his royal master's interest. Ironically -- in view of Lisle's subsequent misfortunes -- they were also ordered to protest to the pope about the archbishop's conduct. 
Following the unexpected death of Simon Montagu in 1345 the prior of Ely, Alan Walsingham, was elected bishop. Lisle was conveniently at the curia, where he had been appointed a penitentiary. He was provided to the see on 15 July and consecrated at Avignon on the 24th. To meet his expenses he was granted a faculty to raise a loan of 12,000 florins and permission to levy a charitable subsidy from his diocese. His profession to Canterbury followed on 9 September and the day after, having performed fealty, his temporalities were restored, which suggests that Edward III was not averse to the appointment even if he disliked the method. Lisle was solemnly enthroned on 27 November, following which, alleges his Ely biographer, he acted with extravagant splendour. 
Lisle's episcopal register suggests diligence. He performed all recorded ordination ceremonies in person except for one in 1349, when the bishop of Leighlin acted for him during his absence abroad. He held a visitation of his cathedral priory in 1346, and in that year and the following one is stated to have visited seven religious houses, for some of which injunctions are recorded. Of parochial visitation nothing is discoverable. Under the year 1352 the register lists his dedication of thirteen parochial and conventual churches, and his consecration of the high altars of six other churches. In 1349 he had papal licence to appropriate Leverington church, valued at $85, to the bishop's 'mensa', or general fund for his support, on the grounds that his possessions were held of the king 'in capite', and could therefore be confiscated. Administration was complicated by the fact that, although Pope Clement VI ('r'. 1342-52) had provided Cardinal Gaillard de la Mothe to the archdeaconry of Ely, there were two other claimants, one of whom -- unnamed but presumably in 'de facto' possession -- was, so the bishop alleged, publicly defamed of adultery and fornication in the diocese and guilty of failing to exercise his office in accordance with the canons. The king, who for reasons of his own had confiscated the fruits of the archdeaconry, issued a prohibition against interference with the archdeacon's jurisdiction. Lisle, however, explained the situation and secured a writ of consultation, which enabled him to continue proceedings. The outcome is unknown. 
The black death took a heavy toll of incumbents. Between the beginning of April 1349 and the end of January 1350 eighty-one institutions are recorded, as against a total of fourteen for the years 1345-8 inclusive. By March 1349 Lisle himself was at Avignon, but on 1 October 1348, before his departure, he had appointed no fewer than five vicars-general -- an unprecedented number. So great was the mortality, however, that emergency arrangements were called for, and on 9 April 1349, still at Avignon, Lisle appointed three supplementary vicars-general, and on account of its impracticability cancelled the clause in the earlier commissions requiring two persons for certain types of business. Lisle was back in his diocese by the end of 1350, and the following year appropriated Whaddon and Caxton rectories to St George's Chapel, Windsor. On 1 January 1352 at his manor of Hatfield he confirmed the refoundation by the Norwich diocesan, William Bateman (died 1355), of the Hall of the Annunciation, as Gonville Hall was called following its founder's death, and on 3 February 1353 licensed the founding of another college under the name of the Guild of Corpus Christi. The establishment of a third Cambridge college, Pembroke, had been confirmed (23 November 1349) in his absence by Chancellor John Hoo as vicar-general. It was alleged that in 1358 the bishop appropriated the manors of West Wratting and Swaffham Prior to Peterhouse without licence. 
The anonymous 'Historia Eliensis' considered Lisle a good pastor and an excellent preacher, but felt that although he advocated mercy he himself preferred justice. He kept a good table and maintained a fine retinue. The ill omen of the fracture of a glass flagon full of wine at his consecration need not be taken too seriously -- it follows the recitation of two other miracles. His quarrel with the prior and convent over their right to dig gravel and clay from the episcopal demesne for the cathedral's repair temporarily impaired their relationship. On the evidence of commissions of oyer and terminer it has been claimed that Lisle was prone to violence. Early in his episcopate commissions were appointed to examine complaints against him, and the final years of the episcopate saw a bitter quarrel with the king. Previously he had been been on good terms with Edward. Thus, in 1346 he had added a forty days' indulgence to that of Archbishop Stratford for those praying for the king's safe return from the continent, and in the following year he had given rather than loaned him six sacks of wool. He was among those who in August 1354 sealed the 'procuration' for persuading the pope to act as arbiter in his quarrel with the French king. 
The damaging dispute that erupted between Lisle and Blanche, daughter of Henry of Lancaster (died 1345) (hence kinswoman of the king), widow of Thomas, Lord Wake of Liddell (died 1349), precipitated a fracas at Colne near Somersham, Huntingdonshire, in the summer of 1354. Following Blanche's complaint two commissions of oyer and terminer were appointed, and on an indictment that the bishop was an accessory to trespass (a wide-ranging term) the case was taken before king's bench but not actually tried. Meanwhile, the second commission found the bishop and others guilty of trespass and awarded damages against him of $900. This verdict was upheld in king's bench by Sir William Shareshull (died 1370). There was doubt as to whether a writ of 'elegit' could be issued against a bishop, but Shareshull and his fellow justices ruled in favour and Lisle was forced to pay the fine. In the summer of 1355 Lisle was again indicted, this time for incitement to murder one of Blanche's retainers and for having harboured the murderers. The bishop, having irritated Edward by claiming that his justice was perverted in Blanche's favour, planned to escape abroad, but the king issued a prohibition and summoned Lisle to answer in the parliament of November 1355 where, incensed by the bishop's conduct, he adopted Blanche's quarrel and demanded confiscation of the bishop's temporalities. The doubtful legality of this step was overcome by a coroner's indictment brought into king's bench in 1356, the holding of an inquest in which the jury found Lisle guilty as an accessory, and his subsequent surrender as a clerk to Archbishop Simon Islip (died 1366). Refusing to submit to the king, as the archbishop advised, Lisle, who had previously unsuccessfully demanded trial by his peers, now sought purgation. Either this was denied on the grounds that he was a convicted clerk, or possibly Islip was too afraid to publish the outcome, since no one testified against the bishop. He fled to Avignon in November 1356. On the 18th his temporalities were confiscated and in February 1357 farmed to the Lynn merchant John Wesenham, for 3740 marks -- 3000 in successive years -- payable to the royal wardrobe. In 1357 the archdeacon of Richmond, Henry Walton, was under sentence of excommunication for contumacy in failing to appear in the case brought against him by Lisle in the curia for injuries alleged to total 10,000 marks, the archbishop and the bishops of Lincoln and London having failed to take action. 
Clement VI responded to Lisle's appeal by citing to Avignon three of the justices (including Shareshull), the commissioners, and the coroner. On their failure to appear, he excommunicated them, entrusting the execution of the sentence to Bishop John Gynwell of Lincoln. Archbishop Islip -- castigated by the pope in 1357 as a dumb dog who had not acted as the successor of St Thomas -- had been prevented from securing transcripts of the English court proceedings. The affair possibly complicated the negotiations for peace with France, which hung fire until 1360. Wesenham was still in possession of the temporalities at Lisle's death on 23 June 1361, perhaps from a fresh outbreak of plague. 
Lisle was buried at Avignon in the church of St Praxedes, a house of Dominican nuns. Aspects of his case bear a resemblance to those of Adam Orleton (died 1345), John Stratford, and even Simon Mepham (died 1333), who were likewise accused of provoking violence, but he might have argued, as they certainly did, that he was defending clerical immunity against secular power. His anonymous biographer, a monk of Ely, doubtless mindful of the reputation of the see, defended the bishop against any complicity in the crimes and regarded his accusers as malicious. By contrast, the most recent analyst of his career attempts to prove that, like some lay magnates of the period, 'he was the leader of a criminal gang that operated in East Anglia', whose crimes involved arson, theft, abduction, extortion, and even murder (Aberth, 'Criminal Churchmen', 203). This 'gang' was allegedly comprised principally of relatives, notably his brother John, his nephews, and his manorial servants. Certainly the most damning evidence against the bishop is the number of violent incidents and his failure to disown those of his familiars implicated in them. However if, as suggested, the purpose of such conduct was to support an extravagant way of life, it proved counter-productive. 
To Peterhouse, for which college he secured papal authority to appropriate Hinton church, thus implementing a plan of his predecessor Hugh of Balsham (died 1286), Lisle gave a number of manuscripts: a 'Bible', a commentary of Thomas Aquinas on the 'Sentences', and a glossed version of St John's gospel, in which he noted the meaning of 'logos'. To his cathedral priory he left vestments, a chalice, and other silver vessels. 


@@@@@


doc= 16759


Lisle, William (c.1569-1637), translator and Anglo-Saxon scholar, was one of numerous children of Edmond Lisle of Tandridge, Surrey, and Dorothy Rudston, daughter of Thomas Rudston of Cambridgeshire. About 1580 Lisle went to school at Eton College, from where, in 1584, he went on to King's College, Cambridge. He took bachelor's and master's degrees there, and in 1593 is recorded supplicating for incorporation at Oxford. He became a fellow of his Cambridge college, and seems to have stayed in this post until 1608. 
While Lisle's most enduring reputation derives from his work on Anglo-Saxon, he worked too on several other languages, and his first translations were from French. In 1595 he published 'Babilon: a part of the seconde weeke of Guillaume de Saluste Seigneur du Bartas, with the commentarie, and marginall notes of S. G. S'. The translation was dedicated to the lord admiral, Thomas Howard of Effingham. Three years later appeared another translation, 'The colonies of Bartas: with the commentarie of S. G. S. in diverse places corrected and enlarged by the translatour'. He has also been conjecturally identified as the 'W. L.' who wrote, in 1603, the verse pamphlet 'Nothing for a New Year's Gift'. 
In 1608 there took place a 'bloody quarrel' at the notoriously rowdy King's College, in which Roger Goad, the vice-chancellor of Cambridge University, was wounded. Goad involved Lord Salisbury, the chancellor of the university, and Lisle wrote submitting to Salisbury's jurisdiction and begging not to be sacked for his offence. It is unclear whether or not any action was taken against him on this occasion, and very little else is known about his life. 
During these years, Lisle became a pioneer in the study of Anglo-Saxon. In the preface to his edition of the 'Saxon Treatise', he describes his methods in teaching himself this unfamiliar tongue: he studied whatever Old English materials he could find collected by previous antiquaries, as well as other tangentially relevant material such as the Dutch language, and then, having learned 'as it were to swimme without bladders', embarked upon independent studies ('Saxon Treatise', sig. d1'r'). Lisle worked in collaboration with other antiquaries such as his kinsman Henry Spelman, and also Robert Cotton, in recovering Old English. His motives were both political and religious, as may be seen by the extended title of his print publication, 'Saxon treatise concerning the Old and New Testament: written about the time of King Edgar (700 yeares agoe) by AElfricus Aebas, thought to be the same that was afterward archbishop of Canterburie, whereby appeares what was the canon of holy scripture here then received, and that the Church of England had it so long agoe in her mother tongue' (1623). Lisle edited this work from a manuscript belonging to Cotton, and as the title also shows, he suspected the incorrect identification of AElfric Grammaticus with AElfric, archbishop of Canterbury. Appendices contain homilies and epistles of AElfric. The volume is almost in itself an Anglo-Saxon primer, containing as it does additional material such as the Lord's prayer, the creed, and the ten commandments in Anglo-Saxon with interlinear translation. 
The 'Saxon Treatise' was Lisle's only work of Anglo-Saxon scholarship to be printed in his lifetime, and it was also reissued in 1638 under the title 'Divers Ancient Monuments'. However, he contributed much other work to the revival of Anglo-Saxon studies. Letters exchanged with Robert Cotton mention a lexicon prepared by Lisle of Anglo-Saxon vocabulary, which Lisle was seeking to have printed, but this work has not survived. Two manuscripts now in the Bodleian (MS Laud misc. 201, MS Laud misc. 381) represent substantial projects by Lisle. The first of these is entitled, in the manuscript, 'The Saxon-English psalter, to preserve the memory of our mother churche and language'. Based on the Eadwine psalter and completed by Lisle in 1630, this is the first modern edition and translation of an Old English psalter. A similar search for national identity informs the other manuscript, a collection of largely 'Old Testament' material in Old English, designed to illustrate 'the Roots & grounds of our mother toong' (Pulsiano, 183). Lisle also worked on the 'Ancrene Wisse' and on Anglo-Saxon law. 
Lisle appears to have had access to some manuscripts that are now lost, and his work is the sole source for subsequent knowledge of, for instance, AElfric's homily on 'Esther'. While his all-round achievements are remarkable, recent scholarship has discovered that he occasionally distorts the texts he transcribes, most notably through deliberate archaizings and silent omissions. He certainly had the facility to compose in Old English if he chose to. 
Alongside his Anglo-Saxon career, Lisle continued to produce verse translations from other languages. In 1625 and 1637 appeared more work by him on Du Bartas: in 1628 he printed 'Virgil's Eclogues, Translated into English by W. L., Gent.', with the accompanying commentary of Vives. In 1631 Lisle printed 'The Faire Aethiopian', a verse translation of Heliodorus dedicated to the king and queen. This was reissued in 1638 under the title, 'The Famous Historie of Heliodorus'. In addition, Lisle wrote Latin hexameter verses which appeared in the preface to the second edition of his neighbour Michael Dalton's book 'The Countrey Justice' (1619); a verse inscription on the tomb of William Benson in St Olave's, Southwark; and he has been credited with English verses signed 'W. L.', beginning 'When stout Achilles heard of Helens rape', that appeared prefixed to the 1590 'Faerie Queene'. However, this last identification is far from certain. 
Lisle died in September 1637 at the family estate at Wilbraham, Cambridge. He was buried in Walmer, Kent, where a monument commemorates him. 


@@@@@


doc= 16760


Lister, Edward (1557-1620), physician, son of William Lister and brother of Sir Matthew Lister, was born at Wakefield, Yorkshire, and educated at Eton College. In 1575 he was elected a scholar of King's College, Cambridge, where he graduated BA in 1580, MA in 1583, and MD in 1590. He was elected a fellow of the College of Physicians on 30 September 1594, was chosen as censor six times, and was treasurer from 1612 to 1618. He was physician-in-ordinary to Queen Elizabeth and to James I. 
Lister lived in the parish of St Mary Aldermanbury, London, and married Anne (died 1613), widow of his fellow collegian, John Farmery, on 27 February 1593 in the parish church. Lister died on 27 March 1620 in Aldermanbury, and was buried in the same church. 


@@@@@


doc= 16761


Lister, Joseph (1627-1709), nonconformist autobiographer, was born on 7 June 1627 at Bradford, Yorkshire, to 'godly religious parents'. His father died when Joseph was about six and, after a period at the free grammar school, he was apprenticed by his mother to John Sharp, a godly clothier of the town, about 1641. At this time Joseph attended 'many funeral sermons, lectures and monthly exercises and constantly repeated what I had heard' ('Autobiography', 7), and his autobiography describes his puritan upbringing, conveying effectively the influence of the preachers on the religious temper of that part of the West Riding on the eve of the civil wars. The panic which passed through the population of the area following the Irish rising in 1641 is described graphically and, after the outbreak of war, Joseph also compiled a full account of the siege and relief of Bradford in 1643. As a result of the siege his master withdrew from the town and Lister moved to another master at Sowerby in Halifax parish, where he completed his apprenticeship and set up in trade for a short time. In the early 1650s, possibly following an ill-judged engagement to his former master's daughter, Lister moved to London, where he joined the presbyterian congregation of Edmund Calamy at St Mary Aldermanbury, and where, as he was later to acknowledge, he was influenced by the preaching of Simeon Ashe. Lister remained in London for about three years, finding employment as a servant in various godly households. 
In 1655 Lister returned north, to Greatham, co. Durham, as steward to Captain Askwith, and stayed there for two years, commenting on the poor quality of preaching in that region. Following a period of illness he returned to his mother's house at Bradford and in 1657 he married Sarah Denton, of a local family, in a civil ceremony which was followed later by a church service conducted by his uncle Edward Hill of Crofton, later a nonconformist minister. Soon after his marriage he inherited from his wife's uncle a farm at Bailey Fold, Allerton, in the parish of Bradford, and farmed there. His puritan convictions were out of sympathy with the established church after the Restoration, and he joined the dissenting congregation at Kipping nearby, playing a prominent part in its activities. The early years of the church there were characterized by faction and schism involving radical Fifth Monarchist elements, and these engaged the attention of other leading dissenters, such as Oliver Heywood, who tried to act as peacemakers. In the absence of a settled pastor, Lister sometimes exercised ministerial functions during these disturbances. He intended his two sons for the ministry and sent the elder, David, to Richard Frankland's academy at Kendal, where he died in 1677. The second son, Accepted, became a minister and preached at Kipping, being called by the congregation, but he did not settle there, and in 1695 moved to the congregation at Bingley. Accepted had been partially disabled following a fall from a horse and was joined at Bingley by Lister and his wife, the latter dying there about 1697. Lister remained there, but returned to the farm at Allerton when his son returned to the church at Kipping in 1702 as 'a repairer of breaches'. 
Joseph Lister remained at Allerton until his death on 11 March 1709, a fortnight after that of his son. He was buried on 13 March in the chapel yard at Horton, Bradford, and his funeral sermon was preached by Thomas Whitaker of Leeds. By his will Lister left his estate at Allerton to his nephew Joshua Dawson of Leeds, with legacies of $100 to each of his four remaining nephews and nieces, along with other small bequests. His autobiography, which is typical of other puritan texts in its emphasis on the workings of God's providence at critical moments of the subject's life, remained unpublished until 1842, though his account of the siege of Bradford was published earlier, in 1810. 


@@@@@


doc= 16762


Lister, Joseph Jackson (1786-1869), wine merchant and microscopist, was born on 11 January 1786 in Lothbury, City of London, the only son of John Lister, a wine merchant, and his wife, Mary Jackson (died 1808). His parents were members of the Society of Friends; his father's family, originally from Yorkshire, had settled in London, and both parents were part of the close-knit Quaker business community of the City. Mary Lister's father, Stephen Jackson, was a wine merchant and on their marriage John Lister left his trade as a watchmaker and took over his father-in-law's business in Lothbury. The Listers had two daughters before their son, Joseph Jackson, was born after a gap of seventeen years. His birth was greeted with rejoicing, and he was given a name commemorating his two grandfathers. He was a gifted child, and was educated from 1792 to 1796 at a Friends' school in Hitchin, and then for a year at Rochester School. At the age of twelve in 1798, he was sent as a boarder to one of the best private schools open to members of the Society of Friends, run by Thomas Thompson at Little Compton in Dorset. The school encouraged general reading and the pupils were allowed some discretion in the employment of their time. That was good for Lister, who had great mental curiosity and was well able to follow his own paths to knowledge. He was said to be the only boy at the school who owned a telescope. 
At the age of fourteen Lister left school to work in the family wine business, living above the premises in Lothbury with his parents until the death of his mother in 1808. His father then moved to Stoke Newington, where he lived with his unmarried daughter, taking an annuity out of the business. Joseph Jackson Lister was now a wine merchant, and about 1812 he transferred to a new address nearby at 5 Tokenhouse Yard, where, on 14 July 1818, he brought Isabella Harris ('c'.1795-1864), a schoolteacher, as his bride. Four years later they moved to Stoke Newington, and then in 1826 Lister bought Upton House, West Ham, where he lived for the rest of his life. The property was large enough to provide space for a growing family of three daughters and four sons, of whom Joseph Lister became Baron Lister of Lyme Regis, the famous surgeon, and Arthur Lister became a botanist. These moves were made possible by the addition to the staff of Lister's nephew, Richard Low Beck, who became a resident partner. 
Alongside the family man with a successful business and an energetic younger associate, was the meticulous inventor, who, in his spare time, and for no remuneration, carried out the research in the design of lenses that transformed the microscope into the most ubiquitous and practically useful of all scientific instruments. The development and use of the microscope, from its invention in 1608 until the early years of the nineteenth century, were hampered by the quality of glass available for the lenses, and by aberrations of the image. Chromatic aberration was the name given to the coloured edge to the image caused by unequal refraction of light rays. This was corrected for the telescope by John Dollond in 1758, and for the microscope by the Amsterdam instrument maker, Harmanus van Deijl, who published in 1807. The other serious source of aberration resulted from the spherical curvature of the lenses, which produced a blurred image, and this problem was still unsolved in the early 1800s. Lister described how, in his thirty-eighth year, he became involved in the design of microscope lenses. about 1824 he saw at William Tulley's, the instrument maker, an achromatic object glass of two convex lenses of plate glass sandwiching a concave lens of flint glass. By a tracing made from a camera lucida with his own microscope he showed Tulley that his objective was clumsy. Lister's suggestions resulted in ''Tulley's 9/10' which became 'the' microscopic object-glass of the time' (J. Lister, 141). 
Further researches resulted in Lister's important discovery announced in the paper 'On the improvement of compound microscopes' read before the Royal Society on 21 January 1830. There he stated that an achromatic combination of a negative flint glass lens with a positive crown glass lens has two aplanatic focal points. The spherical aberration is overcorrected for all points between these foci, and is undercorrected for all points outside. So if a doublet objective is made that is composed of two sets of achromatic lens combinations, spherical aberration can be avoided if the object to be viewed is at the shorter aplanatic focus of the first lens pair, which then passes the rays on to the longer aplanatic focus of the second pair. Lister's design of the first aberration corrected object glass for the microscope thus brought to an end the trial and error efforts of instrument makers and scientists alike by establishing a scientific principle for the making of microscope objectives. These could now be free of both achromatic and spherical aberration, and also of the effect known as coma, which caused a spot of light to appear elongated and fuzzy, like a comet. The design of low-power objectives for the optical microscope even at the end of the twentieth century was based on Lister's discovery. Its importance was recognized by the election of Lister to fellowship of the Royal Society in February 1832. 
Having made a highly significant contribution to microscope design Lister was eager to continue his research but found that Tulley could not spare the time to make lenses to his specification. Therefore Lister began, in late 1830, to do his own grinding and polishing. As he explained: 'Without having ever before cut brass or ground more than a single surface of a piece of glass, I managed to make the tools and to manufacture a combination of three double object-glasses, without spoiling a lens or altering a curve. (J. Lister, 140)' The optical instrument makers did not immediately adopt Lister's designs, since there is always inertia in economic production. He had hoped that his improvements would be followed up by the opticians, but the object glasses produced by the makers continued to be of the usual simple design of two or three plano-convex compound lenses until the beginning of 1837. It was then that Andrew Ross, a leading maker, made a one-eighth inch objective to Lister's design, and in 1840 James Smith constructed quarter inch objectives that became popular with microscopists. Over the next four decades, with Lister's designs commercially available, the microscope became a serious scientific instrument in many fields, notably in medicine and public health, and it reached its limit of resolution in the 1880s. 
James Smith's association with Lister was a long and important one. In 1826 he made a new form of microscope stand to Lister's design, intended to provide the greater stability demanded by the increased magnification that could be achieved. This innovation was also gradually adopted by microscopists. Richard Beck, the son of Lister's nephew and partner, Richard Low Beck, was apprenticed to Smith and went into partnership with him in 1847. Richard Beck was joined in the firm by his brother Joseph in 1851 and the latter was made a partner in 1857. The firm of R. and J. Beck was established on Smith's retirement in 1865. The optical factory of the firm was opened at Holloway in 1853, appropriately named the Lister Works, and it clearly followed the Quaker tradition. The microscopist Thomas Hudson recorded in his diary a visit to the works in May 1854, finding it 'a model optical manufactory having a Steam Engine working Lathes &c this is a most complete establishment having a Library and Reading and Refreshment Room' (Turner, 'Frederick Thomas Hudson's microscopical diary', 198). 
Lister was not only a designer, but also throughout his life a skilled microscopist. He published in 1827 a paper with Thomas Hodgkin that described for the first time the true form and most accurate measure of the diameter of red blood cells. His observations of zoophytes and ascidians were reported to the Royal Society in 1834. He did considerable research into the resolving power of the human eye and of the microscope, anticipating some of the findings of Abbe and Helmholtz, but did not publish the paper, which existed ready for press, during his lifetime. Lister's manuscripts include designs and draft papers, and these, together with a case of tools, lenses, and microscope objectives made by Joseph Jackson Lister were presented to the Royal Microscopical Society on 15 May 1912 by the executors of Lord Lister. 
Lister's greatest work was his paper on the theory of the microscopic image drafted during 1842-3, although it was not published in his lifetime; it represented over ten years' work. On receiving Lord Lister's bequest, the council of the Royal Microscopical Society asked Alexander Eugen Conrady, a lens designer who became, in 1917, the first professor of optical design at Imperial College, London, to examine the Lister archive. He transcribed (not always accurately) for publication in the 'Journal of the Royal Microscopical Society', 33 (1913), 27-55, Lister's memorandum to Andrew Ross dated 1837, some correspondence, and the draft paper 'On the limit to defining-power, in vision with the unassisted eye, the telescope, and the microscope', dated 1842-3; it occupies pp. 34-55. Conrady commented that the paper is the first proof that J. J. Lister knew in 1832 that the resolving-power of microscope objectives grows not with the angle itself, as was thought for many years after that date, but with the chord of an angle, later called numerical aperture (Conrady, 52). The paper is evidence that Lister, having provided the original impetus to developing the scientific microscope, derived the law of image formation three decades before Ernest Abbe of Jena University. The development of the instrument would have been even more rapid had he published this paper. It also seems curious that his son, Lord Lister, when writing his father's obituary in 1869, did not see fit to publish it, for he was in possession of the archive. 
Lister lived during the golden age of the light microscope, and was admired by many of its leading users. He was one of the group of microscopists who met in September 1839 and agreed to form a society to promote microscopical investigation, the Microscopical Society of London, later to receive a royal charter. John Quekett, the first secretary of the society, dedicated to Lister his best-selling 'Practical Treatise on the Use of the Microscope' (1848), with the words: 'To Joseph Jackson Lister Esq. FRS, to whose labours in perfecting the achromatic compound microscope science in England is so deeply indebted'. Lister died at his home, Upton House, on 24 October 1869, of old age and pneumonia. 


@@@@@


doc= 16763


Lister, Martin (bap. 1639, d. 1712), physician and naturalist, was baptized on 11 April 1639 at Radclive, Buckinghamshire, fourth of the ten children of Sir Martin Lister (1602-1670), farmer and MP for Brackley, and his second wife, Susanna (1604?-1669), widow of Sir Gifford Thornhurst (died 1627), and daughter of Sir Alexander Temple of St Margaret's, near Rochester in Kent, and his first wife, Mary. In 1646 Sir Martin moved with his family to the manor of Thorpe Arnold, Leicestershire. Young Martin is said, by Anthony Wood, to have been educated under the care of his great-uncle, Sir Matthew Lister MD, who was childless. He attended Melton Mowbray School and was admitted as a pensioner to St John's College, Cambridge, in 1655. The following year Sir Matthew died and the family moved to his old home, the manor of Burwell, Lincolnshire, to which Martin returned after graduating BA in 1659. At the Restoration he was appointed fellow of St John's College by royal mandate. It is probable that he owed this to his great-uncle's service as physician to the king's father and grandfather. 
In 1663 Lister travelled to France, joining other English scholars at Montpellier. Protestants could not enrol at the university, but Lister was able to join an academy through which he studied medicine, anatomy, and botany. He travelled a lot, notably for a few months in 1665-6 with John Ray and Philip Skippon, when they made observations on the natural history of the countryside, and when they travelled back to England. 
Lister and Ray became firm friends and began a correspondence on scientific matters that lasted more than ten years. Meanwhile Lister did a little teaching at St John's College, but he secured some financial independence through a settlement of land by his father. In the summer of 1669 he resigned his fellowship and married, in York, Hannah (1645-1695), daughter of Thomas Parkinson of Carleton Hall in Craven, Yorkshire. 
The Listers moved to Hannah's home for the birth of her first child, Susanna Lister, while Lister explored the natural history of Craven. In 1670 he established a medical practice at York. Here were born other children: Anne Lister ['see under 'Lister, Susanna], Michael, Frances, Dorothy, Alexander, Barbara, and Jane. He gathered around him a club of virtuosi, including the artists Francis Place and William Lodge, who illustrated some of Lister's works. Lister continued his correspondence with John Ray, and with Henry Oldenburg, secretary of the Royal Society. Several of his letters were published in the 'Philosophical Transactions', and in 1671 Lister was admitted as fellow of the Royal Society. He continued to publish there and wrote his first book, the 'Historia animalium Angliae tres tractatus' (1678-81), of which the first part was a systematic description of English spiders and their habits, while the others were about terrestrial and marine molluscs. Other books followed, on insects (translation of work by the Dutch entomologist Goedart), mineral waters, and Lister's collected papers from the 'Philosophical Transactions'. 
In September 1683 the Lister family moved to London. Martin Lister began to participate regularly in meetings of the Royal Society and was elected to its council. However, lacking a medical degree he would not have been permitted by the Royal College of Physicians to practise medicine in London. Perhaps it was to win goodwill at Oxford that, in 1682, shortly after the opening of the Ashmolean Museum, he had made substantial donations to it of books, manuscripts, antiquities, and other specimens. In March 1684 he was granted a DM by the University of Oxford. Two months later he was accepted by the Royal College of Physicians, and began to practise medicine among the highest levels of society, including attending the post-mortem of Charles II. When James II renewed the charter of the Royal College in 1687 Lister was named a fellow; in 1694 he was elected censor. 
In January 1685 Lister was elected vice-president of the Royal Society. Since the president, Samuel Pepys, was often absent, Lister chaired most of the meetings that year. But his attendance ended abruptly, early in 1686, although he continued to contribute to the 'Transactions'. He frequently attended the weekly meetings of the Temple Coffee House club of naturalists in the 1690s. His chief activity in natural history at this time was the preparation of a classified set of copperplate-engravings of all known shells, largely executed by his eldest children, Susanna and Anne. The work is divided into four sections, the first of which (on land snails) was issued in 1685 under the title 'De cochleis', the others following in successive years. Sets were sent to friends for review and each was continually revised: the final version, 'Historia sive synopsis methodica conchyliorum', with over a thousand plates, was not completed until 1697. He also published, in three parts, descriptions of the internal anatomy of Mollusca: 'Exercitatio anatomica' (1694-6). He published a set of essays on common diseases, 'Sex exercitationes medicinales de quibusdam morbis chronicis' (1694), in order 'to stop the censorious mouthes who thinke and say a man that writes on Insects can be but a trifler in Physic' (BL, MS Ashmole 1816, fol. 113). 
Two of the Listers' children died while still young. A tablet in Westminster Abbey bears the simple but eloquent statement 'Jane Lister, dear Childe, died Oct 7th, 1688'. Hannah Lister died in 1695 and was buried at St Paul's Church, Clapham. The only surviving son, Alexander, matriculated at Balliol College, Oxford, in the same year, but in 1697 earned his father's displeasure by an imprudent marriage. In October 1698 Martin Lister married Jane (died 1736), daughter of Peter Cullen. 
Late in 1697 William Bentinck, Lord Portland, was sent on a diplomatic mission to Paris, and Lister accompanied him as physician. His duties left him ample time to meet and talk with other intellectuals, to see their collections and gardens, and to explore the city. He was there for six months and shortly after his return published 'A Journey to Paris in the Year 1698' (1699). The book ran to three editions within a year, but was lampooned by William King for its supposed triviality. In fact it is a unique first-hand account of Parisian scientific society, and a useful description of the city and its life. 
Lister was asthmatic: he enjoyed the dry air of France, but not the 'choakie air of London' (BL, MS Ashmole 1816, fol. 126). In 1699 he and Jane moved from London, taking lodgings at Leatherhead, and in 1702 they moved to Epsom, though he still travelled to London when necessary. He had a useful connection at court: Sarah, duchess of Marlborough, was Lister's niece by his mother's first marriage, and a close friend of Queen Anne. In 1702 he became fourth physician to the queen. At Epsom he spent much time in his garden, but continued to write. He translated the aphorisms of Sanctorius and Hippocrates (1702), and a Roman cookery book in 'De arte coquinaria' (1705). His last works were published in 1709: an essay on body fluids, 'Dissertatio de humoribus', and an account of British beetles appended to John Ray's 'Historia insectorum'. In 1710 he was appointed second physician to the queen, but he died at Epsom on 2 February 1712, and was buried beside his first wife at Clapham, where there was formerly a monument to his memory. He was commemorated by Robert Brown in the genus 'Listeria' among orchids. 
Martin Lister was a successful and respected physician who had the gift of 'hitting distempers' (Gunther, 288) but is better remembered for his work in natural history. In both fields he was initially a keen observer and had some good ideas, but later became more conservative. He was reluctant to use a microscope because, by revealing details of tiny creatures, it seemed to be disrespectful to the ancients. His advice to a prospective medical student in 1698 was to study 'the ancients... he will find that all the rest have added little' (BL, MS Ashmole 1818, fol. 124). His career was marked by contentious relations with other physicians, with fellows of the Royal Society, and with two of his children. In natural history he was the first to study spiders, making detailed observations on their structure and behaviour. He was the first to suggest that rocks might be characterized by their fossil contents, and to propose the creation of geological maps. A painstaking observer, he was well aware of the differences between fossils and modern shells and was therefore prepared to accept that they were 'formed stones' (like crystals). 'If otherwise, the animals they so exactly represent have become extinct' (Stearns, xlvi). He was the first to attempt a comparative anatomy of the Mollusca, and his 'Historia conchyliorum' was the bible of conchologists for over a hundred years. It is for that work that he is chiefly remembered. 


@@@@@


doc= 16764


Lister, Sir Matthew (bap. 1571, d. 1656), physician, son of William Lister, and younger brother of Edward Lister, was born at Thornton, Yorkshire, and baptized on 7 April 1571 at Gisburn, Yorkshire. He entered Oriel College, Oxford, on 23 February 1588, graduated BA in 1591, became a fellow of his college, and proceeded MA in 1595. He graduated MD at Basel about 1603 and was incorporated at Oxford in 1605, and at Cambridge in 1608. He was elected a fellow of the College of Physicians, London, in 1607 along with William Harvey, serving as censor in 1608, and as an elect in 1625. On 4 October 1614 Lister and Sir William Paddy were sent to persuade the lord mayor, Sir Thomas Middleton, that the City had no right to force the college to bear arms, and succeeded in establishing this immunity. Soon after his election to the college, Lister began a successful court practice, serving as physician to James I and Queen Anne, and treating Robert Cecil, first earl of Salisbury, during his final illness in 1612. Lister later became physician to Mary, countess of Pembroke, and there were rumours that they were married shortly before her death. However, in Lister's will made on 18 August 1656, he refers to 'my loving wife the Ladie Anne Lister' (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/261). 
The medical faculty at Basel was known for its support of chemical and Paracelsian remedies, and Lister associated with other chemical physicians at court, such as Sir Theodore Turquet de Mayerne, whose manuscripts contain a number of Lister's remedies. At the request of the privy council, Lister also assisted Mayerne in drawing up plans for a board of health for the City of London and for the construction of a pest house to control epidemics of the plagues. Their proposal would have removed the responsibility of public health from the City and placed it more directly under the crown and the privy council, but Charles I allowed the project to die. In May 1644 Lister and Mayerne made an emergency trip to Exeter, responding to Charles's panicky letter from Oxford concerning Queen Henrietta's health. Pregnant and past due, the queen was successfully delivered after the two aged physicians made the seven days' journey in her chariot. Lister was knighted at Oatlands, Surrey, on 11 October 1636. He retired to Burwell, Lincolnshire, and died there on 14 December 1656. 


@@@@@


doc= 16765


Lister, Thomas (c.1559-1628), Jesuit, was apparently a younger son of Christopher Lister of Midhope, Yorkshire, and Ellen, daughter and coheir of John Clayton of Clayton Hall, Leyland, Lancashire, where he may have been born. He entered the English College at Rome on 15 September 1579, joined the Society of Jesus on 20 February 1583, being fellow novice with Vitelleschi, afterwards general of the society, and graduated DTh at Pont-a-Mousson in 1592. Lister was sent to England, and worked with Edward Oldcorne in the Worcestershire district, based at Hindlip, the home of Thomas Habington. He apparently used the surname Butler as an alias. Because of Lister's claustrophobia and fear of priest's holes, the Jesuit superior, Henry Garnet, employed him as a socius. But Lister's nervous energy, violent headaches, excitability, and neuroses made him a difficult companion, unsuited to the clandestine English mission. He spent some time in Flanders, but was once again in England at the turn of the century. Garnet wrote that Lister's troubles stemmed not so much from 'weakness of character' as from 'a disturbed mind and lack of responsibility' (Caraman, 233). On 3 June 1610 Lister was professed of the four vows. In 1621 he was superior of the Oxford district. 
Lister was the author of 'Treatise of schism', in which he maintained that the appellant priests who refused to acknowledge the archpriest's jurisdiction were 'ipso facto' deprived of their ecclesiastical powers, and ought to be treated as schismatics. This work, which caused much disquiet among the secular clergy, was extensively circulated in manuscript. It was first published in Christopher Bagshaw's 'Relatio compendiosa' of 1601. 
Lister died at Liege on 19 February 1628, and was buried there. 


@@@@@


doc= 16766


Lister, Thomas (1597-1668), politician, was the eldest son of William Lister (died 1641) of Coleby Hall, Lincolnshire, and his wife, Grisell (died 1642) daughter of William Rivett of Rowston in the same county. On 1 November 1616 he was admitted of Gray's Inn. He married Margaret Armyn or Armine (died 1661), daughter of Sir William Armine of Osgodby, Lincolnshire, on 6 February 1622 at Lenton, Lincolnshire. Robert, earl of Lindsey, gave him a commission on 5 July 1629 as captain of foot in the Lincolnshire militia (Sleaford session). At the outbreak of civil war in August 1642 royalist troopers broke into Coleby Hall and carried him prisoner before the king's council. After his release he became a lieutenant-colonel in the parliamentary army and deputy governor of Lincoln. In 1644 he served as high sheriff of Lincolnshire and also served as a member of the parliamentarian county committee. He was elected MP for Lincoln on 24 May 1647, and was one of the MPs who fled to the army in July 1647. He survived Pride's Purge and continued as an MP until the dissolution of the Rump Parliament in 1653. On being appointed one of the commissioners to try the king he attended for a short time, after which he declined to act. He was nominated a member of the council of state on 13 February 1651, and served on several committees. He represented Lincolnshire in Cromwell's parliaments from 1653 until 1656, and again from May 1659 until the overthrow of the Commonwealth, his name frequently occurring as one of the tellers in division. He was included in the exceptions to the 'Act of Oblivion', but on 24 June 1660 he petitioned the House of Lords that he might receive the benefit of the indemnity, claiming that he had not been present when the king was tried and sentenced. Accordingly, on 29 August he was merely incapacitated for life from holding any office. 
Lister died at his house in Lincoln's Inn Fields, and was buried in the church of St Paul's, Covent Garden, on 10 November 1668. His wife had been buried at St Paul's, Covent Garden, on 14 November 1661. He left no children, and his estates of Coleby Hall Manor, Downehall in Rippingale, Lincolnshire, and others, descended to his nephew, William Lister (1632-1687). 


@@@@@


doc= 16767


Lister, Thomas (1810-1888), poet and naturalist, was born at Old Mill, Barnsley, Yorkshire, on 11 February 1810, the youngest of the fourteen children of Joseph Lister, a Quaker gardener and small farmer. From 1821 until 1824 he attended Ackworth School, and afterwards was an assistant to his father until 1832, when he began work in a linen warehouse in Barnsley. During the parliamentary election of 1832 Lister worked actively for the return of Lord Morpeth (afterwards earl of Carlisle) for the West Riding of Yorkshire, and wrote several effective verse squibs in his support. Lord Morpeth offered to obtain for him the postmastership of Barnsley, but, as a Quaker, Lister was unwilling to take the requisite oath. 
In 1834 Lister published 'Rustic Wreath', a collection of his verses. It was very popular; an edition of 3000 copies was quickly sold. It was followed by 'Temperance Rhymes' in 1837. In that same year, after visiting Spencer T. Hall at Nottingham, and forming an acquaintance with Ebenezer Elliott, Lister made a walking tour of the Lake District, and journeyed into Scotland, where he met Professor John Wilson (Christopher North), William and Robert Chambers, and William Miller the artist. In 1838 he visited France, Italy, Switzerland, and the Netherlands. He forwarded many of the poems, sonnets, and translations which he wrote during this tour to Elliott, and they were published in 'Tait's Magazine'. In 1839, when the office of postmaster at Barnsley again became vacant, Lister was appointed to it, as a simple affirmation had been substituted for the oath, and he held the post until 31 March 1870. The new security of this position permitted him to marry, on 12 March 1841, Hannah Schofield (1812-1882); they had no children. 
An enthusiastic naturalist, Lister regularly contributed meteorological observations and notes on birds to the 'Barnsley Chronicle'. He was to combine his literary and scientific interests in 1862, with the publication of his 'Rhymes of Progress'. For many years he was president of the Barnsley Naturalists' Society, and contributed to its collections, and he was a constant attendant and contributor of papers at the annual meetings of the British Association. Accompanying the association to Montreal in 1884, he visited the principal towns in Canada and the United States. 
Lister died at Barnsley on 25 March 1888, and was buried on 29 March in the Friends' meeting-house ground in Cockerham Road, Barnsley. 


@@@@@


doc= 16768


Lister, Thomas Henry (1800-1842), writer and civil servant, was the eldest son of Thomas Lister of Armitage Park, near Lichfield, Staffordshire, and his first wife, Harriet Anne, the daughter of John Seale of Mountboone, Devon. His father was a cousin of the first Baron Ribblesdale (1752-1826). Lister was educated at Westminster School, London, to which he was admitted on 25 March 1814, and he entered Trinity College, Cambridge, in May 1819. Although he matriculated in 1820, he left the university without taking a degree. 
Lister was a refined and accomplished man who moved in aristocratic circles. In 1826 he published 'Granby', a novel set in English high society. It tells the story of its eponymous young hero's love for Miss Jermyn, whose parents disapprove of the relationship. But when Granby turns out to be the heir of Lord Malton, all is well. It is often regarded as the first full example of the 'fashionable' or 'silver-fork' novel, a genre also associated with Theodore Hook, Disraeli, Bulwer-Lytton, Mrs Gore, and Lady Blessington, among others. It was well received, with Sydney Smith in the 'Edinburgh Review' of February 1826 going so far as to praise it as 'a very easy and natural picture of manners, as they really exist among the upper classes' (p. 396). When it was republished in 1838 as volume 11 of Henry Colburn's 'Modern Novelists', Lister was compelled to deny an assertion in the 'Quarterly Review' of March 1826 that it owed much to Lord Normanby's 'Matilda' (1825); it had, in fact, been completed four months previously. Two years later he published 'Herbert Lacy' (1828), another 'fashionable' novel. He wrote a tragedy, 'Epicharis', based on the history of Piso's conspiracy; this was successfully staged at the Theatre Royal, Drury Lane, London, on 14 October 1829. 
Lister married Lady Maria Theresa Villiers (1803-1865), the only daughter of the Hon. George Villiers, on 6 November 1830 ['see 'Lewis, Lady (Maria) Theresa]. They had a son, Thomas Villiers (1832-1902), who became an assistant under-secretary for foreign affairs in 1873 and was made a KCMG in 1885. They also had two daughters, of whom the elder, Marie Therese Lister (1835-1863), married in 1859 Sir William G. G. V. Harcourt, and the younger, Alice Beatrice Lister (1841-1898), married in 1870 Sir Algernon Borthwick (later Lord Glenesk). In 1832 Lister published 'Arlington', the third and last of his 'fashionable' novels. 
Lister held a number of official administrative posts. On 4 June 1834 he was nominated a commissioner for inquiring into the state of religious and other instruction which then existed in Ireland. He was given a similar responsibility on 19 July 1835, when he was one of those commissioned to investigate the opportunities for religious worship and the means of religious instruction in Scotland. On 19 August 1836 he was appointed the first registrar-general of births, marriages, and deaths of England and Wales. It was suggested that he owed this last appointment to the patronage of Lord John Russell, who was his brother-in-law. Nevertheless, he carried out his duties thoroughly and systematically, issuing his first annual report in 1839. 
Meanwhile Lister continued his literary work. Between 1830 and 1841 he made twenty-one contributions to the 'Edinburgh Review'. Dickens was delighted with his appreciative review in October 1838 of 'Sketches by Boz', 'Pickwick Papers', and the first instalments of 'Oliver Twist', in which Lister compared the young writer to Hogarth. He published 'The Life and Administration of Edward, First Earl of Clarendon' (1837-8), which had a hostile reception in the 'Quarterly Review' of October 1838 from John Wilson Croker, who thought that it was unjust in its judgements and inaccurate, but the biography was welcomed by others as a valuable contribution to historical knowledge. Lister issued 'An Answer to the Misrepresentations' [in Croker's article] in 1839. 
Lister died of lung disease on 5 June 1842 at Kent House, Knightsbridge, London, the mansion of his relative the earl of Morley, and was buried in Kensal Green cemetery, Middlesex. 
Thomas Henry Lister's half-sister, 
Harriet Cradock's first novel, 'Anne Grey, a Novel, Edited by the Author of 'Granby'', appeared in 1834. It was sometimes attributed to Lister, despite (or perhaps because of) the fact that its anonymity was reinforced by Lister's statement in the preface that 'the writer is pleased to remain unknown'. The novel is not a 'fashionable' one, but a lively and unexaggerated tale of personal relationships in upper-middle-class English society. Harriet Cradock's other novels include 'Hulse House' (1860), 'John Smith' (1878), and 'Rose' (1881). Among her miscellaneous works are 'The Calendar of Nature, or, The Seasons of England' (1849), edited by her kinsman, Lord John Russell, and the letterpress for 'Views of Elf Land' (1878), designed and executed by William Weird. She died on 16 June 1884 at her home, Cowley Grange, near Oxford. 


@@@@@


doc= 16769


Liston, Henry (1771-1836), inventor of a musical instrument and writer on music, the eldest son of Robert Liston, minister of Aberdour, Fife, was born on 30 June 1771. He matriculated at Edinburgh University in 1787 and read physics and mathematics before studying for the church. In 1793 he became minister of the parish of Ecclesmachan, Linlithgowshire, where he remained for the rest of his life. He married Margaret Ireland, the daughter of David Ireland, town clerk of Culross, on 21 October 1793. There were two sons of their marriage: Robert Liston and David Liston, professor of oriental languages at Edinburgh. Henry Liston died suddenly at Merchiston Hall, Falkirk, on 24 February 1836. 
Liston's abilities in mechanics and music led to his invention of the euharmonic organ, an acknowledged adaptation of a similar instrument by Dr Robert Smith of Trinity College, Cambridge. In Liston's instrument, built by Flight and Robson, each note of the chromatic scale was provided with a further pipe tuned to its enharmonic equivalent. Designed to give perfect intonation in each of the major and minor keys, an 'original scale' (C-Csharp-D-E[flat]-E- F-Fsharp-G-Gsharp-A-B[flat]-B) was played from the manual keys, but the pipes of the 'euharmonic scale' (Bsharp-Csharp-Dsharp-Esharp-Fsharp-Asharp- D[flat]-F[flat]-G[flat]-B[flat]-C[flat]) were made playable as required through five pedals, three 'acute' and two 'grave', which acted on the sharp and flat pitches respectively. Although complicated to operate, it was approved by Samuel Wesley, who compared it favourably with similar inventions by Hawkes and Loeschman when it was exhibited in London in 1811. In his 'Essay on Perfect Intonation' (1812), Liston described his instrument and related it to the theory of acoustics and tonal music. He wrote the article 'Music' in the 'Edinburgh Encyclopaedia', and translated the sixth book of Caesar's 'Gallic Wars' for use in schools. Liston also invented an improved form of plough, which was used in his district. 


@@@@@


doc= 16770


Liston, John (c.1776-1846), actor, was born in London, reputedly the son of a watchmaker or of the occupant of an inferior position in the gaming houses, or of a cook's shopkeeper, in either the parish of St James's or St Ann's, Soho, although no record of his birth appears in the registers for either parish. His death certificate gives his age as seventy in 1846. He was allegedly educated at Soho School and he later worked as an usher at the Library School in Castle Street, close to the Haymarket. He made his debut as an actor at the Theatre Royal, Haymarket, on 15 August 1799, as Rawbold in George Colman's 'The Iron Chest', for Charles Kemble's benefit. He appeared in Dublin, though as little more than a spear carrier, for the winter season of 1799-1800, then from 1800 to 1801 he acted at Taunton, Weymouth, and Exeter. He then joined Stephen Kemble's company, which performed in a circuit based on Newcastle upon Tyne, and made his first recorded appearance on the Newcastle stage on 3 August 1801. According to Anne Matthews, Liston's debut on the Newcastle circuit was at Durham, during Sarah Siddons's engagement; she adds that he later revealed his comic talents to Kemble in the role of Diggory in 'She Stoops to Conquer'. Apart from several months with Tate Wilkinson's York-based company in 1803, Liston remained with Stephen Kemble until May 1805; he acquired a particular reputation for his skills in low-comedy roles, for which he was regularly praised in the 'Monthly Mirror' and in the Newcastle press. 
On Monday 10 June 1805 Liston made his debut as a low comedian at the Theatre Royal, Haymarket, playing Sheepface in 'The Village Lawyer'. When the Haymarket season ended he was engaged by Covent Garden, where he remained until 1822. His Covent Garden debut occurred on 15 October 1805, when he played Jacob Gawkey in 'The Chapter of Accidents'. He then played Memmo in 'Monk' Lewis's 'Rugantino' and Gaby Grim in Colman's 'We Fly by Night'. It took several years before he established himself as a major comedian, but his reputation was considerably enhanced through summer seasons at the Haymarket, where, partnered with Charles Mathews, he appeared in a number of specially written plays by Theodore Hook, such as 'Catch him who Can' (1806), 'The Fortress' (1807), 'Music Mad' (1807), and 'Killing No Murder' (1809). He developed a skill in performing conceited and affected provincial characters, such as Apollo Belvi in the last-mentioned play, often embellished with comic dancing, which was also a feature of his Caper in 'Who Wins' (1808) and his Lord Grizzle in 'Tom Thumb', the first role for which he won particular acclaim at Covent Garden. Apart from Lord Grizzle, Liston also achieved acclaim in other burlesque roles, especially Don Whiskerandos in 'The Critic' and the title role in 'Bombastes furioso'. A particular contribution of Liston's to the English stage was the conceited cockney, which first surfaced in the character of Henry Augustus Mug in Colman's 'The Africans' (Haymarket, 1808) and for which he achieved particular renown as Lubin Log in James Kenney's 'Love, Law and Physic' (Covent Garden, 1812). Sam Swipes in Hook's 'Exchange No Robbery' (Haymarket, 1820) was another successful character in this mould. Liston created many new low-comedy parts in the comedies, farces, and melodramas played at Covent Garden and the Haymarket, as well as re-creating a number of already established roles, such as Bob Acres and Sir Benjamin Backbite. His Shakespearian performances included Bottom, Sir Andrew Aguecheek, Malvolio, Pompey, Launce, Dromio, Polonius, Slender, and Cloten, while he was also the first English-speaking Figaro in Henry Bishop's Covent Garden versions of 'The Marriage of Figaro' and 'The Barber of Seville'. In adaptations of the novels of Sir Walter Scott he was particularly praised for his Dominie Sampson in 'Guy Mannering', Baillie Nicol Jarvie in 'Rob Roy', and Captain Dalgetty in 'Montrose'. His benefits often showed him in new guises, most notoriously as Ophelia in John Poole's 'Hamlet Travestie' in 1813 and as Lord Grizzle delivering an 'Epilogue on an Ass' in 1818. A desire to play more serious roles emerged in his 1809 benefit, when he played Octavian in 'The Mountaineers', and in 1829, when he played Baron Wildenheim in 'Lovers' Vows' for his last Haymarket benefit. 
Liston left Covent Garden Theatre on 31 May 1822, on which occasion his wife, Sarah, took her professional leave of the stage. Liston had married Sarah Tyrer (1781-1854) at St Martin-in-the-Fields on 22 March 1807, and she had given birth to a son, John Terry, in 1813 and a daughter, Emma, in 1814. She had originally made her debut at Drury Lane on 21 May 1801 and first appeared at the Haymarket a month later. A short, plump woman, she was first engaged at Covent Garden in 1805, where she played comic roles, such as serving maids, and was also in demand on account of her vocal powers. One of her most famous parts was Queen Dollallola in 'Tom Thumb'. 
By 1822 Liston had also become a popular attraction in the provinces, and often toured during the summer seasons in which he was not engaged at the Haymarket. At Covent Garden his weekly salary had never risen above $17, considerably less than he could earn on provincial tours and than the $50 he was offered to join the Drury Lane company in 1823. He made his Drury Lane debut on 28 January as Tony Lumpkin, and remained there, when not fulfilling equally lucrative engagements in the provinces and at the Haymarket, until 1831. During these years he became a firm favourite of George IV and developed some of his most popular roles, such as Mawworm in 'The Hypocrite', Tristram Sappy in 'Deaf as a Post', Billy Lackaday in 'Sweethearts and Wives', and Paul Pry, described by Genest as 'a perfect piece of acting' (Genest, 'Eng. Stage', 10.318). John Poole's 'Paul Pry' was first performed at the Haymarket Theatre on 13 September 1825, and had one of the most successful runs enjoyed by a play since 'The Beggar's Opera' in the previous century. Liston was reputedly paid $100 per week for his performance, although it was later rumoured he was paid $50 or $60 per night when 'Paul Pry' was revived. Paul Pry, with his catchphrase 'I hope I don't intrude', was a unique creation, dressed in baggy striped trousers tucked into hessian boots, tail coat, and top hat, and accompanied always by an umbrella. Likenesses soon appeared everywhere: in prints, on porcelain and toby jugs, adorning cakes and pats of butter, sewn into pocket handkerchiefs, embellishing snuff boxes, and used as insignia on carts, buses, and fairground stalls. The part itself became the 'sine qua non' of the low comedian: even in the 1890s J. L. Toole was still re-creating the role in a style of dress based on Liston's original costume. 
While Liston's renown was based largely on his performance in low-comedy roles, he was sometimes also praised for parts that required a quieter and more restrained style of acting, such as Adam Brock in J. R. Planche's 'Charles XII' (Drury Lane, 1828). These qualities were particularly in evidence during the last six years of Liston's professional career, which were spent almost entirely at the small Olympic Theatre under the management of Madame Vestris, at a salary variously reported as $60 and $100 per week. Liston had previously appeared with Vestris, not only in 'Paul Pry', but also as a Broom Girl, in the duet 'Buy a Broom', in 1826. He made his debut there on 1 October 1831 as Dominique in 'Talk of the Devil', and during the next six years created a succession of largely original roles, contributing greatly to the theatre's success. In 1835 he introduced Charles Mathews the younger to the theatrical public in 'The Old and Young Stager', and the following year played with him in Planche's 'The Two Figaros'. He took his leave of the Olympic stage on 31 May 1837, and on 5 June he played in a benefit at Covent Garden for George Herbert Buonaparte Rodwell, who was married to his daughter, Emma. His last professional performance occurred on Saturday 10 June at the Lyceum Theatre for the benefit of James Vining. He then moved to his country villa at Penn, near Windsor, but spent the final years of his life at his residence in St George's Place, near Hyde Park Corner. 
Liston was undoubtedly the greatest comic actor of his generation. He gave detailed, well-observed performances which emphasized such human foibles as greed, conceit, affectation, and cowardice. His deadpan style was enhanced by his extraordinary face. 'There is one face of Farley', wrote Charles Lamb, 'one of Knight, one (but what a one it is!) of Liston' ('London Magazine', Oct 1822). His high forehead was offset by goggle eyes, a snub nose with dilated nostrils, fleshy lips, and large cheeks. Leigh Hunt noted how his mouth and chin with the throat under it 'hung like an old bag' ('Autobiography', 186). The gravity of his face added to his comic effect. According to Hazlitt, describing his Sir Peter Pigwiggin in 'Pigeons and Crows', 'His jaws seem to ache with laughter, his eyes look out of his head with wonder, his face is unctuous all over and bathed with jests' ('Complete Works', 15.359). Liston was 5 feet 11 inches in height, and in his younger days was considered one of the best-built men around London. As he grew older he grew fatter, and his typical posture in performance, judging from surviving prints, was a slouch with knees bent, bottom thrust out, and hands in pocket. He dressed his characters with great skill and enjoyed a very good relationship with his audiences, partly because of his powers of ad libbing. Although some critics accused him of buffoonery, many praised him for his quietness and repose, for the original and natural qualities of his performances, and for his effortlessness. 'Other actors labour to be comic. I see nothing like labour or system about Liston', wrote Boaden (2.198). He was unique in himself and also possessed the ability to merge his special talents with the character he was creating -- 'an outline or figure was all that was wanting to his art; he infused into it the richness of his own comic imagination'. 
In his lifetime Liston embodied a number of contradictions. Solemn in private life, he was also something of a practical joker; a reader of serious literature and books on theology, he allegedly wanted to play tragedy, but his career was devoted to low comedy. He was accused by some of heavy drinking and hypochondria, but there is little firm evidence to substantiate such claims. Ludicrously dressed on stage, he was always exquisitely dressed in private life and a frequenter of such fashionable resorts as Brighton. In his last years his spirits and health declined, and he died in London, after a severe apoplectic fit, on 22 March 1846. He was buried at Kensal Green cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 16771


Liston, Sir Robert (1742-1836), tutor and diplomat, was born at Overtoun, Kirkliston, Linlithgowshire, on 8 October 1742, the second, and oldest surviving, son of Patrick Liston of Torbanehill (died 1749) and Christian Dick (died 1790). He studied for the Church of Scotland at Edinburgh University, but then was offered the post of private tutor to the sons of Sir Gilbert Elliot of Stobs. He was expected to 'perfect himself in classics, law and dancing' ('Life and Letters', 1.91) before accompanying the boys -- Gilbert, aged twelve, afterwards first earl of Minto, and Hugh, aged ten -- to Paris in 1763. There he directed their studies under the general supervision of the historian David Hume, who introduced him to the retired actress Marie-Jeanne Riccoboni. Liston submitted a continuous record of activities and expenses to Elliot, which gives an insight into the life and upbringing abroad of the two young Scottish gentlemen. In 1772 he assisted Gilbert Stuart on the 'London Magazine', contributing letters compiled from the journals of his own travels, mainly in France. Between 1766 and 1782 he maintained a lively and, certainly on her side, intimate correspondence (eighty-three of her letters to 'mon cher Bob' survive) with Madame Riccoboni, who was thirty years his senior. The letters remain together among his papers in the National Library of Scotland. 
When Hugh Elliot adopted a diplomatic career Liston became his private secretary, and accompanied him on missions to Munich, Regensburg, and Berlin. In March 1783 Lord Mountstewart, later first marquess of Bute, was sent to Madrid as ambassador-extraordinary, and appointed Liston as secretary to the embassy. This, at forty-one years old, was his first diplomatic appointment. He acted as charge d'affaires in Mountstewart's absence, and succeeded him as minister-plenipotentiary at Madrid for five years. In May 1785 he was made LLD Edinburgh. From August 1788 to May 1793 he served as envoy-extraordinary at Stockholm. In 1793 he was appointed to the once lucrative position of ambassador-extraordinary to the prestigious embassy of the Sublime Porte in Constantinople during the reign of Selim III. He travelled overland with Dr John Sibthorp among others, and served there just three years. At a time of decreasing trade with the Levant Company (which paid most of his salary) Liston believed that the British in the Ottoman states 'flouted Ottoman sovreignty at every turn' (Cunningham, 85). In February 1796 he was appointed British minister to the United States of America, only thirteen years after the ending of the American War of Independence. On 27 February 1796 he married Henrietta [
Liston was not eager to accept this post at a crucial period in British-American relations, with the heavy responsibility it carried of 'clearing up the debris left behind in 1783: Indian affairs, debt questions and boundary issues' (Wright, 123). He remained at Philadelphia until December 1800, and, through his actions, the British government agreed that Britain would not intervene in west or south-west America. He acted skilfully as an intermediary between the Canadian and American governments about the upper Mississippi valley, and did much to encourage the informal system whereby Royal Navy ships convoyed American merchantmen. When he handed over, 'British-American relations were much more cordial than anyone might have foreseen five years earlier' (Wright, 127). Henrietta Liston wrote frequent frank letters home, reporting knowledgeably on life and politics in America. Her letters tell of housekeeping, Liston's observation that the planned site for Washington strongly resembled Constantinople, George Washington's favourite occupation of farming, the social life in Philadelphia, freedom of speech, and visiting Niagara Falls. 
Liston was next appointed envoy-extraordinary and plenipotentiary to the Batavian republic. He arrived in The Hague in September 1802, but in June 1803 left on a mission to Copenhagen until May 1804. Then, at the age of sixty-two, he retired on a pension. The Listons built Millburn Tower near Edinburgh. Henrietta Liston created an American garden, and introduced plants from America and the West Indies and later from Constantinople. In 1811, after the renewal of diplomatic relations with Turkey, Liston was reappointed to Constantinople, taking over from Stratford Canning, who had been acting in the senior post for some time. The Listons were accompanied by a large embassy, including Brigadier-General Sir Robert Wilson (as special military commissioner), Bartholomew Frere, and William Turner. Wilson's diary of their journey (BL, Add. MS 30100) was published as the 'Private Diary of Sir Robert Wilson' in 1861. The mission in Constantinople started unfavourably for, since the treaty of Bucharest, the Turks were 'in a state of... extreme ill-humour with England for having 'advised' the conciliation of the treaty' ('Private Diary', 1.395). However, over the years, relations improved, and Liston departed before the start of the Greek War of Independence. 
Liston is notable as one of only three commoners to hold the highest diplomatic office at this time. He was sworn of the privy council in 1812, and made GCB (civil) in 1816. He finally retired on a pension at the age of seventy-nine. He died at his residence, Millburn Tower, on 15 July 1836, at the age of ninety-three. He was an accomplished linguist in ten languages. The 'Gentleman's Magazine' recorded that he was 'the father of the diplomatic body throughout Europe'. An American admirer summed him up as 'sensible -- pleasant -- easy -- an agreeable man' (Cowan, 190). His wife, Henrietta, had died in 1828, probably at Millburn Tower. Apart from her letters home from their diplomatic appointments, she took a keen interest in botany and collected specimens for Sir Joseph Banks. Sir Robert and Lady Liston were buried near each other in Gogar churchyard. 


@@@@@


doc= 16772


Liston, Robert (1794-1847), surgeon, was born on 28 October 1794 in the manse of Ecclesmachan, Linlithgowshire, the eldest child of Henry Liston (1771-1836), the minister of the parish, and his wife, Margaret, daughter of David Ireland, town clerk of Culross. His brother David became professor of oriental languages at the University of Edinburgh. Liston spent a short time at school in Abercorn, but was chiefly educated by his father. In 1808 he entered the University of Edinburgh, where he won a prize for Latin prose composition. In 1810 he became assistant to John Barclay (1758-1826), a well-known extra-academical lecturer in anatomy and physiology. Liston continued with Barclay until 1815, eventually acting as his senior assistant and prosector. Barclay was an enthusiastic teacher, and from him Liston derived his love for anatomy. From 1814 to 1816 he became 'surgeon's clerk' (house surgeon) at Edinburgh Royal Infirmary, first to George Bell and afterwards to Dr Gillespie. He went to London in 1816, and worked under Sir William Blizard and Thomas Blizard at the London Hospital; he was also admitted a member of the Royal College of Surgeons and began to attend John Abernethy's lectures at St Bartholomew's Hospital. He then returned to Edinburgh, where he taught anatomy with James Syme. In 1818 he was made FRCS (Edinburgh) with a thesis on strictures of the urethra. 
Between 1818 and 1828 Liston gained a great reputation in Edinburgh as a teacher of anatomy and as an operating surgeon. However, he quarrelled constantly with the infirmary authorities, and this led to his expulsion from the Royal Infirmary in 1822. Nevertheless, in 1827 he was appointed one of the infirmary surgeons, apparently by the exercise of private influence, and in 1828 he was made the operating surgeon. Liston was married and had six children. A daughter married a son of William Dalrymple, surgeon, and his eldest surviving son became a colonel. 
Liston failed to be elected professor of clinical surgery in 1833 in succession to James Russell; Syme, his younger rival and former colleague, was appointed instead, and this failure for Liston probably determined the rest of his career. In 1834 he came to London having been appointed surgeon to the newly founded North London (University College) Hospital. In 1835 he was appointed professor of clinical surgery at London University (University College). He was a member of the council of the Royal College of Surgeons in 1840, and of the board of examiners in 1846. In May 1841 he was elected a fellow of the Royal Society. 
Liston was remembered for his surgical skill and his profound knowledge of anatomy, which enabled him to operate successfully in cases from which other surgeons shrank. Mainly working at a time immediately before the introduction of anaesthetics, he attained a dexterity in the use of cutting instruments which has probably never been equalled. When anaesthetics were unknown it was of the utmost importance that surgical operations should be performed as quickly as possible. It was said of Liston that when he amputated the gleam of his knife was followed so instantaneously by the sound of sawing as to make the two actions appear almost simultaneous, and yet he perfected the method of amputating by flaps. He was 6 feet 2 inches tall and so strong that he could amputate through a thigh with only a single assistant, who held the limb. He could compress an artery with one hand while operating with the other. He excelled too in cutting for stone, and he devised a straight splint for treating dislocation of the thigh. 
Liston wrote many pamphlets and case reports, and also 'The Elements of Surgery' (1831-2; 2nd edn, 1840) and 'Practical Surgery' (1837). He was also the first man in England to perform an operation under ether vapour, at University College Hospital on Monday 21 December 1846. He posted a notice that the operation would take place and the theatre was filled with spectators. 'Gentlemen, time me', said Liston, and the successful amputation of the mid-thigh took twenty-five seconds (Cock, 137). Stitching was done later. The frightened patient, who recovered, was Frederick Churchill, a Harley Street butler in his thirties, who on coming round asked when the operation was going to start. 
Liston was not a good speaker. He was: 'a surgeon, nothing but a surgeon, having no interests, artistic, literary or scientific, except in connection with his profession; for he was in the habit of using his microscope with care and intelligence... a man exceedingly (one might say excessively) fond of all kinds of pleasure. (Bellot, 165-6)' He was popular with students, though many stories were told of his rough manners to his inferiors, his rudeness, and the retorts which followed. He was devoted to outdoor sports, especially yachting.Liston died of an aneurysm of the arch of the aorta on 7 December 1847, at his house, 5 Clifford Street, London; after a large funeral he was buried in Highgate cemetery. His eldest son, Robert, aged fourteen or fifteen, died at Duddingston House, Edinburgh, only twelve days after his father. After Liston's death a subscription raised $700, not enough for the suggested marble statue, but enough for four busts and the Liston gold medal, which was still being awarded 150 years later. In 1850-51 his widow was awarded a government pension of $100. 


@@@@@


doc= 16773


Litchfield, Harriett (1777-1854), actress, is said to have been born on 4 March 1777. Her father, John Sylvester Hay (died 1787?), the only son of the vicar of Maldon, Essex, was surgeon of the East Indiaman 'Nassau', and afterwards head surgeon of the Royal Hospital, Calcutta, where he is stated to have died in his thirty-seventh year, leaving his daughter aged about nine. He may have been the 'Mr John Hay' who was 'proprietor and printer of the 'Calcutta Gazette'', and proprietor and manager of the Calcutta theatre, who died at Fort William in April 1787 ('Gentleman's Magazine', 2, 1787, 1024). 
Miss Hay, sometimes called Miss Sylvester, made her first appearance at Richmond in the summer of 1792, as Julia in Colman's 'The Surrender of Calais'. Encouraged by Dorothy Jordan's applause, she played three or four other characters. Early in 1793 she acted in Scotland and later received a letter from Robert Burns inviting her in the name of the citizens of Dumfries to revisit that town. Her next engagement, under Francis Aickin at Liverpool, proved unsatisfactory. He allowed her only two parts: Sophia in Thomas Holcroft's 'The Road to Ruin' and Edward in Elizabeth Inchbald's 'Everyone has his Fault'. On 27 May 1796 she appeared in London at Covent Garden 'as a young Lady' for the benefit of Mary Ann Davenport, playing her Liverpool role of Edward. 
Parish records at St Paul's, Covent Garden, confirm that Harriett Sylvester Hay married John Litchfield (1774-1858) on 14 September 1796. He was a clerk of the privy council, and Gilliland in the 'Dramatic Mirror' reported that he was 'a gentleman well known and admired in the literary world, and much esteemed as a private character'. He was also the author of some prologues and epilogues, and he occasionally acted. After their marriage the couple settled at 36 Bedford Street, Covent Garden. A child, the first of six, most of whom died in infancy, was born on 30 September 1796, and baptized Thomas Litchfield at St Paul's on 21 November 1796. 
Harriett Litchfield had briefly left the stage upon her marriage, but reappeared in the benefit performances for Mary Ann Yates at the Haymarket on 9 February 1797 and later for other benefits at Covent Garden. Her reception on these occasions gained her an engagement for the following season, and she performed at Richmond during the summer. Engaged at $3 a week, she appeared at Covent Garden on 20 September 1797 as Marianne in Reynolds's 'The Dramatist'. Her other roles that season included Catalina in 'The Castle of Andalusia', Lady Anne in 'Richard III', and Dimity in Arthur Murphy's 'Three Weeks after Marriage'. In October 1797 the 'Monthly Mirror' was enthusiastic in praising her performances, and it is possible that the reviews of her work in that journal were written by her husband. 
On 5 December 1800 Mrs Litchfield played Lady Macbeth, making such a success that she was established as a judicious actress. The 'Monthly Mirror' enthused 'the attempt was bold and hazardous, but her success in the character was complete'. After a quarrel in 1806 with her managers, she returned to the Haymarket. Richard Brinsley Peake recalled that Colman relied on her 'capability of sustaining a variety of parts'. Thereafter her name all but disappears from the theatrical record. She played for six nights at Bath in May 1810, enacting Lady Clermont in Dimond's 'Adrian and Orilla' and performing in a monodrama by Matthew Gregory Lewis that had been written especially for her. On 8 October 1812 she appeared at the Haymarket as Emilia in 'Othello', one of her best characters. This was announced as her first appearance on the stage for six years; it seems also to have been her last. 
The 'Thespian Dictionary' (1805) complimented her skill in tragedy and in irascible characters such as Mrs Oakley in Colman's 'The Jealous Wife', and further commented 'that the animation of her performance makes ample compensation for the disadvantage of figure'. Thomas Gilliland and Anne Mathews remembered her as an esteemed and celebrated actress, and the former further recorded her cheerful and unaffected manners in private life. 
Harriett Litchfield and her husband survived another four decades. She died, probably in London, on 11 January 1854. The 'Gentleman's Magazine' (July 1858) reported John Litchfield's death as having occurred on 30 May 1858, at the age of eighty-four, at the home of his only surviving daughter, Mrs Harriet Sarah Abraham, of Mountfield House, Harrow Road, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 16774


Lithgow, William (b. 1582, d. in or after 1645), traveller, was born at Lanark, the eldest of three known children of James Lithgow (died 1623), a wealthy burgess, and Alison Graham (died 1603), possibly a relation of the earls of Montrose who were later Lithgow's patrons. He was educated at Lanark grammar school. An unlikely tradition that he was intended to become a tailor seems to derive from the appointment of a tailor, James Lithgow (relationship unknown), as an overseer of his mother's will. The provisions of the will included a bequest of 200 marks to William Lithgow. 
Some time before he was twenty-one Lithgow was savagely maltreated by the brothers of a woman with whom he was involved -- he described the incident thirty years later as 'foure blood-shedding wolves' devouring 'one silly stragling lambe' (Lithgow, 'Totall Discourse', 6). Tradition affirms (there is no contemporary evidence) that the family's name was Lockhart and that the brothers cut off or mutilated Lithgow's ears so that he became known as Cutlugged Willie or Lugless Will. He says that the authorities made him submit at the time to 'arbitrement, satisfaction and reconciliation', but that as he grew in years and understood 'the unallowable redresses, and the hainousnesse of the offence; I choosed rather... to seclude my selfe from my soyle... then to have a quotidian occular inspection' (ibid., 7). Among the other reasons he gave for embracing a life of difficult travel is that 'the science of the world', which is superior to other branches of knowledge, is 'acquisted... above all, and principally by Travellers, and Voyagers in divers Regions, and remote places, whose experience confirmeth the true Science therof' (ibid., 301). 
While still in 'the stripling age of my adolescency' (Lithgow, 'Totall Discourse', 9) Lithgow twice visited Orkney and Shetland, the abundance of which he was later to contrast with the relative barrenness of the Aegean Islands. By the early summer of 1609 he had also toured extensively, doubtless, as later, on foot, in Germany, Bohemia, Switzerland, and the Low Countries. He spent ten months in Paris before setting off, in March 1610, on a forty-day walk to Rome. There he inspected the antiquities, violently disapproved of Roman Catholic rites, and was, he claims, harried by the Inquisition. After encountering the 'ignorant devotion' of pilgrims to Loreto (ibid., 25) he sailed from Ancona to Venice. His companion until Venice was James Arthur, a Scottish gentleman who long remained his friend. Lithgow continued, via Zara and Ragusa, to Corfu and the Greek mainland. 'In all this countrey of Greece' he observes: 'I could find nothing, to answer the famous relations, given by Auncient Authors, of the excellency of that land, but the name onely; the barbarousnesse of Turkes and Time, having defeated all the Monuments of Antiquity: No shew of honour, no habitat of men in an honest fashion... But rather prisoners shut up in prisons, or addicted slaves to cruell and tyrrannicall Maisters. (ibid., 65)' At Khania in Crete, Lithgow says, he rescued a French protestant condemned to the Venetian galleys by getting his keeper drunk and smuggling him away disguised as a woman. After other adventures, including shipwreck on Chios, he saw what was then believed to be the remains of Troy and, surviving a beating by four French 'runnagates' on the quayside, landed in Constantinople, where he remained until the early summer of 1611. He stayed for three months with the ambassador, Sir Thomas Glover, and studied Turkish customs, religion, and society. 
Among the many other places Lithgow now visited were Smyrna, Rhodes, Cyprus, and Aleppo. In the spring of 1612 he left Aleppo with a caravan of Armenians and Turks, travelling via Damascus to Galilee and eventually, on Palm Sunday, Jerusalem. During the journey marauding Arabs had to be fought off or paid off, an ambush was narrowly avoided, and Lithgow's Turkish conductor had to be palliated continually with money and tobacco. Once in the city Lithgow looked askance at the rites and observances of his Franciscan hosts but was prepared on the whole to take more seriously the sights at the holy sepulchre, where he spent Easter. With a caravan including six German protestants he made the hard desert journey to Cairo in May 1612. Three of the Germans died on the journey and the other three soon after their arrival. Lithgow claims that he inherited from the Germans some 942 sequins (about $400). From Cairo, 'Microcosmus of the greater World' (Lithgow, 'Totall Discourse', 274), he saw the pyramids and sphinx before sailing, by way of Malta, to Sicily. There, he claims, he narrowly escaped capture by Moorish slavers, raised the alarm, and, on the slavers' arrest, was feasted and richly rewarded by local people. He accompanied the earl of Bothwell and Captain George Hepburn to Rome, travelled fairly rapidly to the Alps, was saved from murder near Frejus partly by his pilgrim's patent, and went to Montpellier, Barcelona, Pau, Bordeaux, and Paris, where ended 'my first, my painefull, and Pedestriall Pilgrimage' (ibid., 298). 
Soon afterwards Lithgow returned to Britain. In London he presented to King James a hunting rod which he had cut from a turpentine tree by the River Jordan and to Queen Anne some medicinal white earth from the cave in Bethlehem and a girdle and garters 'all richly wrought in silke and gold' and inscribed 'Sancto Sepulchro, and the word Jerusalem, &c.' (Lithgow, 'Totall Discourse', 247). He also sought the favour of the earl and countess of Somerset, initially dedicating to him, with verses to her, 'A Most Delectable and True Discourse, of an Admired and Painefull Peregrination' (1614, reissued 1616). At the Somersets' fall a dedication to 'all Noble-minded Gentlemen, and Heroicke Spirits' was substituted. 
The 1614 account was much expanded, and supplemented by accounts of the two later 'peregrinations', in the new edition of 1623 (also extensively selected for 'Purchas his Pilgrimes... the Second Part', 1625) and 'The totall discourse of the rare adventures and painefull peregrinations of long nineteene yeares travayles' (1632). Already in 1614, however, many of the distinctive features of Lithgow's writing were in place: the anti-Catholicism (varied by and on occasion linked to anti-Muslim sentiments); the action-filled narrative (doubtless exaggerated at times; usually there is no way of telling which incidents, if any, are actually invented); the accounts of charges, expenses, thefts, and counter-balancing gifts and rewards; the often colourful 'aureate' style and vocabulary. 
Lithgow departed for his second round of peregrinations in September 1614 'upon some distaste' (Lithgow, 'Totall Discourse', 298). In the Netherlands he was received equally by the opposing generals Spinola and Prince Maurice. He sailed up the Rhine to Heidelberg and 'saluted the Princesse Palatine [Elizabeth of Bohemia] with certayne rare Relickes of the Holy land' (ibid., 305). At Pistoia he was (allegedly) unjustly arrested and condemned to the galleys by the corrupt Bargello but freed by the governor and given 50 Florentine gold crowns in compensation. But the most famous or infamous (conceivably untrue) incident of the second journey took place in Sicily, where, coming upon the bodies of two noblemen who had killed each other, he stole and concealed their rings and money, alerted the townspeople to the deaths, retrieved the booty, left Sicily for Malta as soon as possible, and later vaunted the deed in print -- 'there is aye some fortune falleth by accident, whether lawfull or not, I will not question'. From Malta he sailed to Tunis, visiting the Christian renegade John Ward in his magnificent palace. He went with Ward's safe conduct to 'the theevish Towne of Algier' (ibid., 317) and on to Fez, whose free sexual practices he abhorred but whose palaces, mosques, colleges, hospitals, and palatial taverns he admired. After an unsuccessful attempt to strike south through the desert he returned to Sicily. In September 1615, at Syracuse, he arranged the burial of the renegade Sir Francis Verney, whom he had met six weeks earlier in Palermo. The rest of the second journey continued, amid the usual vicissitudes, through Italy to Vienna, Hungary, Moldavia, Cracow, Danzig (where he was for a time seriously ill), Elsinore, Stockholm (where the illness seemed to be returning), and, from Elsinore again, to England. 
Before beginning his third expedition Lithgow published his poem 'The Pilgrimes Farewell, to his Native Country of Scotland' (1618). This was printed at the author's own expense, but one of its aims was clearly to attract finance for the journey. Among the many dignitaries saluted is John Graham, fourth earl of Montrose, probably already a patron, as apparently was his father, John, third earl (died 1606). (The epistle dedicatory of Lithgow's religious poem 'The Gushing Teares of Godly Sorrow', 1640, asks the fifth earl to continue the favour extended to him by his father and grandfather.) The motivation of the journey was to see the remaining parts of Europe, including Ireland and much of Spain, and to press further into Africa to the realm of Prester John. Lithgow was in Ireland between August 1619 and February 1620 and reported much ignorance, misery, irreligion, and water. From Youghal he sailed to St Malo and proceeded to Portugal and Spain through France (where the traveller is advised to avoid lodging near 'palludiat Ditches, least the vehemency of chirking frogs, vexe the wish'd for Repose of his fatigated body, and cast him in a vigilant perplexity'; Lithgow, 'Totall Discourse', 382). 
Lithgow's account of what happened to him in Malaga in the autumn of 1620 needs to be treated -- like his other encounters with Roman Catholics -- with a degree of caution, especially since it was first published in the virulently anti-Spanish context of 1623. He was waiting for a boat bound for Alexandria, he says, when he was seized and secretly imprisoned in the governor's palace. He was suspected of spying for the English ships which had come against the pirates of Algiers and with the crews of which he had been happily fraternizing. Kept in irons, he was taken in late December to be tortured at a vine-pressing house a league from the town. His terrible sufferings included six hours on the rack. When he failed to confess to spying -- this is where the details become arguably less convincing -- he was charged instead with heresy, tortured again, and told that he would be burnt at the stake unless he recanted within eight days. But at this point a Flemish servant told the English consul about Lithgow's plight. The consul alerted the ambassador in Madrid, who was able to arrange Lithgow's release on Easter Sunday 1621. 
When Lithgow landed in England he was taken on a feather bed to Theobalds to show his 'martyrd anatomy' to the king and court. Clearly his injuries were severe, whether or not they were inflicted in exactly the way he claims. At James's expense he twice took the cure at Bath and largely recovered his health and strength, although his left arm remained badly damaged, but he found it more difficult to achieve redress from the Spaniards. The ambassador in London, Gondomar, promised compensation in June 1621, but it was not forthcoming. In April 1622 he confronted Gondomar and as a result was committed to the Marshalsea prison for nine weeks. In September the council asked for him to be admitted to the Charterhouse Hospital at the first vacancy, but in February 1623 he was committed again, for unknown reasons, this time to the Gatehouse. In January 1624 his bond in $200 for good behaviour was required. Nevertheless, he continued to pursue his case. He preferred a bill of grievance to the House of Lords in 1626, returning to Scotland only after the dissolution of parliament in 1627. 
In 1628 Lithgow visited the marquess of Hamilton on Arran. He spent the winter of 1628-9 in northern Scotland before crossing to Orkney, which he found well governed and notable for 'the stately and magnifick Church of St. Magnus built by the Danes' in Kirkwall (Lithgow, 'Totall Discourse', 437), and Shetland, contrastingly badly administered, a victim of recent 'deoccular' (ibid., 438) -- absentee -- government. (By now, he claims at the end of the 'Totall Discourse', he had travelled 36,000 miles.) He says that he 'perfected' but had not yet published 'Lithgowes Surveigh of Scotland'. It has not survived, but something of its tenor, and perhaps the difficulty in publishing, are indicated in his long poem 'Scotland's Welcome to her Native Sonne, and Soveraigne Lord, King Charles' (1633). The king is asked to redress the many ills of Scotland, where trade, agriculture, seaports and defences, learning, law and order, and morality suffer while the nobility and gentry are at court trying out strange fashions and wasting money. They should 'spend their rents, where growes their graine' ('Poetical Remains', B4). Lithgow's anger was perhaps fuelled not only by Scotland's wrongs but by a further spell in the Gatehouse apparently resulting from the outspoken anti-Spanish material in the comprehensive 1632 version of his travels. 
Lithgow's last known foreign journey was to witness the siege of Breda in the summer of 1637. (He had intended originally to sail to Russia.) 'A True and Experimentall Discourse... of the Siege of Breda' (1637), pithier than his other writings, was composed as he lay on cold straw amid the clangour of military preparations and draws on personal observation and conversations with officers and men. His remaining works are more polemical in intention but share this 'experimentall' -- experientially grounded -- emphasis. For example, in 'A briefe and summarie discourse upon that lamentable and dreadfull disaster at Dunglasse' (1641), Lithgow, investigating the explosion which killed sixty people in August 1640, has: '
search'd, and tryde, and seen the place, 

And spoke with some alive. 
('Poetical Remains', A4'v')' He was in London in 1643, walking 'eighteen Kentish miles' around the perimeter of the city to inspect its impressive fortifications and telling anyone who would listen that the Scots will come to their aid now if the citizens will completely give up their 'popish observances' (Lithgow, 'Present Surveigh', B4'v', C2'v'). He was at the siege of Newcastle and wrote about it in 'An Experimentall Relation upon that Famous Siege of Newcastle' (1645). 
Nothing more is heard of Lithgow after 1645. According to tradition he died at Lanark and was buried in the churchyard of St Kentigern's. His late works chronicle the rapidly changing political and military situation while retaining something of the exotic style of the 'Rare Adventures' and much of their anti-Catholicism. He is convinced that in England there is no real dispute between king and parliament -- rather 'the quarrell dependeth only and absolutely betweene the Papists and Protestants' (Lithgow, 'Present Surveigh', C2'v'); still at Marston Moor the enemy are 'Romish Butchers' (Lithgow, 'Experimentall Relation', 6). It was mostly, however, as the hero of his own travels (prominent in various guises and plights in the accompanying woodcuts) that he continued to appeal to readers. There were editions of his travels in 1640, 1682, 1692, 1770, 1814, and 1906, and a chapbook version published in Glasgow (1816?). Some nineteenth-century readers found his style 'inflated and obscure' ('Poetical Remains', vii), but many later readers have relished its baroque richness and exaggeration. 


@@@@@


doc= 16775


Litlyngton, Nicholas (b. before 1315, d. 1386), abbot of Westminster, claimed to be a member of the Despenser family, a claim corroborated by his familiarity with Bishop Henry Despenser of Norwich (died 1406), who ate three times at his table in the period October 1371 - July 1372, and with Sir Edward Despenser (died 1375), for whom he was attorney during the latter's absence in France in 1373-4, and from whom he received a legacy of a gilt hanaper in 1375. His parents, for whom he founded anniversaries at Hurley Priory and Great Malvern Priory, were named Hugh and Joan. They cannot now be further identified, but their marriage can probably be inferred from the fact that Litlyngton used the Despenser arms without any mark of illegitimacy. The toponym by which he was known in the monastery may derive from Littleton, or Litlyngton, Middlesex, where the abbey purchased land, as part of Billets manor, during his abbacy. 
Litlyngton entered the monastery in or, quite possibly, before 1333. Aristocratic recruits were rare at Westminster, but high birth did not speed his progress through the monastic 'cursus honorum'. Although he had already served the monastery in external affairs at important junctures, he was twice passed over for the priorship in 1349, and became prior only when the office again fell vacant in 1350. The convent was perhaps wary of the pride of family that would inspire Litlyngton, when abbot, to place his monogram -- the initials N. L., surmounted by a coronet -- on sets of plate given by him to the refectory and misericord, and to acquiesce in, if he did not initiate, the use of this device and the Despenser arms on bosses in the cloister, on tiles on the refectory floor, and in other strategic places. 
Yet Litlyngton was no blinkered snob in monk's clothing, but a competent and energetic man of business who, after he became abbot in 1362, completed the rehabilitation of the monastery begun by his predecessor, Simon Langham, following the crushing blow delivered to its numbers and income by the black death of 1348-9. Langham, who became successively bishop of Ely and archbishop of Canterbury, maintained a stream of benefactions to the abbey until his death in 1376, and enabled Litlyngton, who enjoyed his confidence and was an executor of his will, to spend on a large scale. The rebuilding of the cloister, long in hand, was completed; work on the nave of the abbey church resumed after the lapse of a century; and new quarters, including a new infirmary, provided for some major departments. Litlyngton himself contributed to these works on a relatively generous scale. What the prior and convent long remembered, however, was his failure to pay them for lead from the old nave which was used to roof the abbot's new house in the precinct; this was built in the 1370s. Even so, he spent about $450 on this house from abbatial funds and also paid for the new house which he had built earlier, in the 1360s, at Denham, Buckinghamshire. If the new buildings served to glorify the abbot, they also raised the morale of his monks and probably assisted the recruitment of novices. The total number of monks climbed into the mid-forties -- a remarkable achievement, since the number before the black death had probably not exceeded fifty. The missal, now known as the Litlyngton missal, that he gave to the high altar, and in which his monogram and arms are frequently displayed, was produced in the monastery in 1383/4 at a total cost to Litlyngton of $34 4's'. 7died The scribe, Thomas Preston, subsequently entered the community as a monk. The illumination was the work of two artists, now unknown. 
Litlyngton itinerated less extensively than most of his predecessors. He normally attended parliament if it met at Westminster, and when he did so was named as a trier of petitions. In October 1378, however, in the tense aftermath of the murder of Robert Hawley in Westminster Abbey, he attended parliament at Gloucester, to answer the council's charge that in admitting Hawley, a debtor and alleged traitor, to sanctuary he had obstructed royal justice. Outwitting his opponents, Litlyngton took the initiative in addressing the Commons in defence of the abbey's liberties before they heard John Wyclif, who had been summoned by the council to speak against them. Writing about fifty years later, John Flete praises Litlyngton's zeal for the interests of the monastery both in this controversy, and in the long-running dispute with the dean and canons of St Stephen's Chapel, Westminster, over jurisdiction in the Palace of Westminster. In the late summer of 1386 the threat of a French invasion enabled Litlyngton to demonstrate a different kind of patriotism, and he and two other senior monks equipped themselves for service against the French, should they invade. The hauberks, cuirass, and other items of military equipment found among his chattels at his death, and given by his executors to his successor, William Colchester, were presumably purchased on this occasion. However, the bows and arrows mentioned in the same list had probably been used on hunting parties, for Litlyngton kept hounds. 
Unusual, perhaps, in his martial zeal, Litlyngton was in many other respects the epitome of the successful Benedictine prelate in late medieval England: unembarrassed by wealth and a largely secularized mode of life, a good man of business, a great builder, and courageous in defence of monastic privilege. He died at La Neyte, his house in present-day Pimlico, on 29 November 1386 and was buried on 17 December in the chapel of St Blaise in the abbey church. 


@@@@@


doc= 16776


Lister, Geoffrey (d. 1381), rebel, has been the subject of much confusion over his identity. Walsingham wrongly states that he was called John and that he was a Norwich dyer, while Froissart says that his name was William and that he came from Stafford. He was in fact a dyer from Felmingham, near North Walsham, Norfolk. He paid 6died in the poll tax of 1379, and is described in the tax records as a 'lestere' or dyer. He had a wife called Agnes. He possessed at the time of his death goods and chattels worth 33's'. 9died, and held half an acre of land from the duchy of Lancaster. He was the most prominent rebel leader in Norfolk during the rising of 1381, when his actions displayed a political and tactical acumen comparable to that of the better-known rebel leader in Kent, Wat Tyler. 
The first outbreaks of insurgency in Norfolk in 1381 occurred in west Norfolk, beginning with the appearance of Suffolk rebels at Thetford on 14 June 1381 and culminating in the sack of houses belonging to John Reed, a poll tax collector, at Rougham on 18 June. During this time proclamations were made in Lister's name urging people to rise in east Norfolk, but there is no record of any major incident there before 17 June, when a great force of rebels assembled on Mousehold Heath outside Norwich. Lister was already established as the leader of this band. His lieutenants included two disaffected members of the local gentry, Sir Roger Bacon and Thomas, son of Sir Thomas Gissing. While they were at Mousehold, the rebels killed three men they had captured: Reginald Eccles, a local justice of the peace, Sir Robert Salle, a notable military leader, and John Newlyn, a serf of John of Gaunt, duke of Lancaster (died 1399). The insurgents burst into Norwich and sacked houses there. On 18 June Lister led his force to Yarmouth, where they forced the burgesses to hand over a charter that gave the town a monopoly over the local herring trade and control of the port of Kirkley Road. Lister and his followers cut the charter in two, sending one part to their fellow rebels in Suffolk. Houses belonging to William Ellis and Hugh Fastolf, the most powerful of the Yarmouth burgesses and the customs collectors there, were attacked and records destroyed. A proclamation was made in the name of Lister and Bacon at Kirkley Road against the collection of customs in the port. On 19 June, perhaps after Lister had left the town, the gaol was attacked, and three Flemings held there were killed. Lister returned towards North Walsham, attacking the manor of John of Gaunt at Gimingham. Lister appears to have assumed some kind of judicial authority. Thomas Soppe was arrested for attacking property of the abbot of Dereham at Holkham, but was released because Lister said he approved the act. Then on 21 June, at Thorpe Market, Lister received a bill naming the parson of Thursford and others as traitors, and also heard an appeal for help in destroying the records of the prior of Binham. 
These actions support stories told by Walsingham and repeated, many years later, by John Capgrave. Walsingham claims that Lister tried to capture William Ufford, earl of Suffolk (died 1382), to give authority to his actions. Ufford escaped, disguised as a groom, but five other members of the local gentry -- Roger Scales, William Morley, John Brewes, Stephen Hales, and Robert Salle -- were forced to ride with the rebels. Walsingham states that Lister called himself 'the king of the commons', and compelled the captive knights to taste his food and drink and to kneel to him in deference. Salle was supposedly killed because he was disobedient. Eventually Lister decided to send Morley and Brewes to try and purchase a charter of manumission from the king with money looted in Norwich. The two knights were accompanied by three of Lister's most trusted men. But when they reached Icklingham near Newmarket they met the bishop of Norwich, Henry Despenser (died 1406), 'a man ideally suited for fighting and armed to the teeth' ('Historia Anglicana', 2.6). He urged the knights to give up any traitors among them. Emboldened by the bishop's forceful manner, they told him the story of their mission. The bishop seized the three rebels and killed them, and then headed for North Walsham, where Lister was awaiting the return of his envoys. Despenser probably arrived at North Walsham on 26 June. The rebels had fortified their camp outside the town by surrounding it with a ditch filled with stakes. The bishop and his retinue nevertheless overwhelmed the rebels. Despenser -- who seems to have been acting without due legal authority -- sentenced Lister to be hanged, drawn, and beheaded. He accompanied Lister to the gallows, 'thereby performing despite his victory a work of mercy and piety. He held up the rebel's head to prevent it knocking on the ground while he was being dragged to the place of his hanging' ('Historia Anglicana', 2.8). Two medieval stone crosses outside North Walsham are said to be associated with Despenser's victory over the rebels. 


@@@@@


doc= 16777


Littledale, Sir Joseph (1767-1842), judge, was born on 31 May 1767, the eldest son of Henry Littledale, a mercer and draper, of Eton House, Lancashire, who came from a Cumberland family, and his wife, Sarah (died1807), daughter of Isaac Wilkinson of Whitehaven. He was educated at St John's College, Cambridge, where he was senior wrangler and Smith's prizeman, and graduated BA in 1787, proceeding to an MA in 1790. In 1789 he was elected to a fellowship at St John's, which he held until his marriage. He was admitted at Lincoln's Inn in 1786, migrating in 1793 to Gray's Inn, and practised as a special pleader until he was called to the bar on 28 June 1798. Asked about his politics, he is said to have given the reply, which became a 'bon mot' in legal circles: 'My politics are the politics of a special pleader'. He joined the northern circuit, attending the Chester sessions, and in 1813 was appointed counsel to the University of Cambridge. In 1813, along with his younger brother Edward Littledale (1779/80-1837), also a bibliophile, he was elected a member of the Roxburghe Club, for which in 1821 he edited Skelton's 'Magnyfycence, an Interlude'. He married on 26 February 1821 Hannah Timberlake (died 1857). 
On 30 April 1824 Littledale succeeded Mr Justice Best as judge in the court of king's bench, although he had never been made a king's counsel or sat in parliament. Nor did he find any government patronage, beyond being appointed to assist in government prosecutions in Scotland in 1822. He was knighted on 9 June 1824. 
Littledale resigned because of poor health on 31 January 1841. He was sworn of the privy council, but died shortly afterwards at his house in Bedford Square on 26 June 1842 and was buried in St George, Bloomsbury. He left a daughter, Elizabeth, who afterwards married Thomas Coventry, a barrister. 


@@@@@


doc= 16778


Littledale, Richard Frederick (1833-1890), Church of England clergyman and religious controversialist, the fourth son of John Littledale, auctioneer of Dublin, was born there on 14 September 1833. On 15 October 1850 he entered Trinity College, Dublin, as a foundation scholar, graduated BA as a first class in classics, and in 1855 obtained the senior Berkeley gold medal and the first divinity prize. He proceeded at Dublin MA in 1858, and LLB and LLD in 1862, and at Oxford on 5 July 1862 DCL 'comitatis causa'. He was curate of St Matthew in Thorpe Hamlet, Norfolk, from 1856 to 1857, and from 1857 to 1861 curate of St Mary the Virgin, Crown Street, Soho, London, where he took a great interest in the House of Charity. For the rest of his life he suffered from chronic ill health, performed few parochial duties, and devoted himself mainly to writing. 
Littledale was a significant controversialist, becoming a leading exponent of ritualism in the Church of England in the 1860s and 1870s. In a series of pamphlets and lectures he argued that the Tractarian movement was ripe for a further advance, specifically in terms of ceremonial practice. In pamphlets such as 'The Real Presence' (n.d.) and 'The Christian Sacrifice' (n.d.) he asserted that Tractarian eucharistic doctrine had reached a point where its visible expression in ceremonial had become essential. In 'The Law of Ritual' (n.d.) he further claimed a legal basis for this, arguing that all pre-Reformation uses were legal unless specifically repealed. In 'The North Side of the Altar' (1865) legalistic complexity led him into a detailed examination of the precise meaning of such terms as 'side' and 'end' of the communion table. A further line of argument developed from his long association with John Mason Neale (1818-1866), namely that the restoration of church buildings led inevitably to a desire for a more elaborate ceremonial, a point he first made in 'On the Application of Colour to the Decoration of Churches' (1857) and repeated in 'Ritualists not Romanists' (1876). 
Yet despite Littledale's claim that the ritualists were the inheritors of the Tractarians, he never gained the support of all the clergy of that older generation. Some of them, such as William Gresley, William Butler, and Thomas Stevens, were deeply concerned that country parishioners were unprepared for such elaborate ceremonial. The parishes most influenced by Littledale's theories were mainly in London and other urban centres with more sophisticated congregations. As ritualistic practices spread among them, so the controversy they aroused extended throughout the Church of England and beyond, leading to royal commissions sitting from 1867, and finally to the 'Public Worship Regulation Act' of 1874 and the prosecution of ritualist clergy that followed. 
Another area of controversy in which Littledale engaged was the defence of Anglicanism against the claims of Rome following the declaration of papal infallibility in 1870. His arguments were elaborated in a series of works such as 'An Inner View of the Vatican Council' (1877), 'Why Ritualists do not Become Roman Catholics' (1878), 'Plain Reasons for not Joining the Church of Rome' (1880), 'Words for Truth: Replies to Roman Cavils Against the Church of England' (1888), and 'The Petrine Claims: a Critical Inquiry' (1889). For Littledale the revival of Catholic doctrine and ceremonial in the Church of England, combined with what he saw as unauthorized additions to the faith by Rome, made conversion both unnecessary and morally dubious. 
Littledale also collaborated with other authors, most notably John Mason Neale in the 'Liturgy of SS Mark, James, Clement, Chrysostom, Basil' (1868-9), and after Neale's death in 1866 he completed the 'Commentary on the Psalms from Primitive and Mediaeval Writers' (vols. 2, 3, and 4, 1868-74), and later re-edited two other editions of the entire work. With James Edward Vaux he wrote 'The Priest's Prayer Book' (1864), 'The People's Hymnal' (1867), 'The Christian Passover' (1873), and 'The Altar Manual' (n.d.). Littledale was also a noted confessor, and it was claimed that he had heard more confessions than any other priest in the Church of England apart from Pusey. 
Littledale died on 11 January 1890, at his home, 9 Red Lion Square, London. A reredos to his memory was erected in the chapel at St Katherine's, 32 Queen Square, London, in March 1891. 


@@@@@


doc= 16779


Littler, Sir John Hunter (1783-1856), army officer in the East India Company, eldest son of Thomas Littler and his wife, Diana, daughter of John Hunter, a director of the East India Company, was born on 6 January 1783 at Tarvin, Cheshire, where his family had been established for many generations. He was educated under the Revd Dr Devonport at the grammar school at Acton, near Nantwich. On 19 August 1800 he was appointed ensign in the 10th Bengal native infantry, and in that regiment became lieutenant on 29 November the same year, captain on 16 December 1812, and major on 22 September 1824. He went out to India in the Indiaman 'Kent', which was captured by a French privateer in the Bay of Bengal. The passengers were set adrift in a pinnace, but arrived safely at their destination. Littler served with his regiment in the campaigns under Lord Lake in 1804-5 and at the reduction of Java in 1811, returning to India in 1816. He then served as sub-assistant commissary-general in the marquess of Hastings's army, continuing in the post until 1824. Littler had previously been married, and on 25 June 1827 married, at Benares, Helen Olympia (died 12 Jan 1885), only daughter of Lieutenant-Colonel Henry Stewart, a claimant of the Orkney peerage; they had four daughters. After his death, in 1858 she married Thomas Aston Cokayne. 
Littler became lieutenant-colonel of the 14th Bengal native infantry in 1828, and colonel of the 36th Bengal native infantry in 1839, the colonelcy of which he retained until his death. In 1841 he was promoted major-general, and in 1843 was appointed to command the Agra division of the Bengal army. He commanded a division of Sir Hugh Gough's army at the defeat of the Gwalior army at Maharajpur on 29 December 1843, where he was slightly wounded and had two horses killed under him. He received for his services the thanks of parliament and the Gwalior star, and was made KCB on 2 May 1844. At the outbreak of the First Anglo-Sikh War in 1845 he was in command of the Ferozepore division. Leaving half his troops to protect the cantonment, he marched with the rest to meet the Sikhs when they first crossed the Sutlej on 11 December, but they declined the challenge, although they considerably outnumbered Littler's force, and turned aside to Ferozeshahr. Littler effected a junction with Gough's army on 21 December 1845, and at the battle of Ferozeshahr on 21-2 December commanded a division, and again had a horse killed under him, receiving once more the thanks of parliament. At the close of the campaign he was appointed to command at Lahore. In 1848 he was appointed to the supreme council of India, and was made GCB and deputy governor of Bengal. Littler returned home, with the rank of lieutenant-general, in 1851. The remainder of his life was passed in retirement at his seat, Bigaden, Buckfastleigh, near Totnes, Devon, where he died on 18 February 1856. He was buried at Tarvin, Cheshire. 


@@@@@


doc= 16780


Littleton, Adam (1627-1694), Church of England clergyman and philologist, was born on 2 November 1627 at Halesowen, which was then in Shropshire, the sixth son of Thomas Littleton, the vicar there. He claimed to descend from the ancient Littleton/Westcote family of Worcestershire, which included the fifteenth-century jurist Sir Thomas Littleton. Having been educated under Richard Busby at Westminster School, in 1644 he was admitted to Christ Church, Oxford. By 1647 he was a stipendiary student at Christ Church, but he was ejected in 1648 by parliamentary visitors. He might have written the single sheet 'Tragi-Comoedia Oxoniensis, a Latin Poem on the Mad Proceedings of the Parliamentary Visitors' (1648), but this is doubtful. 
Soon afterwards Littleton became usher under Busby at Westminster School, where he was later (1658) appointed second master; he also taught at other places. His fame as a grammarian dates from this time. He wrote 'Pasor metricus, sive, Voces' (a Greek and Latin grammar printed in 1658 with 'Diatriba in octo tractatus distributa') and 'Elementa religionis, sive, Quatuor capita catechetica totiden linguis descripter, in usum scholarum' (supposedly printed in 1658 with 'Complicatio radicum in primaevo Hebraeorum lingua'). By 1657, when his first child was born, he had married his first wife, Elizabeth, but having given birth to a second child in 1659, she died that year and was buried in St Paul's, Covent Garden. 
During the 1660s Littleton was appointed a chaplain in ordinary to Charles II, who at some point also granted him the reversion of Busby's post, although the ageing master in the event outlived him. In 1662 he published 'Solomon's Gate, or, An Entrance into the Church', ostensibly commemorating the north gate of Westminster Abbey, but, in fact, a sort of catechism 'of the grounds of religion conteined in... the Lord's prayer, the Apostles creed, the 'Ten commandments', the sacraments'. On 24 January 1667 Littleton married his second wife, Susan Rich of West Ham, Essex. Two years later Littleton obtained the rectory of St Luke's in Chelsea, where he may already have done some teaching, and also in 1669 delivered the funeral sermon for Lady Jane Cheyne, wife of Charles Cheyne, later Viscount Newhaven, also of Chelsea and perhaps his patron. The same year he became a prebend at Westminster and some time later was subdean. On 12 July 1670 he received a DD, 'without taking any in arts, on account of his extraordinary merit', because letters from Humfrey Henchman, bishop of London, recommended him for his humanity, manners, genius, 'and ready faculty in preaching' (Nichols, 'Lit. anecdotes', 2.58-60n.). Increasingly this talent was exhibited in occasional sermons at, among other places, Guildhall, Westminster, and Whitehall, before the royal family; he may have been chaplain to the prince Palatine. Many of his sermons were published in three large folio volumes, entitled 'Sixty One Sermons Preached Mostly upon Publick Occasions' (1680). They emphasized the ceremonies and uniqueness of Anglicanism, 'having stood intirely ('sic') upon her own Bottom' (2.sig. B[3]), and being neither Calvinist nor Lutheran. He repeatedly attacked 'the foolish and outragious zeal and odd practises of our fanatick brethren' (1.172) and reminded dissenters of their obligation to authority. Indeed, loyalty and a distrust of nonconformity were his watchwords. Even during the Popish Plot scare, when he delivered 'A sermon at a solemn meeting of the natives of the city and county of Worcester, in the church of St Mary le Bow' (1680), he hoped 'that neither Popery nor Schism may ever prevail over' us and recommended charity for 'the old Cavaliers', who 'have since the Kings happy Restauration been too too much neglected' (p. 34). 
Alongside his active preaching schedule, Littleton maintained his philological research and in 1678 published 'Linguae Latinae liber dictionarius quadripartitus', a huge Latin dictionary, which was published at least four times by his death, and several more times in the eighteenth century before it was superseded by later dictionaries. He was working on a Greek lexicon at the end of his life and read and annotated pieces in Hebrew, Chaldee, and Arabic. His skill in languages allowed him to publish an edition of Cicero in 1681 and translate from Greek a life of Themistocles, which appeared in an edition of Plutarch's 'Lives' (1683). The same year, adopting the pen-name Redman Westcote in evocation of his Worcestershire ancestors, he published as 'Tracts Written by John Selden' a translation of the latter's 'Jani Anglorum facies altera'. He also composed some commendatory verses to his friend, Baldwin Hamey, which he published appended to Hamey's posthumous 'Dissertatio epistolaris de juramento medicorum' (1693) (Greek and Latin texts of the Hippocratic oath), and several other pieces. He purchased so many books and manuscripts from Europe, Asia, and Africa that he might have exhausted his income, because his successor at Chelsea, John King, claimed he died insolvent and left his widow, his third wife, the daughter of Richard Guildford of Chelsea, in distressed circumstances even though she had brought her husband some wealth. Neither the Greek lexicon nor his pieces on 'mystical numeration' (Nichols, 'Lit. anecdotes', 2.60n.) survive. 
Littleton retained the Chelsea living to the end of his life. He may also have held the rectory of Overton, Hampshire, from 1683, and he was minister of St Botolph, Aldersgate, London, from about 1685 until about 1691, when he resigned, perhaps because of ill health. He died at Chelsea on 30 June 1694 at the age of sixty-seven and was buried at St Luke's, Chelsea, where a tablet to his memory was placed. A catalogue of his library, 'Bibliotheca Littletoniana' was printed the next year and his books dispersed. His widow died in 1698 and was buried at Chelsea on 14 November. 


@@@@@


doc= 16781


Littleton, Edward, Baron Littleton (1589-1645), judge and politician, came from a prodigious legal background. His family were descendants of the younger son of the famous fifteenth-century judge and writer on tenures, Sir Thomas Littleton. Born at Mounslow, Shropshire, in 1589, Edward was the eldest son of Sir Edward Littleton of Henley, chief justice of north Wales, and Mary, daughter of Edmund Walter, chief justice of south Wales. After entering Oxford as a gentleman commoner of Christ Church on 28 November 1606, he took a BA degree on 28 April 1609. Admitted to the Inner Temple in London in 1608 he was called to the bar there in 1617. Littleton was a close friend of the famous jurist John Selden, and was said by Clarendon to have taken 'great pains in the hardest and most knotty part of the law' (Clarendon, 'Hist. rebellion', 5.SS204), suggesting that he was expert in records as well as book learning. Among lawyers in his generation he was widely regarded as 'the best antiquary of the profession who gave himself to practice' (ibid.). 
Littleton's early public career was associated with Wales and the border counties, where he also maintained personal as well as political connections. In 1614 he was returned to the Addled Parliament by Bishop's Castle, Shropshire. He became a justice of the peace in Shropshire and was appointed second judge for the northern circuit of the court of great sessions in 1622. Made a member of the council in the marches in 1623, he also served as recorder of Bridgnorth from 1624 until 1640. After the death of his first wife, Anne, the daughter of John Lyttelton of Frankley, Worcestershire, he married (before 1625) Sidney, the daughter of the judge Sir William Jones of Castellmarch, and the widow of both Richard Wynn of Glasinfryn, and Sir George Calverley, of Ley, Cheshire. Returned to parliament for both Leominster and Caernarfon borough in 1625, he vacated the Welsh seat in favour of his brother-in-law, Robert Jones. He was elected again for the same places to the next two parliaments and sat in 1626 for Leominster and in 1628 for Caernarfon. Though he was apparently sometimes absent from the house while away on circuit, Littleton gradually made an increasingly significant impact. He sat on a few committees in 1625, but was quite active both as a speaker and committee man in 1626. A participant in the attack on the king's favourite, the duke of Buckingham, Littleton none the less advised that while common fame constituted sufficient grounds on which to accuse the duke, it was not sufficient evidence on which to condemn him. He was also involved in drafting a remonstrance for presentation to the king in which the house responded to the arrest of Elliot and Digges by asserting its claim to freedom of speech in discussing all business that concerned the commonwealth. 
Littleton emerged as a leading figure in the parliament of 1628 which condemned the forced loan and pushed forward the petition of right in the wake of the arrest by the council, and detention without bail, of the five knights who had refused to pay the loan. He spoke frequently and was appointed to forty-six committees. The chairman of that on liberty and property, he guided the inquiry into the use of martial law and the detested practice of billeting soldiers on the country. Making a report from the committee on 3 April he stressed that it was 'an ancient and undoubted right of every free man that he hath a full and absolute propriety in his goods and estate' (Johnson, 2.278). Presenting the Commons' case against arbitrary arrest to the Lords less than a week later, he used 'Magna Carta' and other statutes to demonstrate how 'due process of law', including the right to bail and trial by peers, was 'lex terrae', the law of the land, and that it applied to those arrested by the crown and council in just the same way as it did in ordinary cases (ibid., 2.334ff.). When the goods of John Rolle, a member of the house, were seized for his refusal to pay tonnage and poundage Littleton moved, on 22 January 1629, that those responsible for the breach of parliamentary privilege should be sent for. Later on in the same session he stated that no canon made by the convocation of the church could have any authority unless it had the approval of the state, expressed in parliament. 
Acting as counsel for Selden in the case of the MPs arrested on the king's orders for causing a disturbance at the end of the 1629 session, Littleton referred several times to the petition of right in arguing that they should be granted bail. Early in 1631 he acted for defendants who had refused to compound for the recently introduced knighthood fines, although he appears to have accepted that the king had the substantive right to impose the measure. Like several other leading lawyers of the 1620s who had been critical of royal policy he was in any case advanced as a servant of the crown in the course of the 1630s. On the recommendation of King Charles the City of London made him its recorder on 7 December 1631, and in the same year he was appointed counsel to the University of Oxford. Nominated autumn reader at the Inner Temple in 1632 he lectured on the statute 27 Ed. III c. 17 (Merchant Strangers), a topic that gave him the opportunity to quote the works of the Dutch jurist Hugo Grotius and reflect on a subject of some importance at the time, the sovereignty of the seas. The diarist Sir Richard Hutton thought that Littleton was the first choice of William Noy to succeed him in the post of attorney-general, but when Noy died in 1634 John Bankes was promoted instead. Littleton replaced Bankes as solicitor-general on 17 October 1634, and he was knighted in October 1635. Although he was a member of the court of high commission from 1633 and a commissioner for searching out defective titles to land, Littleton's role in the formulation and execution of Caroline financial measures is unclear, but in 1637, when the legality of ship money was tested in court, he spoke for three days in response to the case made for John Hampden against the king. Invoking the words of Sir Edward Coke, who had said that court records were a much better guide to legal history than chronicles, Littleton elaborated his case with a 'beadroll of examples and precedents' ('State trials', 3.926) from before the conquest to the time of the forced loan, but since Hampden's lawyers had not yet questioned the claim that the levy was made in response to an emergency his principal point was also based on the law of nature and reason. The defence of the realm was more important than the law of property; indeed, individual property could not be safe if the commonwealth was in danger. 'Salus populi suprema lex... And truly it is a strange imposture, that the law should so provide, that the king by his writ can give us a remedy for white-acre and black-acre, for a clod of earth, and not be able to give a writ to defend the kingdom when it is in imminent danger. (ibid.)' Between 1634 and 1638 Littleton served as treasurer of the Inner Temple. Having been made a serjeant-at-law just a few days earlier, on 27 January 1640 he became chief justice of the court of common pleas. This was the most lucrative position in the legal system, and the one which Littleton had always described as his highest ambition, but his tenure was short, and he was soon enveloped in the growing political storms of the next couple of years. Having been appointed a privy councillor on the advice of Archbishop William Laud and the earl of Strafford, on 18 January 1641 he was removed from common pleas and made lord keeper of the great seal after the previous holder, Sir John Finch, had fled into exile. A month later he was created Baron Littleton of Mounslow, with the probable intention that he should use his position in the House of Lords to help deflect the growing attack on the earl of Strafford. At this point, however, Littleton suffered a serious illness that incapacitated him until after Strafford's trial, and which, according to Clarendon, took a permanent toll on his 'natural vigour and vivacity' (Clarendon, 'Hist. rebellion', 5.SS203). 
On 18 May 1641 Littleton was placed at the head of a commission to execute the office of lord high treasurer. When, on 16 August, the parliamentary commissioners were about to proceed to Edinburgh to treat with the Scottish parliament Littleton refused to pass their commission under the great seal in the absence of directions from the king, but thereafter his actions began to lead King Charles seriously to question his loyalty. He firmly refused to put the great seal to the proclamation for the arrest of the five members in January 1642, and some reports suggest that he asked to be allowed to resign his position. In April and May he lent his weight to the view that it was legal for the houses to commission lord lieutenants, and he also spoke for, and voted in favour of, the militia ordinance, perhaps hoping that the measures would help stop the king from declaring war. In a private conversation reported by Clarendon, Littleton claimed that he feigned complicity with the houses because he feared that they would otherwise take the great seal into their own custody, but the king, now in York, remained dissatisfied. Charles sent a messenger to collect the seal, and after handing it over Littleton took advantage of a weekend break in the parliamentary proceedings to depart from London on 23 May. Soon afterwards he informed the Lords that the king had ordered him not to leave his presence; after giving him warning a year later that he would lose his place if he did not return the seal, the two houses passed an ordinance for creating a new one on 10 November 1643. 
Evidently depressed at what he saw as the inevitability of war, Littleton displayed a 'visible dejectedness' (Clarendon, 'Hist. rebellion', 5.SS203) when he arrived at York which did little to restore Charles's confidence in him; for some time afterwards the great seal was kept in the king's bedchamber. Though he possessed a 'grave and comely' presence (ibid., 3.SS81), Littleton's manner and legal learning appear not to have made him a very effective councillor, but he was present when Charles received the parliamentary peace proposals at Oxford in early 1643. In May of the same year he was again appointed a commissioner of the treasury, and on 21 May 1644 he was given a commission as colonel to raise a regiment of foot from among the gentlemen of the inns of court and chancery in London. Along with other royalists he was granted a DCL degree from Oxford University on 31 January 1643, and it was probably when he was with the king in Oxford that he began working on a major jurisprudential treatise, which he seems to have intended for publication and which he entitled, with reference to his distinguished ancestor, 'The newe Littleton'. Although only parts of the manuscript survive (now at Harvard law school, MS 2106), it demonstrates his vast learning not only in English legal sources, but also in a very wide selection of continental works ranging from the 'Corpus juris civilis' to Italian and especially French treatises of the sixteenth century. Organized on an alphabetical basis the treatise was intended to be an encyclopaedic comparative work that would cover international and ecclesiastical as well as private and constitutional law. 
Littleton died at Oxford on 27 August 1645 and was buried in Christ Church Cathedral, where his daughter erected a monument to his memory. When parliament ordered in the following September that his books and manuscripts in London should be seized they were put into the hands of Bulstrode Whitelocke, but were evidently disbursed thereafter. A volume of law reports published under Littleton's name in 1683 may have been owned by him, but he is unlikely to have been the author. 


@@@@@


doc= 16782


Littleton, Edward (bap. 1625, d. 1702), planter and judge in Barbados, was baptized on 21 December 1625 in Stoke St Milborough, Shropshire, the son of Sir Adam Littleton (died 1647), son of Thomas Littleton, and his wife Frances Lutley. His mother was Audrey (died 1648), daughter of Thomas Poyntz of North Ockendon, Essex, and his wife, Jane Peryam. He attended Westminster School (according to Anthony Wood) before becoming a commoner in St Mary Hall, Oxford, matriculating on 2 April 1641. He graduated BA on 6 July 1644, was elected a fellow of All Souls in 1646, and proceeded MA on 14 December 1648. He was admitted to Lincoln's Inn on 24 April 1649, but seems to have remained in Oxford for several years, as he was senior proctor in 1656. He was incorporated MA at Cambridge in 1657, but resigned his Oxford fellowship in 1663 and was called to the bar in 1664. Two years later he sailed to Barbados to serve both as secretary to William, sixth Baron Willoughby of Parham, the governor, and as king's attorney for the island colony. About 1669, while living on Barbados, Littleton married Dorothy, widow of Edward Harrison of Barbados and daughter of John Booth, of Glossop, Derbyshire. The Littletons had no children. 
By 1673 Littleton had become one of the largest landowners on Barbados, with 600 acres. Although he soon sold much of the land, the census of 1679 reveals that he remained one of the leading planters on the island. He had 205 acres in St James parish with 120 slaves and three servants. Littleton served for several years as a judge of the Holetown court of common pleas, and for six years from 1674 he represented St James parish in the house of assembly, twice serving as speaker of that body. In these positions he became a staunch advocate for the interests of the planter class. When a new governor, Sir Richard Dutton, arrived in 1680, Littleton led the opposition to Dutton's efforts to force planters into compliance with imperial rule. Early in 1682 Dutton reported that he had dissolved the assembly and dismissed all his detractors from civil and military positions including Littleton. The latter was vindicated when a newly elected assembly selected him as speaker. 
In 1683 Littleton returned to England, where he spent the rest of his life. He remained an opponent of Dutton, appearing as a witness against him before the lords of trade in autumn 1683. He also published an impassioned defence of his fellow planters in a pamphlet entitled 'The groans of the plantations, or, A true account of their grievous and extreme sufferings by the heavy impositions upon sugar, and other hardships relating more particularly to the island of Barbados' (1689). In it he charged that his fellow sugar planters had been brought to the brink of ruin by heavy customs duties, the requirement that they purchase all imports from within the empire, and their dependence upon the Royal African Company for slaves. The Barbados assembly not only sent a letter of thanks to Littleton; they hired him to serve as their agent. For a decade beginning in 1691 he lobbied successfully with William III and the House of Commons on behalf of his fellow sugar planters. His efforts contributed to the repeal of an imperial sugar tax imposed in 1685 and the withdrawal from the Royal African Company of its monopoly permitting new traders to enter the slave trade -- a circumstance that rapidly doubled the number of slaves delivered to the island. Although Littleton published several other pamphlets dealing largely with imperial, diplomatic, and economic issues, his significance derives from 'The Groans of the Plantations' and his other activities on behalf of Barbados sugar planters. He is last recorded as agent for Barbados in 1701, and was buried at Greenwich, Kent, on 9 February 1702. 


@@@@@


doc= 16783


Littleton, Edward (bap. 1698, d. 1733), Church of England clergyman and poet, was baptized at Stoke St Milborough, Shropshire, on 16 February 1698, the son of John Littleton and his wife, Ann. He was educated upon the royal foundation at Eton College under Dr Snape. In 1717 he was elected to a scholarship at King's College, Cambridge, where he graduated BA in 1721, MA in 1724, and LLD in 1728. 
In 1720 Littleton was appointed an assistant master at Eton. He was ordained deacon in April 1724, and priest the following month. In 1726 he was elected a fellow of Eton and presented to the vicarage of Mapledurham, Oxfordshire. Littleton married Frances, daughter of Barnham Goode, under-master of Eton, and they had three children. 
While an undergraduate Littleton composed a humorous poem entitled 'A Letter from Cambridge to Master Henry Archer, a Young Gentleman at Eton School'. This first appeared posthumously in the 'Gentleman's Magazine' in 1738. His more celebrated poem 'On a Spider' appeared in James Ralph's collection of 'Miscellaneous Poems' (1729). Both pieces were reprinted in Robert Dodsley's popular anthology, 'A Collection of Poems' (1748-58), and there were a number of later editions. Littleton also wrote a pastoral elegy on the death of Ralph Banks, a scholar of King's College, but only a few fragments of this have been preserved. On 30 January 1730 he preached a sermon before the House of Commons at St Margaret's, Westminster, and on 9 June 1730 he was appointed one of the king's chaplains. Littleton died of a fever on 16 November 1733, and was buried at his church at Mapledurham. His wife subsequently married John Burton (1696-1771), Littleton's successor in the living at Mapledurham. 
Two volumes of Littleton's 'Sermons upon Several Practical Subjects', dedicated to Queen Caroline, were published by subscription in 1735, for the benefit of his family. A third edition, with a memoir of Littleton by Thomas Morell, appeared in 1749. 


@@@@@


doc= 16784


Littleton, Edward John, first Baron Hatherton (1791-1863), politician, was born in London on 18 March 1791; he was the only son of Moreton Walhouse of Hatherton in the parish of Wolverhampton, Staffordshire, and his wife, Anne Cracroft, daughter of Abraham Portal, goldsmith and dramatist. He entered Rugby School at midsummer 1806, and matriculated from Brasenose College, Oxford, on 27 January 1809, and was created a DCL on 18 June 1817. He was admitted a student of Lincoln's Inn on 17 November 1810, but took his name off the books on 6 November 1812. In compliance with the will of his great-uncle, Sir Edward Littleton, bt (a lineal descendant of Sir Thomas Littleton KB, author of the 'Treatise of Tenures'), he assumed the surname of Littleton in lieu of Walhouse on 23 July 1812, and on attaining the age of twenty-four succeeded to the family estates in Worcestershire and Staffordshire and to $18,000 p.a. At a by-election in June 1812, occasioned by his great-uncle's death in the previous month, he was returned unopposed as MP for Staffordshire, holding the seat until 1832. He applied for the baronetcy but decided the request compromised his political independence, and withdrew it. 
On 21 December 1812 Littleton joined the Canningite camp by marrying Hyacinthe Mary (1789?-1849), illegitimate daughter of Richard, first Marquess Wellesley, and Hyacinthe Gabrielle, daughter of Pierre Roland, a Frenchman. After 'early prepossessions' of toryism, his 'feelings were with the more liberal party' and he supported Catholic emancipation; however, he supported the property tax in 1816. He seconded Manners Sutton's nomination for the speakership on 2 June 1817 and supported Mackintosh's motion for a select committee on the criminal laws on 2 March 1819, serving on the subsequent committee. He sat on many other committees (finance, Windsor's establishment, the Bank of England). From 1817 until 1862 he kept a journal which has been much used by historians, and was partly published in A. Aspinall's edition of extracts from three such works (1952). He supported radical poor-law reform. On 22 April 1825 he introduced his 'Elective Franchise in Ireland Bill', a buttress to Burdett's 'Roman Catholic Relief Bill'; both bills failed. It reflected his increasing whiggery, which, after the death of Canning in 1827, became overt. In 1828 he supported parliamentary reform; in 1830 he represented the views of Huskissonites to the tory leadership, pressing for reform; in 1831 the whig government appointed him to superintend and report on the boundary commissioners. 
In 1832 Littleton was elected unopposed for South Staffordshire. Annoyed by the cabinet's decision to continue Manners Sutton as speaker, the radicals nominated Littleton (proposed by Joseph Hume, seconded by Daniel O'Connell); but he declared himself 'unwilling' and the motion was lost. In May 1833 he was appointed chief secretary to Ireland and was re-elected by 439 votes to 6 for South Staffordshire (his only contested election); in June he was sworn of the privy council. His position as chief secretary was, to say the least, awkward. The Liberal section of the cabinet pressed for a more radical policy towards the Irish church and for an accommodation with O'Connell. Littleton got on good terms with O'Connell and used the Irish secret service funds to secure a good press in Ireland. But O'Connell took him by surprise on 13 February 1834 by introducing a motion for a select committee on Baron Smith. Littleton accepted O'Connell's motion which was passed but was then reversed, the debate seriously weakening the government. On 20 February Littleton carried a motion for the commutation of existing tithes into a land tax and on 2 May introduced his 'Tithe Bill'. On 6 May Russell, without consultation, announced that Irish church revenues were unnecessarily large and that the surplus should be appropriated. The crisis over appropriation, as a result of which Stanley and Graham resigned, merged with that over coercion a month later, when Lord Wellesley (the lord lieutenant and Littleton's father-in-law), who had hitherto advised renewal of the meetings' clauses, changed his advice in response to an appeal from Littleton, who recommended their abandonment on 21 June. Littleton, who had written to Wellesley at Brougham's instigation, then saw O'Connell and gave him the strong but erroneous impression that the Liberals in cabinet had carried the day. When it was clear that Grey had in fact overruled the Liberals, O'Connell revealed to the Commons his private dealings with Littleton, who in turn admitted 'a gross indiscretion'. The episode led to the resignations of Grey and Althorp and the premiership of Melbourne. Littleton's tenure of the chief secretaryship was thus the occasion for a string of resignations which affected British politics for a generation. These were not altogether Littleton's fault, but his amiable character did not equip him to bring a tense situation under control. On 16 July 1834, recognizing that he had been 'the main cause of Lord Grey's resignation', Littleton offered his resignation to Melbourne but agreed to stay on when Althrop, who had resigned over the same matter, withdrew his resignation. He passed his 'Coercion Bill' (the court-martial and meetings' clauses being omitted) but his 'Tithe Bill' was rejected by the Lords. He resigned on Melbourne's dismissal in November 1834. 
Littleton was again unopposed in South Staffordshire in January 1835, but his hopes of the speakership were denied by the government's support for Abercromby. He was never appointed to any other ministerial office. He was created Baron Hatherton of Hatherton on 11 May 1835 and took his seat in the Lords on 1 June. In his maiden speech the next day he caused a short but excited discussion by applying the word 'sectarian' to the established church in Ireland ('Hansard 3', 28, 1835, 355-8). He supported the repeal of the corn laws in 1846 and was appointed lord lieutenant of Staffordshire on 8 June 1854. 
Hatherton's first wife died on 4 January 1849, aged fifty-nine, leaving him with one son, Edward Richard, who succeeded to the title, and three daughters. On 11 February 1852 he married Caroline Anne, widow of Edward Davies Davenport of Capesthorne, Macclesfield, and daughter of Richard Hurt of Wirksworth, Derbyshire; they had no children and she died aged eighty-eight at Worthing on 16 May 1897. 
Hatherton spoke for the last time in the Lords on 23 May 1862. He died on 4 May 1863 at his seat, Teddesley, near Penkridge, Staffordshire (demolished in 1954); he was buried in Penkridge church on 12 May. Hatherton was a man of moderate abilities and little tact who at the vital moment of his career found himself the superficial cause of a split in the whig party, which was in fact of long-standing causation, though he compounded it by an over-estimation of his capacity to manage the strong personalities around him; when warned against O'Connell he is reported to have said: 'Oh! leave me to manage Dan' ('Greville Memoirs'). He had not the will or the ability to recover from the blame consequently attached to him. 


@@@@@


doc= 16785


Littleton, Henry (1823-1888), music publisher, was born in London on 7 January (Krummel and Sadie give 2 January) 1823, the son of James and Elizabeth Littleton. About 1837 he began working for the music-sellers and publishers George and Manby of Fleet Street, and was later employed by the music and musical instrument sellers and publishers Monro and May in Holborn. In 1841 he entered the music publishing house of Novello (then at 69 Dean Street, Soho) as a 'collector', when his job was to go round the publishing houses to obtain ordered copies of works not issued by the firm. In 1846 he became manager, in 1861 a partner, and in 1866 sole proprietor. However, J. Alfred Novello had ceased to be personally involved in the day-to-day running of the firm from 1857, when he moved to Italy, and Littleton had effectively been in charge since then. He was evidently a great businessman, and many of the transactions which gained the firm a name for enterprise are attributable to him. The company expanded rapidly, and the development of the English taste for choral music during the period was owing largely to Novello's cheap publications. This was Alfred Novello's idea but it was Littleton who executed it. One of his earliest publications was Novello's 'Parish Choir Book', and the first edition of 'Hymns Ancient and Modern' appeared in 1861. The business of Ewer was acquired in 1867, and the firm subsequently began to publish more secular and orchestral music and entered into concert promotion. 
Littleton promoted many well-known composers, including Verdi and Dvorak, as well as publishing editions of works by Purcell. It was partly on his invitation that Liszt visited England in 1886, after an absence of nearly fifty years, when he was Littleton's guest at his home, Westwood House, Sydenham, Kent. When Littleton retired in 1887 the business was the largest of its kind in the world. Both his sons, Alfred Henry (1845-1914) and Augustus James (1854-1942), became chairmen of the company in turn. (His daughter had died in 1885.) He died on 11 May 1888 at Westwood House, and was buried on 16 May at Lee cemetery, Kent. His residence in London was at 1 Berners Street, where the business was located until the end of 1906, and where his sons also resided. 
Littleton's portrait reveals a man of heavy build with a long beard and moustache. His 'singleness of purpose and integrity of action' is commented on in 'A Short History of Cheap Music' (p. 142), and an obituary (written by Joseph Bennett) remarked that 'under the mask of the man of business -- which was all that the general public saw -- lay a most affectionate and tender nature... For proof I need only refer to the kindness he showed to young composers, in several cases going so far as to bear the expense of their education at home and abroad. ('Musical Times', 29, 332)' 



@@@@@


doc= 16786


Littleton, James (bap. 1668, d. 1723), naval officer, was baptized on 29 October 1668, the fourth son of James Littleton of Lingfield, Surrey, and Susanna White ('nee' Medlicot). He was the grandnephew of Sir Thomas Littleton, speaker of the House of Commons and treasurer of the navy, whom he succeeded to the estate of North Ockenden, Essex, in 1714. He became first lieutenant of the 'Dreadnought' in the battle of La Hogue in May 1692. On 27 February 1693 he was promoted captain of the 'Swift Prize' (24 guns); subsequently he commanded the 'Dover' and the 'Winchelsea'. In 1696 he commanded the 'Portland' (48 guns) in the channel, and also escorted the annual convoy from Newfoundland to Cadiz and the Mediterranean; he returned to England in May 1697. For the rest of 1697 and throughout 1698 the 'Portland' was employed on the home station. 
In 1699 Littleton went out to the East Indies in the 'Anglesea', one of a small squadron under Commodore George Warren, which had been ordered to act against the pirates of Madagascar. Warren died in November, and the command passed to Littleton. Several of the pirate ships were destroyed and, after proclamations of pardon had broken up the other crews, Littleton returned to England. From 1702 to 1705 he commanded the 'Medway' in the channel, and in January 1705 he was commodore of a small squadron which captured the 'Auguste', a large French privateer, when her consort, the 'Jason', commanded by the celebrated Rene Duguay-Trouin, escaped with difficulty. In 1706 he commanded the 'Cambridge' under Sir John Leake at the relief of Barcelona and the capture of Alicante, where he is said to have been landed in command of a battalion of seamen. 
In 1709 Littleton was captain of the 'Somerset' in the West Indies; and in July 1710 he was appointed commodore and commander-in-chief of the squadron going to Jamaica, with his broad pennant in the 'Defence'. He arrived there in November, and in the following July put to sea on intelligence of a Spanish fleet of twelve large ships being assembled at Cartagena. He arrived on the coast of New Spain with five two-decked ships on 26 July, and drove five large vessels in under the guns of the castle of Boca-Chica, the entrance to the harbour of Cartagena. The next day, 27 July, four others were sighted and chased. At about 6 p.m. the headmost ships, 'Salisbury' and 'Salisbury Prize', came up with the rearmost, which, after a sharp combat, struck flag on the approach of the 'Defence'. The 'Jersey' captured another; the other two escaped. Afterwards Littleton, with his squadron, cruised off Havana, in order to intercept Admiral Jean-Baptiste Du Casse, who was expected there. He then drew back to cover Jamaica on receiving intelligence that a fleet of eighteen French warships was gathering at Martinique, presumably for an attack on that island. The information proved to be false; but Du Casse, taking advantage of Littleton's absence, got into Havana. 
In July 1712 Littleton was relieved by Sir Hovenden Walker and returned to England. In November 1714 he was appointed resident commissioner and commander-in-chief at Chatham, a post he held until 1722. On 1 February 1716 he was promoted rear-admiral of the red, and on 15 March 1717 vice-admiral of the blue, after which he served as second-in-command to Sir George Byng in the Baltic before returning home in June. In the spring of 1719 he was for a few weeks first captain to the earl of Berkeley, first lord of the Admiralty, specially authorized to fly the flag of lord high admiral. 
Littleton married Jane, daughter of Richard Bunch MD; they had one son and two daughters. Elected MP for Weymouth in 1710, despite being in the Caribbean, he was unseated on petition both then and after the subsequent by-election in 1711. He was returned successfully at Weymouth in 1713, and served as a whig until 1715; after a break from parliament he had a brief term as MP for Queenborough, serving from 24 March 1722 until his death on 3 February 1723. 


@@@@@


doc= 16787


Littleton, Sir Thomas (d. 1481), justice and legal writer, was the eldest son of Thomas Westcote or Heuster, a lawyer who became chief prothonotary of the common pleas, and Elizabeth Littleton, daughter and heir of Thomas Littleton (died 1422). It is supposed that he assumed his mother's surname and arms under the terms of her first marriage settlement, as heir to the Littletons' manor of Frankley in Worcestershire. 
In the 1430s, perhaps under his stepfather's influence, Littleton went to London to study law, and he was admitted to the Inner Temple. Sir Edward Coke's claim that Littleton was a member of the inn was long doubted, but it is corroborated by manuscript evidence that he attended readings there after he became a serjeant. Coke also said he had seen Littleton's own reading on the 'Statute of Westminster II' c. 1, 'De donis' (concerning entails); this would have been given in the 1440s, and if it could be found would be the earliest named reading. By the end of the 1440s Littleton was an established lawyer, and he was elected recorder of Coventry in 1449. In 1453, when probably not out of his thirties, he was created serjeant-at-law, and two years later he was appointed king's serjeant. His clients included the earl of Wiltshire, the duke of Buckingham, Lord Clinton, Sir William Trussel, and the duchy of Lancaster. In 1466 he was raised to the bench, and from then until his death he sat as a justice of the common pleas. As an assize justice he was sent at first on the northern circuit, but in 1471 he changed to the midland. In company with Chief Justice Bryan he was made a knight of the Bath at Whitsun 1475. 
In January 1444 Littleton married Jane (died 1505), the young widow of Sir Philip Chetwynd. She brought him estates at Grendon and Dordon in Warwickshire, and Ingestre in Staffordshire, which she claimed as her jointure but which were the subject of litigation with the Chetwynd family for over thirty years. Fifteen years later, she inherited other lands in Shropshire and Staffordshire from her father, William Burley (died 1459), a Shropshire apprentice of the law and sometime speaker of the Commons. Littleton bought further property in those counties, as well as in his home county of Worcestershire, and also rented a London house on the north side of St Sepulchre's Church in Holborn. 
The justice's professional immortality derives not so much from his learning as displayed in the year-books, which report many of his arguments and opinions, as from his celebrated treatise on tenures. The treatise, known simply as 'Littleton', was printed anonymously and without title by John Lettou and William Machlinia within a year of his death in 1481: it was the first law book printed in England. Since it purported to have been written for the instruction of one of the author's sons, it probably dates from about ten years earlier. A few fifteenth-century manuscripts survive, though none can be positively dated before the first printed edition, and it therefore seems possible that the text was indeed private to the Littleton family until the justice's death. Littleton's modesty might have deprived posterity of a masterpiece. It proved to be the most successful law book ever written in England, enjoying over ninety editions, some of them (after 1525) translated from the original law French into English. (There is an earlier English translation in manuscript.) It was already an established authority by the early sixteenth century, and its propositions were cited as 'maxims' and 'grounds' of the law of property. Chief Justice Mountague asserted in 1550 that it was 'the true and most sure register of the foundations and principles of our law' ('Les commentaries', fol. 58'r'- 'v'), and in 1600 William Fulbecke went so far as to say that 'Littleton is not now the name of a lawyer, but of the law itself' ('Direction', fol. 27'v'). 
Until Victorian times, 'Littleton' was one of the first books placed in the hands of a law student. Copies were often interleaved for heavy annotation, and the contents laboriously digested into commonplaces. An anonymous Jacobean commentary was printed in 1829, but the best-known commentary was that by Sir Edward Coke. 'Coke on Littleton' (1628) took the form of a massive gloss piled around the words of Littleton, in the continental manner, emphasizing the almost oracular authority of the original text. Coke, outraged by the ill-judged censures of the French civil lawyer Francois Hotman, lauded the text as 'the most perfect and absolute work that ever was written in any human science' (Coke, 'Le Second Parte des Reportes', fol. 67). Littleton himself made no such claim to infallibility, and in the epilogue expressly denied it, stating that his object was to communicate an elementary understanding of legal reasoning, and warning that some of what he wrote might not be law. The key to the book's success lay in the clarity of its style and the simplicity of its propositions. Littleton sensed more keenly than most lawyers of his time the need for a distinction between the theoretical and the vocational stages of legal education. He knew the finer points of pleading and practice as well as anyone, but kept them from cluttering his exposition of first principles. He cited few cases, mentioned few controversies, and passed over modern developments (such as uses or trusts of land) which might have confused the beginner. Instead, the underlying axioms of the land law were revealed in easy stages, with examples and reasoned explanations -- the law was more praiseworthy, according to the concluding Latin motto, when it could be proved by reason: 'Lex plus laudatur quando ratione probatur' (Coke, 'Institutes', fol. 395). The work shows a coherence in common-law thought which the year-books of the same period largely conceal from the modern reader. 
The treatise is divided into three books. The second book alone deals with tenures, the author having decided first to describe the system of estates in land. The first begins with a definition of fee simple, which is still found in textbooks on real property. These first two books, according to a note at the end, were intended to explain the 'Old Tenures', a fourteenth-century primer which Littleton's 'New Tenures' virtually supplanted. The third book is three times longer than the first two together, and covers a series of topics relating to title. The further division of the treatise into 749 sections was made by the Tudor printers, who also interpolated some apocrypha -- including a few references to cases -- about 1530. A translation into modern French, by the Norman lawyer Houard, was published at Rouen in 1766. William Jones (died 1794) prepared a new law-French text in 1776, but abandoned his plan for a new edition on learning that Hargrave was working on a new edition of 'Coke on Littleton'. The last French edition was printed in 1841, and the last English reprint was published in Washington, DC in 1903. 
Littleton died on 23 August 1481 and was buried in Worcester Cathedral, where he founded a chantry for his parents and for William Burley and Sir Philip Chetwynd. His tomb chest, bearing the indent of a figure in judicial robes, is still to be seen in the nave; the brass was stolen during the civil war. There was formerly a portrait in scarlet gown and coif, kneeling at a prie-dieu, in the windows of Frankley church, where at the time of his marriage he had founded for his domestic use a chapel of the Holy Trinity; there was a similar figure at Halesowen in Shropshire. The Frankley window was probably the basis of the engraving executed by Robert Vaughan for the 1629 edition of 'Coke on Littleton'. The Inner Temple has a more fanciful full-length painting, attributed to Cornelis Janssens, which was given by Coke's daughter in 1662; for over 250 years it hung in hall with a companion portrait of Coke. Littleton's will, dated the day before his death, does not list his law books but mentions a number of others, including a 'Catholicon' and 'Polychronicon', Lyndwode's 'Provinciale', 'De gestis Romanorum', 'Fasciculus morum', 'Medulla grammatica', and an obscure 'grete English boke'. He appointed as its overseer John Alcock, then bishop of Worcester. 
The justice's eldest son, Sir William (1450-1507), knighted after the battle of Stoke, and his second son, Richard (died 1517), were both members of the Inner Temple; a third son, Thomas (died 1524), was admitted to Lincoln's Inn in 1476 and kept chambers there for many years. He also had two daughters, Ellen and Alice, who died unmarried. Only Richard -- who represented Ludlow in the 1491 parliament -- seems to have practised law, and his father left him the town house near Newgate; he became a bencher of the Inner Temple, where he gave an important reading on the law of felony (Westminster II cc. 12-14) in 1493. Richard Littleton was seated at Pillatonhall in Staffordshire, where his male line continued until 1812; there is a portrait of him incised on stone in Penkridge church. From William Littleton descended the lords Lyttleton of Frankley (now represented by Viscount Cobham), and from Thomas descended Edward Lyttelton (died 1645), lord keeper to Charles I, who became Lord Lyttelton of Mounslow. 


@@@@@


doc= 16788


Littleton, Sir Thomas, third baronet (1647-1709), speaker of the House of Commons, was born on 3 April 1647, the second but eldest surviving son of Sir Thomas Littleton, second baronet (1619/20?-1681), of Stoke St Milborough, Shropshire, and North Ockenden, Essex, and his wife, the Hon. Anne (1623-1705), daughter and heir of Edward Littleton, first Baron Lyttleton of Mounslow. As a younger son Littleton was apprenticed to a City merchant, but on the death of his elder brother, Edward, he was sent to Oxford where he matriculated at St Edmund Hall in April 1665. He entered the Inner Temple the following year and was called to the bar in 1671. On his father's death, on 14 April 1681, he succeeded to the baronetcy, and on 6 September 1682 he married Anne ('bap'. 21 Aug 1663, died 1714), daughter and heir of Benjamin Baun of Westcote, Gloucestershire; they had no children. 
Littleton was elected to the convention of 1689 for Woodstock, Oxfordshire, through the interest of his kinsman Sir Littleton Osbaldeston, first baronet, and continued to represent the town until 1702. His whiggish outlook had been moulded against the background of his father's prominence as a presbyterian spokesman in Charles II's Cavalier Parliament, although as an adult he had also imbibed lessons from his father's bitter experiences of factional politics. Moderation, pragmatism, and good sense were always Littleton's chief strengths, and his even and agreeable temper made him a great advocate of restraint and conciliation. The irony of Littleton's career was that these sterling abilities, coupled with a flair for financial administration, should make him a compliant tool from the early 1690s of the Junto whigs. 
Littleton soon made his mark in parliament as a diligent spokesman for the court. He was made a commissioner of prizes in June 1689 in recognition of his efforts in the promotion of measures to ensure the stability of the revolution settlement; promotion to the clerkship of the ordnance followed in 1690. His association with the Junto group began during their embryonic phase early in William III's reign, and it was highly significant that Littleton should be chosen in 1693 to succeed one of them, Sir John Somers, as chairman of the committees of supply and ways and means. In this demanding role Littleton was responsible for supervising the court's financial measures through the House of Commons. It also involved him in the informal processes of managing the court's supporters and he regularly briefed them on government measures at meetings of the back-bench Rose Club. In March 1695 Littleton was put forward as the Junto's choice for the speaker's chair following the disgrace of Sir John Trevor, but on this occasion the favoured candidate was Paul Foley. Littleton's rising importance to the Junto dominated ministry was acknowledged in his appointment in April 1696 to a place on the Treasury board. In this new capacity Littleton worked closely with his Junto friend Charles Montagu, the chancellor of the exchequer, in ensuring the survival of the newly established Bank of England, and in the execution of a broad programme of financial reconstruction. 
Following the 1698 general election Littleton was elected speaker of the House of Commons without challenge. In May the following year, at his own request, he was transferred from the Treasury board to the more profitable treasurership of the navy. However, Littleton's term as speaker proved brief and stormy. The Junto ministry grew unpopular and was subject to increasing opposition in the Commons. Littleton's efforts to appear impartial while doing his best to serve his Junto masters weakened his authority. Worse still an aggravated bladder problem, necessitating frequent exits from proceedings, made him a laughing stock. When parliament returned after the next election in January 1701 he was replaced by Robert Harley. Littleton was now able to devote much fuller attention to the Navy Office. Despite the appointment of a mainly tory administration at the accession of Queen Anne in 1702 he retained the treasurership, and was to do so for the rest of his life. Through a series of far-reaching reforms he was able to rationalize the office's chaotic accounting procedures, thereby leaving a legacy which remained in force for much of the eighteenth century. 
Littleton lost his safe electoral haven at Woodstock in 1702, but was MP for Castle Rising in Norfolk, 1702-5, for Chichester in Sussex, 1705-8, and for Portsmouth from 1708 until his death. His links with the junto whigs largely ceased in these later years. He remained a government supporter, and in debates on major questions was always particularly attentive to the defence of procedural form. Commanding the respect due to a former speaker he 'often diverted the House of Commons with a pleasant story which was always apropos' (newsletter, 3 Jan 1710, BL, Add. MS 70421). He died on 31 December 1709, his baronetcy becoming extinct, and was buried at his home parish of North Ockenden in Essex. 


@@@@@


doc= 16789


Littlewood, William Edensor (1831-1886), writer, was born at London on 2 August 1831, the only son of George Littlewood, a London printer and engraver, and Catherine, his wife. He was educated at Merchant Taylors' School (from 1840) and at Pembroke College, Cambridge, which he entered on 12 June 1850. In 1851 he was awarded the chancellor's medal for an English poem on Gustavus Adolphus, later printed in 'A Complete Collection of English Poems', (1859). He graduated BA in 1854, taking a third class in classics and being bracketed thirty-fifth wrangler. He proceeded MA in 1860, was ordained deacon in 1857, and priest in 1858. In the same year he married Laetitia Thornton, the third daughter of T. Thornton of London. Littlewood was curate of St John's, Wakefield, from 1857 to 1861; headmaster of Hipperholme grammar school, Halifax, Yorkshire, from 1861 to 1868; perpetual curate of Southall, Middlesex, from 1868 to 1870, and vicar of Ironville, Derbyshire, from 1870 to 1872. From 1872 to 1881 he was vicar of St James's, Bath, and served as minister-in-charge of St Thomas's, Finsbury Park, Middlesex, from 1881 to 1886. 
Besides various contributions to the 'Sunday at Home', Littlewood's publications were numerous. Among his religious works were 'A Garland from the Parables' (1858), being a volume of religious verse, 'Essentials of New Testament Study' (1872), and 'Bible Biographies, or, Stories from the Old Testament' (1878). His historical interests found expression in 'Essentials of English History' (1862), 'An Elementary History of Britain' in 'Cassell's Primary Series' (1869), and 'England at home: being a familiar description of the principal physical, social, commercial, and topographical features of England and Wales' (1870). He also published 'The Visitation of the Poor: a Practical Manual for District Visitors' (1876). Littlewood died on 3 September 1886 at Rushend vicarage, Hatfield, Broad Oak, Essex. He was survived by his wife and two sons. 


@@@@@


doc= 16790


Litton, Marie (1847-1884), actress and theatre manager, was born of unknown parentage in Derbyshire. She made her first appearance on the stage in London, at the Princess's Theatre on 23 March 1868, as Effie Deans in a revised version by Boucicault of 'The Trial of Effie Deans', his adaptation from Scott's 'The Heart of Midlothian'. It was a performance of much promise. On the opening of the Gaiety on 21 December 1868 she played Mrs Cureton in 'On the Cards', an adaptation by Alfred Thompson from 'L'Escamoteur'. In December of the next year she understudied Lilian Adelaide Neilson in H. J. Byron's 'Uncle Dick's Darling', but was prevented by the recent birth of her baby from taking the leading role when Miss Neilson was incapacitated by a falling piece of scenery. (Her husband was William Wybrow Robertson.) She was later connected with the Brighton theatre. 
On 25 January 1871 Marie Litton undertook the management of the Court Theatre in Sloane Square, London (designs by Walter Emden), and opened with 'Randall's Thumb' by W. S. Gilbert. She retained the theatre until 13 March 1874 and put on very many plays; comments were made on the grace of manner of her acting. She took secondary roles in her own theatre and at the same time appeared at the Haymarket. By 24 April 1875 she was playing the original Caroline Effingham in Gilbert's 'Tom Cobb' at the St James's, and from there went on to the Prince of Wales's. She then took the Royal Aquarium Theatre (renamed the Imperial) and, with a strong company, which included Samuel Phelps nearing the end of his career, began a series of revivals of 'old comedy', taking many leading roles, including Lady Teazle and Lydia Languish, herself. Her Miss Hardcastle played for 137 nights at the Imperial and her Rosalind for 100 nights at the same house before transferring to Drury Lane. There she acted with a distinguished cast which included Hermann Vezin, William Farren, and Sylvia Hodson; her Rosalind was much admired. In 1879 she managed the matinees at the Gaiety and was seen to even greater advantage as Peggy in a modification of Garrick's 'The Country Girl'. She then went north to manage the new Theatre Royal in Glasgow, but by August 1881 was back at Drury Lane as Eve de Malvoisie in 'Youth' by Paul Meritt and Augustus Harris. After this she played at the Globe and was the original Vere Herbert in Henry Hamilton's adaptation of Ouida's novel 'Moths', in which role she gave an excellent interpretation. 
However, signs of serious illness intervened and Marie Litton was compelled to quit the stage. She retired with her husband and two children to Ascot, where her health continued to fail. She died after a long illness at her town house, 6 Alfred Place, Thurloe Square, South Kensington, on 1 April 1884. 


@@@@@


doc= 16791


Ligulf (d. 1080), nobleman, was an Anglo-Danish landowner with substantial hereditary landholdings in Yorkshire. It has been suggested that he may also be that Ligulf, lawman of York, who gave evidence on the archbishop's liberty in 1080. During the Norman occupation of the north of England he seems to have been displaced in the aftermath of the rebellion in Yorkshire against William I, 'c'.1068-1070. He made his way north with his family and his Yorkshire estates may have passed to Robert, count of Mortain. Ligulf is described as a devotee of St Cuthbert and John of Worcester's chronicle says that he would recount to Ealdred, archbishop of York, his visions of the saint; but his decision to settle in the area to the north of the Tees was probably more influenced by his marriage to Ealdgyth, the daughter of Ealdred, earl of Northumbria. With the death of Earl Osulf, the exile of Earl Gospatric, and the execution in 1076 of Earl Waltheof, Ligulf may have become the most senior representative of the comital house of Bamburgh, and therein lies his importance in northern English politics at this period. It was probably in this capacity that he became one of the closest advisers of Walcher, bishop of Durham (died 1080), who had assumed the role of earl of Northumbria after Waltheof's execution. Ligulf is described as a 'noble and good thegn' by the author of the Durham compilation the 'Historia regum Anglorum' and it is said that Bishop Walcher would not conduct any secular matters without his advice, indicating a close working relationship between the Norman-appointed bishop and the representative of the native aristocracy. 
The administration was, however, undermined by the antagonism towards Ligulf of two members of Walcher's entourage, his chaplain Leobwin and the bishop's kinsman, Gilbert. Leobwin had been elevated to a high position within Walcher's 'familia' with general oversight of the administration of the bishopric and county of Durham, possibly indicative of archidiaconal status. Leobwin opposed Ligulf's counsel and quarrelled with him often in the bishop's presence. In one meeting of the episcopal council Ligulf seems to have won the day, prompting Leobwin to plot Ligulf's death with Gilbert, who had been appointed governor of the earldom under the bishop. One night in April or May 1080, Gilbert and Leobwin, together with their own men and soldiers of the bishop, marched to Ligulf's residence and slew him and almost all of his family. Learning of Ligulf's murder, Bishop Walcher retired to Durham Castle and sent out messengers dissociating himself from the act, offering to banish Gilbert from the bishopric and submit himself to the judgment of the pope. At this point Walcher may have also tried to conciliate Ligulf's wife with a gift of land. A meeting was arranged between the two sides at Gateshead on 14 May 1080 where, despite Walcher's protestation of innocence, the Northumbrians slaughtered the bishop and his men. 
Ligulf had two recorded sons with Ealdgyth, Morcar and Uhtred. By 1074-5 Morcar had been given as a boy to the monastery at Jarrow through the intervention of his uncle Earl Waltheof. He may also be the Morcar, son of Ligulf, who appears as a lawman of York in the early twelfth century. Uhtred may have succeeded his father in some of his Yorkshire lands as 'Domesday Book' records an Uhtred as tenant of the king in the manor of Rudston in Yorkshire in 1086. It is just possible that Ligulf had a daughter, since a Ragnald, daughter of Ligulf and wife of Robert de Sarz, appears making a series of grants to Fountains Abbey, probably in the 1130s. 


@@@@@


doc= 16792


Lively, Edward (c.1545-1605), Hebraist, was a scholar and later fellow of Trinity College, Cambridge, whence he graduated BA in 1569 and MA in 1572. He was taught Hebrew by the eminent John Drusius, a former student of the trilingual college at Louvain and one of several religious refugees who promoted the study of Semitics in sixteenth-century England. He succeeded Thomas Wakefield as regius professor of Hebrew in 1575, but resigned from his college fellowship when he married Katherine Lorkin on 14 June 1578, with whom he had eleven children. In 1602 he was collated to a prebend of Peterborough, and in 1604 he was presented by the king to the living of Purleigh. He was among the learned men appointed by James I to be responsible for the Authorized Version of the 'Bible', but died before the work got under way. He was buried at St Edward's, Cambridge, on 7 May 1605; his wife predeceased him, dying on 8 April 1599. 
In the course of a distinguished career Lively proved to be a competent teacher and an able scholar. The letters which passed between James Ussher, later archbishop of Armagh, and his friends early in the seventeenth century testify to the respect in which he was held as a Hebraist by biblical scholars of his own day. His funeral oration, delivered by Thomas Playfere, Lady Margaret professor of divinity at Cambridge, demonstrates how successfully he had communicated his love of Semitics, and in particular his interest in and appreciation of rabbinic literature, to his contemporaries. Referring to Hebrew, Playfere says: 'Which tongue, howsoever some account of it, yet ought to be preferred above all the rest. For it is the ancientest, the shortest, the plainest of all... The rabbis themselves, though they have no small number of fables and lies in them, yet diverse things they have notwithstanding fit for the opening of the 'Old Testament'. Therefore though a man cannot read the rabbis, yet unless he can understand handsomely well the Hebrew text, he is counted but a maimed, or as it were half a divine, especially in this learned age. (Playfere, 1.57)' Although three of Lively's works are extant in manuscript, as far as is known he is the author of only two books. The first was a series of notes on five of the minor prophets, originally published in London in 1587 and later printed in Pearson's 'Critici sacri' of 1660. The second was his commentary on the seventy weeks mentioned in 'Daniel' 9: 24-7, that 'dismal swamp of 'Old Testament' criticism' which engendered fierce debate among sixteenth-century theologians. Entitled 'A true chronologie of the times of the Persian monarchy and after to the destruction of Jerusalem by the Romans' (1597), the book runs to 250 octavo pages, and offers ample evidence of the author's breadth of scholarship and of his attitude towards the Hebraic tradition of exegesis. As the title-page states, his intention is to expound 'the Angel Gabriel's message to Daniel... against the frivolous conceits of Matthew Beroald', a French protestant; but after refuting other opinions, he presents a well-ordered and logical case for his own understanding of the passage. His exegetical principles, on which he expands in a lengthy introduction, are twofold: 'the one is a just account of the times; the other, a true interpretation of the words in the original tongue'. If the commentator fails in either of these, 'there is no hope to know what Daniel meant by his weeks' ('A True Chronologie', 27). In his search for the true interpretation he has constant recourse to the 'judgment of cunning linguists and sound divines' (ibid., 44). The result is that the comments of classical authors, church fathers, and Jewish exegetes are harnessed to the task of biblical interpretation. 
It is this blending of three quite distinct sources in his exposition of the text that renders Lively's scholarship exceptional for the age in which he lived. Classical learning, in which he himself was steeped, is recommended to all those aspiring to understand scripture. He stresses the contribution made by such non-Christian writers as Pliny, Horace, Homer, and Herodotus, to the understanding of the 'Bible': 'For many parts of Scripture they are diligently to be sought unto, and not as some rash brains imagine, to be cast away as unprofitable in the Lord's schoolhouse; but especially for 'Daniel' above all' ('A True Chronologie', 22). It was this reliance on classical texts for help in difficult places that displeased Richard Simon and led him to criticize Lively for parading his learning and 'adorning his discourse with unnecessary authorities' (Simon, 3.110). Simon represents a later generation of biblical scholars who rarely illustrated any points by referring to classical authors, and certainly did not accept them as authoritative. But in Lively's opinion these 'profane writers' were important sources for the illumination of the word of God. 
The second source of information was the church fathers, who should be respected by the exegete because they had the weight of tradition. Jerome, Eusebius, Theodoret, and Tertullian feature prominently throughout the exposition of the seventy weeks. Clement of Alexandria should be a constant source of reference because of his great knowledge, while Sulpicius Severus's comments on 'Daniel' are invaluable because they are more illuminating than those of any other ancient writer. 
Lively's third and constant court of appeal as he wrestles with the angel Gabriel's message is the work of post-biblical Jewish exegetes, lexicographers, grammarians, and historians. As well as 'Targum' and 'Talmud', and the principal commentators of the late middle ages, he makes use of two significant lexicographical works, David Kimchi's 'Book of Roots' and the 'Tisbi' of Elias Levita. On matters related to Jewish history and chronology he introduces us to two sources not previously used by Christians: Abraham ibn Daud's 'Book of Tradition', a survey of Jewish history from 300 BC to 1100 AD, and the 'Seder `Olam', a history of the Jews from Adam to Bar Kochba written in the second century AD. A notable omission in Lively's list of Jewish authors is Isaac Abravanel, one of medieval Jewry's most illustrious sons, whose commentary on 'Daniel' ('The Wells of Salvation') was published in 1497 and again in 1551. In the whole of 'A True Chronologie' there is not one explicit reference to it. This is all the more surprising when we remember the interest which Abravanel's writings generated among Christians. In all probability he is omitted from the list of rabbinic sources because of his spirited defence of Judaism and his refutation of the Christian interpretation of crucial passages. On the whole, however, Lively is favourably disposed towards post-biblical Jewish works, and states categorically that they are of value for the Christian biblical scholar: 'The Church of God... is much beholding to the Hebrew rabbis, being great helps unto us for understanding holy scripture in many places, as well of the 'New Testament' as the 'Old'' ('A True Chronologie', 35). 
By his linguistic expertise and his appreciation of rabbinic sources, Cambridge's second regius professor of Hebrew played a leading role in furthering Hebrew studies in Elizabethan England. Lively's only major published work reflects controversies about the interpretation of scripture current in the sixteenth century. In defence of his views he made extensive use of post-biblical Jewish sources, and on the whole adopted an unbiased attitude towards the Jews. 


@@@@@


doc= 16793


Liverseege, Henry (1803-1832), painter, was born on 4 September 1803 at Manchester, where his father was employed in a cotton mill; he had at least one sister. Neglected by his father, he owed his early education to his uncle, Mr Green, a wealthy mill owner who encouraged him to pursue the profession of artist, for which he showed an early inclination at school. He was initially self-taught, copying in order to learn. His earliest attempts at painting were in portraiture, for which he received instruction from Mr Knowles; these included miniatures, silhouettes, and inn signs, but he soon devoted himself to genre painting including subjects from works by Sir Walter Scott, Shakespeare, and Cervantes. He also excelled as an amateur actor. Liverseege exhibited three small pictures of 'Banditti' at the Royal Manchester Institution in 1827 which attracted attention, and at the end of that year he went to London to study at the British Museum, and also to copy the works of old masters at the British Institution. He visited Thomas Lawrence's collection of paintings and Lawrence offered him an introductory letter to the Royal Academy. Through some informality in his application he failed to gain admission and returned to Manchester in 1828 where he resumed portrait painting. He visited London again in 1829, but in 1830 returned to Manchester, where his mother died early the next year. He paid one more visit to London, where the duke of Devonshire purchased his 'Sir Piercie Shafton and Mysie Happer' (exh. RA, 1831; Chatsworth, Derbyshire). In four years he exhibited eighteen works in London, between the Royal Academy, British Institution, and Suffolk Street. He also showed works in exhibition at Birmingham, Liverpool, Leeds, and Norwich. 
Liverseege was considered to be a painter of some promise. His 'The Recruit' (exh. RA, 1832; Whitworth Art Gallery, Manchester) shows the influence, in both subject and treatment, of works by Sir David Wilkie. His works were published in mezzotint in twelve parts under the title 'Recollections of Liverseege' (1832-5) and a set of thirty-five mezzotint engravings from his pictures was published in 1875, with a portrait engraved from a painting by his friend William Bradley. Many of his works are now in Manchester City Galleries. 
Liverseege suffered throughout his life from a collapsed lung and as a result was often tired and melancholic. After he returned to Manchester in 1831 his health broke down completely, and he died of a lung disease on 13 January 1832; he was buried on 19 January in St Luke's churchyard, Manchester. He was unmarried. Liverseege was 5 feet tall, slightly built, with deformed shoulders and a pale complexion. 


@@@@@


doc= 16794


Livesay, Richard (1750-1826), painter and engraver, was born on 8 December 1750. Of his parents, nothing is known. He entered the Royal Academy Schools on 21 March 1774, as a draughtsman. He exhibited for the first time at the Royal Academy in 1776. Between 1777 and 1785 he lodged with William Hogarth's widow in Leicester Fields, and executed for her a series of facsimiles of drawings by Hogarth, among them the seven illustrating the well-known tour, 'An account of what seemed most remarkable in the five days' peregrination of the following five persons, viz. Messieurs Tothall, Scott, Hogarth, Thornhill and F. Begun on Saturday, May 27, 1732, and finished on the 31st of the same month', by E. F. (Ebenezer Forrest), published in 1782. He also made engravings after Hogarth's paintings. He was engaged by Benjamin West, of whom he was a pupil, to copy pictures at Windsor Castle. Livesay went to reside there about 1790, and gave lessons in drawing to some of the royal children. While at Windsor he executed many portraits of young Etonians, generally small whole-lengths, many of which were exhibited at the Royal Academy. His large unfinished picture of 'Eton Boys Going to Montem' hangs in Eton College. 
Livesay exhibited sixty-nine pictures in total at the Royal Academy between 1776 and 1821. On 8 October 1793, Joseph Farington recorded Livesay as being one of the candidates for the election of two associates. In 1796 he was appointed drawing-master to the Royal Naval Academy (later College) at Portsmouth and so moved to Portsea. On an address card which he issued at that time he described himself as 'Portrait, Landscape, and Marine Painter, Drawing-Master to the Royal Academy, Portsmouth, 61 Hanover Street, Portsea.' He painted some of the English warships and their French prizes, and in 1800 published a set of four plates of the reviews of the Isle of Wight Volunteers, aquatinted by Wells. Archibald noted his 'impressive picture of a review of the Worcestershire Regiment with a background of Portsmouth harbour and shipping' (Archibald, 148). Livesay's large picture 'The Grand Review of Troops at Hatfield by King George III on June 13, 1800', is in the collection at Hatfield House. It was engraved by J. C. Stadler. He also made engravings after marine subjects. His portrait of James Caulfeild, first earl of Charlemont, is in the National Portrait Gallery, London. Several of Livesay's portraits have been engraved. Livesay was succeeded at the Royal Naval College in 1811 by John Schetky and then returned to London. He was in Winchester in 1821 but when he wrote his will in January 1826 he was resident in Bath. He died at Southsea, Hampshire, in November 1826. The sole legatee, his nephew John Livesay of Penny Street, Portsmouth, renounced his claim when it became apparent that his uncle's debts were likely to exceed his assets. 


@@@@@


doc= 16795


Livesey, James (1626-1682), Church of England clergyman, was born in Heape, in the parish of Bury, Lancashire, on 1 January 1626, the son of Robert Livesey (1591?-1675), yeoman. He was educated locally and on 9 May 1645 was admitted to Christ's College, Cambridge. He did not complete his studies and on 26 February 1647 he was admitted sizar at St John's College, Cambridge, where he graduated MA. He returned to Lancashire and was appointed minister at Turton, near Bolton, by the Bury classis on 23 October 1650. Here he married, probably in 1652, Elizabeth Chetham, daughter of George Chetham of Turton Tower (nephew of the philanthropist Humphrey Chetham). They had five sons and two daughters. 
On 28 June 1652 Livesey became minister at the chapel at Atherton or Chowbent, in the neighbouring parish of Leigh, then in the patronage of the godly magistrate John Atherton. Here he established a reputation as a zealous presbyterian, and published 'Enchiridion judicum... a Sermon before the Judges... at Lancaster, March 26, 1655', a lengthy exposition upon the alliance of magistracy and ministry, together with 'Catastrophe magnatum... a Sermon... at the Funeral of... John Atherton' (1657). In 1657, following Atherton's death, the dean and chapter of Christ Church, Oxford, appointed him minister of the largely puritan-inclined parish of Great Budworth, Cheshire. In 1662 he initially failed to subscribe to the canons, but later reluctantly conformed and remained minister at Great Budworth. Nevertheless, he remained familiar with local nonconformists, especially the ejected minister Adam Martindale, and preached the funeral sermon for Martindale's son in 1680. His own son, Robert, became schoolmaster within his parish. Until his death he remained a zealous preacher and three further sermons were published in 1674. He died suddenly at Great Budworth on 7 February 1682. He was survived by his wife and clearly mourned by his parishioners, as shown by this excerpt from a poem penned by Thomas Bradshaw, rector of Lymm, for Livesey's funeral on 10 February, before burial at the church there: '
Great Budworth's faithfull pastour now is gone 

And left his congregation here alone. 

How desolate is she: well may she weep 

Her learned Livesey now in Christ doth sleep. 
(Shaw, 'Minutes of Bury Presbyterian Classis', 2.247-50)' 



@@@@@


doc= 16796


Livesey, Joseph (1794-1884), temperance advocate, was born on 5 March 1794 at Walton, near Preston, Lancashire. His parents, John Livesey and Jennette Ainsworth, died of consumption in 1801, and William, his only sibling, died early. Joseph's paternal grandfather, a small farmer also named Joseph, took responsibility for Joseph and for John's hand-loom weaving business, which failed. In a damp cellar, the young Joseph educated himself while working at the loom. Influenced by the Portlock family, he became a Scotch Baptist, was baptized ('c'.1811) in a Baptist chapel, and in 1815 married a Scotch Baptist, Jane Williams (died 1869), the daughter of a Liverpool master rigger. The marriage was happy; the couple had ten sons (including the civil engineer James Livesey) and three daughters, but lost four children in infancy. 
In 1816 Livesey moved from Walton to Preston and became a prosperous cheese factor, henceforth his lifelong occupation. Self-denying and economical with time, he was an exemplar of self-help. Acknowledging no barrier between middle and working class, he concentrated on making recruits for respectability and on harmonizing employer with employee. He was active in local government, championing municipal reform and public health with all the early-Victorian radical's angry energy, defending Preston's hand-loom weavers, and helping to fend off local application of the reformed poor law. Sharing the Quakers' distaste for formalities, he attacked privilege in religion as in everything else -- once deliberately sitting on a tasselled 'Bible' cushion before beginning a sermon. But there was a gentler side: he loved children, and in repudiating Anglican and aristocratic values he was discriminating and not vindictive. His religion was unsectarian and practical, his daily life founded on the 'New Testament'. 
There were many early-Victorian Liveseys. Joseph was distinctive for acting upon his belief that economic progress required moral reform. He, above all others, pushed the temperance movement into abandoning beer as well as spirits, thus transforming it into an exhilarating crusade against the entire drink trade. This required courage, if only because beer then seemed essential to health. Yet Livesey was a teetotaller from early in 1831, and on 1 September 1832 joined six Preston men in taking a pledge to abstain experimentally from beer for one year. A temperance 'reformation' seemed imminent, and he publicly walked arm-in-arm with drunkards ripe for reclamation. 
A resourceful propagandist and courageous lecturer, Livesey gave teetotalism its doctrinal foundation with his populist, closely argued, widely delivered, and oft-reprinted 'Malt Lecture', complete with scientific demonstrations that then seemed exciting but now seem flawed. Teetotalism also benefited from the avalanche of his publications, weapons in a lifelong quest to improve the world. His monthly 'Moral Reformer' (January 1831 - December 1833) became the 'Preston Temperance Advocate' (January 1834 - December 1837), the first teetotal periodical. Its cheap woodcuts, plain speaking, and diverse approaches to its subject aimed at the millions. Likewise his widely circulated weekly, 'The Struggle' (235 numbers from 1842 to 1846), helped render the Anti-Corn Law League popular. From there he moved easily into general journalism, and from 1844 to 1859 he and his sons managed the 'Preston Guardian', a leading Liberal weekly. Livesey published many more teetotal periodicals and tracts, as well as his autobiography (1867-82). 
Yet by the 1850s teetotalism had lost momentum, and with others Livesey turned to prohibition, promoted from 1853 by the United Kingdom Alliance. Drink was, after all, a trade where his free-trade principles clearly did not apply. Characteristically, he soon questioned the new orthodoxy, seeing prohibitionists' political preoccupations as divisive and as downgrading the reclamation and visitation of drunkards which he prized. Controversy resulted, old friends were disappointed, and Livesey's later writings breathe an air of disillusioned nostalgia for the teetotallers' pioneering days. As an old man he was revered as the founder of a movement which now seems somewhat sectarian. It was an ironic outcome, for he had aimed, not at a movement, but at a reformation, nor had temperance ever been his sole enthusiasm. He died on 2 September 1884 at Bank Parade, Preston, and was buried in the nonconformist section of Preston cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 16797


Livesay, Sir Michael, first baronet (1614-1665?), politician and regicide, was the only surviving son of Gabriel Livesay (died 1622) of Hollingborne, Kent, and his second wife, Anne, daughter of Sir Michael Sondes, of Throwley. Although often portrayed as an upstart family, the Livesays were in fact established members of the gentry. Sir Michael's grandfather had been sheriff of Surrey, and although his father was the first member of the family to settle in Kent he soon established himself as a figure of influence in the community, and served as sheriff in 1618. Their status was reflected in the baronetcy granted to Michael Livesay in 1627, by which time he was settled at Eastchurch on the Isle of Sheppey. By 1637 he was a justice of the peace, and in 1640 he emerged as one of the most prominent puritan firebrands in the county. He presented information against recusants to the Long Parliament in November 1640, and was one of the ringleaders of the Kentish petition of grievances in February 1642. In November 1642 he was one of only two Kentish parliamentarians excluded from pardon by Charles I. 
During the first civil war Livesay commanded a Kentish regiment, and in addition to fighting throughout the southern counties he was active against malignants in his own county, an enthusiastic member of the county committee, and sheriff in 1643. Depicted as ruthless by royalist enemies, he was also regarded with suspicion by fellow parliamentarians. The accusations of cowardice levelled against him by a disgruntled and paranoid junior officer, Colonel Anthony Weldon, were probably without substance, and were contradicted by other commanders. However, Livesay was clearly one of a number of local military commanders who challenged the authority of Sir William Waller in the summer of 1644. Their disagreement was brought before the committee of both kingdoms in July 1644, and by the following September the two appear to have reached an uneasy reconciliation. Livesay's troops rejoined Waller's army until the spring of 1645, and although there were fresh accusations of mutinous behaviour, he went unpunished. He refused to serve in the New Model Army, and his place was taken by Henry Ireton. 
Livesay was elected to parliament on 15 September 1645 as a recruiter for Queenborough, where he had been a freeman since 1641. He quickly emerged as a supporter of the independents and the army interest, and appears to have worked closely with the most radical members of the Commons. This was particularly clear during the counter-revolution of 1647, when he was one of the members who fled to the safety of the army in the face of presbyterian inspired riots in Westminster in July. When royalist riots broke out in Kent in December 1647 he returned to the county to quell the trouble, and spent much of the spring and summer of 1648 in service against royalists both there and in Surrey and Sussex. In August he was granted a commission of martial law in order to punish royalist spies in the region, and advocated harsh treatment for offenders. Once again, his troops were accused of disorder and plunder, and he had to be warned to keep them under control, for fear of disaffecting the community further. It seems likely that his men had become radicalized, and they certainly expressed approval of Pride's Purge in December 1648. 
During a brief spell in parliament in April 1648 Livesay had opposed reopening talks with the king and indicated his republican credentials by refusing to commit himself to a constitution which included a monarchical element. He was an obvious candidate to serve on the high court of justice to try Charles I, and attended every day of the trial prior to signing the death warrant ['see also 'Regicides]. During the republic Livesay's troops were disbanded, leaving him able to concentrate on parliament, where he remained a controversial figure. His hardline views on the constitution led to a determination to defend the Commons against the council of state as the locus of sovereign power. He probably grew disillusioned by the drift of political events in 1653, and almost certainly opposed the protectorate established in 1654. During the mid-1650s he confined his activity to local affairs, serving as sheriff of Kent in both 1655 and 1656. 
Like many republicans Livesay returned to Westminster when the Rump was recalled in May 1659, although illness delayed his appearance. Thereafter he supported civilian rule rather than the army faction based at Wallingford House. Upon the Restoration, however, he was forced to flee to the continent, and his lands were forfeited to the crown. Although there were reports that he had been murdered by a royalist mob in the Low Countries in October 1660, he was at Hanau in early 1662, and in the following year was allegedly involved in plotting against Charles II. In October 1663 he was rumoured to have returned to England in order to further such plans, although in June 1665 he was at Rotterdam, where he probably died shortly afterwards. When administration of his wife's estate was granted to one of their daughters in February 1666 Elizabeth Livesay (died 1665) was described as a widow. 


@@@@@


doc= 16798


Lyfing (d. 1020), archbishop of Canterbury, was abbot of Chertsey from about 989 until either 998 or 999 and then bishop of Wells until 1013. He was also known as AElfstan or AEthelstan. In 1013 he succeeded the murdered AElfheah at Canterbury while England faced the devastating Danish invasion. Understandably there was a delay before he was able to obtain his pallium, so that AElfwig was consecrated bishop of London by Archbishop Wulfstan at York in February 1014. Lyfing is said by Gervase to have consecrated both Edmund Ironside and also Cnut, in 1016. The inference would be that the former ceremony, at least, was performed before the archbishop was granted his pallium, because, when he returned from Rome, he brought with him a letter from Pope Benedict VIII, addressed to Cnut. Evidently this urged the king 'to exalt God's praise everywhere; to suppress wrong and to establish full security' (Lawson, 129), an indication that Lyfing had reported to Rome the prevalence of apostasy and lawlessness resulting from the recent warfare. Lyfing was said to be very prudent, and to give very firm advice, whether in matters of church or state. He obtained from Cnut a solemn confirmation of the liberties of Christ Church, Canterbury, as a defence against predatory royal officials, and also grants of land for his church. He donated fine ornaments to the cathedral and restored its roof. Lyfing died on 12 June 1020. He was buried in Christ Church, Canterbury, on the left side of the altar of St Martin. 


@@@@@


doc= 16799


Lyfing (d. 1046), abbot of Tavistock and bishop of Worcester, was an ambitious monk who prospered in the disturbed political conditions between the death of AEthelred II in 1016 and the accession of Edward the Confessor in 1042. He was a member of an ecclesiastical dynasty, a monk of Glastonbury or Winchester, abbot of Tavistock before 1027, and was probably a protege of Earl Godwine, a favourite of King Cnut. In 1027 he accompanied the king on his visit to Rome, and, after his return with Cnut's admonitory letter to the English church, was appointed to succeed Eadnoth, bishop of Crediton, who had died on the journey. At about the same time, he followed his uncle, Brihtwold, as bishop of Cornwall, a union of dioceses which was to last until 1877. After Cnut's death Lyfing backed Harold I in 1035-6 and in 1038 or 1039 was rewarded with the rich bishopric of Worcester. But his supposed implication in the murder of Edward the Confessor's younger brother, Alfred, in 1036 caused the next king, Harthacnut, temporarily to deprive him of Worcester (1040-1). However, Lyfing's support of Edward in 1041-2 left him in peaceful possession of the three dioceses. 
Clearly a 'vicar of Bray' figure, Lyfing received no favourable notices from either contemporaries or later historians. William of Malmesbury, writing in the different climate of the 1120s, thought him, 'shamefully ambitious, an invincible, it is said, perverter ['tyrannus'] of the ecclesiastical laws, who valued nothing unless it entirely served his purpose' ('De gestis pontificum', 2.94). But, to be fair, the churches of Crediton and, particularly, Cornwall were poorly endowed; and Worcester, coveted by similarly indigent York, provided an important royal counsellor with a suitable income. The pluralism was also part of a general centralizing tendency of the time. Lyfing seems to have made proper provision for Worcester's spiritual needs by employing Ealdred, abbot of Tavistock and his successor in that see, as his suffragan. One book owned by Lyfing, the Lanalet [St Germans] pontifical, may have been copied for Tavistock, of which he was a great benefactor. And it may be that he left his successor in the West-Saxon dioceses, the important reformer, Leofric, with foundations on which to build. Lyfing died between 20 and 25 March 1046 and was buried in Tavistock Abbey. 


@@@@@


doc= 16800


Livingston, Sir Alexander, of Callendar (b. c.1375, d. in or before 1456), courtier and administrator, was the eldest of four sons of the first marriage of Sir John Livingston of Callendar ('fl'. 1371-1402) to a daughter of John Menteith of Kerse. It is likely that Alexander was born in Stirlingshire about 1375 at the latest as Sir John's second marriage occurred in 1381. The family's principal estate was Callendar, near Falkirk. Alexander was probably knighted on the return of James I from captivity in England in 1424, but neither he nor any son of his acted as a hostage for the king's ransom, as happened with many Scottish barons. Although he played little part in political life under James I, the assassination in 1437 of King James (succeeded by the six-year-old James II) and the subsequent deaths of various senior members of the Scottish nobility opened the way for hitherto little-known men to make their mark. Livingston was apparently so enraged by the queen mother's marriage to Sir James Stewart of Lorne less than a month after the death of Archibald Douglas, fifth earl of Douglas, the lieutenant-general of the realm, in June 1439, that he arrested her and imprisoned Stewart and his brother in Stirling Castle. Despite the severity of the act, in September 1439 a settlement was concluded between the Livingstons and the queen mother, with the approval of the three estates, whereby the king was to reside in Stirling Castle under Livingston's guardianship until his majority. The possession of the king was a crucial gain. 
The chancellor, Sir William Crichton (died 1454), was now Livingston's only real rival at court. Together, however, they engineered the execution of the sixth earl of Douglas on 24 November 1440. There can be no doubt that they worked with the connivance of Douglas's great-uncle James Douglas, earl of Avondale (died 1443), already a significant court figure. He became seventh earl of Douglas and acted to improve the lot of his own sons, including William, eighth earl of Douglas (died 1452), who began to ally himself with Livingston. The replacement of Crichton as chancellor by James Bruce, bishop of Dunkeld, in 1444 removed the last check on the Livingstons, notwithstanding the presence of the eighth earl of Douglas. Their power can be clearly seen in the distribution of offices acquired during the 1440s, many of which would have brought pensions to their holders. Sir Alexander was justiciar from about 1444 and sheriff of Stirlingshire by 1448. His son and heir, James, was captain of Stirling Castle by May 1442, keeper of the king's person by March 1445, and chamberlain by June 1448. Other family members held the posts of constable of Stirling Castle, captain of Methven and Doune castles, Perthshire, sheriff of Fife, and king's comptroller (the financial officer responsible for the maintenance of the royal household). Beyond the immediate family, the custumar of Dumbarton burghs, the keepers of the castles of Dumbarton, Dunoon in Argyll, Restalrig in Edinburghshire, and Kildrummy in Aberdeenshire, and the master of the king's household were Livingston associates or relatives. 
This stranglehold on government, particularly in central Scotland, came to a dramatic end in 1449. James Livingston and three others were arrested on 23 September, and Sir Alexander and Robert Livingston, the comptroller, soon afterwards. After a trial in parliament in January 1450 Robert and Sir Alexander's second son, Alexander, were executed. Sir Alexander, who may later have been expelled from Scotland, and James Dundas of Dundas, probably his brother-in-law, were imprisoned in Dumbarton Castle. The terms of a remission in 1452 suggest a plot against the persons of the king or queen, although there has also been speculation that the Livingstons abused their power for financial gain. 
Sir Alexander Livingston's death is usually dated about 1451, but as his son is not styled of 'Callendar' in a Scottish source until September 1456 a date in mid-1456 is preferable. He is said to have married a daughter of Dundas of Dundas and had two sons, James and Alexander, and four daughters. Of the daughters, Janet married James Hamilton of Cadzow ['see under 'Hamilton family] and Joanna married Sir John Sibbald of Balgonie, master of the king's household. Livingston had attempted to found a collegiate church at Falkirk, obtaining papal approval in 1449, but following his family's loss of power the project foundered. 
Sir Alexander's eldest son, 
It is surprising that only in March 1458 (not in 1455 as traditionally stated) was he created Lord Livingston, especially given the Livingston dominance in the 1440s when many Scottish families adopted a peerage style. In April 1458 the free barony of Callendar was created for Lord Livingston by consolidation of his estates in Stirlingshire, Lanarkshire, and Perthshire. After the king's death in August 1460 Livingston is seldom found at court, although he remained chamberlain and was appointed ambassador on occasion. His exclusion may have resulted from the personal animosity towards him of the queen mother, Mary of Gueldres. If this is true it may help explain the fall of his family in 1449, three months after the arrival of the queen in Scotland. 
James Livingston died about August 1467. He is known to have married Marion (died between June and October 1478), daughter of Thomas Berwick, a burgess and custumar of Edinburgh. She had apparently married first Sir John Oliphant of Aberdalgie (died 1446) and may therefore have been Livingston's second spouse. His children included James, second Lord Livingston, whose idiocy prevented the family from returning to prominence in the remainder of the century, and Elizabeth, who married John MacDonald, earl of Ross and lord of the Isles. 


@@@@@


doc= 16801


Livingstone, Alexander, first earl of Linlithgow (d. 1621), politician and courtier, was the eldest son of William Livingston, sixth Lord Livingston (d. 1592), and Agnes Fleming ('fl'. 1553-1584), daughter of the third Lord Fleming, who had married about 1553. As master of Livingstone he fought with the queen's party during the civil wars of 1567-73, and was captured at the taking of Dumbarton Castle on 2 April 1571. With his father he submitted to the regents, but was not in favour until the end of the earl of Morton's regency in 1578. He accompanied the young James VI on his progress from Stirling to make his entry to Edinburgh in September-October 1579. The establishment of a more formal court followed, and on 15 October 1580 Livingstone became one of the gentlemen of the chamber. He was on the assize which on 1 June 1581 found Morton guilty of the murder of Darnley. 
After the seizure of the king by the Ruthven raid of 23 August 1582, Livingstone mustered forces to oppose the raiders. On the latter's success he retreated to Glasgow with the fallen royal favourite the duke of Lennox. He eventually accompanied Lennox to France (in December), and remained with him until his death on 26 May 1583. Having returned to Scotland, he was sent back to France after the fall of the Ruthven regime in 1583 to bring Lennox's son to Scotland. 
By contract dated 26 and 31 January 1584 Livingstone married Lady Eleanor Hay (died 1627) ['see 'Livingstone, Helen], daughter of Andrew Hay, fifth earl of Erroll. In April that year he played a leading part in suppressing the Stirling raid in which the earl of Mar and other former Ruthven raiders attempted to recover power. When the raiders fled, he and his followers took possession of Stirling Castle. In August he temporarily gained the abbey of Cambuskenneth from Adam Erskine, a Ruthven raider. However, when Mar and his pro-English faction regained power in a successful coup of 2 November 1585, Livingstone was one of those captured at Stirling. Thereafter he was temporarily in eclipse. In the turbulent early 1590s he took a generally conservative stance, but was mentioned as an associate of the fugitive earl of Bothwell in 1592. He succeeded his father as seventh Lord Livingstone about November 1592, and gained in political prominence. He was a privy councillor from May 1593 onwards. He attended council meetings only irregularly, but he did assiduously attend the frequent conventions of the nobility held in this period. He carried the towel at the baptism of Prince Henry on 23 August 1594. In 1595 he incurred the wrath of the earl of Mar when a Livingstone killed one of Mar's followers. The feud rumbled on until 1599, but the king prevented further bloodshed. 
On 3 December 1596 Livingstone received a notable mark of royal trust, being appointed keeper of the infant Princess Elizabeth. This angered many leading ministers because, though he himself was at least nominally a protestant, his wife was a committed Catholic, regularly in trouble with the church. Nevertheless, Livingstone retained the princess and also gained custody of her short-lived sister Margaret (1598-1600). Unlike Mar, keeper of Prince Henry, he was on good terms with Queen Anne, whom he escorted to England with her daughter in 1603. He was created earl of Linlithgow on 25 December 1600, at the baptism of Prince Charles. It had been rumoured in November that he would refuse the honour. In a 'Catalogue' of the nobility of about 1602 he was 'estemit to be Catholique, no actor, but a peaceable nobill man, and wealthy' (Rogers, 78). 
Linlithgow's direct connection with the court lapsed with the union of the crowns in 1603. He was one of the Scottish commissioners for union with England in 1604. Having been appointed in July, the commission met at court between October and December, and Linlithgow served on a subcommittee to discuss customs rates. However, he made no attempt to build a court career in England. He remained an irregular privy councillor, and served on some minor parliamentary commissions. 
As keeper of the palace of Linlithgow, and of the state prison Blackness Castle, the earl was involved in the show trial of six dissident Presbyterian ministers in 1606. David Calderwood noted that his wife on this occasion was 'howbeit an obstinat papist, but now a zealous professour', who received the ministers 'verie courteouslie' (Calderwood, 6.375). Linlithgow was forced to inform the king in 1607 that the palace's north quarter had collapsed through neglect (it was eventually rebuilt in 1618). 
Linlithgow attended the privy council for the last time on 30 September 1618, though he remained nominally a councillor until his death. The five articles of Perth introduced kneeling at communion in 1618, and as a councillor Linlithgow received an order to communicate kneeling at Easter 1619. He refused, citing sickness as an excuse but indicating tacit disapproval of the articles. He gave a proxy to his son-in-law the earl of Eglinton to attend the parliament of August 1621. Eglinton used it to cast Linlithgow's vote against the ratification of the articles. Whether this accorded with Linlithgow's own views cannot be proved conclusively, but Linlithgow could have given his proxy instead to another son-in-law, the earl of Wigtown, who voted with the government. Linlithgow died at Callendar House, near Falkirk, on 24 December 1621. 


@@@@@


doc= 16802


Livingstone, Charles (1821-1873), missionary and traveller in Africa, younger brother of David Livingstone, was born at Blantyre in Lanarkshire on 28 February 1821, the son of Neil Livingstone and his wife, Agnes Hunter. He attended the local school and worked with his brother in the cotton factory of H. Monteith & Co., from which he moved to a lace factory at Hamilton, near Glasgow. He devoted his leisure time to study, and became a Sunday school teacher. In 1840 he emigrated to the United States of America, where he became a student at Oberlin College, Ohio, a training college for missionaries. In 1847 he entered the Union Theological College in New York city, from which he took his degree in 1850. He then held ministerial posts in New York state, Vermont, and Massachusetts. On 29 January 1852 he married Harriette Cemanthia Ingram (died 1900) in Plympton, Massachusetts; they had three children. 
In April 1857 Livingstone went to Britain on leave of absence, and met his brother David, fresh from his discoveries in central Africa, who induced him to leave his family and his post in America, and to join the Zambezi expedition (1858-64), as 'moral agent'. Through many privations and difficulties he remained with the expedition until 1863, when he was invalided home and went to join his family in America. His health did not, however, allow him to resume his ministerial duties, and after writing out his journal he again went to meet his brother in England, to assist him in preparing a joint journal, 'Narrative of an Expedition to the Zambesi' (1865). In October 1864 he accepted an appointment as her majesty's consul for the Bight of Biafra, west Africa, which was extended in 1867 to include the Bight of Benin. His time as consul was taken up largely in dealing with the ramifications for British trading interests of the crisis within the state of Bonny, which culminated in the secession of Opobo in 1869, and of the accompanying wars across the Niger delta. His actions, particularly in demanding a trade blockade, made him unpopular with British traders and he was recalled by the Foreign Office in 1873. His career as consul was dogged by ill health and he died at sea near Lagos on 28 October 1873, during his return to Britain. 


@@@@@


doc= 16803


Livingstone, David (1813-1873), explorer and missionary, was born on 19 March 1813 at Blantyre, Lanarkshire. He was the second son of Neil Livingstone (1788-1856) and his wife, Agnes (1782-1865), daughter of David Hunter. Neil's father, also Neil, had been a tenant farmer on the island of Ulva, off Mull, who in 1792 had left with his wife and seven children for the cotton mills of central Scotland, and found work in Blantyre, on the River Clyde, with H. Monteith. His sons became clerks for the firm, though Neil, the youngest, was soon apprenticed to the firm's tailor, David Hunter, whose daughter Agnes he married in 1810. The younger Neil then became a self-employed tea dealer. His first child, John, was born in Glasgow, but the family soon returned to Blantyre; they took over the one-room tenement in Shuttle Row, a block owned by Monteith's mill, in which Agnes had grown up. 
In that tenement David Livingstone was born. As other children arrived, the family struggled to make ends meet, and from the age of ten David was employed in the mill (as John had been) as a 'piecer', tying up broken threads on spinning jennies for twelve hours a day. Yet David and a few other children still had the energy and will-power after work to put in two hours at the village school. Such determination was to be characteristic of the grown man, but study was also a family trait. Reading, conjoined with religion, was taken seriously by both Livingstones and Hunters. Neil Livingstone, a strict teetotaller and Sunday school teacher, distributed tracts; he interested himself in missionary work and accounts of foreign travel. He raised his children in the Church of Scotland, and vainly pressed religious literature on David, who preferred not only travel books but also science, which Neil distrusted as hostile to faith. Limestone quarries aroused David's interest in geology; if he feared for his soul, it was due to his fascination with the astrology embedded in Culpeper's 'Herbal', one of his aids to the collection of medicinal plants. 
In 1832, at a time of crisis in the Church of Scotland, father and son both reached a spiritual turning point. David came across recent books by Thomas Dick, a minister and amateur astronomer. These gave him the assurance he had been seeking that science could be reconciled with Christian belief. Meanwhile, a sermon by a Canadian preacher prompted Neil to leave the Church of Scotland for a Congregational church in Hamilton, near Blantyre; he was soon followed by David. Both heard the Glasgow Congregationalist Ralph Wardlaw declare that atonement was not confined to a predestined elect. Both were introduced through the Hamilton church to the liberal theology of the American Charles Finney. In 1834 Neil brought home a pamphlet by Karl Gutzlaff appealing for medical missionaries for China. David seized on this to prove to his father that his own growing ambition to study medicine could serve religious ends. For the past three years he had been working as a cotton spinner, and by 1836 he had saved enough to enter Anderson's College in Glasgow as a medical student; he also took Greek classes at Glasgow University and attended divinity lectures by Wardlaw. David is likely to have been impressed at this time by the anti-slavery campaign in Glasgow, in which Wardlaw was prominent. 
In 1837 the Hamilton church put David in touch with the London Missionary Society (LMS), which was in effect a Congregational body. In April 1838 the Blantyre mill refused to let David continue to earn money for college fees through vacation work, and in August he went to London for an interview. He was sent for a probationary year of scriptural studies to a clergyman in Chipping Ongar, Essex. Livingstone had hoped to be sent in due course to China, but by June 1839 this had become problematical (the First Opium War broke out in September). The LMS proposed to Livingstone that he should go to the West Indies; Livingstone preferred South Africa. The LMS continued his training, and in January 1840 he moved to London for lectures on anatomy and medicine, where his teachers included Richard Owen and James Risdon Bennett. In the same year he met Robert Moffat, on leave from the LMS outpost at Kuruman, north of the Orange River and well beyond the limits of Cape Colony. Moffat excited Livingstone's imagination with talk of work to be done still further north. In June 1840 Livingstone attended the meeting at Exeter Hall which launched the ill-fated Niger expedition of 1841-2; he heard T. F. Buxton expound the strategy of undermining the slave trade through 'legitimate trade' in conjunction with the Christian gospel. Later in 1840 Livingstone returned to Glasgow for examinations; in November he became a licentiate of the Faculty of Physicians and Surgeons of Glasgow. Back in London he was ordained, on 20 November, in Albion Chapel, London Wall, which belonged to the Congregational Union of England and Wales. 
The LMS assigned Livingstone to Kuruman, and on 8 December 1840 he sailed for South Africa. Gales forced the ship to put in at Rio de Janeiro, where Livingstone spent some time ashore; he reached Simon's Bay on 15 March 1841, having learned the rudiments of navigation from the ship's captain. He spent three weeks in Cape Town, and stayed with the veteran LMS missionary John Philip, a champion of Africans against the demands of white colonists for land and labour. Divisions among white Christians provoked Livingstone to write home, 'I would never build on another man's foundation. I shall preach the gospel beyond every other man's line of things' ('David Livingstone: Family Letters', 1.31), a phrase that recurs in later letters. At the end of July he reached Kuruman. He was not impressed by it as a mission centre: there seemed to be far too few people. Rogers Edwards, one of the two artisan missionaries at Kuruman, had already decided to visit the Kwena, a seTswana-speaking people 250 miles to the north-east. He set off with Livingstone in October, and they were away for six weeks. They identified a site for a new mission, but Livingstone was looking still further afield: he was sure that the northern Tswana would welcome missionaries as allies at a time of growing insecurity. The region was disturbed by the advance of 'trekboer' Afrikaners into the Transvaal, to the east, while the Ndebele (Matabele), though now settled far to the north, near Bulawayo, were still feared as raiders. The scale of violence increased as traders and hunters, European and African, took firearms ever further into the interior. 
In the course of 1842, Livingstone made two more long journeys northwards, and by June he was fluent in seTswana; he then worked at Kuruman as a preacher, doctor, builder, and printer, and also travelled northwards again. In December 1843 Robert Moffat returned with his family to Kuruman; in January 1844 Edwards, Livingstone, and an African teacher named Mebalwe founded a mission at Mabotsa, among the Kgatla. On 2 January 1845 at Kuruman, Livingstone married Moffat's eldest daughter, Mary (1821-1862); in January 1846 she gave birth to a son, Robert. Meanwhile, Edwards had left Mabotsa after a quarrel with Livingstone, who himself began work to the north-east at Chonuane among the Kwena, whose chief, Sechele, soon learned to read. Livingstone believed that the LMS should make more use of African evangelists, and at Kuruman in March 1847 the annual LMS district committee unanimously supported his proposal to assess the number of African converts suitable for training as teachers. However, Livingstone had a low opinion of his colleagues, apart from Moffat; he already had a more acute, and more tolerant, understanding of African custom and belief, and he sent the directors in London his views on mission strategy as well as tactics. 
In May 1847 Mary gave birth to a daughter, Agnes; in July the Livingstones returned to Chonuane. The water supplies there had proved inadequate, so together with Sechele they moved west to Kolobeng, near the present Gaborone. While Mary started an infant school, David began writing a philological analysis of seTswana. In October, Livingstone made the only convert of his career: he baptized Sechele after the chief had sent away all but his senior wife. When he took back one of his rejected wives, Livingstone suspended him from communion. Drought made it likely that the Kwena would move yet again: altogether, the prospects for Livingstone's mission seemed far from promising, whether among the Kwena or among people under Boer influence to the east. 
However, Livingstone now had a new field in mind. Ever since his arrival at the Cape he had been intrigued by stories of a lake in the far interior (in fact, Lake Ngami). In 1847 he had proposed going there with Moffat; in 1848 he secured as companion William Cotton Oswell, a wealthy sportsman who had visited Mabotsa in 1845. Livingstone dispatched his family (now including a second son, Thomas) to Kuruman. Oswell reached Kolobeng in May 1849, with the horses, oxen, wagons, and supplies required for a year-long expedition. The moment was propitious: not only was this the right season to cross the Kalahari, but Livingstone had just been visited by envoys from the Tawana, near the lake, who wanted a resident white man: there was also the possibility of meeting Sebituane, the Kololo chief, known to Sechele, who had recently settled north of Lake Ngami. The expedition, including a trader, J. H. Wilson, reached the Botletle River in July and followed it westward to the lake. The lake made less impression on Livingstone than the river, which was connected to rivers further north and opened out 'the prospect of a highway capable of being quickly traversed by boats to a large section of well-peopled territory' ('Livingstone's Missionary Correspondence', 133). Since the Niger expedition had failed, Livingstone believed that of all the missionaries in Africa he now had 'the key to the Interior' (ibid., 140). Without a boat, however, it proved impossible to advance northward, and the expedition returned to Kolobeng. 
Livingstone's set purpose now was to reach Sebituane. Oswell agreed to return with a boat, but before he got back from the Cape, in May 1850, Livingstone had already set off northward, this time with his family and Sechele. They reached the Botletle, where Oswell caught up with them, but two of the children fell ill, and the Livingstones got back to Kolobeng just before a second daughter was born (she lived for six weeks). This ill-conceived journey was an early example of Livingstone's erratic judgement when gripped by a powerful idea, but it only stiffened his resolve to find 'a passage to the sea, on either the Eastern or Western coasts... the Bechuana Mission was virtually shut up in a cul de sac' ('Livingstone's Missionary Correspondence', 157). Besides, envoys of Sebituane arrived at Kolobeng with gifts of cattle for the Tswana and requests that they help the whites to visit him. Moreover, while the family were at Kuruman recovering from their ordeal, news came that Livingstone had been awarded 25 guineas by the Royal Geographical Society (RGS) for discovering Lake Ngami. This had, in truth, been a joint effort, but Livingstone had got in first with his report. 
Oswell returned to Kolobeng in 1851, with fresh supplies and animals, and set out once more for the north, this time ahead of Livingstone, who had defied a plea from Mary's mother to leave his family behind. Learning that another group of white travellers were on their way to the Kololo, he risked a short cut across the desert north of the Botletle. The party nearly died of thirst, but reached the Chobe River. Livingstone and Oswell went on to meet Sebituane, who had recently conquered the Lozi kingdom on the upper Zambezi. Sebituane barely had time to express his urgent desire for guns before he died suddenly of pneumonia. None the less, Livingstone now knew that there was a great river to the north, and on 4 August 1851 he and Oswell reached the Zambezi, near Sesheke. This indeed seemed the hoped-for highway to the east coast; moreover, many people understood seTswana. These facts were the more significant since slave traders from Angola now visited the upper Zambezi. Recalling Buxton, Livingstone looked to a legitimate trade in English manufactured goods to undermine this slave trade. First, though, it would be necessary to find a more healthy site for a mission and trading station than the malarial swamps to which Sebituane had retreated for fear of Ndebele attacks. Livingstone rejoined his family and took them back south; a third son, named after Oswell, was born 'en route'. The party duly reached Kolobeng but then went farther south, since Livingstone had decided to send his family to Britain while he made a fuller exploration of the Zambezi. In March 1852, helped by Oswell, the Livingstones reached Cape Town; Mary and the children embarked for Britain, where they spent the next four years, without a settled home, dependent on handouts from the LMS. 
Livingstone had other business in Cape Town. He had a troublesome uvula excised. With Oswell he composed his first direct communication to the RGS, a report on their recent journey. From the astronomer royal, Thomas Maclear, Livingstone learned how to make observations with sextant and chronometer; thereafter he regularly sent his results to Maclear. With further help from Oswell, he fitted out his new expedition and enlisted George Fleming, who had worked for Oswell, to accompany him with trade goods for buying ivory on the Zambezi. On their return to Kuruman news came of a Boer attack in August on Sechele's people, and the sacking of Livingstone's house at Kolobeng. Livingstone considered that the Kwena had been justly punished for rejecting the gospel; besides, he had already declared, 'We ought to give all if possible a chance, and not spend an age on one tribe or people' ('David Livingstone: Family Letters', 1.14). In face of the Moffats' disapproval he turned his back on Sechele and in December started for the north. On 23 May 1853 he and Fleming reached Linyanti, the Kololo capital on the Chobe. 
Livingstone's conviction that he was the favoured instrument of providence was reinforced by the welcome he received from Sekeletu, Sebituane's eighteen-year-old son and successor, to whom he gave powder and ammunition. The search for a mission site was fruitless: the upper Zambezi valley was malarial, and Livingstone himself suffered several attacks of fever. The highlands downstream sounded more promising, but were vulnerable to the Ndebele. Meanwhile, Livingstone's search for a trade route to the sea was influenced by meeting two Portuguese traders who had come from the west coast. Sekeletu was eager to co-operate: he organized an expedition under two Kololo headmen to open up trade with Luanda. In November 1853 Livingstone set off once more up the Zambezi with this party; Fleming in due course went south. 
Once the expedition had left Kololo-controlled territory, Livingstone depended heavily on his African companions as interpreters, for he could no longer communicate through seTswana. Their progress was smoothed by Sekeletu's presents of oxen and beads for chiefs, but they soon had to give up travelling by canoe, and as they struck out westwards (Livingstone riding on an ox), the going was very difficult, for the rainy season had set in. The prospects for wagon traffic were further blighted by the tsetse-fly, which was liable to kill domestic animals. Slave trading in the region had raised prices, and when the expedition reached the Kwango River, on 4 April 1854, they had exhausted their trade goods and sold much of the ivory intended for the coast. Soon afterwards they reached Kasanje, a Portuguese military and trading post where Livingstone was made welcome. On the last stretch Livingstone had a severe attack of malaria; he collapsed when he reached Luanda, on 31 May, at the house of Edmund Gabriel, the local British commissioner for the suppression of the slave trade. Yet he declined a passage to England: he wished to see whether a route from the Zambezi to the east coast might be easier than that to the west. He duly set off on 20 September, with presents for Sekeletu from the government of Angola. 
The return to Linyanti took almost a year -- twice as long as the outward journey. Sekeletu was sufficiently impressed by the travellers' tales and presents to send another expedition with ivory to Luanda, in the care of an Arab from Zanzibar, Said b. Habib, who had already been to Benguela. (This enabled Livingstone to dispatch to one of his Portuguese hosts a model of the Crystal Palace, which he had received from his sister Agnes by way of the Ndebele king Mzilikazi, who had forwarded to the Zambezi mail brought north by Moffat in 1854.) News of the route from Zanzibar intrigued Livingstone, but he held to his intention of finding a water route to the east coast. Sekeletu was also keen on this project, and on Livingstone's behalf he fitted out a new expedition, led by Kololo; and Livingstone agreed to sell a consignment of ivory for Sekeletu. 
The expedition set off for the Zambezi in November. Not far below Sesheke it came to the colossal waterfalls known locally as Mosi-oa-Tunya, 'the waters that thunder'; Livingstone named them after Queen Victoria. The party then moved away from the valley, to the plateau beyond the north bank. By the time they reached the Kafue River, Livingstone was sure that this fertile country, 'well adapted for cattle and health', was just what he sought for a mission ('Livingstone's African Journal', 348). In December they rejoined the Zambezi not far above Zumbo, crossed the river further down, and followed the right bank down to the Portuguese settlement at Tete. As a result Livingstone failed to see the formidable cataracts of Quebrabasa, which he persuaded himself were only a 'small rapid'. They reached Tete on 2 March, and Livingstone found the governor very hospitable, as indeed most Africans had been throughout this journey. He left most of his companions at Tete, where they were given land to cultivate; Livingstone intended to accompany them home when he returned from Britain. From Tete he proceeded down river by canoe, with his chief guide and interpreter, Sekwebu, who was anxious to see Britain. In May, enfeebled by fever, they reached the seaport of Quelimane, where Livingstone left Sekeletu's ivory. In July they took ship for Mauritius, but rough seas so unbalanced Sekwebu's mind that he drowned himself. Livingstone grieved at the loss of a 'very good friend'; 'he was my right hand man and contributed greatly to my success' ('David Livingstone: Family Letters', 2.291). In Mauritius, Livingstone recuperated before going home by way of the Red Sea. Mary met him at Southampton on 12 December 1856. 
Livingstone had intended to stay only a month or two in Britain: he did not reckon with the problems of the LMS, or the effects of his own celebrity. His reports on the journeys between 1849 and 1851 to Lake Ngami and the Zambezi had been published by the RGS. Its president in 1851-2 (as in 1856-7 and between 1862 and 1871) was the geologist Sir Roderick Murchison. British exploration in Africa was currently at a low ebb, even if the German Heinrich Barth had in 1849 gone overland to west Africa with British support. Livingstone had sent Murchison ten letters during his crossing of Africa between 1854 and 1856, and these too had been duly published. By the time news of Livingstone's arrival at Luanda reached London, Murchison had prompted the RGS, in 1855, to award Livingstone its annual gold medal. Livingstone, in turn, was acquainted with Murchison's work; at Sesheke, in October 1855, he had read Murchison's argument that the structure of Africa was basin-like, shaped by ridges near the coasts -- a theory confirmed by his own laborious travels. It was thus to Murchison that Livingstone had turned when, on reaching Quelimane in May 1856, he learned that the directors of the LMS 'were restricted in their power of aiding plans connected only remotely with the spread of the Gospel'. The LMS was, as it happened, heavily in debt, and understandably reluctant to reach out into 'untried, remote, and difficult fields of labour' ('Livingstone's Missionary Correspondence', 277). Livingstone, however, was deeply wounded by this advice, which directly challenged his own conception of mission work. On the way to Mauritius, Livingstone told Murchison that he would prefer to work in Africa as a 'private Christian' (Livingstone, 'Zambezi Expedition', ed. J. P. R. Wallis, 1956, xx). He also painted a rosy picture of the commercial prospects for British enterprise on the Zambezi, even implying the possibility of new sources of cotton to replace the slave states of the USA. 
Within days of Livingstone's return to Britain in 1856 the RGS held a special meeting, on 15 December, to bestow on him its gold medal; on the next day the LMS held a reception for him, chaired by Lord Shaftesbury. Over Christmas and the new year, Livingstone visited his mother and sisters in Hamilton (his father had died in February 1856), after which he began work in London on a book to be published (through Murchison's good offices) by John Murray. In April Murchison induced the foreign secretary, Lord Clarendon, to employ Livingstone as a consul in central Africa. Livingstone himself concealed this from the LMS, even after persuading its directors (on the strength of his recent information about the Kafue plateau) to support a Zambezi mission led by himself, coupled with a mission by Moffat to the Ndebele. 
Surrounded by his family Livingstone wrote his book in great haste, at first in lodgings in Sloane Street and then, from May to August, at Hadley Green, Barnet. The title, 'Missionary Travels and Researches in South Africa', evokes earlier accounts of southern Africa, notably by Philip and Moffat, but Livingstone's book stands out from these by reason of its intellectual breadth. Throughout his sixteen years in Africa, Livingstone had kept himself supplied with reading matter on religion, medicine, natural history, and physical anthropology. He had, moreover, maintained an extensive correspondence with friends made in Glasgow, Ongar, and London. And from 1851, aware of his growing reputation as an explorer, he kept a journal. Here he recorded a miscellany of ruminations and minute observation which attest to a wide-ranging curiosity about the human race and the natural world, and owe much to his medical training. When he came to write his book, he enriched a stirring narrative, told in conversational style, with insights acquired by informed eyes and ears, as well as with shafts of caustic humour. 
However, Livingstone aimed to do more than instruct and amuse. Murchison (who ensured that the book was dedicated to himself) might value 'Missionary Travels' as a commercial prospectus and confirmation of his own theories; Livingstone conceived it as propaganda for the campaign against the slave trade and for his own role in spreading knowledge of the Christian gospel. The book was a highly self-conscious presentation of a career which Livingstone had come to believe was divinely ordained. This coloured his reporting. He now believed that legitimate trade was a precondition for the spread of Christianity. He thus had a reason not only for noting economic resources but for exaggerating them. Besides, his lifelong fear of being 'cut out' by other travellers led him to imply that he was the first European to travel between Angola and the upper Zambezi. 'Missionary Travels' fails to mention either Silva Porto or Ladislav Magyar, who did so in 1853, let alone earlier crossings of the continent by African-Portuguese or Arab traders. But these are flaws in an avowedly popular work of unusual humanity. It is untouched by the 'pseudo-scientific racism' of mid-century anthropology, and while Livingstone looked to the 'Anglo-American race' to promote liberty and progress he could also assess African behaviour in terms of environment and history, making cross-cultural comparisons to support his arguments. He concluded that Africans are 'just such a strange mixture of good and evil, as men are everywhere else' (Livingstone, 'Missionary Travels', 510). 
Livingstone spent the latter part of 1857 on a speaking tour. To one listener he appeared: 'plainly and rather carelessly dressed, of middle height [he was 5 ft 8 in.], bony frame and Gaelic countenance, with short-cropped hair and moustachios... His face is deeply furrowed, and pretty well tanned... when excited, a varied expression of earnest and benevolent feeling, and remarkable enjoyment of the ludicrous... passes over it... When he speaks to you, you think him at first to be a Frenchman; but as he tells you a Scotch anecdote in the Glaswegian dialect, you make up your mind that he must be, as his face indicates, a countryman from the north. (G. Seaver, 'David Livingstone', 1957, 286-7)' In Dublin, Livingstone addressed the British Association for the Advancement of Science; in Manchester, the chamber of commerce. He also spoke in Glasgow, Blantyre, Edinburgh, Leeds, Liverpool, Birmingham, and Oxford -- where, as in Glasgow, he received an honorary degree. In Cambridge, on 4 December, he was introduced at Senate House by William Whewell and the geologist Adam Sedgwick. A large audience cheered his concluding appeal for missionaries: 'It is a mistake to suppose that 'any one', as long as he is pious, will do for this office. Pioneers in everything should be the ablest and best qualified men... I beg to direct your attention to Africa... do you carry out the work which I have begun. (J. Simmons, 'Livingstone and Africa', 1955, 79)' By this time, 'Missionary Travels' had appeared. The first impression, of 12,000, was sold out before publication in November, and 30,000 were sold in Britain by 1863. Livingstone had meant the book to make money; it earned him over $8500. A compelling drama of self-improvement, expanding knowledge, and non-sectarian Christian fortitude, it was admired by Charles Dickens, no friend of missionaries, whose own precarious early life had resembled Livingstone's. 'Missionary Travels' quite eclipsed the austere erudition of Barth's 'Travels and Discoveries in North and Central Africa' (1857-8). 
Well before the end of 1857 Livingstone had become a national hero. Early in 1858 he was elected a fellow of the Royal Society and in February he had an audience with the queen. To help him get back to Africa was a matter of public concern. The travels which made him famous had been financed by well-wishers in Africa, especially Oswell and Sekeletu. His return might be assisted by public subscriptions ($2000 was raised in Glasgow), but there was pressure on the government (notably from Manchester businessmen and the British Association) to provide Livingstone with a steamship for use on the Zambezi. Although preoccupied with the Indian mutiny the prime minister, Lord Palmerston, was responsive, while Lord Clarendon had already promised Livingstone a consulate and had recently funded William Baikie's trading expedition on the Niger and supported exploration in east Africa by Richard Burton and John Hanning Speke. Late in October 1857 Livingstone clarified his own position by formally resigning from the LMS. On 1 December he sent Clarendon plans for a Zambezi expedition, which he expected to last two years; on 11 December parliament approved a grant to this end of $5000. The expedition was to include several Europeans besides Livingstone; in choosing them he was given a remarkably free hand, though Murchison ensured that they included scientists whose work could have practical results. Livingstone chose Norman Bedingfeld, whom he had met in Luanda, as steamship commander, and George Rae, from Blantyre, as engineer. Murchison chose as geologist Richard Thornton, a recent graduate of the School of Mines; as economic botanist, John Kirk, a young physician; and as artist to the expedition, Thomas Baines, who had lately worked for the RGS in Australia. Finally, and crucially, Livingstone created the nebulous post of 'moral agent' for his younger brother Charles Livingstone, who had recently returned to Britain from the USA (he had gone there to study in 1839 and had become a pastor in New England). 
For the government the aim of the expedition was to assess the prospects for British trade up the Zambezi. This involved negotiations early in 1858 with the Portuguese, whose maps were limited and patchy but who claimed authority as far west as Zumbo and confined foreign traders to the mouth of the Zambezi. They exempted the expedition from import duties, but otherwise held firm in opposing free trade and accepted Livingstone as British consul only for Quelimane. This put in question the ultimate purpose of the expedition and Livingstone was duly angered; besides, he privately cherished the hope that the expedition might result 'in an English colony in the healthy highlands of Central Africa' (G. Seaver, 'David Livingstone', 1957, 308), albeit very different in character from the British in South Africa, of whom he was highly critical. He had in any case kept up pressure on the LMS for a Kololo mission, even though he would not take part in it; the LMS, against its better judgement, appointed its own team. 
The Zambezi expedition left Birkenhead on 10 March 1858, on the steamship 'Pearl', which carried, in three sections, a steam launch which had been hastily built by Macgregor Laird. This was called the 'Ma-Robert', the African name for Mary Livingstone, who was on board with her youngest son Oswell: the other children had been left with relatives and were supported by a trust fund from their father's literary earnings. It then became clear that Mary was pregnant, and she and Oswell were left behind at Cape Town to be taken to Kuruman by her parents. The 'Pearl' reached the Zambezi in mid-May but was too large to sail, as intended, through the delta and up to Tete; instead, stores had to be taken up in relays by the 'Ma-Robert'. Meanwhile, Bedingfeld fell out with Livingstone and resigned. Livingstone took over the 'Ma-Robert', which often ran aground on sandbanks and also consumed a great deal of firewood. In November and December, Livingstone and Kirk investigated the Quebrabasa cataracts. Kirk realized that these were an insuperable obstacle to navigation. Livingstone refused to admit this; indeed, he asked the British government to supply a more powerful steamer, and asserted that the whole expedition expected the cataracts to be submerged when the river was in flood. 
However, Livingstone now had in mind an alternative to the Zambezi as a 'highway' to the interior. This was the Shire River, which joins the Zambezi below Sena, from the north, and which was said to flow from a large lake. By 9 January 1859 Livingstone and Kirk had ascended 100 miles up the Shire; again they encountered cataracts, and again Livingstone made light of them. Moreover, Livingstone's first glimpse of the hill country above the Shire convinced him that this, as well as the Kafue plateau, was suitable both for a mission and for a cotton-exporting British colony, even if the slave trade was also on the increase here. In March and April, Livingstone, Kirk, and others reached Lake Shirwa, north of the highlands. Backbiting by Charles Livingstone caused David to dismiss Thornton in June, and Baines in July. In August the Livingstones, Kirk, and Rae, with several Kololo resident in Tete, went once again up the Shire; on 17 September they reached the south end of Lake Nyasa. There was little more that Livingstone could do to further his designs until he knew whether the government would prolong the expedition beyond its allotted two years and replace the 'Ma-Robert'. He was committed to escorting the Kololo back to the upper Zambezi, but the journey would not be practicable before a new harvest in the countries upriver. Rae went home in March 1860 to advise on the construction of a steamer which could be carried in sections past the Shire cataracts and placed on Lake Nyasa. Meanwhile, Livingstone was considering yet another possible water route to the interior: the Rovuma River. This later formed the northern frontier of Mozambique; to Livingstone it appealed because it lay well beyond the sphere of the Portuguese, whom he not only saw as an obstacle to any future British trade but now believed to be implicated in the expanding slave trade of east central Africa. 
In May 1860, two years later than he had originally intended, Livingstone, with Charles and Kirk, set off from Tete with those few Kololo who wished to go home. On the middle Zambezi, they found outcrops of coal, supplementing those examined (and mined) by Thornton near Tete. In August, Livingstone delivered to Sekeletu goods he had ordered in 1856, though not the sugar mill (which remained at Tete) or the rifles and ammunition. The Kololo told Livingstone of the disastrous LMS mission, which had reached Linyanti in April 1860: of the Europeans three out of four adults had died and three out of five children, while four Africans had also died. During this Zambezi journey the Livingstone brothers quarrelled bitterly; David came to think he had relied far too much on Charles. Yet neither Charles nor Kirk (who loathed Charles) thwarted David's foolhardy impulse, on the way back, to descend the uppermost Quebrabasa rapids in canoes: Kirk nearly drowned, and lost his notes, drawings, and instruments. At Tete, Livingstone found a dispatch from London extending the expedition for a further three years. This decision had not been taken lightly. Ministers were unexcited by Livingstone's visions of British colonies in tropical Africa, whether of master farmers or the urban poor, which were 'only to be reached by forcing steamers up cataracts' (G. Martelli, 'Livingstone's River', 1970, 108). Eventually, however, his shift of focus to the Shire highlands was approved, along with his proposal to explore the Rovuma, and a new steamship was sent out. 
Missionaries were also coming to join him. Livingstone had tried in 1859 to interest the Church Missionary Society in the Shire highlands; he also approached the bishop of Cape Town, Robert Gray, who had already reported that Anglicans in the universities of Oxford, Cambridge, Durham, and Dublin were planning a mission to central Africa. By the end of 1860 this had been organized under the leadership of Charles Mackenzie. In December, Livingstone descended the Zambezi and abandoned the leaking 'Ma-Robert' on a sandbank. In February 1861 he met the missionaries, who had just arrived from Cape Town, together with his new ship, the 'Pioneer'. Livingstone insisted that Mackenzie join him on a reconnaissance of the Rovuma. This diversion proved fruitless: the 'Pioneer' could get only 30 miles upriver. Its master resigned, since Livingstone would not accept him as second in command of the expedition. It was not until July that the Universities' Mission to Central Africa (UMCA) established itself in the Shire highlands, at Magomero. This was a Manganja village harassed by Yao slavers. By entrusting abandoned slaves to the mission, and burning a slavers' village, Livingstone plunged the UMCA fatefully into local politics. 
Livingstone's next concern was to explore Lake Nyasa. In August, with Charles, Kirk, and an Irish seaman, John Neil, Livingstone set off northwards with a four-oared gig. Just below the lake he noted that mosquitoes 'showed... the presence of malaria', but did not guess at a causal connection, despite being aware that tsetse-flies and ticks were vectors of disease. Once on the lake he hoped to find an outlet to the Rovuma, but he followed the western shore and, delayed by equinoctial gales, turned back at Nkata Bay for want of food. The country they had seen was troubled by Arab slavers, and also by Ngoni raiders. From the lower Shire, in November, Livingstone took the 'Pioneer' down to meet new arrivals. At the end of January a ship from the Cape brought Rae with the new portable steamer, 'Lady Nyassa'. Livingstone had had to pay for this himself: the Admiralty considered that he 'has already discovered more country and more people than he can deal with' (G. Martelli, 'Livingstone's River', 161). There was also Mary Livingstone, who after the birth of another daughter, Anna Mary, at Kuruman in November 1858 had returned to Scotland. On this latest voyage she was escorted by James Stewart, a young Scots minister who had decided on his own initiative to assess the prospects for a Scottish mission in the Zambezi region. 
It took over four months to assemble the 'Lady Nyassa' at Shupanga; meanwhile news came in March of the death of Mackenzie and another missionary, and on 27 April 1862 Mary Livingstone died. (The use of quinine as prophylactic or cure for malaria was still at an experimental stage; Livingstone himself had, from at least 1853, relied much on pills combining quinine and mild purgatives.) Livingstone pressed on; the 'Lady Nyassa' was launched in June, but by then the Zambezi was too low to allow ascent and instead he took the 'Pioneer', with Charles, Kirk, and Rae, back to the Rovuma, which this time they entered in sailing boats. Livingstone's determination to get the boats through every shallow forced Kirk (who in February had declared him 'always very good company') to conclude that 'Dr L. is out of his mind... he is a most unsafe leader' ('Zambesi Journal... of John Kirk', 567, 475, 482). Livingstone himself was aware that such frantic activity was a means to keep grief at bay. After 160 miles, even he had had enough. By December they were back at Shupanga, where they met a disenchanted James Stewart on his way home. 
The year 1863 was still more depressing. In January the 'Pioneer' and 'Lady Nyassa' went up into the Shire valley. This was now a scene of horror: there were corpses in the river and along its banks, victims of drought as well as slave raids. The river was so low that it was April before the ships reached the cataracts. It was here that Richard Thornton died (after his dismissal in 1859 he had travelled in east Africa, and in 1862 returned to the Zambezi delta, where Livingstone had reinstated him). The rest of the expedition suffered severe dysentery, and on 19 May Kirk and Charles Livingstone left for Quelimane. Livingstone himself, with Rae, began to dismantle the 'Lady Nyassa' and to build a road past the cataracts, but famine threatened food supplies. At this critical juncture, on 2 July Livingstone received a letter from London recalling the expedition. The ships could not get downriver until the end of the year, so Livingstone decided to investigate the sources of the slave trade to the north-west. With Thomas Ward, a steward on the 'Pioneer', he reached Lake Nyasa at Nkhota Kota and then travelled west for 100 miles. He got back to the ships on 1 November and reached the Zambezi mouth in February 1864, after learning to his fury that the UMCA, now much depleted, had decided to withdraw. From Mozambique the 'Pioneer' returned to the Cape, while Livingstone and Rae took the 'Lady Nyassa' to Zanzibar. With a crew of twelve but without Rae, Livingstone sailed the little ship across to Bombay just before the monsoon broke. He left her in Bombay, where she was later sold unprofitably; he was back in London on 23 July. 
This time Livingstone's reception was subdued. The Zambezi expedition had cost much more, and achieved much less, than expected. At least $30,000 had been spent on it (as much as on the Niger expedition of 1857-60). It had involved the deaths of Thornton and Mary Livingstone, and also missionaries of the LMS and UMCA, as well as several sailors. It had lasted six and a half years, though scarcely eighteen months were spent on travel above the Shire and Zambezi cataracts and on the Rovuma, due to sickness and logistical problems. The geographical and scientific results seemed hardly commensurate with the effort expended, and plans to check the slave trade had come to nothing. Stewart had identified: 'the fallacy in Livingstone's method. He meets a difficulty, overcomes it by an amount of perseverance and an expenditure of strength and money which men will put forth once or twice but which it would be ruinous to carry out as a rule.' Kirk was driven to write to Stewart in 1864, 'in him I believe all kindly feelings to be absolutely extinct' (J. P. R. Wallis, ed., 'The Zambesi Journal of James Stewart', 1952, 264, 228). 
Fortunately, this was untrue. Livingstone regretted that he had seen so little of his children, and in August 1864 he rejoined his family, in Hamilton, though Robert had gone to the USA (and later that year died fighting for the north in the civil war). Livingstone then visited the west highlands, including Ulva, as the guest of the duke of Argyll. From September 1864 to April 1865 Livingstone and his elder daughter Agnes were at Newstead, in Nottinghamshire, the home of W. F. Webb, whom he had known in south Africa. Here he worked on a second book. This had originally been planned as a pamphlet in which to accuse the Portuguese of fostering the slave trade in central Africa; however, Charles made his own journal available, and David drew extensively on this. The 'Narrative of an Expedition to the Zambesi and its Tributaries' (1865) shows some of the qualities of 'Missionary Travels', but it is more impersonal and much more tendentious. Given the quarrels and reverses which marred the expedition, there was much for which Livingstone could attract blame, and he sought to direct it elsewhere. 
Livingstone was intent on returning to Africa. On his way home he had learned more about the Arab slave trade and had glimpsed possibilities for legitimate trade with India. He was, moreover, convinced that he could throw light on the Nile problem. In 1862 Speke had found that the White Nile flowed from Lake Victoria, but Livingstone did not believe this was the whole answer: since at least 1857 he had thought that the source of the Nile was close to that of the Zambezi. He wanted to outshine Burton as well as Speke, and by November 1864 he had agreed with Murchison that he would try to 'settle' the watersheds of central Africa, though he insisted that he remained primarily a missionary. He planned to return to the Rovuma, pass to the north of Lake Nyasa, look for the Nile headwaters, and then make for Ujiji, on Lake Tanganyika; but he still hoped to find a site for a trading mission. The expedition was to be small-scale, without a steamboat, and without other Europeans. The RGS put up $500, as did the British government; and $1000 came from James Young, a friend from Livingstone's student days in Glasgow, who had made a fortune from distilling paraffin. Livingstone was appointed to a roving consulship outside the Portuguese sphere, without salary or pension. As the time for departure approached he continued to spend much time with Agnes: a month in London, and two months in Scotland (where he attended his mother's burial in June). In August he settled Agnes in a finishing school in Paris, before taking ship from Marseilles. 
In Bombay, Livingstone recruited several sepoys, and twelve Africans from mission schools, including four whom he had brought across in 1864. His host in Bombay was the governor, Sir Bartle Frere, who in January 1866 gave the party passage in a government ship to Zanzibar. Here Livingstone added ten men from the Comoro Islands. Once on the mainland the expedition soon ran into trouble. It took four months to reach Lake Nyasa, past frightful evidence of slaving, and by then the sepoys had been dismissed. Rumours of war obliged Livingstone to go round the south end of the lake, where the Comorans gave up. In January 1867, soon after crossing the Luangwa River, the chronometers were damaged, which caused persistent error in observations of longitude. Then a temporary porter made off with the medicine chest. Livingstone was aiming for Lake Bangweulu, which he believed to be linked to Lake Tanganyika (and thus, he thought, to the Nile), but it was now the rainy season, and the country in that direction was so swampy that he made directly for Lake Tanganyika, visiting the Bemba king Chitimukulu. 
Henceforward, progress was repeatedly interrupted by local wars and by illness. Livingstone received much help from Arab and Swahili traders, but he suffered from pneumonia, dysentery, ulcers, and haemorrhoids. Between November 1867 and July 1868 he reached Lake Mweru and Lake Bangweulu, and visited the Lunda king Kazembe, on the Luapula. In March 1869 he got to Ujiji, where he found few of the stores he had ordered from the coast. He now thought it likely that the upper Nile was to be identified with the Lualaba River, west of Lake Tanganyika, but he did not reach this until March 1871, after receiving further supplies relayed by Kirk, now vice-consul in Zanzibar. At Nyangwe, Livingstone vainly sought canoes to explore the course of the Lualaba, and rejected Arab help after a massacre of local Manyema in July. He returned to Ujiji in October to find little left of the goods from Zanzibar funded by the British government (at Murchison's insistence). Instead, he was relieved in November by H. M. Stanley, who had been told to 'find Livingstone' by the editor of the 'New York Herald' and who traced him to Ujiji, there greeting him with the famous and premeditated salutation, 'Dr Livingstone, I presume?' (H. M. Stanley, 'How I Found Livingstone', 1872, 412). They travelled together to the north end of Lake Tanganyika and proved that it had no outlet there. They parted on 14 March 1872 at Tabora, on the caravan route to the east coast, where Livingstone waited for fresh supplies to be sent up by Stanley. These arrived in August, along with the fifty-six porters who had contracted to work for him, and the five remaining from his original team. 
Livingstone resumed his quest. He was not sure that the Lualaba was the Nile, but his obsession with finding the Nile's ultimate source drove him to seek not where the Lualaba went but where it came from. Thus he went south from Tabora to the south-eastern shore of Lake Tanganyika, and returned to Lake Bangweulu. However, his attempt in 1872-3 to traverse the 'sponges' around the lake and push west was confused by the faulty longitudes of 1867-8 and was further delayed by heavy rains and by his own debility. By April 1873 he was bleeding profusely and soon had to be carried in a litter. He died during the night of 30 April at the village of Chitambo, a Lala headman. Command of the expedition was assumed by Abdullah Susi, from Shupanga, who with James Chuma, a Yao, and Edward Gardner had accompanied Livingstone continuously. The heart and viscera were buried on the spot, but Susi decided to carry Livingstone's body, duly embalmed, to the coast, along with his effects. At Tabora, Susi's expedition met a search party led by V. L. Cameron; against his advice, the team held firm to their remarkable purpose and reached Bagamoyo in February 1874. Kirk's deputy arranged for the body to be dispatched to England. On 18 April 1874 Livingstone was buried in the nave of Westminster Abbey. The pallbearers included Oswell, Kirk, Stanley, and Jacob Wainwright, one of Stanley's recruits for the final journey from Tabora. Murchison -- 'the best friend I ever had' ('Last Journals', 2.205) -- had died in 1871, but Robert Moffat was there, and James Stewart. 
In death Livingstone became once more a national hero. The Treasury paid $500 for the funeral; Gladstone awarded a pension to Livingstone's daughters; and Disraeli's subsequent ministry gave the family $3000. Although Livingstone's Nile theory had already been disproved, he was acclaimed once again as a great abolitionist: his numerous reports on the slavers' advance across Africa from the east coast were seen to have led to the treaty against the trade enforced on the sultan of Zanzibar in 1873. Missionaries soon began to realize Livingstone's vision of rivers and lakes as highways for the spiritual and social regeneration of Africa, even if his views on the commercial function of missions were sometimes more influential than his lifelong advocacy of 'native agency'. Two Scottish missions -- one named Livingstonia and the other Blantyre -- went out to Lake Nyasa and the Shire highlands in 1875-6. Both were crucial factors in the British occupation of what became Nyasaland and then Malawi. Meanwhile the UMCA, which had re-established itself in Zanzibar, was at work on the mainland; by 1878 the LMS was on Lake Tanganyika, and the Church Missionary Society was in Buganda, as a result of Stanley's return to east Africa. Stanley himself completed Livingstone's geographical work by reaching the Lualaba and following the Congo to the sea. 
Stanley had, of course, taken the lead in reviving Livingstone's celebrity and his book, 'How I Found Livingstone' (1872), presented the traveller as a genial saint. Horace Waller, who had been with the UMCA at Magomero, fastidiously edited Livingstone's 'Last Journals' (1874), a poignant testimony to soul-searching, suffering, forbearance, and tenacity. These books, and their derivatives, contributed to a Livingstone legend which had begun with 'Missionary Travels'. There was a peculiar romance about the lone missionary ever pressing into new country, concerned not to convert but to bear Christian witness by preaching the gospel, giving magic-lantern shows, and speaking against slavery. Livingstone became a symbol of what the British -- and other Europeans -- wished to believe about their motives as they took over tropical Africa in the late nineteenth century: in effect he redeemed the colonial project. In 1929 the Scottish national memorial to David Livingstone was opened at his birthplace, Blantyre, by the duchess of York; by 1963 there had been 2 million visitors. In Africa, he is still commemorated in the names of two towns: Blantyre, in Malawi, and Livingstone, in Zambia, beside the Victoria Falls. 
For half a century after his death Livingstone was the subject of hagiography rather than scholarship. More realistic assessments became possible with access to the papers of Kirk and other members of the Zambezi expedition. The chief work of reappraisal, however, was achieved in Isaac Schapera's magisterial editions of Livingstone's journals and letters up to 1856. During the later twentieth century a complex character came into focus: versatile in practical skills, intellectually curious, strikingly free from religious or racial prejudice, exerting unusual charm, and inspiring at least a few to great loyalty; yet deficient in political sense, tactless, touchy, rancorous, stingy with thanks or encouragement, devious, and callous when other people's interests seemed to conflict with his duty to God. Livingstone's reputation for managing Africans, if not Europeans, rests on the expeditions of 1853-6, which were organized chiefly by Africans, and on Waller's emollient edition of his last journals. None the less, his writings have acquired new value as a rich source for the history of Africans. His pioneering cartography of eastern Angola and what became Botswana, Zambia, and Malawi was but one facet of his skill as an amateur field-scientist in an age of growing specialization. Secular knowledge and material mastery were integral to his missiology: the industrial revolution was part of a divine plan. Livingstone both embodied and transcended the nineteenth-century tension between religion and science, and it was this which accounted for the scale and complexity of his career in Africa. 


@@@@@


doc= 16804


Livingstone, George, third earl of Linlithgow (1616-1690), army officer, was born in July 1616, the eldest son of Alexander Livingstone, from 1622 second earl of Linlithgow (died 1648), and his first wife, Lady Elizabeth Gordon, second daughter of George Gordon, first marquess of Huntly. From 1622 until his succession to the earldom George was styled Lord Livingstone. His early years were spent with his maternal grandfather, and in 1626 the king wrote to Linlithgow expressing his displeasure that the young Lord Livingstone was being brought up in the household of the Catholic Huntly: 'in regard of his [Huntly's] aversness from the religion professed within that our kingdome not giving the Church satisfaction, we doe not lyk that your sone should be bred up in such companie' (GEC, 'Peerage', 8.28). Nevertheless, there is no evidence that George as an adult deviated from the Church of Scotland in his religion, moving from presbyterian to episcopalian when the church did at the Restoration. In the summer of 1640 he attended the court of Elizabeth of Bohemia at The Hague. On 15 December 1642 he was appointed constable and keeper of Linlithgow Palace and Blackness Castle upon the resignation of his father. 
The Scottish estates appointed Livingstone colonel of the Stirlingshire foot in the army of the solemn league and covenant on 26 August 1646. He also became a member of the Clackmannanshire committee of war. He served with his regiment at Marston Moor and led it in storming the Sandgate during the climax of the siege of Newcastle. Livingstone and his regiment subsequently quartered in co. Durham, then served in Leven's field army during the 1645 campaign. In November 1645 he was under investigation by the estates for communicating with royalists. In 1648 he commanded the Midlothian and Linlithgowshire horse in support of the engagement for the rescue of Charles I. He resisted the whiggamore raid of late summer 1648. As a result of being an engager he was barred from all state offices. 
Livingstone succeeded his father as earl on the latter's death between 11 June and 20 December 1648. On 30 July 1650 he married his first wife, Lady Elizabeth Maule (died 1659), daughter of Patrick Maule, first earl of Panmure, and widow of John Lyon, second earl of Kinghorn. She was the mother of all Linlithgow's children before her death at Castle Huntly in October 1659. In October 1650 Linlithgow repented as an engager, removing his incapacity for holding offices. On 4 December he was admitted to the estates, which on the 29th nominated him to command a cavalry regiment from Perthshire. In January 1651 Hartwoodburn's Horse was added to his regiment. He served in the Worcester campaign but escaped capture. By 1653 he had become a supporter of the English regime in Scotland; he was one of the few nobles not penalized in Cromwell's 'Act of Pardon and Grace'. However, the Scottish royalists in Glencairn's rising burnt his Perthshire estates. In 1654-5 Linlithgow represented Perthshire in Oliver Cromwell's parliament, and he was again in the united parliament in 1656 and 1659. He became a JP (another sign of English favour) in 1656. 
Despite his service to the protectorate, at the Restoration Linlithgow received the colonelcy of the Royal Regiment of Horse Guards, and a place on the privy council on 13 July 1661. He served on various commissions of the council and regularly attended parliament until his death. On 5 May 1663 he began a lengthy career of suppressing covenanters when the council ordered him to enforce the regime's anti-presbyterian religious policies. In the same cause the council named him one of the justiciars in the south-west on 5 December 1666. He seems to have gained additional military commands for on 9 October 1667 the council disbanded his regiment and sent his men to Lord George Douglas's Foot in the French service. On 29 October the king commissioned him a colonel of foot with the earl of Kellie as his lieutenant-colonel and Sir James Turner as his major. Several weeks later, on 26 November, the council appointed Linlithgow commander-in-chief in Scotland during the absences of the lord chancellor. On 22 June 1671 he became colonel of the King's regiment of foot guards. In a change from state business he was noted as feuding with his stepbrother Alexander who had succeeded their uncle James Livingston as earl of Callendar over the detention of goods bequeathed by the latter in 1674. The council appointed Linlithgow colonel of the Linlithgowshire and Peeblesshire militia on 25 February 1675. On 8 June 1676 he received command of his heir, George's, horse troop during the latter's absence. The regime's use of the earl in military affairs is further indicated by his appointment to the militia committee in 1676. Likewise his support of its authoritarian policies appears from his position as supervisor of the election for provost in Linlithgow. 
In June 1677 Linlithgow married again; his second wife was Agnes Wauchope, daughter and coheir of George Wauchope, merchant and burgess of Edinburgh, and widow of Alexander Scott, goldsmith, of Edinburgh. During that year the earl became a member of the highland and public affairs committee. On 26 December the council recorded his appointment as Sir George Monro's replacement as major-general of horse and foot in Scotland -- or simply commander-in-chief. His assistance in suppressing the conventicles is apparent from his appointment on the anti-covenanter committee for the west on 18 January 1678. His actions in assailing the covenanters gained him the council's thanks that April. He received and implemented additional orders to the same end. In December the council had him make the militia take the oath of allegiance and supremacy. In January 1679 he garrisoned Blackness Castle (a prison for covenanters) and imposed order in Edinburgh. In March and May the council authorized him to act against covenanters in Linlithgowshire and Fife. After the defeat of Claverhouse at Drumclog on 1 June 1679, the earl became disheartened. On 6 June he asked for English or Irish reinforcements. Meanwhile he had ordered Claverhouse to fall back to the main army at Stirling. The united royal army failed to confront the rebels, but retreated to Edinburgh where it awaited reinforcements from England. On 18 June James, earl of Monmouth, arrived with English troops and took command of the army. After Monmouth's victory at Bothwell Bridge the council sent Linlithgow and Claverhouse to London to advocate sterner measures against the rebellious areas. 
On 19 September Linlithgow resigned as major-general and commander-in-chief and had his former rank abolished owing to the demobilization of the army. He again became or was reconfirmed as constable of Blackness Castle on 15 January 1680. His importance in local affairs is apparent from his appointment as convener of the Linlithgowshire excise commissioners. His military duties continued in 1681 with service in the Linlithgowshire-Peeblesshire militia and reduction of his regiment. Likewise he continued to repress dissent, this time as the imposer of the 'Test Act' on Linlithgow, Queensferry, the regality of Ogilface, and the JPs of Linlithgowshire. On 7 January 1682 he replaced Callendar, who had refused the test, in a heritable jurisdiction in Stirlingshire. In November he became a member of the commission to proceed against the disaffected in Linlithgowshire. The following year the council named him convener of the shire's JPs and provost of Queensferry. The king made him lord justice-general on 15 July 1684. Owing to his personal expenditure in repairing Blackness Castle his royal pension rose to $200 sterling annually in December 1685. With the revolution of 1689 he lost his offices, but he accepted the convention of estates as a free and lawful assembly. In April he was named to the Linlithgowshire commission for supply. He died on 1 February 1690 and was buried at St Michael's Kirk, Linlithgow. The earl exemplified the self-interested Scots nobleman of the second half of the seventeenth century, who exchanged political and religious principles for personal aggrandizement. 
Linlithgow's elder son and heir, George Livingstone (died 7 Aug 1695), was implicated in Jacobite activities in 1689. After brief imprisonment he submitted; though apparently still toying with Jacobitism, in May 1690 the new earl of Linlithgow was reported as having 'beaten the Highlanders' and in 1692 he was admitted to the privy council (GEC, 'Peerage', 8.31). The younger son Alexander (died 1692), who had succeeded by entail to the earldom of Callendar in 1685, likewise was imprisoned for Jacobitism with his brother in 1689. Linlithgow's daughter Henrietta (died 1683) married Robert MacGill, viscount of Oxfuird and Lord MacGill of Cousland. 


@@@@@


doc= 16805


Livingstone, George, fourth earl of Linlithgow (c.1652-1695), army officer, was the eldest son of George Livingston, third earl of Linlithgow (1616-1690), soldier and politician, and his first wife, Lady Elizabeth (died 1659), daughter of Patrick Maule, first earl of Panmure, and widow of John, second earl of Kinghorne. First commissioned, as captain in the Scots foot guards (the new regiment of foot guards), in September 1668, he actively assisted his father in harrying the covenanters in the aftermath of the Pentland uprising of 1666. During the covenanter rising of 1679 Lord Livingstone, as he was then titled, saw further active service at the battle of Bothwell Bridge on 22 July. During the critical point in this engagement he advanced with 300 Scots foot guards to support Theophilus Oglethorpe's troop of the Royal Dragoons, which was in danger of being cut off. His intervention swayed the balance in favour of the duke of Monmouth's army, and the covenanters were heavily defeated. On 1 May 1684 he was promoted through the patronage of the duke of York to command the troop of the Scottish life guards (the Scottish troop of horse guards) in succession to the marquess of Montrose. About this time he was created provost of Linlithgow equipped with special powers by the Scottish privy council to deal with covenanters in and around that town, where the burghal authorities had, in Livingstone's opinion, been deficient in vigour. 
In September 1688 the entire Scottish army, amounting to 2946 soldiers, marched south to reinforce James II, ready to face the anticipated invasion by William of Orange. Livingstone and his men were thus present at the debacle on Salisbury Plain during November, and retired with the royal army along the Thames valley towards London. Following the earl of Feversham's decision to disband the royal army, Livingstone, now acting commander of the Scottish forces, asked permission of William of Orange to march his troops home in formed units. William was happy to oblige as he thereby preserved the Scottish army intact and assisted the maintenance of law and order in England. Livingstone attended the Scottish convention on 14 March 1689 as representative of Linlithgow, but he was not allowed to take his seat because he was the son of a peer. When Viscount Dundee defied the convention on behalf of James II on 18 March 1689 and left for Stirling with a troop of dragoons, he spent that night at Linlithgow. Livingstone was tempted to join him but, on receipt of a visit from a herald of the Scottish estates, who ordered him to lay down his arms and appear before the convention within twenty-four hours on pain of arrest for treason, he immediately detached himself from Dundee and complied. Later in the year, accompanied by a body of horsemen, he travelled to the residence of his brother-in-law Lord Duffus in Sutherland. This was construed as an intention to join the Jacobite army in the highlands and the council summoned him to Edinburgh. Although he endured a few days' imprisonment in Edinburgh Castle, his explanations were accepted and he was among those who took advantage of the offer of indemnity before the deadline of 10 September. 
Livingstone succeeded as fourth earl of Linlithgow on 1 February 1690 and continued to toy with Jacobite conspiracies, but a serious illness in 1691 presented the opportunity for reflection upon the direction of his career. He determined to abandon flirtations with Jacobitism in favour of seeking an accommodation with William III and to transfer his allegiance from episcopacy to presbyterianism. Initially the earl of Portland was sceptical of the sincerity of Linlithgow's sudden double conversion, but on receipt of a signed statement giving the reasons for his change of heart, an interview with the king was arranged. William was impressed with his personal qualities and apparent political acumen and considered making him lord chancellor of Scotland. Instead, in 1692 he was appointed to both the Scottish privy council and Treasury commission, a move sometimes seen as seeking to balance party positions within the government of Scotland, Linlithgow still being considered part of an 'episcopalian' party. On 22 July 1695 he was granted the escheat of Urquhart, part of the forfeited estate of the earl of Dunfermline. Linlithgow had married, before 1689, Lady Henrietta Sutherland, the eldest daughter of Alexander, Lord Duffus, but, as they had no children, the succession passed to his nephew James Livingstone, fourth earl of Callandar, on his death on 7 August 1695. Linlithgow was survived by his wife. He was buried in Linlithgow church. 


@@@@@


doc= 16806


Livingston, James, of Barncloich, first Viscount Kilsyth (1616-1661), nobleman, was born on 25 June 1616, the younger son of Sir William Livingston of Kilsyth (died 1627), a lord of session from 1609 and vice-chamberlain of Scotland from 1613, and his second wife, Margaret, daughter of Sir John Houston of Houston. On 23 April 1647 he was served heir to his brother's grandson William Livingston of Kilsyth. He suffered substantial losses during Montrose's campaign in 1645, and his house was burned and his lands plundered -- apparently by both English and Scottish forces -- in 1650-51. He was imprisoned in Edinburgh in 1651, excepted from Cromwell's 'Act of Pardon and Grace' (1654), and fined $1500 (later reduced to $800). After the Restoration, in recognition of his loyalty to the crown, he was raised to the peerage, as Viscount Kilsyth and Lord Campsie, on 17 August 1661. He acted as a commissioner of supply and as commissioner to parliament for Stirlingshire in 1661. Kilsyth and his wife, Euphame, daughter of Sir David Cunningham of Robertland, whom he had married on 10 December 1639, had four children: James, second Viscount Kilsyth, died in 1706 and was succeeded by his brother, William (1650-1733), who, having engaged in the Jacobite rising of 1715, was forced to seek safety abroad and suffer forfeiture of his estates; the title died with him, in Rome. Elizabeth married Major-General Robert Montgomery, fifth son of Alexander, sixth earl of Eglinton; her sister, Anne ('b'. 1648), died unmarried. Kilsyth died in London on 9 September 1661. 


@@@@@


doc= 16807


Livingston, James, of Kinnaird, first earl of Newburgh (1621/2-1670), nobleman, was the only son of Sir John Livingston of Kinnaird, first baronet (died 1628), groom of the bedchamber to James VI and I, and his wife, Jane ('c'.1584-1665), daughter of Richard Sproxtoune of Wakefield, steward of the Star Chamber, and widow of William Marwood of Little Burby, Yorkshire. Livingston was about six years old when his father died. On 17 December 1638 he matriculated at Merton College, Oxford, aged sixteen, and, two years after that, Sir Nathaniel Brent reported to Archbishop Laud that although the young man had recently been neglecting his books and had begun 'to haunt the town more than is fit', no one had more civil and gentle behaviour than Livingston did. Moreover, 'the remonstrances of myself and his tutor, and our recommendations to his mother to remove him in case he change not his course, have made him a new man of late' ('CSP dom.', '1644-5', 302). 
Livingston was not always as gentle as he seemed, for in March 1645, while in Paris to continue his education, he fought the first of a long series of duels, on that occasion with Elizabeth of Bohemia's son Edward. On his return to Britain he became a staunch supporter of Charles I, and on 13 September 1647 was created Viscount Newburgh. At the end of the following year he married Katherine Stuart (d. 1650), whose husband, George, seigneur d'Aubigny, had been killed at Edgehill. Their only child Elizabeth ['see 'Delaval, Lady Elizabeth] became a Jacobite agent. That December he and his father-in-law, Theophilus Howard, second earl of Suffolk, devised a plan to rescue the king from his captors when Charles was taken briefly to Newburgh's house at Bagshot, but they did not put it into effect. 
Newburgh and his wife fled to The Hague, where she died in 1650, leaving him with a son and a daughter. He returned to Scotland with Charles II. An intercepted letter from Scotland to his mother, requesting robes for the coronation of Charles II, resulted in the sequestration of his property. In November 1650 he was made lieutenant-colonel of the king's lifeguards. He sat in the Scottish parliament, took the covenant, and was presumably present when Charles was crowned at Scone. He fought in the royal army at the battle of Worcester on 3 September 1651, afterwards escaping back to the continent. 
Newburgh's military career continued, and he was in 1656 given command of Middleton's regiment in the Low Countries. Much of Charles II's correspondence with Scottish royalists was conducted through him, and in consequence he was excluded from Cromwell's 'Act of Grace' of 12 April 1654. After showing an interest in Anne, daughter of James Douglas, ninth earl of Morton, and being linked with Mrs Jane Lane, Charles II's rescuer after Worcester, about 1656 he married Anne ('bap'. 1637, died 1692), daughter of Sir Henry Poole of Saperton, Gloucestershire. 
With the Restoration, Newburgh's loyalty was well rewarded. His estates, estimated in 1656 as having a value of $411 p.a., were now restored to him, he was granted a tack of the customs of the borders, said to be worth $1000 p.a., and received a grant of $1600, arrears of the tenths of the clergy in the diocese of Lincoln. Elected MP for Cirencester, he was given the degree of MA by his old university, and became vice-admiral for Scotland. He was also made captain of the king's bodyguard and colonel of the 4th Horse Guards. On 31 December 1660 Charles II created him earl of Newburgh, viscount of Kinnaird, and Lord Livingston of Flacraig. 
In 1662-3 Newburgh was associated with John, first earl of Middleton, in the king's efforts to establish episcopacy in Scotland, but by 1670 he had to retire from his military appointments because of 'corpulency and goutishness' (GEC, 'Peerage'). He died on 4 December 1670, to the regret of contemporaries, who praised him as one of the finest gentlemen of the age, with untainted principles of loyalty and honour. He was buried two days later, beside his father in 'Kinges Armes Valt', at St Margaret's, Westminster. 


@@@@@


doc= 16808


Livingston, James, first earl of Callendar (d. 1674), army officer, was the third son of Alexander Livingston, first earl of Linlithgow (died 1621), and Helen Hay, daughter of Andrew Hay, earl of Erroll. 
Livingston was probably born in the 1590s, and enlisted in the Dutch service, being lieutenant of a company commanded by his elder brother, Sir Henry Livingston, in 1618. He was promoted lieutenant-colonel of one of the three regiments of the Scottish brigade in the Netherlands in 1629, and colonel in 1633. That his early career also saw service to the British crown is indicated by the facts that he was granted a pension by James VI and that by 1628 he had been knighted, being referred to by Charles I as one who 'has been soe long abroad in our service beyond sea' (C. Rogers, ed., 'The Earl of Stirling's Register of Royal Letters', 2 vols., 1885, 1.326). The following year he is mentioned as a gentleman of the king's privy chamber, and when Charles I visited Scotland in 1633 he was created Lord Livingston of Almond (Amont) on 19 June. 
Lord Almond was one of those sent to Scotland in 1638 by Charles I to encourage opposition to the covenanters; he was admitted to the privy council there on 2 July, but his loyalties proved uncertain. Almond signed the 'king's covenant', intended to rival the national covenant, on 22 September, but in December joined others in declaring that he understood it as upholding presbyterianism, the opposite of the king's intention. In the first bishops' war of 1639 the covenanters expected that Almond would accept appointment as second in command of their forces, but 'in the tyme of our most need, the grievousness of his gravell, or the pretence of it, made him goe to France to be cutted' ('Letters and Journals of Robert Baillie', 1.212). He had sought treatment for the stone previously, at Harrogate in 1637, but suspicion that his illness was a pretext to avoid having to take sides in the conflict was heightened when, after he found that he did not need to be 'cut', he proceeded to Holland to take command of his regiment there instead of returning to Scotland. However, the covenanters having been successful in their defiance of the king in 1639, Almond agreed to serve as their lieutenant-general in the second bishops' war of 1640. He played a leading role in the Scottish army's advance into England, which led to victory at the battle of Newburn and the occupation of Newcastle, but just before the campaign had begun he had signed the Cumbernauld bond with the earl of Montrose and others, indicating opposition to the policies of the earl of Argyll and other covenanting leaders. In spite of the discovery of the bond and the denunciation of its signatories Almond retained his military command, as the covenanters did not want to emphasize division in their ranks, and perhaps because Argyll remained 'to that man a most speciall friend' ('Letters and Journals of Robert Baillie', 1.390). 
Support for the covenanters lost Almond his Dutch command for, evidently at the request of Charles I, he was replaced as colonel of his regiment on 5 November 1640. When Charles was negotiating a settlement with the covenanters in 1641 he still had sufficient hopes of Almond's loyalty to propose his appointment as treasurer of Scotland, but Argyll took a lead in blocking the proposal, indicating that public good came before private friendship. That the covenanters' doubts about Almond's reliability were justified was confirmed in October by 'the Incident', a plot whereby a group of royalist officers planned a 'coup d'etat'. Proposals to arrest the earl of Argyll and the marquess of Hamilton were alleged to have been made in Almond's house, and he was said to have been assigned a leading part in seizing the two nobles. However, the matter was not investigated too closely, as both king and covenanters were determined not to let the affair prevent them reaching an agreement. As part of the settlement Almond was created earl of Callendar on 6 October 1641. 
In spite of Callendar's flirtations with royalists in 1640-41 the new earl's military reputation was sufficient for the covenanters to offer him the position of lieutenant-general again in 1643, when they were moving towards alliance with the English parliament against the king in the English civil war, even though some still doubted his commitment to the cause. Early in 1644 he was involved in the plottings of royalists with malcontent army officers for risings in favour of the king. According to James Turner he 'persuaded me in his oune house of Callendar, and upon a Lords day [Sunday] too, that he would faithfullie serve the King', and swore oaths to that effect (Turner, 36). But on 16 May he accepted a commission to serve the covenanters as lieutenant-general, commanding in chief all forces being raised in Scotland. This meant that the marquess of Argyll, who was to command an expedition being sent north against the royalist rising led by Sir John Gordon of Haddo, came technically under Callendar's command. Callendar's insistence on this arrangement may not have been merely a squabble about rank, but a reflection of hopes of his that having Argyll, the covenanters' political leader, under his military command could help him to divert the new army from fighting against to fighting for the king. Certainly he continued to assure Turner of his loyalty to Charles I, and that high rank among the covenanters would increase his ability to help him. However, his manoeuvrings look more like the fumblings of an ambitious man seeking to keep open the option of changing sides if events made that expedient than those of a man of firm loyalty to any cause. 
Callendar's forces were first used to police the border, to prevent incursions of royalists from the north of England, such as that led by Montrose in April 1644. However, when it turned out that the main Scottish army in England, engaged in the siege of York, was unable to suppress the activities of Montrose and other royalists in northern England, Callendar was sent into England with his army, 7000 to 10,000 strong, on 25 June. He reasserted Scottish military control of the north-east, and was joined in the siege of Newcastle by the main Scottish army in England in August. On the victory of Montrose at Tippermuir, near Perth, on 1 September, Callendar's army was at first ordered to return to Scotland, but the covenanters' determination to give priority to the war in England led to the orders being countermanded. Callendar was then offered command of another new army being raised in Scotland, to pursue Montrose, but chose to remain in England, where he took part in the storming of Newcastle on 19 October. 
In January 1646 there were renewed demands that Callendar return to Scotland to direct action against the royalists in the north, and thus take up the duties envisaged in his 1644 commission as commander of the forces within the country, but his demands for authority over all other commanders were rejected on this occasion, and he was left without employment. As before, his motives are hard to fathom, perhaps belief in his own indispensability mingling with thoughts of gaining as much military authority as possible for political ends. Like several other senior Scottish officers in England he had had secret meetings with royalists in 1645, and he visited Charles I when he was being held prisoner by the Scottish army in Newcastle in 1646. In March 1647 Callendar's tendency to over-price himself when attempting to sell his services again revealed itself. As civil war in Britain seemed to have ended he proposed to raise a regiment to serve the king of France -- provided that he was made a brigadier-general (thus outranking the French officer who commanded all Scottish troops in French service) and captain of the horse of the king's household. The offer was refused (Fotheringham, 2.30). 
Callendar played an active part in the making of the engagement treaty between Scottish commissioners and the king, then imprisoned at Carisbrooke Castle, in December 1647, and was rewarded with appointments as sheriff of Stirling and keeper of Stirling Castle. When the engagers raised an army in 1648 Callendar had hopes of being appointed general, but his refusal to serve against Montrose in Scotland in 1644-6, his tendency to harbour grievances, and doubts as to his trustworthiness counted against him. Instead he was commissioned to his old position of lieutenant-general, with the duke of Hamilton as general. The appointment was politically expedient, for to get the engagement accepted by the Scottish parliament the votes of a group of royalists who were suspicious of the sincerity of Hamilton's commitment to the king, and were led by Callendar, was essential. But Callendar's commission gave the engagers' army a second in command who was notoriously difficult to work with and who deeply distrusted his commander. 
The disastrous decisions that led the engagers' invasion of England to defeat at Preston in August 1648 owed much to the unfortunate combination of Callendar, ever ready with ill-judged advice, and Hamilton, uncertain in military matters and ready to accept the opinions of the overbearing professional soldier he was supposed to command. By 17 August the Scottish cavalry had reached Wigan, and Hamilton ordered his infantry to follow it by crossing the River Ribble at Preston. However, news arrived that an English royalist force under Sir Marmaduke Langdale, which was moving to join Hamilton, had come under attack by Cromwell. Hamilton therefore cancelled his orders for the advance over the Ribble so that his infantry could support Langdale. But Callendar argued that the Scottish infantry could not resist Cromwell without cavalry support. The infantry should after all cross the Ribble, to put the river between them and Cromwell until the cavalry could be recalled from Wigan. Hamilton agreed, and only he, with Callendar and a few Scottish horsemen, went to Langdale's support. The royalists were quickly crushed by Cromwell. Hamilton and Callendar, with the remnants of the royalist force, escaped across the Ribble, and it was proposed to make a stand on the river. Callendar again intervened, arguing in favour of a withdrawal southwards under cover of darkness in an attempt to link up with the Scots cavalry. Hamilton again gave way to Callendar, but with the infantry already demoralized and bewildered by a confusion of orders and counter-orders, planned retreat quickly turned to precipitate flight, and the Scottish army disintegrated. Callendar's final contribution to the campaign was to advise the infantry to surrender at Warrington. Hamilton surrendered with the remaining cavalry at Uttoxeter, while Callendar fled to Holland, and was rumoured to be the only man in the whole army to succeed in escaping to the continent. 
Callendar returned to Scotland in May 1650, but was forced to leave immediately because of his role in the engagement. However, disaster at the battle of Dunbar (3 September 1650) and the English occupation of southern Scotland led to a relaxing of attitudes, and he was soon allowed to return. On 23 April 1651 the kirk accepted his declarations of repentance for his part in the engagement. It was even proposed that he yet again be made lieutenant-general, and when his reluctance to fight Montrose in 1644-6 was cited as showing he was 'not worthy of trust' (T. M'Crie, ed., 'The Life of Mr. Robert Blair', Wodrow Society, 11, 1848, 170-71) he argued that he had refused because Montrose had held a royal commission -- a declaration of royalism that suited the atmosphere of royalist revival in 1651 but failed to explain why he had been ready to fight those holding the king's commissions in England. Callendar was refused a military command but was appointed a member of the committee of estates, and he was present when the remnants of the committee were captured by the English at Alyth on 28 August 1651, though he managed to escape. He surrendered to General Monck in November 1651, but by December 1653 was reported to be 'lurking in some parts of the North' awaiting an opportunity to join the royalist rebels there (Firth, 'Scotland and the Commonwealth', 305). He soon did so, a move that worried the English because of 'the dangerousnesse of his principles and spiritt' (Firth, 'Scotland and the Protectorate', 47). However, he was arrested in February 1654, and spent some time as a prisoner in Edinburgh Castle, his estates being confiscated. In 1655 he went to London and after having 'kissed the Lord Protecteur his hands' ('Correspondence of Sir Robert Kerr, First Earl of Ancram, and his Son William, Third Earl of Lothian', ed. D. Laing, 2 vols., 1875, 2.391) obtained the restoration of his lands. On his return to Scotland he gave General Monck, the commander-in-chief there, his word as a gentleman that he would not act against Cromwell or the government. However, in August 1659 he refused to sign an undertaking, imposed by the collapsing republican regime, not to act against it or in favour of the exiled Charles II, and orders were given for his imprisonment in Stirling ('The Clarke Papers', ed. C. H. Firth, 4 vols., CS, new ser., vols. 49, 54, 61, 62, 1891-1901, 4.41). 
After the Restoration Callendar's refusal to serve against Montrose in the 1640s at last brought praise instead of suspicion, and on 11 May 1661 he was one of the fourteen earls who carried Montrose's coffin in the elaborate procession through Edinburgh which preceded his burial. Glimpses at personal life behind the public facade of the shifty professional soldier are rare. In 1633 he had married Margaret Hay ('c'.1592-1659), daughter of Lord Yester and widow of the first earl of Dunfermline. They had no children, though Callendar had two illegitimate children. In 1640 he founded a hospital for four aged and infirm persons at Falkirk. Nothing is known of his final years; he died at Callendar House and was buried at Falkirk on 25 March 1674. He was succeeded as earl by his nephew Alexander, the second surviving son of his elder brother Alexander Livingston, second earl of Linlithgow. 
Lack of information about Callendar's early career makes it difficult to know what particular qualities as a soldier made Scottish regimes in 1639-48 so eager to secure his services in a senior position. What political scruples he had probably inclined him towards royalism, but ambition made him willing to serve the covenanters. He then attempted to salve his conscience by serving the covenanters against the king in England but refusing service in Scotland, earning general distrust. In the 1648 engagement he at last served the king directly, but his animosity towards Hamilton combined with ill judgement on the field of battle to bring what had once been a distinguished military career to an ignominious conclusion. 


@@@@@


doc= 16809


Livingstone, John (1603-1672), Presbyterian minister in the Netherlands, was born on 21 June 1603 at Monyabrock, Kilsyth, Stirlingshire, one of three sons of William Livingstone ('c'.1576-1641), minister of Kilsyth and afterwards of Lanark, and his wife, Agnes ('c'.1585-1617), daughter of Alex Livingstone, portioner of Falkirk and brother of the laird of Belstane. He was educated from 1613 at Stirling grammar school and graduated MA in 1621 after four years' study under Robert Blair at the University of Glasgow. Despite his father's wish for him to live as a country gentleman, he decided to study theology at St Andrews and was licensed to preach in 1625. He acted as assistant in the parish of Torphichen from 1626 until told by the presbytery to leave in October 1627, and was afterwards chaplain to the earl and countess of Wigtown until August 1630. He was in great demand as a preacher: famously in June 1630 his sermon at Shotts, Lanarkshire, was said to have affected five hundred people. 
Despite his popularity Livingstone's steadfast refusal to promise obedience to the five articles of Perth prevented his receiving ordination in Scotland, so in 1630 he travelled to Ireland, a country with which he was to keep close links during the following two decades. Livingstone was ordained by some Scottish ministers under the presidency of Andrew Knox, bishop of Raphoe, and he became minister at Killinchy in co. Down. In May 1632 he was suspended for nonconformity by the bishop of Down, but according to his memoirs was restored in May 1634 on the intervention of the lord deputy, Viscount Wentworth. In November of the following year Livingstone was deposed again and subsequently excommunicated. He turned instead to America, leaving Ireland in September 1636 with a number of Scots and English presbyterians and independents, but this venture was soon forced to turn back because of severe weather in the Atlantic. 
Livingstone often returned to Scotland during the 1630s, and in Edinburgh on 23 June 1635 he was married by his father to Janet (died 1693), eldest daughter of Bartholomew Fleming, a merchant, and his wife, Marion Hamilton. Although necessity often meant they were separated in the years ahead, theirs seems to have remained a close marriage. They had eight sons and seven daughters, of whom three sons and four daughters survived childhood. 
When the national covenant was signed in March 1638 Livingstone was sent to London with copies for friends at court. In July of that year he was inducted to the parish of Stranraer, where his preaching proved as popular as it had been in the 1620s. He was a member of the Glasgow general assembly of 1638, and of all subsequent assemblies until 1650 with the exception of 1640, when he travelled as the earl of Cassillis's regiment chaplain to Newcastle. 
Livingstone participated most actively in national church affairs in the 1640s and 1650s. He and others who had been in Ireland formed the core of an extreme party, which demanded the abolition of some traditional forms of worship. In 1648 the general assembly sent him to try to dissuade Scottish troops in Ulster (where he had continued to officiate during summer months) from joining the army then being raised in support of the engagement. In August of that year he was translated to the parish of Ancrum, Roxburghshire. 
Livingstone was one of the commissioners appointed by the church to treat with Charles II at Breda in 1650 and he received the king's oath of fidelity to the covenants before Charles was permitted to land in Scotland. Despite having performed this office, Livingstone soon afterwards joined the party who opposed the king's coronation. In October 1651 he was elected moderator of a meeting of protesters (who rejected the government's view that those who had taken part in the engagement might be allowed to serve in the army), but he withdrew from their discussions when he found he could not modify their extremist views. In 1654 Cromwell sent for Livingstone and two other protesters in an attempt to secure co-operation in introducing a new system for managing the Scottish church. 
After the Restoration Livingstone was called before the privy council, on 11 December 1662, and on refusing to take the oath of allegiance was banished. In April 1663 he arrived in Rotterdam, and he spent the remainder of his life there, occasionally preaching in the Scottish church and devoting himself to theological study and correspondence with Dutch theologians. He also met other exiled presbyterian stalwarts, such as Robert McWard, John Brown, and Robert Traill. His wife and two of their younger children (one of whom died in Rotterdam) joined him in exile. 
While in Rotterdam, Livingstone did not shirk involvement in religious disputes. In February 1670 the Quakers John Swinton and George Keith attempted to speak to a number of exiled ministers. Livingstone was the only one who would speak to them, though he refused to allow them to enter his house and denounced them for their lack of respect and 'blasphemous' writings. He continued to exhort his former congregation in Ancrum to avoid contact with the Quakers in a letter written from Rotterdam in October 1671, and also dipped into the debate about indulgences. He was more humble than his fellow exiles McWard and Brown, however, admitting that 'None of us who are here, and seem to be dissatisfied with some things at Home, want conviction of our own grievous miscarriages' (Livingstone, 'Letter', 15-16). Most of Livingstone's diverse writings -- including his autobiography, written in Rotterdam -- were gathered together and published by the Wodrow Society in 1845. A noted linguist, Livingstone worked on Latin biblical texts while in exile, but he never published them. He also assisted McWard and the Dutch theologian Matthias Nethenus with the publication of Samuel Rutherford's 'Examen Arminianismi' in 1668. 
Despite his continuing interest in theological debate, Livingstone was by this time clearly in poor health. He complained of gravel in the bladder from 1667 and it became so severe that he had to take a house nearer the church so that he could attend the services on Sundays. He died aged sixty-nine in Rotterdam on 9 August 1672 and was buried there five days later in the 'French Church' (probably the chapel of St Sebastian, where the Scots worshipped). His wife went back to Edinburgh; and herself a strong supporter of the presbyterian cause, in 1674 presented with others a petition to the Scottish privy council asking that nonconforming ministers should have greater liberty to preach. She returned to Rotterdam in 1679 to live with their daughter Janet (died 1696), who had married the notable Rotterdam merchant Andrew Russell, and died there in 1693. Most of her children went into the merchant trade, including William (1638-1700), a merchant in Edinburgh who moved to Rotterdam in 1682 and was appointed clerk to the Edinburgh kirk sessions after the revolution of 1688, and Robert (1654-1725), an American merchant who established the merchant dynasty of Livingston Manor, New York. 
Livingstone was remembered by contemporaries as a gifted presbyterian preacher and theologian. Matthias Nethenus described him as 'most learned, most industrious and most zealous in the cause of God' (S. Rutherford, 'Examen Arminianismi', 1668, preface), and Robert McWard affectionately recalled his fellow exile as a 'burning and shining light, worthy and warme' (MS, Scot Church, Rotterdam). 


@@@@@


doc= 16810


Livingstone, Thomas, Viscount Teviot (c.1651-1711), army officer, was born in the Netherlands, the elder of the two sons of Sir Thomas Livingstone (died 1673), who was created a baronet by Charles I, and was colonel of a regiment of foot in the Dutch service. His mother, Gertrat, was the daughter of Captain Thomas Edmond. He succeeded his father as second baronet in 1673. Having followed his father into the Dutch service, he acquired military reputation as an officer in the 3rd Scottish regiment in the Anglo-Dutch brigade. By 1688 he was lieutenant-colonel of Balfour's foot regiment and went to England with William of Orange in that year. On 31 December 1688 he was appointed colonel of the Royal regiment of Scots dragoons (later the Royal Scots Greys). Livingstone was already well known in the regiment from his numerous visits to Scotland when recruiting for the Anglo-Dutch brigade. The regiment (not to be confused with the Royal regiment of Scots horse, afterwards disbanded) was in England at the time, and its colonel, Charles Murray, first earl of Dunmore, had refused to serve against King James. Livingstone served in Scotland under General Hugh Mackay, and when in command at Inverness, by forced marches with a body of horse and dragoons, surprised and completely routed the Jacobite forces under General Thomas Buchan at Cromdale, on 1 May 1690. The engagement put an end to the resistance of the clans. Livingstone succeeded General Mackay as commander-in-chief in Scotland, and was sworn of the privy council. On 1 January 1696 he became major-general on the English establishment, and on 4 December 1696 was created Viscount Teviot in the peerage of Scotland. 
Livingstone married Macktellina Walrave de Nimmeguen (died 1729), from whom he appears to have separated about 1701. She pursued him in the Scottish courts in November 1703 for the sum of $500, to pay her debts contracted since he left her, and alimony at the rate of $400 per annum. The lords of session 'recommended, under the circumstances of the case, to cause pay her bygone debts, and to settle somewhat upon the lady yearly with the time coming, and to treat with the viscount to that effect' (J. Lauder, Lord Fountainhall, 'Decisions of the Lords of Council and Session', 1759-61, 2.200). As a result probably of this litigation, Teviot sold the colonelcy of the Scots Greys on 7 April 1704 to Lord John Hay. In the great seal registers are charters of resignation by him of the lands of Lethington on 23 June 1702, and of the lands of Waughton on 26 July 1709. Teviot became a lieutenant-general on 1 January 1704. He died in London, aged sixty, on 14 January 1711, when, his having no male heirs, the viscountcy became extinct, and the family baronetcy devolved on his brother, Sir Alexander Livingstone, third baronet. Teviot was buried on 24 February in Westminster Abbey, where his brother erected to his memory a sumptuous monument on the north side of the nave. By his will, dated 27 September 1710, he left his house and estate, known as Livingstone House, Wimbledon, Surrey, with furniture, plate, and other effects, to Lady Elizabeth Gordon, daughter of Charles Gordon, second earl of Aboyne. The lady, at this time a child, died unmarried in 1770. The remainder of his property went to his brother, Sir Alexander, except a legacy of $1000 to his cousin german John Cornelius Edmond, then residing in the Netherlands. 


@@@@@


doc= 16811


Livingston, William, sixth Lord Livingston (d. 1592), nobleman, was the second son of Alexander Livingston, fifth Lord Livingston (died in or before 1553), and his wife, Lady Agnes Douglas, daughter of John Douglas, second earl of Morton. His parents were guardians of Mary, queen of Scots, when she was a child, and his sister Mary Livingston became one of the queen's famous attendants, the four Queen's Maries. The Livingston lands lay in Linlithgowshire and Stirlingshire and included Kilsyth and Falkirk, as well as Callendar House, the family's principal residence. William succeeded to these, and to his father's titles in 1553, and about that time married Agnes, daughter of Malcolm Fleming, third Lord Fleming. Their eldest son was the politician and courtier Alexander Livingstone. Livingston was a protestant, but nevertheless when Mary, queen of Scots, returned to Scotland from France in 1561 he became one of her most loyal supporters, entertaining her at Callendar House on various occasions. On Sunday 1 July 1565, for instance, Mary was present at the christening of one of his seven children there, and although he declined to attend her mass on 2 February 1566, he was one of the few protestants to accept an invitation to the Roman Catholic baptism of her son, the future James VI and I, at Stirling on 17 December 1566. 
Livingston was present during many of the dramatic events of Mary's life. He was with her in the little supper room in the palace of Holyroodhouse on the evening of 9 March 1566 when her husband, Lord Darnley, and his fellow conspirators burst in to murder her secretary, David Riccio. On 13 January 1567 Mary spent the night at Callendar House on her way from Stirling to Edinburgh with her infant son, and she was back less than a fortnight later, when she rode to Glasgow to visit Darnley, who was lying ill there. One of the notorious casket letters describes how Livingston teased her that evening. She allegedly wrote that Livingston: 'at supper sayd softly to me when I was leaning upon him and warming myself, 'You may well go and see sick folk, yet can you not be so welcome unto them as you have this day left somebody in pain'. (Henderson, 135)' The letters are generally believed to be forgeries but even so, this passage with its unpleasant innuendo was probably not a complete invention, but rather an exaggerated account of a relationship which, while entirely innocent, was indeed one of close and friendly informality.Three days later Mary and her husband spent the night at Callendar on their way back to Kirk o'Field, just outside Edinburgh's city walls, where Darnley was to convalesce. When he was murdered shortly afterwards Mary's enemies alleged that she had deliberately lured him to his death, and she made matters worse by marrying James Hepburn, fourth earl of Bothwell, generally believed to be the principal assassin. Livingston was a guest at their wedding on 15 May 1567. He may have been unhappy with its disastrous consequences, for he was not with the queen when she surrendered to her rebellious lords at Carberry Hill. During her imprisonment in Lochleven Castle, however, Livingston was one of a deputation who went to the regent Moray to plead for her release. The request was refused, but when Mary finally managed to escape from Lochleven, Livingston rode at once with his vassals to join her at Niddrie Castle, and accompanied her to Hamilton. Present in her army at the battle of Langside in 1568, he was one of the three lords who led her away when it became obvious that her forces would be defeated, and he went with her when she escaped to England. 
Livingston remained with Mary in England for almost two years, and his wife, Agnes Fleming, was allowed to join him. He was one of Mary's commissioners at her first trial in York in October 1568, and throughout her years of imprisonment he continued to be active in her cause. He was in Scotland in July 1570 on her behalf, and in 1571 he visited France, staying in Paris during the St Bartholomew's day massacre in the following year. Lady Livingston was allowed to return to Callendar House in 1572, and took the opportunity of passing on secret correspondence between the queen's various friends. As a result, she was imprisoned for two months. 
Livingston was finally allowed to go home to Scotland after Edinburgh Castle fell to James VI's supporters in May 1573. He was made a member of the Scottish privy council in March 1575, but his influence had waned because of his identification with Mary's cause. He was among the lords who advised the young James VI to start ruling for himself in 1577, became a friend of James's favourite, Esme Stewart, first duke of Lennox, and was rumoured to be a Roman Catholic in his later years. His last known public act was to serve on the jury which convicted the first earl of Gowrie of treason in 1584. Livingston's signature appears on a family charter dated 18 October 1592, but he was dead by 29 November. He was buried in the churchyard at Falkirk. 


@@@@@


doc= 16812


Livinus (supp. d. 633?), missionary, is patron of St Lievens-Esse and St Lievens-Houtem in Belgium and is sometimes known as 'the Apostle of Brabant'. All information about him, which is late and of dubious reliability, derives from the church of St Bavo at Ghent, to where his relics were translated in 1007. These include a verse and epitaph, attributed to 'Livinus archiepiscopus' and allegedly composed for Flobert, abbot of Ghent, which are now recognized to be eleventh-century works. Livinus is named in a letter by Abbot Othelbald to Countess Otgiva (dated to between 1019 and 1024) which lists the saints buried at Ghent. His life is recounted in a 'Vita sancti Livini', composed between 1025 and 1058 (probably 'c'.1050), and there is a 'translatio' describing the events of 1007, composed after 1066. Finally, a number of late chronicles, especially the fourteenth-century 'Annales sancti Bavonis Gandensis', refer to Livinus. 
The biographical information supplied by these Ghent sources may be summarized as follows. He was regarded as being of Irish (or perhaps Scottish) origin: 'episcopus de Scotia' or 'genere Scotus et Hiberniae archiepiscopus'. He was born during the reign of a Colman (Cologmagnus or Calomagnus), king of the 'Scoti', to a 'dux' of the 'Scoti' called Theagnius and mother Agalmia (Agalinia or Agalunia), daughter of an Irish king Ephigenius. His birth was prophesied by the Irish holy man Menalchius and he was subsequently baptized by Menalchius and by Augustine, apostle of the Anglo-Saxons. Following his education by a priest of the 'Scoti' of noble birth called Benignus (Benen), he spent a period of solitude with three disciples, called Foillanus (Faelan), Helias, and Kilianus, before travelling to the continent as a missionary. Having made a token visit to Ghent during the abbacy of Flobert, the party arrived at Esse. Eventually, Livinus was killed there by two brothers Walbertus and Meinzo (or Menizo), along with a noblewoman Chraphildis (whose blind son Livinus had previously cured) and St Brictius, 'the infant', and all three are said to have been buried at Houtem. The Ghent annals describe the saint's arrival and subsequent martyrdom 'sub anno' 633. Furthermore, his relics are said to have been 'elevated' by Theodoric, bishop of Cambrai, in 842, and were formally moved to Ghent in 1007. The annals also record a 'translatio prima' in 1083 by Radbod, bishop of Noyon, and Wichmann, abbot of Ghent, and a 'translatio secunda' in 1171 by Gautier, bishop of Tournai. 
All this information can probably be dismissed as eleventh-century Ghent ecclesiastical propaganda and tells little, if anything, about a historical personage called Livinus. Indeed, it has been noted that Livinus (Lieven or Lievin in the vernacular) shares his feast day (12 November) with the Anglo-Saxon missionary saint Lebuin (also known as Leofwine or Livinus) of Deventer in Holland. The evident similarity of their names, plus the fact that in the tenth century Count Wichmann of Hamaland (incorporating Deventer as well as Houtem and Esse) was also the Burggraf of Ghent, may even suggest that Livinus is simply a doublet of Lebuin, attached to Esse and Houtem and subsequently appropriated by Ghent, and that his Irish origin was merely inspired by the tradition of Irish 'peregrini' (pilgrim monks) on the continent. 


@@@@@


doc= 16813


Livio, Tito, dei Frulovisi (fl. 1429-1456), humanist and historian, was born in Ferrara, probably after 1400. Educated in Venice and Padua, he became a notary but by 1429 he was running a school in Venice in the parish of San Basso and was also described as a physician. In the early 1430s he wrote three Latin comedies, which were heavily influenced by readings of the classical playwrights but which drew themes from contemporary life and raised many hackles. He left Venice in 1433-4, travelling via Florence, Rome, Capua, and Naples, where he began his 'De republica'; returning to Venice in 1434-5 he once again caused outbursts by two new satirical plays. He fled to Candia (Crete) and Rhodes before coming to England, probably in 1436. He subsequently claimed to have been attracted thence by the fame of Henry V in arms and of Humphrey, duke of Gloucester, in letters, but it seems more likely that he was recommended to the latter by Piero da Monte, the papal envoy. 
In the duke's service Livio assisted with formal Latin correspondence and composed Latin plays ('Peregrinatio' and 'Eugenius'). In letters of denization granted at Humphrey's request on 7 March 1437, he is described as the duke's 'poeta et orator'. His employment did not prove permanent; he seems to have made enemies in the duke's circle and may have been dismissed. In 1438-9 he approached the chancellor of England, John Stafford, bishop of Bath and Wells (died 1452), for a post in royal service, or, failing that, for financial assistance to return to Italy. Monte secured for him a papal sub-collectorship in England but he did not take up the post, being faced with a charge of defamation by John Gele, another naturalized Englishman who held a canonry at Lubeck. His letter of 'c'.1442 to fellow humanist Pier Candido Decembrio suggests that he was afterwards in Milan, which he left because he was 'nauseated by princes' ('Opera', xiv), and then Toulouse, where he received the degrees of doctor of physic and arts, and that he had moved to Barcelona by 1442. Decembrio urged him to lead a quiet life and to earn money. By 1456 he was once more in Venice, practising as a doctor. The 'De orthographia' printed in Cologne under his name in 1480 is now thought unlikely to be his work. 
In addition to two plays, other compositions, all of which reveal contemporary humanist trends, are directly linked to Livio's time in England. The petition to Stafford takes the form of an encomium of sixty-three lines. Another Latin poem, the 'Humfroidos', celebrates Duke Humphrey's successes against Philip, duke of Burgundy, in 1436, and may have been commissioned by the duke or else written to please him. His most famous work, the 'Vita Henrici quinti' ('c'.1438), was probably commissioned by Humphrey in order to stimulate renewed interest in the French war, particularly on the part of Henry VI, to whom the work was addressed. The 'Vita' was intended to glorify the duke as well as his royal brother -- it begins with a panegyric on Gloucester, and devotes much space to his military prowess during the conquest of Normandy. Livio's precise contribution to Duke Humphrey's patronage of humanism in England is unclear; he was only one of several Italians in the duke's service, and his works have not enjoyed scholarly esteem. But his 'Vita Henrici quinti' still stands as an important and independent near contemporary account of Henry V's reign, being an early chronicle authority for the period from 1418 to 1422. It was undoubtedly a source for the Pseudo-Elmham chronicle, a longer work on Henry V written about 1445-6, which is also humanist in tone and connected with Gloucester's circle. The 'First English Life' of Henry V, composed in 1513-14, is essentially a translation of Livio's 'Vita', with additions drawn from Monstrelet, the 'Brut', and a now lost source connected with James Butler, fourth earl of Ormond (died 1452). 


@@@@@


doc= 16814


Lizars, John (1791/2-1860), surgeon, was born in Edinburgh, the son of Daniel Lizars (1760-1812) ['see under 'Lizars, William Home], a publisher and engraver, and his wife, Margaret Home. The painter and engraver William Home Lizars (1788-1859) was his brother. He was educated at Edinburgh high school and at Edinburgh University. He was taught surgery and surgical anatomy by John Bell, an eminent surgeon and extramural teacher, to whom he had been apprenticed. From 1810 he acted as surgeon on board a man-of-war commanded by Admiral Sir Charles Napier, and he saw active service on the Portuguese coast during the Peninsular War, under Lord Exmouth. After returning to his home city in 1814, he was elected a fellow of the Royal College of Surgeons of Edinburgh and became a partner in surgical practice with John Bell and Robert Allan. He was highly successful, first in partnership and afterwards alone, as a teacher of anatomy and surgery. In 1828 he joined the Brown Square School, and in 1831 he was appointed to succeed John Turner as professor of surgery in the Royal College of Surgeons. Lizars defeated James Syme for this post, which was the cause of lasting enmity between the two men. Lizars also became a senior operating surgeon in the Edinburgh Royal Infirmary. 
A bold and accomplished operator, Lizars was the first to ligate the innominate artery for aneurysm, the first to cut the deeper branches of the Trigeminus nerve for the relief of neuralgia, and the first Scottish surgeon to excise the upper jaw. His most famous work, 'A system of anatomical plates of the human body, accompanied with descriptions, and physiological, pathological, and surgical observations', was published in five folio volumes between 1822 and 1826. The many plates, beautifully engraved by his brother William under Lizars's close direction, were intended as a practical guide to dissection and were extensively used by medical students for several decades. In 1825 Lizars published 'Observations on Extraction of Diseased Ovaria', which dealt with four cases of ovariotomy, one of which had been successful. The patient survived despite Lizars's misdiagnosis of a tumour in the abdominal cavity, when in fact the 'swelling' was due to the woman's obesity. Lizars was, nevertheless, the first British surgeon to perform an ovariotomy. His suggestion that the operation should become part of the normal repertoire of the general surgeon was, however, controversial and damaged his reputation among his surgical colleagues. 
In 1838 Lizars published 'A System of Practical Surgery', which contained a bitter attack on James Syme, now professor of clinical surgery at the University of Edinburgh, accusing him of gross negligence in the course of an operation for anal fistula. Syme sued and won, albeit only with token damages. In 1839 the Royal College of Surgeons did not renew Lizars's appointment as professor of surgery, a move in which Syme's influence has been discerned. Lizars never held a public appointment again. In 1851, Lizars published a treatise on urethral stricture in which he criticized Syme's practice of external excision. Syme responded with a vehement attack on Lizars's personal and professional character. Lizars sued and lost, unfairly in the view of many contemporary observers. His private practice, already in difficulties from his bluntness of speech and considerable eccentricity of manner, declined. 
Lizars, who was married to Sarah, 'nee' McCraken, died suddenly on 21 May 1860, at his residence, 15 South Charlotte Street, Edinburgh, possibly due to an overdose of laudanum. He was buried in the West Church burial-ground, Edinburgh, and was survived by his wife. 


