@@@@@


doc= 16815


Lizars, William Home (1788-1859), painter and engraver, was born in Edinburgh on 4 May 1788, the son of 
William Home Lizars was educated at the Royal High School in Edinburgh. He was then apprenticed to his father, from whom he learned engraving, but in order to pursue his ambition to become a professional painter he entered the Trustees' Academy in Edinburgh, under John Graham. It is possible that at about this time he took painting lessons from Alexander Nasmyth. Certainly he was influenced by Nasmyth's emphasis on the importance of drawing, but his contemporary David Wilkie played a significant role in the development of his work. Indeed, Lizars's arresting portrait of an Edinburgh beggar, John Cowper (Fitzwilliam Museum, Cambridge), painted in 1808 when the artist was just twenty years old, was formerly attributed to Wilkie. Lizars's early promise was noticed, and the same year he received a commission to paint David Steuart Erskine, eleventh earl of Buchan. 
Between 1808 and 1815 Lizars exhibited portraits and genre paintings in Edinburgh. In 1812 he exhibited two works at the Royal Academy in London; 'Reading the will' and 'A Scotch Wedding' (both National Gallery of Scotland, Edinburgh) were hung on the line, where they were much admired, and both were later engraved. They illustrate clearly Lizars's skilful observation of character and still life. His use of dramatic lighting and anecdotal detail reveal his debt to seventeenth-century Dutch artists and Adriaen Brouwer in particular, a debt that he shared with David Wilkie (as was revealed when Wilkie tackled the same subjects a few years later). 
In the same year that Lizars achieved acclaim with these two works, his father died and, in spite of his recent success as a painter, he decided to concentrate on the business of engraving and copperplate printing in order to support his mother and family. With his artistic and printmaking background it is perhaps hardly surprising that Lizars proved to be a superb topographical draughtsman, etcher, and illustrator, and it is as an engraver that he subsequently became best known. The family firm, which he ran with his brother Daniel, was known variously as W. and D. Lizars or W. H. and D. Lizars. It produced a variety of printed material, including many illustrated maps, charts, anatomical plates, and Scottish scenes. Lizars perfected a method of copper-engraving which imitated the effect of wood-engraving and first used this for the frontispiece to J. G. Lockhart's 'Peter's Letters to his Kinfolk' in June 1819. An important illustrative project was reproducing the design of the architect Andrew Elliot for the national monument of Scotland and, together with Andrew Geddes and John Thomson, he recorded the Scottish regalia following their rediscovery in 1818. He also illustrated news events -- such as the fire in the Old Town of Edinburgh in 1824, and engraved paintings, such as Richard Dadd's 'Puck and the Fairies'. In 1826 Lizars met J. J. Audubon when he visited Edinburgh, and later he engraved the first ten plates of his 'Birds of America', the remainder being undertaken by the Havell firm in London. Early in their subsequently very successful careers Lizars employed two Glasgow artists, Horatio McCulloch and Daniel McNee, to hand-colour prints. 
Lizars was closely involved with the founding of the Royal Scottish Academy in 1826 and that year was appointed an associate engraver. In 1832 Lizars's company was declared bankrupt and the following year Daniel Lizars emigrated to Canada. William Home Lizars married, first, Eliza, whose portrait bust of 1852 by Patrick Park RSA (1811-1855) is in the collections of Aberdeen Art Gallery, and, second, Henrietta Wilson. He died in High Town, Galashiels, on 30 March 1859, leaving a widow and family, although this may not have been Henrietta. He was buried at St Cuthbert's churchyard, Edinburgh. The Scottish National Portrait Gallery, Edinburgh, houses several intimate studies by him in chalk and pencil, including depictions of the sculptor John Flaxman, the naturalist Sir William Jardine, and the agriculturist James Smith of Deanstone. 


@@@@@


doc= 16816


Llewelyn, Thomas (c.1720-1783), Particular Baptist minister, was born at Penalltau isaf, Gelli-gaer, Glamorgan, the son of a farmer, Evan Llewelyn. After embarking on the tailoring trade as a youth, he was baptized in 1738 in the Hengoed Baptist Church and trained for the Baptist ministry at Trosnant Academy, near Pontypool, in 1740, together with Morgan Edwards. He then studied at Bristol Baptist Academy under Bernard Foskett, and in London at the Independent academy under doctors Walker, Marriott, and Jennings. He was ordained at Prescott Street, Goodman's Fields, London, about 1747, but never took pastoral charge and was described as 'no preacher' (Swaine, 65). After securing financial independence through his marriage to Mary, he established an academy to train poor students for the Baptist ministry, where he taught from 1746 to 1770. He was presented with the degree of MA, and afterwards LLD, by the University of Aberdeen. 
Llewelyn played a major role in the promotion and distribution of the Welsh translation of the 'Bible'. To this end he published in 1768 'An Historical Account of the British and Welsh Versions and Editions of the Bible', translated into Welsh in 'Seren Gomer' (1815), and his 'Historical and Critical Remarks on the British Tongue' (1769). His work prompted the SPCK to publish 20,000 copies (8000 more than originally intended) of the Welsh 'Bible' in 1769. He also joined the Book Society for Promoting Religious Knowledge among the Poor in 1768 and prepared a list of congregations, of all denominations, to whom free copies of the Welsh 'Bible' might be sent. Both of his works demonstrate his classical scholarship, and his historical research has been used by subsequent writers on the history of the Welsh 'Bible'. Llewelyn was said to have been a descendant of Thomas Llewelyn of Rhigos, near Aberdar, who, it was claimed by Edward Williams (Iolo Morganwg), translated a portion of the 'Bible' into Welsh about 1540, twenty-seven years before William Salesbury's translation of the 'New Testament' was printed (B. H. Malkin, 'The Scenery, Antiquities, and Biography of South Wales', 2nd edn., 2 vols., 1807, 1.297). 
In 1776 Llewelyn took a prominent part in the establishment of a Baptist mission for north Wales. He was one of the first members of the Gwyneddigion Society of London, and was its president in 1775. He was also a great supporter of the School for Welsh Girls, subsequently located at Ashford in Middlesex. He lived for many years in Queen Square, Bloomsbury, but died in Castleton, Monmouthshire, on 7 August 1783. He was buried in Bunhill Fields. He gave generously to education, and in particular to the Baptist college in Rhode Island and to Bristol Baptist college, to which he left his library, valued at his death at $1500. 


@@@@@


doc= 16817


Lloyd, Bartholomew (1772-1837), college head, born at New Ross, co. Wexford, on 5 February 1772, was descended from a Welsh family which, about the end of the seventeenth century, settled in co. Wexford. He was the eldest son of Humphrey Lloyd (1735-1786), himself the son of the Revd Bartholomew Lloyd of the Abbey House of New Ross. His father died while he was still a boy, and an uncle, the Revd John Lloyd, rector of Ferns and Kilbride, to whose care he had been committed, did not long survive, so that he was left to struggle for himself. He entered Trinity College, Dublin, in 1787 as a pensioner. In 1790 he gained first scholarship, in 1792 graduated BA, and in 1796 obtained a junior fellowship on passing a remarkably high examination. He graduated MA in the same year, BD in 1805, and DD in 1808. In July 1799 he married Eleanor, daughter of Patrick McLaughlin of Dublin, and had a family of four sons and six daughters. 
In 1813 Lloyd was appointed Erasmus Smith's professor of mathematics at Trinity College, Dublin, on the resignation of William Magee, afterwards archbishop of Dublin. In 1822 came a further appointment, as Erasmus Smith's professor of natural and experimental philosophy in succession to William Davenport. His publications, 'A Treatise on Analytic Geometry' (1819) and 'An Elementary Treatise of Mechanical Philosophy' (1826), were not the result of original work. In both his chairs, however, he introduced radical change into the methods of teaching. Immediately after his appointment to the mathematics chair, he began to bring in the new analytical methods of French mathematics. In revolutionizing the curriculum, he has been reckoned 'the founder of the distinguished Dublin mathematical school of the nineteenth century' (McDowell and Webb, 159). His versatility and the wide range of his attainments are shown by the facts that in 1821 and again in 1823 and 1825 he was elected regius professor of Greek in the university, and in 1823 and again in 1827 Archbishop King's lecturer in divinity. His 'Discourses, Chiefly Doctrinal, Delivered in the Chapel of Trinity College, Dublin' were published in 1822. 
In 1831 Lloyd was elected provost of the college, in succession to Samuel Kyle. He embarked on a programme of academic reform including the foundation of new chairs, and alterations in the tenure of existing chairs to allow holders more opportunity to undertake advanced teaching and original work. A new undergraduate course in logic and ethics was introduced. His reorganization of the academic year and establishment of a division between pass and honours courses lasted for over a century. 
The magnetic observatory of the college was founded through Lloyd's influence. In 1835 he was appointed president of the Royal Irish Academy, in the affairs of which he took an active interest; and in the same year he acted as president of the British Association meeting at Dublin. His inaugural address dealt mainly with 'the correspondence of the objects of science with divine revelation'. His house in Dublin was a meeting place for men of science. Lloyd died suddenly in Dublin of apoplexy on 24 November 1837, and was buried in the chapel of his college. The Lloyd exhibitions were founded by subscription in 1839 in his memory. His eldest son, Humphrey Lloyd, became provost of Trinity College, Dublin, in 1867. 


@@@@@


doc= 16818


Lloyd, Sir Charles (c.1602-1661), royalist army officer, was the son of Sergeant-major Brochwel Lloyd of Moel-y-garth, Montgomeryshire, and his wife, Honoria, daughter of Sir Stephen Procter. He served in the Dutch army in the 1630s, where he showed his skill as a map maker and military engineer, and was an ensign by 1632. His abilities as an engineer were such that in April 1639 he was appointed engineer-in-chief and quartermaster-general for life of all fortifications in the British Isles, at 13's'. 4died per day. He was employed to repair the fortifications of Berwick upon Tweed in the winter of 1639-40 and served as a captain in the earl of Northumberland's regiment in the second bishops' war. 
In December 1641 parliament appointed Lloyd chief engineer and quartermaster-general with the army to serve in Ireland, at $1 10's'. per day. He went to Ireland, but when the civil war began returned to England and joined the royalist army. Oxford's fortifications were constructed under his direction in spring 1643 and he supervised the setting out of the camp at Culham in May. Lloyd took command of Sir Thomas Salusbury's regiment following his death in the summer of 1643. This was raised in Denbighshire and Flintshire and was then the largest of the king's foot regiments. It was part of the army during the campaign in 1643 which saw the capture of Bristol, the siege of Gloucester, and the first battle of Newbury. In October 1643 Lloyd was directed to supervise the fortification of Newport Pagnell, Buckinghamshire. He took part in the campaign in the west country in 1644 and on the army's return was appointed governor of Devizes in Wiltshire. He was knighted in Oxford on 8 December 1644. 
Lloyd was an active garrison commander, leading a raid on parliamentarian forces at Aldbourne, Wiltshire, in August 1645 and attempting to make Devizes more secure by firing or wrecking country houses nearby, including Bromham House. He was, however, wary of the reactions of local people. On 15 September 1645 Oliver Cromwell arrived with a detachment of the New Model Army and quickly occupied the town, forcing Lloyd and the garrison, which was said to number 300 men, to retire to the castle gatehouse. This was bombarded by Cromwell's artillery and Lloyd surrendered on 23 September 1645, attracting criticism from Sir Edward Walker for not having made a longer defence. He was given the use of three carriages to take his belongings to Worcester. 
In October 1654 Lloyd arrived at The Hague from England. He returned to England after the Restoration and petitioned for the resumption of the pay of 13's'. 4died per day granted him by Charles I. He was appointed chief engineer in 1660, but did not receive his salary and was forced to borrow money. Lloyd made his will on 8 March 1661 and died, apparently unmarried, at some point between then and 14 March when he was buried at St Margaret's, Westminster. His sister Blanch was his executor and residuary legatee and both she and his mother petitioned after his death for his arrears of pay. He was succeeded as chief engineer by his brother Sir Godfrey Lloyd. 


@@@@@


doc= 16819


Lloyd, Charles (1735-1773), politician and pamphleteer, was born in Westminster, the second son of Philip Lloyd (died 1735) of Grosvenor Street, Westminster, and Catherine Cade (died in or after 1773). His father, who eloped with his mother, an heiress with a fortune of $5000, in 1724, had represented Saltash since 1723 on the duke of Wharton's interest. By 1727, however, Lloyd had changed his political allegiance and was a firm friend of Sir Robert Walpole, a friendship which secured for him in 1730 the position of equerry to George II. Educated at Westminster School as a king's scholar, Charles Lloyd later graduated from Christ Church, Oxford (BA, 1758; MA, 1761). Through his elder brother, Philip Lloyd, who was tutor to George Grenville's sons, he entered the Grenville circle and gained early preferment. 
Lloyd was given the sinecure as receiver-general and paymaster of the band of gentlemen pensioners in March 1762 and a clerkship in the Treasury. He became George Grenville's private secretary in April 1763, and was soon entrusted with the patronage of the new administration, thereby establishing himself as Grenville's man of business. Rewarded with a further sinecure as the receiver of Gibraltar, he also became a member of the corporation of the Treasury borough of Orford, Suffolk. There can be little doubt that if Grenville had remained in power he would have found Lloyd a safe seat in the Commons. Lloyd also proved to be adept as a polemic administration penman and he attacked William Pitt's attempt to replace Grenville in 'The Anatomy of a Late Negotiation', published in September 1763. He also defended Grenville's actions over the prosecution of John Wilkes and the question of general warrants in 'A Defense of the Majority in the House of Commons on the Question Relating to General Warrants' (September 1764), in answer to Charles Townshend's pamphlet 'A Defense of the Minority in the House of Commons', published the previous month. Removed from his sinecures by Lord Rockingham following Grenville's surprising fall from office in July 1765, Lloyd became a successful and prolific political pamphleteer. 
In opposition Lloyd gave full vent to the Grenvillite suspicion that Lord Bute had brought down the administration in his pamphlet 'An Honest Man's Reasons for Declining to Take any Part in the New Administration' (July 1765), and when Grey Cooper defended Rockingham in September 1765 Lloyd answered with his 'A Critical Review of the New Administration' (December 1765). After Rockingham's own short-lived ministry fell in the summer of 1766, Lloyd elaborated upon the view that Lord Bute remained the puppet-master behind the throne in 'The History of the Late Minority Exhibiting the Conduct, Principles, and Views of that Party' (July 1766), a work which gave great offence to George III. When William Pitt succeeded Rockingham, and also accepted a peerage as the earl of Chatham, Lloyd reflected Grenville's own anger in the vicious 'An examination of the principles and boasted disinterestedness of a late right honourable gentleman' (August 1766), a pamphlet which portrayed Chatham as both corrupt and dictatorial. 
Eager to defend the measures of the Rockingham administration, Edmund Burke published a pamphlet in August 1766, which immediately provoked a response from Lloyd, 'A True History of a Late Short Administration', and prompted him to research, with Grenville's help, a much longer defence of Grenville's colonial policy. Published in December 1766, 'The Conduct of the Late Administration Examined' remains one of the best works justifying the 'Stamp Act'. Portraying Grenville as one of the few senior politicians who was above party, the work also damned Rockingham for repealing the 'Stamp Act', a political blunder, Lloyd argued, that would only increase American disobedience. 
The opposition intention of creating a united front against the Chatham-Grafton ministry was weakened in 1767 by Grenville's continued hostility towards Rockingham, and all hope of overthrowing the administration died when the followers of the duke of Bedford negotiated terms for their inclusion in the ministry in November 1767. Lloyd himself had tired of opposition and left Grenville's service that year to accept a government place as deputy teller of the exchequer. This did not prevent him, however, from publishing a passing shot at the Bedfordites in the 'Political Register', 'A word of parting to the grace the d(uke) of B(edford)' (December 1767), a work which greatly offended the duke. 
Whether Lloyd continued secretly to publish articles in the 'Political Register' throughout 1768 remains unknown, but he did remain close to Grenville and until the latter's death in 1770 continued to correspond with him on many of the political issues which would appear in that journal. After a long illness, Lloyd died in St Martin's parish, Westminster, on 22 January 1773. Unmarried, he left his estate, which was administered by his brother Philip, to his mother, Catherine Lloyd. 


@@@@@


doc= 16820


Lloyd, Charles (1748-1828), banker and philanthropist, was born in Edgbaston Street, Birmingham, on 22 August 1748, the second son of Sampson Lloyd (1727-1807) of Birmingham, iron manufacturer and banker and a member of the Society of Friends, and his second wife, Rachel (1712-1756), daughter of Nehemiah Champion of Bristol. He was at a school in Worcester run by a member of the society, Ephraim Goodere, and then entered the family manufacturing and banking business. His chief, and eventually only, concern was banking, as a partner in Taylors and Lloyds Bank (a forerunner of Lloyds Bank). On 13 May 1774 he married Mary (died 1821), daughter of James Farmer of Birmingham, with whom he had fifteen children. His eldest son, Charles Lloyd (1775-1839), was a poet associated with Samuel Taylor Coleridge and with Charles Lamb. 
Though his principles as a member of the Society of Friends debarred him from holding public office Lloyd was active in public activities in Birmingham, was a member of the board of commissioners, then responsible for local government, and helped to found the Birmingham General Hospital, where he served as treasurer for fifty years. In a wider field he went to London in 1775 to meet Benjamin Franklin, in the vain hope of persuading him to avoid war, and was actively concerned with the campaign to abolish the slave trade, his brother John Lloyd being a founder member of the Abolition Committee. 
Having studied the classics, in his spare time Lloyd composed verse translations of Homer and Horace, some of which were published. Inspired by Virgil's 'Georgics' he bought a farm at Olton, just outside Birmingham, and for thirty years he devoted one day a week to farming, which 'contributed, in conjunction with temperance and cheerfulness, to keep a naturally delicate constitution in health and vigour to a late period of his life' ('GM'). He died on 16 January 1828 at his residence, Bingley House, Birmingham, and was buried at the Quaker burial-ground at Bull Lane in the city. 


@@@@@


doc= 16821


Lloyd, Charles (1766-1829), dissenting minister and schoolmaster, was born at Llwynrhydowen, Cardiganshire, on 18 December 1766. He was the third son and fourth child of five born to David Lloyd (1724-1779), Presbyterian minister there, and his second wife, Letitia Lloyd of Llanfechan; a sister had been born in the first marriage. On his father's death his education for the ministry was undertaken by his uncle John Lloyd of Coedlannau. His uncle, however, provided only for his schooling in 1779-84 under David Davis (1745-1827), who had been his father's colleague; Lloyd thought Davis the superior of any teacher of classics who came after. 
In the autumn of 1784 Lloyd entered (with an exhibition of $10) the Presbyterian academy best known as Carmarthen but then at Swansea under Solomon Harries (1726-1785). Lloyd developed an aversion to Hebrew, which was Harries's principal interest, but believed that he profited from his instruction in mathematics. Harries was succeeded in 1785 by Josiah Rees (1749-1804), father of Thomas Rees (1777-1864), and Thomas Lloyd, son of Charles Lloyd's uncle John. William Howell (1740-1822) became theological tutor in 1786, and the other tutors established a grammar school preparatory to the academy, in which Charles Lloyd was appointed afternoon teacher. Among his fellow students was Lewis Loyd (1767-1858), who left the ministry for a highly successful career in banking and who was the father of Samuel Jones Loyd, first Baron Overstone. 
After leaving the academy in 1788 in ill health, Charles Lloyd went to Hotwells, near Bristol, where he received much kindness from John Wright MD (died 1794), and his brother Thomas Wright (died 1797), Presbyterian minister at Lewin's Mead, Bristol, who are among the few whom Lloyd, in his singular autobiography, exempts from censure. 
Through the influence of Nathaniel Philipps (1757?-1842), Presbyterian minister at Derby, Lloyd was elected minister, in August 1788, of the Oat Street congregation, Evesham, Worcestershire, with a stipend of $40. He was at this time a 'moderately high Arian'. He started a Sunday school and an evening service and increased his congregation from 40 to 200. He wished, however, to administer the sacraments without being ordained -- ordination was a matter of serious disagreement among Presbyterians and Unitarians at that time. When the congregation objected he consulted Joseph Priestley, then at Birmingham, who, to his surprise, urged him to be ordained. At length the congregation yielded, persuaded by the expense attending an ordination. Shortly afterwards Lloyd began to have doubts about infant baptism, and on 3 April 1790 proposed to omit this rite or resign; his resignation was at once accepted. 
Through Joshua Toulmin he was put in charge of a General Baptist congregation at Ditchling, Sussex, at a stipend of 60 guineas. There he received adult baptism, but refused to submit to the additional rite of imposition of hands, then usual among General Baptists; he also again declined ordination. He cultivated extempore preaching. At the beginning of 1792 he started a boarding-school and married in the following summer. Early in 1793 he left the ministry and moved his school to Exeter, where it flourished. His first pupil was John Kenrick, who described Lloyd as 'a good classical scholar, [who] grounded his pupils well... interesting them by his remarks on the authors.... But his temper was warm, and he corrected passionately. He was sensitive, and suspicious of affront.' 
Lloyd then turned farmer in 1799 on the small estate of Coedlannau Fawr, Cardiganshire, inherited from his brother Richard, who died on 27 September 1797 aged thirty-seven. His agricultural experiment, caught in the price instability of the war years, exhausted all his savings. By then he had abandoned his Arian position for Unitarianism and would have been glad to act as colleague in the congregation at Llwynrhydowen, which had been his father's, but the pastor, his old schoolmaster David Davis, opposed the election of a Socinian Baptist. By this time, however, he had rejected the rite of baptism in any form, as an institution necessary only in the apostolic age. A secession from the chapel in 1801 resulted in the founding of two small chapels at Capel-y-groes (with a membership of eighty) and Pantydefaid (with a membership of sixty); they chose Lloyd as their minister. His stay in Cardiganshire did not last long. Leaving his congregations to the care of John James (1779-1864), he settled in 1803 in Palgrave, Suffolk, undertaking a school and the charge of a Presbyterian congregation, which he held from 5 April 1803 to 4 October 1811. In 1809 he received the degree of LLD from the University of Glasgow. His first wife, Letty, with whom he had several children, died at Palgrave on 11 December 1808. From a second marriage, to Sara Maria Smith, he had a son, Francis Vaughan ('b'. 1811). 
From Palgrave Lloyd moved to London, where for many years he kept a school in Keppel Street, Russell Square. He died on a visit to relatives near Lampeter, Cardiganshire, on 23 May 1829, and was buried at Llanwenog. 
Lloyd published relatively little: 'Two Sermons on Christian Zeal' (1808), 'Observations on the Choice of a School' (1812), 'Travels at Home' (1814), and a version of the epistles of St Paul and St James 'by Philalethes', identified by John Kentish as Lloyd. Even as a controversialist, he put little in print. One dispute is the overlong exchange in the 'Monthly Repository' at the end of 1813 and the beginning of 1814, over the translation of 'Acts' 20: 28, between Lloyd and John Jones (1766?-1827); Lloyd is said to have played cards with Jones and quarrelled with him every evening. In 'The 'Monthly Repository' Extraordinaire' (1819) he took Robert Aspland to task for his attack on Thomas Paine's 'Age of Reason', which had just been republished by Richard Carlile, though Aspland had conceded Carlile's right to publish. 
Lloyd's fame will rest on his anonymous autobiography, 'Particulars of the Life of a Dissenting Minister... Written by Himself' (1813), an edition with only a few surviving copies because Lloyd subsequently tried to suppress it; but the book was reprinted in 1911, with marginal identifications by the Revd R. T. Jenkins of some of the nameless targets of Lloyd's abuse. Alexander Gordon ('DNB') refers to the impression given by the book of 'an acute and honest, though jaundiced mind', while Robert Brook Aspland, commenting on Lloyd's unsparing characterization of the Evesham congregation, refers to his 'sickness of heart and a temper soured by disappointment' ('Christian Reformer', new ser., 8, 1852, 618). Some of the portraits with which the book ends are harsh beyond any deserving, notably of Timothy Kenrick (1759-1804) and John Jones. Yet the book abounds in insights and offers a pathetic, even tragic, depiction of failure. 


@@@@@


doc= 16822


Lloyd, Charles (1784-1829), bishop of Oxford, was born at West Wycombe, Buckinghamshire, on 26 September 1784, the second son and third of seven children of Thomas Lloyd (1745-1815), a clergyman and schoolmaster, and his wife, Elizabeth (1760-1814), an illegitimate daughter of Nathaniel Ryder, first Baron Harrowby ['see under 'Ryder, Sir Dudley (1691-1756)]. His father, who had been nominated by Ryder to the rectory of Aston-sub-Edge, Gloucestershire, ran a successful private school at Peterley House, Great Missenden, the seat of Lord Dormer. After tuition by his father, Charles went to Eton College in 1800 as a colleger, supported by foundation scholarships to pay tuition and board. In 1803 he matriculated from Christ Church, Oxford, where he was nominated to a studentship by the dean, Cyril Jackson, who exerted a strong influence on Lloyd's early career. 
After gaining first place in the Oxford honours list in 1806 (graduating BA in 1806, MA in 1809, BD in 1818, and DD in 1821), Lloyd left Oxford to serve as private tutor to the children of Lord Elgin at Dunfermline, but within a year was summoned back to Oxford by Dean Jackson, who needed a mathematics tutor. One of Lloyd's first assignments was to prepare Robert Peel for his examinations; Peel attributed his double first to the teaching of Lloyd, who was in later life 'a friend and counsellor', corresponding with him on various political matters and probably influencing his views on currency. Daily correspondence of another Christ Church undergraduate, G. R. Chinnery, suggests that Lloyd was an extraordinarily attentive and effective tutor. He served for several years as librarian and censor of Christ Church, but his most important contribution was a pedagogical zeal which helped to extricate Oxford from the slough of 'port and prejudice' denounced by Gibbon. 
Ordained in 1808, Lloyd held the curacies of Drayton (1810) and Binsey (1818), both near Oxford. In June 1819 he was appointed under Peel's influence to the preachership of Lincoln's Inn, which he held until February 1822 when, on the nomination of Lord Liverpool, he was appointed to the regius professorship of divinity at Oxford, to which was attached a canonry at Christ Church and the rectory of Ewelme. On 15 August 1822 he married Mary Harriet (died 1857), daughter of Colonel John Stapleton of Thorpe Lee, Surrey, and within four years they had a family of one son and three daughters. 
As regius professor Lloyd revived theological studies in the university and was regarded as: 'if not the founder of a new school, at least the infuser of a new and more energetic spirit' ('GM', 561). He supplemented his statutory public lectures with private classes attended by graduates, who included R. H. Froude, J. H. Newman, Frederick Oakeley, and E. B. Pusey (it was on Lloyd's suggestion that Pusey went to Germany to study its theology). Lloyd's revelation of the ancient roots and historical development of the Anglican liturgy and dogma influenced a generation of Oxford theologians, many of his liturgical notes being incorporated into William Palmer's 'Origines liturgicae' (1832). An abstract of his lectures was later published in E. S. Ffoukes's 'A History of the Church of S. Mary, Oxford' (1892). Short, stocky, and prematurely bald, Lloyd was remembered for informally bantering with, and occasionally bullying, the attenders at his private lectures. For a wider clerical readership he published a collection of 'Formularies of Faith Put Forth by Authority during the Reign of Henry VIII' (1825). 
On 4 March 1827 Lloyd was consecrated bishop of Oxford, to which position he had been nominated through Peel's influence. He retained his professorship, continuing to deliver lectures while coping with the considerable problems of pluralism and non-residence in the diocese of Oxford. As a member of the House of Lords Lloyd was confronted with the contentious question of Catholic emancipation. Although he held traditional high-church views hostile to Catholic civil liberties, he had given a favourable assessment of Roman Catholic doctrines in an essay for the 'British Critic' (October 1825). Admitting that some Roman Catholics practised idolatry, he insisted that none of Rome's historical documents or public formularies supported the worship of images. By 1829, however, the Catholic question turned on practical politics rather than religious principles, and he joined Peel in supporting Catholic relief, though he mishandled Peel's unsuccessful candidature for re-election to the Oxford seat (February 1829). During the Lords' debates on emancipation he delivered an important speech in favour of reform (2 April 1829), a stand which made him a favourite scapegoat of defeated conservatives. Shortly afterwards George IV snubbed him at a public function. 
Mentally distressed and physically fatigued, Lloyd attended an anniversary dinner at the Royal Academy at Somerset House, where he caught a cold that lingered and worsened. He died of pneumonia on 31 May 1829 at the house in Whitehall Place, London, which he had rented for the summer season. Two days later he was given a private funeral in Lincoln's Inn chapel, and was interred in the Benchers' vault. 
Of all the posthumous accolades, J. H. Newman's comment was most heartfelt and appropriate: 'He brought me forward, made me known, spoke well of me, and gave me confidence in myself' ('Letters and Correspondence', 1.209). Later interest in Lloyd has been stimulated as studies of Peel, Tractarianism, and of the revival of liturgical and ecclesiological scholarship have come to show his importance in the academic life of early nineteenth century Oxford. 


@@@@@


doc= 16823


Lloyd, Charles (1775-1839), poet, was born in Birmingham, on 12 February 1775, the eldest son of Charles Lloyd (1748-1828), the Quaker banker and philanthropist, and his wife, Mary Farmer (1751?-1821). He was educated privately, and was intended to have entered his father's bank, but he found this unpalatable, as he did the medical studies he briefly attempted at Edinburgh. His first published volume of poems appeared in Carlisle in 1795, and in the following year he met Coleridge when the latter visited Birmingham to enlist subscribers to his newspaper, 'The Watchman'. He was so attracted by Coleridge's conversation that he offered to pay him $80 a year, in return for staying with him and having the benefit of his conversation. They lived together in Kingsdown, Bristol, and Lloyd came to know others in radical and literary circles in that city, including Robert Southey and Joseph Cottle. At the close of 1796 Lloyd accompanied Coleridge and his wife to Nether Stowey. Coleridge's sonnet 'To a Friend', on the birth of his son Hartley, and his lines 'To a Young Man of Fortune', are probably addressed to Lloyd. The latter had already printed at Bristol, for publication in London, a volume of elegiac verse to the memory of his grandmother Priscilla Farmer, with an introductory sonnet by Coleridge, and concluded by 'The Grandam' of Charles Lamb, to whom Lloyd had been introduced by Coleridge. Almost immediately after his arrival at Nether Stowey, Lloyd was attacked by fits, the precursors of his subsequent depressive illness. He remained with the Coleridges until the summer of 1797, and in the autumn of that year all the poems which he wanted to preserve were added by Cottle, along with poems by Charles Lamb, to a second edition of Coleridge's poems. But Coleridge did not think well of this publication, and ridiculed its contents in sonnets signed Nehemiah Higginbottom in the 'Monthly Magazine' (November 1797). 
In the turbulent political climate prevailing in the aftermath of the French Revolution, Lloyd's association with a notable radical like Coleridge made him the object of attacks by conservative publicists -- understandably, when one of the blank-verse poems that he published with Lamb in 1798 celebrated '
the promis'd time... when equal man 

Shall deem the world his temple 
('Blank Verse', 1798, 12-13)' He and Lamb figure in Gillray's famous cartoon illustrating Canning's satire on revolutionary sympathizers, 'The New Morality', appearing there as a toad and a frog. Lloyd was anxious to rid himself of this reputation, and defended his respectability in a 'Letter to the Anti-Jacobin Reviewers'. He reinforced this, in 1799, with some 'Lines Suggested by the Fast... February 27th 1799', where he censured the modern 'spirit of insubordination', and helpfully included in a footnote a quotation from a similar satire by Lamb. Partly with the same purpose, and with Southey's encouragement, he had published in the previous year an epistolary novel, 'Edmund Oliver', a polemic against William Godwin's radical views on marriage, and on the rule of reason over the passions. Although poor as a novel, it gives some insight into contemporary moral and political controversies. It also draws on Coleridge's experiences as a private soldier in a way that Coleridge felt was a betrayal of confidence. This, and Lloyd's resentment at the Higginbottom sonnets, led to an estrangement. 
In 1798 Lloyd was admitted to Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge, and made the acquaintance of Thomas Manning, who was giving private tuition in mathematics. On 24 April 1799 he married Sophia Pemberton. They lived for a time at Barnwell, near Cambridge, but in late November 1800 moved into Old Brathay, a house near Ambleside, where they saw much of the Wordsworths, Southey, and (later) Thomas De Quincey. At first he appeared enviably happy, with no financial anxieties thanks to his wealthy father, and a growing number of children (eventually five sons and four daughters). Sophia herself, De Quincey maintained, was 'as a wife and mother unsurpassed by anybody I have known in either of those characters' (De Quincey, 259). But from 1811 Lloyd began to suffer from distressing auditory illusions, and a serious illness occurred in July 1813. 
For some years Lloyd was engaged in translating Ovid's 'Metamorphoses', and in 1815 published a translation of Alfieri's plays, a project which De Quincey suggests he undertook to divert his mind from the threat of the onset of insanity. He also wrote, and printed privately at Ulverston, a novel, entitled 'Isabel', which was published in 1820; it has remained almost unknown. Meanwhile he was removed to the Quaker psychiatric hospital in York. If De Quincey is to be believed, he was not well treated there, and he escaped some time in 1818, and found his way back to De Quincey's cottage in Grasmere. 
Lloyd now entered on a period of relative health. He himself attributed this to the healing effect of a performance by W. C. Macready in a stage adaptation of Scott's 'Rob Roy', which moved him in a way that recalls the emotional release described by John Stuart Mill in his account of recovery from depression. He became quite productive, publishing a collection of his poems under the title of 'Nugae canorae' (1819); 'Desultory Thoughts in London' (1821); 'Poetical Essays on the Character of Pope' (1821); 'The Duke d'Ormond' (1822), a tragedy published with 'Beritola', a metrical tale; and a small volume of poems (1823). But from this time he was silent, and evidently his disabling depression returned. He eventually went to France, and died in a 'maison de sante' at Chaillot, near Versailles, on 16 January 1839. His wife had predeceased him on 7 August 1830. 
Although Lloyd's life touched several of the older generation of English Romantic writers, his own work is mainly of historical interest. Lamb thought his poetry obscure ('not to be understood reading on one leg') but ''sinuous', and to be won with wrestling' ('Letters of Charles Lamb', 2.402, autumn 1823). As for De Quincey, whose account of Lloyd in 'Recollections of the Lake Poets' is the fullest contemporary assessment that we have, he declared that Lloyd was 'amongst the most interesting men I have known' (p. 258). But this is hardly apparent from Lloyd's published writings. 


@@@@@


doc= 16824


Lloyd, Charles Dalton Clifford (1844-1891), magistrate and diplomatist, was born in Portsmouth on 13 January 1844, the eldest son of Colonel Robert Clifford Lloyd (1809-1863) of the 68th Durham light infantry, and his wife, Annie Savage (died 1908). Both his grandfather, Bartholomew Lloyd, and his uncle, Humphrey Lloyd, had been provosts of Trinity College, Dublin. 
Lloyd was educated at the Royal Military College, Sandhurst and, in 1862, entered the police force in British Burma, where he rose through the ranks as assistant, deputy commissioner, and finally inspector-general of registration. On 30 April 1867 he married Isabel Henrietta Browne; they returned to Britain in 1872. On 3 July 1872 he entered Lincoln's Inn, London, and on 16 February 1874 he was appointed resident magistrate for co. Down, in Ireland. He was called to the bar in Trinity term, 1875. 
The battle conducted by the Land League on behalf of tenant farmers against rack rents and extortion by landlords resulted in non-payment of rent, riots, and agrarian crime throughout the country. W. E. Forster (then Irish secretary) quickly moved Lloyd from co. Down to the south of the country. Lloyd managed to restore order during riots in Longford and was seen by his supporters as having displayed energy and discretion in his role. His detractors, however, saw him as being 'cruel and despotic' (Townshend, 138-40). 
Lloyd began a campaign to break the resistance of tenants to payment of rent in the counties of Cork and Limerick. This he did by extending both his powers and those of the Royal Irish Constabulary, ostensibly within the bounds of the ordinary law. He was a staunch unionist and favoured the decentralization of the Irish administrative system. He was opposed to the use of emergency measures since he felt these would undermine the authority of the union. He therefore extended the interpretation of the 'Riot Act' so far that people could be arrested on the merest suspicion of criminality. On 20 May 1881, amid mass hysteria, he arrested Father Sheehy and other members of the league under the 'Protection of Person and Property Act'. 
Ireland under Forster was divided into five regions, each governed by a special resident magistrate with executive powers. With such executive freedom Lloyd was able to request an increase in the number of troops in Ireland, until by the end of 1881 they numbered over 25,000. He also gradually infused the Royal Irish Constabulary with a military element until by the end of the same year it was composed almost entirely of military personnel, with officers sent from divisional police headquarters to avoid using local forces. He organized an extensive patrolling network, involving 'flying columns', and so intensified security arrangements that they became tantamount to martial law. As a result, over sixteen parliamentary questions were lodged about Lloyd's conduct in 1881-2. Allegations were made to the effect that he refused to accept bail, dispensed summary justice in his own house, and dispersed crowds under the 'Riot Act' with threats that they would be shot. In 1883 he eventually resigned and moved to Egypt, where he was to serve under the khedive as inspector-general of reforms and, subsequently, as under-secretary at the Home Office. 
In Egypt Lloyd's career was again tainted by controversy. He threw himself with zeal into sanitation schemes and judicial reform. However, in his attempted reform of the prison system he met with much resistance from the mudirs, members of the Egyptian ruling class who occupied much the same position as special resident magistrates did in Ireland. Under the existing judicial system an individual could be arrested and convicted without even a written order. Prisons were overcrowded and bribes, torture, false imprisonment, and false convictions were rife. 
Lloyd set about reforming the police force so that it would be answerable to local authorities but could also report to central government. No arrest could be made without a written order. Those who opposed reform were removed from office and replaced by Egyptians from the central administration. The reforms had initial support from Sir Evelyn Baring, but eventually the Egyptian minister Nubar Pasha threatened to resign on the grounds that the proposed reforms deprived the mudirs of all authority and gave their executive powers to the police. There were also allegations that torture in prisons had not been completely eradicated. Despite Lloyd's best efforts he again had to resign, but later he defended his plan of reform in letters to 'The Times' (30 June; 7 and 10 July 1884; 29 Sept 1888). 
In 1885 Lloyd resumed his post as resident magistrate in Ireland, this time in Londonderry. However, in the winter of that year he left for Mauritius, where he had been appointed lieutenant-governor and colonial secretary. This appointment was short-lived, as he could not see eye to eye with the then governor, Sir John Pope Hennessy, recently elected nationalist MP for co. Kilkenny. Lloyd was then transferred to the Seychelles, in August 1886 (to a post which he never took up), and he eventually resigned in 1887. During his subsequent period of unemployment he published memoirs of his time in Ireland under the title, 'Ireland under the Land League: a Narrative of Personal Experiences'. Finally, on 15 September 1889, he was appointed consul for Kurdistan, where his attempts to promote the Armenian cause were appreciated by Sir William White, the English ambassador at Constantinople. Lloyd died of pneumonia at Erzurum, Kurdistan, on 7 January 1891; his wife survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 16825


Lloyd, David (1597-1663), poet and dean of St Asaph, was born in Berth-lwyd, in the parish of Llanidloes, Montgomeryshire, the son of David Lloyd. His uncle was a fellow of All Souls College, Oxford, and held the post of dean of Hereford from 1617 until his death in 1625 at the age of fifty-four. There is also record of a brother called Oliver (died 1662), a doctor of law, who was also a fellow of All Souls, and who, like his brother, suffered deprivation during the interregnum. Lloyd entered Hart Hall, Oxford, on 30 October 1612, graduating BA on 22 June 1615. He was elected a fellow of All Souls in 1618, obtaining a BCL in 1622 (probably in May) and a DCL on 26 March 1628, having been incorporated at Cambridge in 1616. 
Lloyd is chiefly notable for his bawdy mock epic poem, 'The Legend of Captain Jones' (1631), which is his only surviving literary work, although Anthony Wood suggests that he also wrote songs, sonnets, and elegies, 'some of which are printed in several books' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 3.653). These have not been discovered. 'The Legend' tells the story of a famous Elizabethan sailor who performed many spectacular feats of military prowess with his sword, Kyl-za-dog. He killed the mighty giant Asdriasdust and fought off the eleven kings who sought to bar his progress, before being captured by the king of Spain, who lost 6000 warriors in the process. He was immediately ransomed by his loyal countrymen. Andrew Marvell refers to this burlesque poem in 'The Rehearsal Transprosed' (1672-3), suggesting that forty years after its first publication it had become a byword for ridiculous and comic exaggeration. Certainly the existence of separate and revised editions in 1636, 1648, 1656 (containing a frontispiece of Jones on horseback confronting an Indian king mounted on an elephant), and 1659 indicates considerable popularity, and imitations and sequels were published in the eighteenth century. 

'The Legend' is almost certainly not based on a real figure but may refer to various Elizabethan soldiers such as Sir John Norris or Sir Thomas Arundell. It is undoubtedly a pastiche or parody of a Welsh poem, 'Awdl foliant Rhisiart Sion o Fuellt' ('Ode in Praise of Rhisiart Sion of Buellt') by Sion Tudur, a prominent Welsh bard who later lived in Lloyd's diocese of St Asaph. It is also likely that the poem satirizes the boastful and legendary autobiographical accounts of Captain John Smith's exploits in the Americas, which were published in the 1620s and 1630s. The expanded version of Lloyd's poem published in 1656 makes the satirical relationship clearer, probably because Smith died in 1632 and Lloyd felt less constrained in his parodic intentions. 
In 1639 Lloyd became chaplain to William Stanley, sixth earl of Derby, and also controller of his household. He was made a canon of Chester the same year before becoming rector of Trefdraeth, Anglesey, on 2 December 1641. He was subsequently made vicar of Llangynhafal, and, on 21 December of the same year, vicar of Llanfair Dyffryn Clwyd. He also became warden of Ruthin, Denbighshire, in 1642. During the civil war he was deprived of his offices and imprisoned for a time by the Long Parliament. He was reinstated after the Restoration and promoted to the deanery of St Asaph, and then presented to one of the two comportions of Llansannan in 1662. Lloyd's plea to the king for his reinstatement, dated August 1660, claims that he did all he could for the king and church, having entertained princes Rupert and Maurice and Charles I himself on one occasion. He also claims that he was robbed as well as imprisoned by the parliamentary forces. Another letter, dated 16 October 1660, signifies the election of George Griffith to the see of St Asaph, after the death of Dr John Owen. Lloyd died on 7 September 1663 at Ruthin, although no monument remains. A humorous epitaph represents him as running into debt through his love of eating: '
This is the epigraph, 

Of the dean of St. Asaph, 

Who by keeping a table, 

Better than he was able, 

Run into debt 

Which is not paid yet. 
(Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 3.653)' 



@@@@@


doc= 16826


Lloyd, David (1635-1692), biographer, son of Hugh Lloyd, was born at Pant Mawr, in the parish of Trawsfynydd, Merioneth, on 28 September 1635, and was educated in the free school of Ruthin in Denbighshire. In 1653 he became a servitor of Merton College, Oxford, and graduated BA on 30 January 1657 from Oriel College. The warden and fellows of Merton College presented him to the rectory of Ibstone, Buckinghamshire, in May 1658, and he proceeded MA on 4 July 1659. 
Resigning his rectory in 1659, Lloyd went to London and was appointed reader in the Charterhouse under Timothy Thurscross. Around 1663 he suffered six months' imprisonment at the suit of the earl of Bridgewater, who resented Lloyd's publication of 'The Countess of Bridgewater's Ghost' (1663), describing the late countess's virtues. Subsequently he became chaplain to Isaac Barrow, bishop of St Asaph, who gave him several preferments in that diocese and collated him to a canonry. 
The majority of Lloyd's published writings belong to the 1660s and are distinguished by a fervent royalism: he was what Robert Watt called 'a loyal biographer and historian' (2.612). Two such works appeared in the year of the Restoration itself, 'Modern policy completed, or, The publick actions and councels, both civil and military, of... General Monck, under the general revolutions since 1639 to 1660' (1660) -- otherwise known as 'Modern Policy, the Second Part' -- and 'Eikon basilike, or, The True Portraicture of his Sacred Majesty Charles the II' (1660), which incorporated biographies of the dukes of York and of Gloucester. In choosing the latter title, Lloyd was referring to the far better known book attributed to Charles I. In 1664, Lloyd published, under the pseudonym Oliver Foulis, 'Cabala, or, The history of conventicles unvail'd: in an historical account of the principles and practices of the nonconformists' (1664), listing 120 plots alleged to have been perpetrated against the present government. Here Lloyd accused the dissenters of continued disloyalty to the monarchy and the Church of England, and of clinging on to ideas of popular resistance inherited from the civil wars and republic. 
Perhaps Lloyd's most famous works are 'The Statesmen and Favourites of England since the Reformation' (1665), reissued in 1670, and 'Memoires of the lives, actions, sufferings, and deaths of those noble, reverend, and excellent personages, that suffered by death, sequestration, decimation, or otherwise, for the protestant religion, and the great principle thereof, allegiance to their sovereigne, in our late intestine wars, from the year 1637, to the year 1660' (1668), reprinted with a new title in 1677. The 'Memoires' included 'the life and martyrdom of King Charles I', which conformed entirely to the contemporary royalist Anglican view of Charles as a saint and martyr for the establishment in church and state. In 1766 Charles Whitworth reissued 'The Statesmen and Favourites of England' in two volumes, under the title 'State Worthies', in which he balanced the royalist bias of Lloyd's original by additions of his own and added a biographical sketch of Lloyd. 
Anthony Wood says of the 'Memoires' -- which included material already used in 'The Statesmen and Favourites of England' -- that there 'are almost as many errors as lines', and Lloyd gained something of a reputation not only as 'a most impudent plagiary, but a false writer and mere scribbler'. Bishop Humphreys relates that in later years Lloyd himself 'would express no great esteem of his youthful performances' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 4.349, 352n.). Yet for all the errors of detail, Lloyd's writings provide an insight into the beliefs and opinions of the Anglican and royalist clergy in the first decades of the Restoration. 
On 14 August 1671 Lloyd was instituted to the vicarage of Abergele, Denbighshire, which he exchanged in 1672 for that of Northop, Flintshire, where he was also master of the free school. He was also rector of Llanddulas, Denbighshire, in 1672. When his health failed some time after 1673, he retired to his birth place, Pant Mawr, where he died on 16 February 1692. He was buried at Trawsfynydd. 


@@@@@


doc= 16827


Lloyd, David (1642/3-1723), naval officer, was born at Ffosybleiddiaid, Cardiganshire, the second of three sons of Oliver Lloyd (1610-1668) and Jane, daughter of John Lloyd of Llanllyr. He was entered as a volunteer on the 'Phoenix' on 2 November 1671 and, later, as an able seaman. In June 1672 he was promoted to lieutenant and appointed to the 'Henry'. Discharged at the end of the Third Anglo-Dutch War, in 1674, he was appointed a cornet in the earl of Oxford's regiment, from which he was given leave to take up the captaincy of the 'Mermaid' in September 1677. He served in the North Sea with Sir John Holmes, who later accused him of having insolently claimed that 'the only difference between us was the flag' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Rawl. A191, fol. 99). Lloyd escorted William and Mary back to the Netherlands, following their marriage. When he returned to England he found himself in trouble with Pepys for leaving the 'Mermaid', without permission, in the Downs but, despite their earlier dispute, Holmes took Lloyd's side. Lloyd was appointed captain of the 'Reserve' in June 1678 and, shortly before he sailed for Tangier, he provided Samuel Atkins, Pepys's clerk, with an alibi (that they had been in an alehouse) when Atkins was accused of being involved in the murder of Sir Edmundbury Godfrey. 
It was probably because of this alibi that Pepys had Lloyd appointed captain of the 'Dover' in June 1679 and sent as convoy to Newfoundland. Lloyd returned to England in March 1680, when he was dismissed, but in November 1680 he was appointed captain of the 'Crown' and served in the Mediterranean under Arthur Herbert (1680-83). When Atkins arrived in Tangier in 1681 he asked to serve under Lloyd, whom he regarded as 'the best governed, soberest, reasonable man my conversation ever fell with' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Rawl. A183). In December 1681 Lloyd helped to capture a large Algerian ship, the 'Golden Rose', after a long fight. When Herbert returned to England in June 1683 Lloyd remained with Cloudesley Shovell. The 'Crown''s leaks 'being so low not to be stopt otherwise' (TNA: PRO, ADM 106/376, fol. 492), Shovell ordered Lloyd back to England. When George Legge, Baron Dartmouth, arrived in 1683 to demolish Tangier he learned that Lloyd was on his way back to England and promptly recalled him. While in Tangier Pepys discovered that Lloyd was 'a very good artist and curious in it above any gentleman captain' ('Tangier Papers', 134). 
Lloyd was appointed a groom of the bedchamber to James II in May 1685. In May 1687 he was appointed captain of the 'Sedgemoor' and took James Fitzjames, the king's illegitimate son, with him as a volunteer. The 'Sedgemoor' was part of the fleet commanded by Henry, duke of Grafton, that escorted the new queen of Portugal to Lisbon and then sailed into the Mediterranean to make sure the peace treaty negotiated with Algiers, Tunis, and Tripoli remained intact. When Grafton returned to England in 1687 Lloyd remained in the Mediterranean with Shovell; he did not return to England until mid-December 1688, by which time the invasion of William of Orange was accomplished. Lloyd followed James into exile in 1689 and was appointed a groom of the bedchamber, whereupon the House of Commons proclaimed him a traitor. After William and Mary had been crowned James, 'inveighing, with tears, against his daughters', told Lloyd that the behaviour of his younger daughter, Anne, was worse than Mary's. Lloyd, 'who had turned impatiently away, put his head round the door to remark 'Both bitches, by God!'' (H. W. Chapman, 'Mary II Queen of England', 172). 
Lloyd became an active secret agent for James, travelling back and forth between England and St Germain. He was in England in 1691, sounding out Edward Russell and John Churchill about helping James to return, and carried back Lord Dartmouth's 'proffer of service' (Clarke, 2.446-7, 450). While in England Lloyd drew up a 'Memorandum of persons well inclined to his Mjies interest' (Lloyd, vol. 3, pt 3, no. 232). He was also named as the possible commander-in-chief of any invasion fleet. He returned to England in 1692 'with instructions to the King's friends' (Clarke, 2.477). He met Edward Russell several times in connection with bringing the English fleet over to James, but in vain. Lloyd was again declared a traitor but he managed to avoid capture and he returned to St Germain with a letter from Princess Anne to her father. 
Lloyd was in England again in March 1694, when he met John Churchill again and held further meetings with Russell. He continued to act as a go-between for James and his supporters in England and gave naval advice to Louis XIV, for which he was paid 'some 3000 livres a year' (Hilton Jones, 'Mainstream of Jacobitism', 41) until 1701, when, following James's death, he seems to have retired and lived in France. In 1703 he was among the 'friends indefinite' left a mourning ring by Samuel Pepys ('Private Correspondence', 2.318). He appears to have returned to England some time before 1708; there he was 'living very cautiously' when Charles, earl of Middleton, wrote to assure him that his son would be looked after. Lloyd died, aged eighty, on 4 January 1723, while drinking a dish of chocolate at the Cocoa Tree in Pall Mall. His son having died before him, administration of his estate was granted, on 19 February 1723, to his only daughter, Briany. 


@@@@@


doc= 16828


Lloyd, David (1752-1838), Church of England clergyman and writer, was born on 12 May 1752 at Croes Cynon (Croscunnon), Llanbister, Radnorshire, the only son of Thomas Lloyd, a farmer of Trefodig, and his wife, Mary, daughter of David James of Little Croscunnon. Although as a boy he had to work on his father's farm a lot of the time, he received a sporadic education in Latin and mathematics from local schools, as well as teaching himself Greek and developing an appreciation of 'Druidical' and Welsh poetry. In 1771 at the age of nineteen he opened a small school in Llanbister. While teaching he prepared himself for holy orders and was ordained priest in 1778. He married Mary (1747-1836), daughter of John Griffiths of Leehall, Llangunllo, Radnorshire, in 1779, and they had one son, John, who died in childhood. Lloyd was curate at Putley, Herefordshire, between 1785 and 1789, before returning to be vicar of Llanbister, one of the largest parishes in Radnorshire, where he remained for the rest of his life. 
In 1792 Lloyd published 'The Voyage of Life', a religious poem in nine volumes. A new and enlarged second edition was published in 1812; renamed 'Characteristics of Men, Manners and Sentiments, or, The Voyage of Life', it contained an additional (tenth) volume to the original as well as some miscellaneous poems. His other main work was 'Horae theologicae, or, A series of essays on subjects interesting and important; embracing physics, morals and theology', published in 1823. The thirty-seven essays, which include such titles as 'The authenticity of the scriptures', 'The nature and effects of sin', and 'The fall of our parents and its effects', are in fact entirely theological, and provide a brief exposition of the faith of the Anglican church, designed for the 'improvement in Divine knowledge, and confirmation of faith, in readers of all ranks' (preface). His only other published works were a sermon, 'England's Privileges' (1797), and an undated march entitled 'The Loyal Cambrian Volunteers'. Of the many pieces of his music, the latter was the only one to be published. Lloyd's wife died in 1836 aged eighty-nine, and he died at Llanbister two years later, on 3 March. 


@@@@@


doc= 16829


Lloyd, Edward (c.1648-1713), coffee-house keeper, publisher, and eponymist of 'Lloyd's insurance', was probably born about 1648, but nothing is known of his origins. He was the proprietor of a London coffee house licensed some time between March 1685 and 1687. This was almost certainly 'Mr Edward Lloyd's Coffee House in Tower Street', referred to in an advertisement in the 'London Gazette' (18-21 February 1688). Edward Lloyd and his wife, Abigail, had previously lived in the parish of All Hallows Barking, but by September 1682 they were living elsewhere in Tower Street ward, though Lloyd's occupation at that time is unknown. In 1691 he moved to premises in Lombard Street, at the corner of Abchurch Lane, where Lloyd's Coffee House became the recognized centre of shipbroking and marine insurance business. Previously, the chief meeting-place of the brokers and shipowners had been a coffee house known as John's, in Birchin Lane; the well-known Garraway's also had considerable popularity among customers with maritime connections. 
Lloyd appears to have been a man of great intelligence and enterprise. Already by January 1692 he was publishing the first series of a weekly news-sheet, which came out on Saturdays; it was succeeded in September 1699 by a Friday publication, which continued until at least March 1704. The running title for these single-sheet serial publications was 'Ships Arrived at, and Departed from several Ports of England, as I have Account of them in London... [and] An Account of what English Shipping and Foreign Ships for England, I hear of in Foreign Ports'. In September 1696 Lloyd also started the newspaper 'Lloyd's News', a shipping and commercial chronicle which lasted until 1698, but 'Ships Arrived' has a better claim, on grounds of similarity of marine intelligence content, to be the predecessor of 'Lloyd's List', reputedly the second-oldest continuously published newspaper in the world. Under this title, 'Lloyd's List' dates from about 1734, some twenty years after Edward Lloyd's death, but rather than being a new enterprise, it is possible that this twice-weekly paper was a further development of the earlier news-sheet associated with Lloyd's Coffee House. If so, Edward Lloyd deserves recognition as an even more significant figure than the association of his name with marine insurance suggests. 
Another publication associated with marine insurance, which originated in Lloyd's Coffee House, was 'Lloyd's Register of Shipping', first published in 1764. The earliest extant issue of Edward Lloyd's 'Ships Arrived' was dated 22 December 1696 and that of 'Lloyd's List', 2 January 1740. 
In 1693 the Hudson's Bay Company looked to 'Mr Lloyd the Coffee Man for his Intelligence of the Compies Shipps', and by 1700 a poem which professed to follow the daily movements of 'The wealthy shopkeeper, or charitable Christian,' contained the lines: '
Then to Lloyd's Coffee House he never fails 

To read the letters and attend the sales. 

' During the next decade Lloyd's Coffee House prospered continuously. Steele mentioned it in the 'Tatler' (25 December 1710), and Addison described the manners of its frequenters in 'The Spectator' (23 April 1711). The merchants and underwriters used it as a free place of meeting, without rules or organization. 
In 1769 John Julius Angerstein and other City merchants started an association of underwriters, under the name of New Lloyd's, with its headquarters in Pope's Head Alley, Cornhill. Various improvements in marine insurance were introduced. The adjective 'new' was soon dropped, and the offices were moved to the Royal Exchange. This association, improved and reorganized, was incorporated in 1870. At first the contest between the original informal group at Lloyd's Coffee House and New Lloyd's was reflected in rival newspapers, but in due course 'Lloyd's List' became established as a Committee of Lloyd's publication. In 1884 'Lloyd's List' merged with the 'Shipping and Mercantile Gazette'; later, in 1914, responsibility for the publication reverted to the Corporation of Lloyd's and it resumed the title 'Lloyd's List'. 
Apart from a break (1838-44) at the South Sea House while rebuilding took place following a fire, Lloyd's remained at the Royal Exchange until 1928 when it moved to a larger new building in Leadenhall Street. In 1958 it expanded further into a second building in Lime Street and in 1986 yet another new Lloyd's opened on the site of the earlier Leadenhall building. 
Edward and Abigail Lloyd had at least nine children of whom four daughters survived to adulthood. The youngest, Handy, married William Newton, the coffee house head waiter, with whom -- and subsequently with her second husband, Samuel Sheppard -- she managed the business after her father's death. Abigail died in 1698, and in the same year Lloyd married Elizabeth Mashbourne (died 1712). His third wife was Martha Denham, whom he married in 1712. Lloyd died in London on 15 February 1713, and was buried at St Mary Woolnoth in the City of London. 


@@@@@


doc= 16830


Lloyd, Edward (d. 1847), colonist in the Gambia, came from the Lloyd family of Beechmount, near Limerick, who, according to 'Burke's Peerage', were a branch of the family of Lloyd of Castle Lloyd, co. Limerick. Lloyd obtained an ensigncy in the 54th foot division in 1799, and served with the regiment in Egypt in 1801. In 1803 he became lieutenant in the 58th foot, and in 1804 received a company without purchase in the Royal African Colonial Corps, then re-formed. He retired from the army in July 1812. An Edward Lloyd, presumably the same person, had set up in trade at Goree, then British occupied, in 1806, with other traders subsequently transferred to Bathurst, and commanded the Royal Gambia militia. Edward Lloyd (of this article) was regarded as a founder of the Gambia River settlement, where he died, after forty-three years' residence, on 16 March 1847. 
Major Richard Lloyd, an officer mentioned by the African traveller Mungo Park, was, like Edward Lloyd, in the Royal African Corps, and was killed as lieutenant-colonel commanding the 2nd battalion, 84th foot, at the battle of the Nive in December 1813. 


@@@@@


doc= 16831


Lloyd, Edward (1815-1890), publisher and newspaper proprietor, was born on 16 February 1815 in Thornton Heath, Surrey, the son of a Welsh labourer who died in Lloyd's infancy. After a brief elementary education, he worked in a solicitor's office and studied shorthand at the London Mechanics' Institution, winning a silver pen for being first in his class. By the time he was eighteen he had written 'Lloyd's Stenography' (1833) and opened shops in London selling comic valentines and penny story books. 
Beginning with 'The Calendar of Horrors' (1835), Lloyd launched himself into a career as a leading publisher of cheap and mostly sensational literature aimed at the working class. Among these were a series of plagiarisms of the work of Charles Dickens that included 'Nikelas Nickelbery' (1838), 'Oliver Twiss' (1838-9), and 'The Penny Pickwick' (1837-9); the latter apparently enjoyed sales of 50,000 copies. He also started a series of periodicals mainly containing popular fiction which included 'Lloyd's Penny Weekly Miscellany' (1842-7) and 'Lloyd's Penny Atlas' (1842-5). In addition, he published songbooks and treatises on domestic economy. In September 1843 he moved his offices to 12 Salisbury Square, near Fleet Street, which became the centre of his 'penny dreadful' publishing industry. He was responsible for stories such as James Malcolm Rymer's 'Varney the Vampire' (1845) and 'The String of Pearls' (1846) (published in Lloyd's 'People's Periodical and Family Library' and usually attributed to Thomas Peckett Prest), which introduced the character of Sweeney Todd. G. A. Sala remembered that Lloyd's instructions to his illustrators were 'there must be more blood -- much more blood' (G. A. Sala, 'The Life and Adventures of George Augustus Sala', 1875, 1.209). 
Lloyd also moved into journalism, publishing 'Lloyd's Illustrated London Newspaper' for a penny in September 1842 as a rival to the 'Illustrated London News'. The paper was originally unstamped but was compelled by the stamp office to pay the duty, as the paper contained news. It was then relaunched on 27 November price 2died In 1843 the paper became 'Lloyd's Weekly London Newspaper', which was to last until 1931, one of the most successful newspapers of the Victorian period and the first of the cheap Sunday newspapers aimed at the working class. By 1850 the paper was selling 49,000 copies a week. The politics of the paper were Liberal to radical, though not as extreme as those of a number of its competitors. Lloyd became increasingly concerned about the respectability of his publications, a move signalled by his abandonment of 'penny dreadfuls' in the early 1850s and the appointment in 1852 of the popular writer Douglas Jerrold (1803-1857) as editor of 'Lloyd's Weekly Newspaper'. Circulation rose thereafter. By 1853 the paper was selling 90,000 copies to a lower-middle-class and working-class readership, particularly in London, although the paper was distributed throughout the country and abroad; it enjoyed a strong following among women and small property owners. The abolition of the stamp and paper duties allowed for a reduction in price to 1died in 1861. By 1872 the paper was selling half a million copies. Lloyd was devoted to publicity, scouring the country for hoardings to advertise his paper. At one time, he paid his staff with coins on which his newspaper's name was embossed so that they would enter the currency; he was only stopped by government intervention. 
To sustain his popular publications, Lloyd was active in promoting new publishing techniques. In 1856 he introduced Hoe's rotary press into Britain and the web press in 1873. He established a paper mill at Bow in 1861 and a second in 1877 at Sittingbourne in Kent. To supply his mills, he leased 100,000 acres in Algeria to grow esparto grass. Lloyd found himself supplying other newspapers as well as his own with paper and became the owner of a lucrative stationery business. 
In 1876 Lloyd purchased the 'Daily Chronicle' (formerly the 'Clerkenwell News') for $30,000, on which he spent $150,000, transforming it from a suburban paper into a leading London daily paper with special correspondents all over the world. The paper in particular advocated the unification of London local government to restore order to its affairs. Circulation soon increased from 8000 to 140,000 copies. 
Lloyd was a leading Liberal, elected to the Reform Club and a promoter of the National Liberal Club. 'Lloyd's Weekly Newspaper' mainly supported Liberal causes, such as the extension of the suffrage in 1867. Although it opposed home rule in 1886, it tended to support Gladstone. The paper's politics were always moderate, which meant that it was often disliked by radicals. Such was its appeal that when a young singer called Matilda Alice Victoria Wood sought a memorable stage name she called herself Marie Lloyd. By the time of Lloyd's death in 1890 the paper was in sight of achieving sales of 1 million, a feat it accomplished on 16 February 1896, the first paper ever to do so. 
Lloyd was married twice, the second time to Maria Martins. He had nineteen children in total, among them Frank Lloyd (1854-1927), who became chairman and managing director of his father's company on his death. Edward Lloyd died on 8 April 1890 at his home, 17 Delahay Street, Westminster. The cause of death was heart disease, apparently brought on by the strain of revamping his newspaper. He was buried in Highgate cemetery on 11 April, and a plaque was placed in St Margaret's Church, Westminster. One of the leading figures in the expansion of mass publishing in the Victorian period, Lloyd's career is important because of its promotion of the cheap press, new techniques in publishing, and the basic formulae which came to be associated with popular fiction and journalism (with its taste for the sensational). 


@@@@@


doc= 16832


Lloyd, Evan (1734-1776), poet, was baptized on 15 April 1734 at Llanycil, Merioneth, the younger son of John Lloyd (1693-1774), gentleman, of Fron-dderw, Bala, and his wife, Bridget Bevan (died 1746). 
Lloyd was educated at Ruthin School, Denbighshire, and at Jesus College, Oxford, where he matriculated as a scholar on 22 March 1751; he took his BA in 1754 and MA in 1757, but failed to obtain a hoped-for fellowship. Nothing is known of his life over the next four years. He was ordained, probably in November 1761, and became curate of St Mary's, Redriff (Rotherhithe), London, while continuing to haunt the theatres and coffee houses of Westminster. On 27 October 1763, through the influence of Henry Bilson Legge, former chancellor of the exchequer, Lloyd was instituted as vicar of Llanfair Dyffryn Clwyd, near Ruthin, but he employed a curate there and remained in Redriff and London, his tithes and other dues being forwarded via his father. He made frequent visits to Wales, but stayed with his father at Fron-dderw, rather than with his parishioners in Llanfair. 
Occasional poems by Lloyd appeared in journals before he published three substantial verse satires in 1766. 'The Powers of the Pen', in octosyllabic couplets, follows Charles Churchill in attacking critics and ridiculing Warburton and Johnson. 'The Curate', in heroic couplets, on the miserable lot of all the curates in England and Wales, includes some particularly scathing lines on the venality of bishops. 'The Methodist', nearly 1000 lines long, in octosyllabic couplets, and again indebted to Churchill, expresses Lloyd's detestation of Methodism, but is perhaps more strongly motivated by a venomous unexplained personal feud: the character Libidinoso in this poem is a wildly slanderous representation of William Price, former high sheriff of Merioneth, the Lloyds' powerful neighbour in Bala. 
Price sued for libel. Lloyd was tried on 2 May 1768, was imprisoned for two weeks in the king's bench prison, and, on 16 May, was fined $50; to add to his troubles his brother Robert died in September, aged thirty-six. On the other hand Lloyd made two valuable friendships that year: with David Garrick, on whom he called in February, and with John Wilkes, who by chance was a fellow gaolbird in the king's bench prison. Meanwhile Lloyd published 'Conversation' (1767), an inoffensive satire in heroic couplets, followed in 1768 by a second, enlarged edition of 'The Powers of the Pen' and an abortive plan to publish his poems by subscription. He also wrote anonymous anti-government squibs in newspapers. 
In September 1769 Lloyd asked Garrick and Wilkes to help him obtain a nominal chaplaincy to a nobleman, as a device to evade a prosecution threatened by William Price for his non-residence at Llanfair. It is not known whether a chaplaincy or a prosecution ensued, but Lloyd never resided at Llanfair. He became a chaplain, but only to a sheriff of London, Watkin Lewes, during his year of office, 1772-3. 
In 1770 and 1772 Garrick unsuccessfully sought further church preferment for Lloyd, but the bishop of St Asaph, Jonathan Shipley, declared that Lloyd had to 'perform quarantine' for his satires. Reporting this, Garrick's friend Mrs Sarah Wilmot wondered if Lloyd was 'too lively for his cloth' ('Private Correspondence', 2.357). Garrick's friendship was repaid in Lloyd's fulsome 'Epistle to David Garrick' (1773), which was promptly and deservedly ridiculed in William Kenrick's 'A Whipping for the Welsh Parson' (1773). 
Lloyd was a lover of conviviality in London. During his annual visits to Wales he 'buried his talents in Ale, and at last, in consequence of sottishness, brought on consumption' (Fenton). He was also afflicted by gout and rheumatism from 1769. He died unmarried on 26 January 1776 at Fron-dderw and was buried in Llanycil churchyard; his epitaph in the church was written by Wilkes. 


@@@@@


doc= 16833


Lloyd, George (1560/61-1615), bishop of Chester, was the sixth son of Meredith Lloyd of Llaneilian-yn-Rhos, Denbighshire, and Janet, daughter of Hugh Conway, both from old gentry families. He may have settled in Chester as early as 1566: in October 1613 he said he had 'known' the city 'these forty-seven years' (BL, Harleian MS 2103, fol. 8'v'). Certainly he attended the King's School, Chester, from 1575 to 1579, before entering Jesus College, Cambridge, where he graduated BA in 1582. He became a fellow of Magdalene College, Cambridge, in 1585 and proceeded BD in 1593 and DD in 1598. In 1594 Lloyd was elected to the divinity lectureship in Chester Cathedral, during the mayoralty of his eldest brother David Lloyd, a wealthy merchant. Three years later he became rector of Heswall, Cheshire, and he held the parish for the next seventeen years; during that time he and his wife, Anne (died 1648), daughter of John Wilkinson, probably of Northwich, Cheshire (given as Norwich in BL, Lansdowne MS 879), had at least seven children, the eldest of whom, John, was baptized at Heswall in October 1599. On 23 December 1599 Lloyd was presented to the bishopric of Sodor and Man, by the queen rather than the earl of Derby, there being no dean or chapter in the diocese of Man by which any election might be made. His consecration may have been at Chester, not York. Little is known of his activities on Man but the extent and promptness of the reforms introduced five years later by his successor, John Phillips, suggest that there was pressing need for them after Lloyd was translated to Chester, in succession to Richard Vaughan. 
Lloyd was presented to the bishopric of Chester on 18 December 1604 and the royal assent followed on 9 January 1605. He was attentive to his administrative duties in his new see but his mildness of manner encouraged laxity among his officials. Visitations were held regularly, but with limited results. He deprived two ministers in 1606, and occasionally rejected others unwilling to conform to the terms of the 1604 canons, but puritan clergy in general were dealt with leniently. In the aftermath of the Gunpowder Plot he treated Roman Catholics with moderation and even diffidence, at times seeking guidance from the privy council. Relations between the city and the cathedral grew fractious during Lloyd's episcopate, however, and in two sermons preached in the cathedral in 1614 he seemed to reflect adversely on the outgoing mayor, Robert Whitby, the puritanical clerk of the pentice and client of Lord Keeper Ellesmere, and his son Edward Whitby, the new recorder. Lloyd's family associations with the late recorder, Thomas Gamull, prompted the accusation that he had been 'an earnest labourer' for a rival candidate (Harleian MS 2103, fol. 11'r'). Lloyd, a skilful preacher, held firmly Calvinist convictions nevertheless; Sir John Harington noted how Prince Henry 'heard him Preach often, and very well', although none of his sermons was published (Harington). Twice, in 1605 and 1609, Lloyd was invited to deliver a Lenten sermon at court, but on each occasion Martin Heton, bishop of Ely, deputized. 
At the time of his appointment to Sodor and Man, Lloyd claimed his finances would not bear a journey to York; however, as bishop of Chester he had the benefit of Marian improvements to the see and held, in addition first to Heswall and then to Bangor (the living favoured by bishops of Chester) which he exchanged for Heswall in 1613, the substantial livings of Thornton, Waverton, Childwall, and Cartmel in Lancashire, while in 1608 his wife and sons leased Shotwick, Cheshire, from the dean and chapter of Chester. Like Vaughan, Lloyd struggled with the deaneries, in 1615 giving up his attempt to control those in the archdeaconry of Richmond, and granting leases of seven rural deaneries to the commissaries there. Financially there remained much for his successor, John Bridgeman, to do. Lloyd died in his rectory at Thornton on 1 August 1615 in his fifty-fifth year, and was buried 'swiftly' (Burne, 95) five days later in Chester Cathedral. A brass plate set up in his memory has since disappeared, but the text of its inscription has survived. 


@@@@@


doc= 16834


Lloyd, Sir Godfrey (b. after 1608, d. 1671?), military engineer, was the son of Sergeant-Major Brochwel Lloyd of Leighton and Moel-y-Garth, Montgomeryshire, and his wife, Honoria, daughter of Sir Stephen Procter. Godfrey was a younger brother of Sir Charles Lloyd (c.1602-1661), also a military engineer. 
Much of Lloyd's early career was focused on military service abroad. Lloyd, like his father and elder brother, probably served in the Dutch army in the years before the English civil war. Between 1642 and 1644 he was a colonel in the king's northern army commanded by the earl of Newcastle. During the Commonwealth he was a captain of a company of foot in the Dutch service. He is believed to be the Captain Lloyd recalled by James II in his military memoirs as 'a stout choleric Welshman... bred up under the Prince of Orange' and mentioned as the engineer in charge of the approach trenches at the French siege of Conde (Clarke, 1.253). Lloyd, proscribed as a conspirator by the English authorities, was knighted at Brussels by the exiled Charles II in 1657. 
Following the Restoration Lloyd was appointed 'chief engineer of all forts, castles and fortifications etc in England and Wales' in succession to his brother on 27 December 1661, with a fee of $240 ('CSP dom.', '1661-2', 129). His petition in 1666 for arrears of pay ($360) mentions that he had left the service of the duke of Luneburg in order to follow the king's service. 
On 12 May 1666 Lloyd was commissioned captain of a company of foot guards in Portsmouth. In the following month he was superintendent of the fortification of Portsmouth Dockyard being built to the designs of Sir Bernard de Gomme. Lloyd was engaged more widely, as on 2 October that year he requested the usual allowance for thirty-nine days' service in the Isle of Wight viewing the forts, castles, and such and making a map of Yarmouth on the isle. Back in the garrison at Portsmouth in December he was again petitioning the king for arrears of pay. In April 1667 he continued to be involved with the fortification of Portsmouth Dockyard as superintendent of the works. In June he reported to the earl of Arlington that the French fleet was said to be in the channel and heading towards Guernsey and Jersey. 
In the aftermath of the Dutch raid on the Medway in June 1667 Lloyd was consulted by the king, together with Sir Bernard de Gomme, as the leading military engineers, in respect of the defences of the kingdom. By August he had become involved with the fortification of Sheerness. In that month Robert Slater reported to the navy commissioners that, having gone to Sheerness to survey the ground, the fortifications, and the laying out of the navy yard in order to present them with a 'plot', he was denied permission by Sir Godfrey Lloyd to do so without the king's special order, Lloyd 'having the command of that affair but said he would do it himself and send the first draft to His Majesty' ('CSP dom.', '1667', 387). Lloyd himself was fallible: in July he had confessed to Arlington that in his haste to wait on Prince Rupert at Sheerness he had forgotten to tell the ordnance commissioners that 590 palisades were needed for the fort at West Tilbury, with further timbers required to secure the magazine at Gravesend. 
On 17 December 1667 Lloyd was sent $150 towards his travelling charges relating to the fortifications at Portsmouth and Sheerness over the period 24 March to 7 October 1667. He was ordered on 22 January 1668 to prepare an estimate for finishing the fortifications at Sheerness, which he produced a month later. Sir Godfrey Lloyd, 'one of His Majeties Principal Engineers', was by then named as one of the commissioners responsible for managing the works at Sheerness. Shortly afterwards, however, he was dismissed. Charles II, commenting to Pepys on the lack of English-bred engineers, remarked that 'he never remembering any but two in all his time viz. Sir Charles (I think) Floud and Sir Godfrey Floud, the former of whom he said [was] worth very little and the latter... [was] entrusted with the designing and managing the work at Sheerness, where after spending $2000 the king said he was forced to undo all that he had done and put it into the hand of Sir Bernard Degum. ('Samuel Pepys's Naval Minutes', 28)' On 2 April 1668 Sir Godfrey was given leave to accept the offer of the post of quartermaster-general to the States and was licensed to pass to the Netherlands and remain there for six months: he was still holding the position of quartermaster-general to the United Provinces when he made his will on 20 January 1670. He maintained his captaincy in a foot company in Colonel John Russell's regiment of guards during 1669, but in February of the following year he was succeeded in the post by Captain Arthur Broughton. During 1670 he was claiming that he had spent $600 of his own money in the king's service since he had left Germany and $480 of his fees as chief engineer were still due to him. 
Lloyd appears to have died in 1671 since $360 that were due to him were then paid to his executors. There is a mention that Sir Godfrey Lloyd's lady passed 'by one of our packet boats for Holland on 25 July 1672'. His will (translated from Low Dutch) shows him married to a widow, Catherine Smith, previously married to a Thomas Claypole with whom she had a son, also named Thomas Claypole. The will was witnessed by Adriaen Ruysenaers and Peter Adriaenson Block, lidermen of the lordship of Dongen. 


@@@@@


doc= 16835


Lloyd, Hannibal Evans (1770-1847), philologist and translator, was born in London on 30 May 1770, and was baptized at St Mary Marylebone on the day of his birth, the son of Henry Humphrey Evans Lloyd (c.1718-1783) and his wife, Mary, the sister of the Chevalier James de Johnstone. His parents died in his youth, but he was carefully brought up by some near relations, and thrived on a strict programme of studies and activities. He had an extraordinary memory, and was a lover not only of the arts, but of mathematics and science. He visited Europe, and in the spring of 1800 settled at Hamburg. He suffered severely from the hardships that Hamburg endured during its occupation by the French army, and joined the inhabitants in taking up arms in its defence. He eventually escaped, but lost most of his property. On his arrival in England in July 1813 he published, at the suggestion of Lord Bathurst, the foreign secretary, a volume based on his experiences, entitled 'Hamburgh, or, A particular account of the transactions which took place in that city during the first six months of 1813'. About the same time he received an appointment in the Foreign Office, the duties of which had previously been divided among several clerks, but Lloyd's competence in continental languages enabled him to discharge them single-handed. He retained the post until his death. Lloyd married Lucy Anna Margaretta Von Schwartzkopff (1782/3-1855) of Hamburg, with whom he had a son and four daughters, including Elizabeth ['see 'Thompson, Elizabeth Maria Bowen]. A friend of Klopstock, Lloyd translated under his auspices a large part of 'The Messiah', but did not publish his version. His excellent memory and varied acquirements made him a delightful companion. He wrote elegant Italian verse and corresponded with many eminent travellers and men of science. 
Throughout his career in the Foreign Office Lloyd continued to produce many works of a varied nature. He enjoyed biography and historical works, and, capitalizing on his knowledge of European countries, published such works as 'Alexander I, Emperor of Russia' (1826), and 'Descriptive and Historical Illustrations', in English and French, accompanying J. Coney's 'Architectural Beauties of Continental Europe' (1831-4). Lloyd's linguistic studies were also important: his 'Theoretisch-praktische englische Sprachlehre fur Deutsche' (1828) ran to four editions, and was long the standard grammar in several German universities. In 1829 he edited a German-English dictionary, and edited or revised several such works during his lifetime. Chief among his own great number of translations are many works of travel literature rendered into English, including Saabye's 'Greenland' (1818), Prince Wied-Neuwied's 'Travels in Brazil' (1820), Von Kotzebue's 'Voyage of Discovery into the South Sea and Beerings Straits' (1821), Timkovsky's 'Travels of the Russian Mission through Mongolia to China' (1827), Wolff and Doering's 'German Tourist' (1837), Count Bjornstjerna's 'British Empire in the East' (1840), Prince Wied-Neuwied's 'Travels in the Interior of North America' (1843), and Tam's 'Visit to the Portuguese Possessions in South-Western Africa' (1845). 
Lloyd was a constant contributor to the 'Literary Gazette' from its commencement in 1817, chiefly on foreign archaeology and the fine arts. During the last sixteen months of his life he suffered repeated attacks of 'congestion of the brain' ('GM'); he died at Morden College, St German's Place, Blackheath, Kent, on 14 July 1847, and was buried in the cemetery of Morden College, where his widow was also later buried. His eldest daughter, Susette, had married Henry William Smith, treasurer of Morden College, in 1836; she and her sisters were supporters of the college and of missionary work in Syria and Lebanon. 


@@@@@


doc= 16836


Lloyd, Henry Humphrey Evans (c.1718-1783), army officer and military writer, was born the son of a clergyman at Cwm Bychan Farm, in the parish of Llanbedr, Merioneth. He was educated at Jesus College, Oxford. Lloyd hoped to pursue a military career but could not afford to purchase a commission. In 1744 he went to France, where he also failed to secure an officer's posting. Disappointed, he entered a Jesuit college as a lay brother tutoring military officers in geography and field engineering. A year later he left to accompany the French army on an invasion of the Austrian Netherlands during the War of the Austrian Succession (1740-48). Lloyd's sketches of the battlefield of Fontenoy (1745) attracted the attention of the French commanding engineer, and Lloyd received a commission as a junior officer in the engineer corps. With a captain's rank, he then accompanied the forces of Charles Stuart, the Young Pretender, on the ill-fated Jacobite expedition to Scotland (1745-6). Lloyd left the prince's army on a secret mission carrying dispatches to rebel supporters in Wales. Later, disguised as a clergyman, he reconnoitred the south English coast in anticipation of a possible French invasion. Lloyd was arrested (probably under an assumed name since there is no official record of his imprisonment) as a suspected spy and transported to London. His friend John Drummond obtained Lloyd's release and they returned to France. Promoted major, Lloyd distinguished himself in a subsequent French campaign in the Low Countries as an engineer officer at the siege of the Dutch fortress at Bergen op Zoom (1747). Later he entered the Prussian army, but then offered his skills to Marshal Charles Louis Auguste Fouquet de Belle-Isle, returning to French service in 1754. He collected information on the various armies of Europe, subsequently published as 'Capt. Lloyd's Lists' (1760). Lloyd then travelled to England disguised as a merchant and conducted another reconnaissance of the British coast for a proposed French landing. When Drummond met him in London in 1756, however, Lloyd claimed to be receiving a pension from the British government of $500 a year (he was never commissioned in the British army; if true, these funds were most likely from secret service moneys). 
On his return to the continent Lloyd joined the Austrian army with the rank of lieutenant-colonel. He served as a quartermaster officer on Field Marshal F. M. Lacy's staff in the first campaigns of the Seven Years' War (1756-63). Having achieved the rank of major-general, in 1760 he commanded a reconnaissance force tracking the movements of the Prussian army. That same year Lloyd changed sides and entered the Prussian service under Ferdinand, duke of Brunswick. After the war in Germany ended he attempted to obtain a position with Count Wilhelm Schaumburg-Lippe, who was preparing to defend Portugal against a Spanish invasion. Hostilities ended before Lloyd entered the Portuguese service and instead he returned to England, where he began an intermittent writing career. Colonel David Graeme of Grothy allegedly employed Lloyd in negotiating the marriage of Queen Charlotte and George III. In 1768 Lloyd was again serving the British, conducting a secret mission to Italy to organize supplies for the defence of Corsica. In 1773-4 he commanded a Russian division in combat against the Turks and distinguished himself at the siege of Silistria (1773). He later commanded a Russian force opposing the Swedish. He allegedly quit Russian service after he was refused the order of St Anne because of his common birth. His travels then took him to Italy, Spain, and Gibraltar. Lloyd married a sister of the Chevalier James de Johnstone, details of whom are unknown; they had one son, Hannibal Evans Lloyd, the philologist and translator. 
Lloyd is best remembered as a writer on military strategy. His books include 'A Rhapsody of the Present System of French Politics' (1779), in which he set out ways to frustrate a French invasion of Great Britain. After Lloyd's death, British agents allegedly searched his house and removed confidential papers. Lloyd's heirs were later paid by the British government not to publish further editions of his work. Subsequent editions did appear, however, under a different title, 'A Political and Military Rhapsody on the Invasion and Defence of Great Britain', during the invasion scares of 1794 and 1798. Lloyd's most enduring and influential work remains 'The history of the late war in Germany between the king of Prussia and the empress of Germany and her allies' (1766). His 'Reflections on the principles of the art of war', also known as 'Political and military memoirs', was added for the second edition (1781). The 'History' was translated into at least five German and three French editions, the most famous by Georg Fredrich von Templehoff (1783). A second volume of the work, compiled from Lloyd's papers after his death, was published in 1784. In these works rests Lloyd's reputation as the father of the principles of modern warfare. It was his belief that 'this [military] art, like all others is founded on certain fixed principles which are by their nature invariable' (Alger, 19). Lloyd's military principles referred mainly to the organization of armies and the conduct of operations, many of which he based on mathematical calculations. His enunciation of the principles of war reflected the French military school, particularly the writings of Field Marshal Maurice de Saxe (under whom Lloyd had served in 1745), and the philosophy of the Enlightenment which advocated that rational, scientific rules could be derived to predict human behaviour. Among his acquaintances, Lloyd served for a period (1759) with a well-known Milanese exponent of Enlightenment philosophy, Pietro Verri, and the two thinkers undoubtedly influenced one another. Lloyd's other works included 'An Essay on the English Constitution' (1770), an elaboration on the balance of power between monarchy, aristocracy, and democracy (another manuscript on this subject, 'Essai philosophique sur les governments', remained unpublished), and 'An Essay on the Theory of Money' (1771), a defence of the use of paper money. 
Henry Lloyd had significant influence on military leaders and theorists in Europe and in colonial America. General George Washington, commander of the colonial army during the American War of Independence, had a well-read copy of 'Political and Military Rhapsody' in his library. While Napoleon called Lloyd's military theories absurd, Antoine-Henri de Jomini, the best-known contemporary analyst of Napoleon's campaigns, credited Lloyd in his 'Traite de grande tactique' (1803), and plagiarized much of Lloyd's work in the text. Carl von Clausewitz, in his major work 'Vom Kriege' (1832-7), rejected Lloyd's dogmatic approach to military operations for a more comprehensive theory of warfare emphasizing the interplay between the state, politics, chance, individual action, and military affairs. 
In the twentieth century Lloyd's theories were influential on the writings of Colonel J. F. C. Fuller. Fuller, reflecting on the military disasters of trench warfare in the First World War, believed that reviving Lloyd's principles might be instructive to future military leaders. The American Second World War general George S. Patton, who led the US Third Army during the allied campaign in Europe (1944-5), retained a dog-eared copy of Lloyd's 'History' in his extensive professional library. Although the notion of fixed, inviolable principles of war has long gone out of fashion in Western armies, many still retain principles of war in their doctrine as broad guidelines for the conduct of warfare. Lloyd died at The Hague on 19 June 1783. 


@@@@@


doc= 16837


Lloyd, Hugh (1546-1601), headmaster, was born in Llyn, Caernarvonshire. Nothing is known of his parents but there were at least two other sons and a daughter of the marriage. He was elected a scholar of Winchester College in 1560, as was his brother John in 1574. They were only two of numerous Welshmen who entered the college in Elizabeth's reign, an upsurge perhaps resulting from the 'Act of Union' in 1536. He proceeded to New College, Oxford, in 1562, becoming a fellow in 1564. He graduated BA in 1566, BCL in 1570, and DCL in 1588. He married at an unknown date; nothing is known of his wife except that she survived him. He resigned his fellowship in 1578 on his appointment as chancellor of Rochester. 
In 1579 Lloyd became vicar of Charlbury, Oxfordshire, and was elected headmaster of Winchester College. In the latter case he had attracted the support of Ambrose Dudley, earl of Warwick, who wrote to the warden and fellows of Winchester that his recommendation was hardly needed when Lloyd was 'so well known unto you all for his lyfe, religion, and learninge' (Winchester College muniment 23443). As headmaster his teaching of classics seems to have had a certain breadth: one of his pupils was John Owen, the noted writer of epigrams, and another was the poet and wit John Hoskins (whom Lloyd remembered in his will). Lloyd himself compiled 'Phrases elegantiores ex Caesaris commentariis Cicerone, aliisque, in usum scholae Winton', although this was not published until 1654. 
In 1584 Lloyd was made a prebendary of St Paul's and in 1588 he resigned as headmaster on becoming rector of Islip, near Oxford. There he maintained his intellectual interests through contact with a number of academics, particularly from St John's College and New College. Two of them -- Ralph Hutchinson, the biblical scholar, and Anthony Ayleworth, regius professor of medicine -- were made his executors. Lloyd died on 17 October 1601 and was buried in the outer chapel of New College. 


@@@@@


doc= 16838


Lloyd, Hugh (1588/9-1667), bishop of Llandaff, was born in Cardiganshire; his parents have not been identified. Having matriculated as a servitor of Oriel College, Oxford, in 1607, he graduated BA on 12 November 1611 and proceeded MA on 30 June 1614, by which time he had been ordained. He was elected to a fellowship of Jesus College, Oxford, and proceeded BD in 1624 and DD in 1638. He became rector of St Andrews, Glamorgan, in 1617 and rector of St Nicholas in the same county in 1628. He was presented to the sinecure rectory of Denbigh in 1637 and to the rectory of Hirnant, Montgomeryshire, in 1638. He was appointed a canon and archdeacon of St David's on 19 October 1644. 
There is scant trace of Lloyd during the civil wars and interregnum. Walker claimed that his benefices were sequestered and that he was allowed the customary fifth of his income for some years, but Matthews does not record him as a 'sufferer'. In 1660 Lloyd was appointed to the see of Llandaff, perhaps principally because of his long-standing connection with the diocese and because the political situation needed appointees of such uncontroversial 'obscurity' (Green, 95-6). Lloyd was also restored to the archdeaconry of St David's, which he held 'in commendam', and to his livings in Glamorgan and Montgomeryshire; he became a prebendary of Llandaff in 1660 and rector of Llangattock, Brecknockshire, in 1661. As bishop Lloyd left little mark. In October 1662 he wrote to his clergy urging them to manifest their religious zeal and their political loyalty in supporting free schools. White Kennett records some signs of Lloyd's concern to reconcile nonconforming clergy, such as Samuel Jones, former fellow of Jesus College and minister of Llangynwyd, and of his leniency. Lloyd allowed Richard Hawes, ejected minister of Leintwardine, to preach in public without subscription. Lloyd died in Llandaff at the age of seventy-eight on 7 June 1667 and was buried in the dilapidated Llandaff Cathedral. 


@@@@@


doc= 16839


Lloyd, Humphrey (1610-1689), bishop of Bangor, was born in July or August 1610 at Bod-y-fudden in the parish of Trawsfynydd, Merioneth, the third son of Richard Lloyd DD (1573/4-1647?), vicar of Ruabon, Denbighshire, and his wife, Jane (died in or after 1648), daughter of Rhydderch Hughes, another cleric. He matriculated from Jesus College, Oxford, on 25 January 1628, but it was from Oriel College that he graduated BA on 23 January 1630. In 1631 he became a fellow of Oriel, where he remained a tutor for many years, and proceeded MA on 12 May 1635. 
When parliament's lord lieutenant of Oxfordshire, Lord Saye, visited Oxford in September 1642 Lloyd was 'kept as a prisoner at 'the Starre', for some words uttered by him to this effect that 'if he was able he had rather lend the king a thousand pound than one penny to the parliament'' ('Life and Times of Anthony Wood', 1.62). Lloyd was chaplain to John Williams, archbishop of York, who, on 9 April 1644, presented him to the prebend of Ampleforth, but his installation was prevented by the advance of the Scottish army. On 10 June 1647 the House of Lords ordered that he be installed as vicar of Ruabon following the death of the previous incumbent, possibly his father, 'he taking the National League and Covenant' ('JHL', 9.252). Presumably Lloyd did not in the event take the covenant because he either did not take possession of Ruabon or else he was deprived of it soon afterwards. 
At some point following the death of Edward Brereton in 1644, and before 1650 or 1651 when a son was born, Lloyd married his widow, Jane (died 1689), daughter of John Griffith of Cefnamwlch, Caernarvonshire. They had at least three sons, John, Francis, and Richard. His stepson was Edward Brereton, MP for Denbigh Boroughs between 1689 and 1705. Following the Restoration Lloyd returned to Ruabon. In a petition of 1660 he sought confirmation for his prebend at York and also for the archdeaconry of Nottingham. He was presented by the king to the prebend of Ampleforth on 30 July 1660, and installed on 22 September. In another petition of 1660 he enlisted the support of Gilbert Sheldon to ask for the deanery of Bangor, which was not in fact vacant. On 12 September 1661 Lloyd was created DD. In the same year he became vicar of Northop, Flintshire (which he resigned in December 1664) and cursal canon of St Asaph. He was collated dean of St Asaph on 14 December 1663. 
In 1673 Lloyd left Ruabon to succeed his brother, Samuel, at Gresford, Denbighshire. On 10 September 1673 a warrant for a 'conge d'elire' was issued to elect Lloyd bishop of Bangor. On 23 October he was granted permission to hold the archdeaconries of Bangor and Anglesey, the vicarage of Gresford, and the prebend of Ampleforth together with his bishopric. He was enthroned by proxy on 5 January 1674, and the following day a writ was issued summoning him to sit in the House of Lords. He voted by proxy on 20 November 1675 against addressing the king to dissolve parliament. In 1676 he became a canon of Bangor. 
In 1685 Lloyd procured the archdeaconries of Bangor and Anglesey and the sinecure of Llanraeadr-yng-Nghinmeirch, Denbighshire, to be annexed to the bishopric. Lloyd's episcopate was marked by his firm maintenance of the rights of the Church of England and his unbending hostility to dissent. He distrusted the missionary activities in Wales of the presbyterian Thomas Gouge, whose attempts to dispel popular ignorance and spread the protestant word in the dark corners of the land were supported by both nonconformists and moderate Anglicans, and who had sought Lloyd's support for his Welsh edition of the 'Bible'. To Lloyd Gouge was using his preaching tours to sow sedition and religious disaffection in the minds of the gentry and of the 'credulous common people' (Jenkins, 184). Lloyd made his will, 'sick and weake in body', on 22 December 1686, adding a codicil on 9 January 1689. He died on 18 January 1689 and was buried in Bangor Cathedral. 


@@@@@


doc= 16840


Lloyd, Humphrey (1800-1881), physicist and university administrator, was born on 16 April 1800, at Dublin, the eldest son of the Revd Bartholomew Lloyd (1772-1837), later provost of Trinity College, Dublin, and his wife, Eleanor McLaughlin. Having received his early education at Mr White's school, Dublin, he entered Trinity College, Dublin, in 1815, gaining first prize, out of sixty-three competitors, at the entrance examination, then entirely classical. He profited greatly from the renaissance in mathematical education initiated at the college by his father. Following a brilliant undergraduate career, during which he obtained a scholarship in 1818, he graduated BA in 1819, taking first place and the gold medal for science, and proceeded MA in 1827, and DD in 1840. He became a junior fellow in 1824 and a senior fellow in 1843. He devoted himself especially to scientific studies and in 1831 succeeded his father as Erasmus Smith's professor of natural and experimental philosophy. During his tenure of this chair he sought successfully to improve the position of physical science in the university. Following the abolition of celibacy rules for fellows, he married, in July 1840, Dorothea, only daughter of the Revd James Bulwer, rector of Hunworth-cum-Stody, Norfolk. They had no children. 
In physical optics Lloyd made a number of noteworthy contributions. The first of these, in December 1832, was the experimental proof of existence of conical refraction in a crystal of aragonite following a prediction arising from a mathematical investigation of the Fresnel wave surface in biaxial crystals by his colleague William Rowan Hamilton. He demonstrated two species of conical refraction and established the law governing the polarization of the rays. Of significance also was the preparation of a substantial report, '''The progress and present state of physical optics'' (Report of the British Association for the Advancement of Science', 1834). Another success followed shortly afterwards (published 1837) when he demonstrated the interference of light passing directly from a luminous source with that coming from the same source but reflected at an angle of incidence of nearly 90 degree from a plane surface. This variation of Fresnel's famous twin-mirror experiment was regarded as further proof of the correctness of the wave theory of light of which Lloyd was an ardent supporter. He also investigated the phenomena of light incident on thin plates. In 1841 he submitted a communication on the subject to the British Association and in 1859 he described his complete investigation of the phenomena to the Royal Irish Academy. 
Investigation of the earth's magnetic field was Lloyd's primary research interest from the mid-1830s. Working under the aegis of the British Association he achieved prominence in the field of instrumentation. Having devised a method for measuring dip and relative intensity with a single instrument, he carried out, in collaboration with Edward Sabine and James Clerk Ross, a magnetic survey of Ireland in 1834 and 1835. In the two following years this work was extended to Scotland, England, and Wales. At the end of 1835 he established contact with Carl Friedrich Gauss of Gottingen, who, in developing the theory and technique of absolute measurement of the earth's field, had established geomagnetic investigation on a new foundation. 
Lloyd resolved to join the organization of observing stations established by the Hanoverian mathematician over the northern hemisphere. An observatory was built at Trinity College, Dublin, in 1837-8 and fitted out with instruments of Lloyd's design, operating on Gaussian principles and constructed for the most part by Thomas Grubb of Dublin. This became the prototype for a series of similar observatories in Britain and the colonies, established, on the recommendation of the Royal Society, by the government and the East India Company. These, like the Antarctic expedition (1839-43) led by Ross, were provided with instruments similar to those of Lloyd, and the observers received practical training from him at Dublin. This worldwide network of observing stations superseded Gauss's earlier organization and many continental stations joined the association. In all thirty-three observatories were established or re-equipped with instruments of Lloyd's design and the work was continued for nine years (1839-48). For the Arctic expeditions of Sir John Franklin in 1845 and of Sir John Richardson and Sir James Ross in 1848 Lloyd designed an instrument to be used by travelling observers and by mariners. 
Many papers which Lloyd wrote on these and other subjects, such as meteorology, are to be found in the 'Reports' of the British Association and in the 'Transactions' and 'Proceedings' of the Royal Irish Academy. Of the latter body he was president from 1846 to 1851, and in 1862 he was awarded its Cunningham gold medal. He resigned his chair of natural philosophy in 1843, on his accession to a senior fellowship in Trinity College. In 1862 he became vice-provost, and in 1867 provost of the college. He was president of the British Association in 1857, when it met in Dublin, a fellow of the Royal societies of London and Edinburgh, and an honorary member of many other learned societies of Europe and America. In 1855 the University of Oxford conferred on him the degree of DCL. 
Lloyd journeyed on at least four occasions to the continent. Accompanied by Sabine, he visited Berlin, Leipzig, and Gottingen in the autumn of 1839, and met important scientists such as Gauss, Wilhelm Weber, and Alexander von Humboldt. Following his marriage in the second week of July 1840 Lloyd and his wife travelled through Switzerland, northern Italy, Tyrol, and Bavaria. They visited observatories at Milan and Munich, and joined the meeting of the Italian Physical Society at Turin in September before reaching the Brussels observatory about 24 October. In the summer of 1841 he travelled with his wife to Paris to study the French system of training engineers. On a further tour with his wife he visited Berlin in early October 1849 as president of the Royal Irish Academy and was received there by von Humboldt. In 1874 the emperor of Germany awarded him the Order of Merit. 
In university administration, and in educational and ecclesiastical policy, Lloyd was a man of firm principle who was open to reform and innovation. In 1860 he published anonymously a pamphlet entitled 'Is it a Sin?' in which -- diverging from the majority view held by his fellow Irish Anglicans -- he advocated participation, at least in principle, of the Irish church in the national education board that was concerned with the organization of primary education in Ireland. This led to an invitation in the same year for him to join the board but he declined. The biggest issue he had to face as provost of Trinity College was the political pressure for change in its status following the enactment of Gladstone's 'Irish Church Act' of 1869 (effective, 1 January 1871) that disestablished the episcopal Church of Ireland. It was evident to him that the educational advantages hitherto enjoyed by members of his church would have to be shared by protestant dissenters and the majority Roman Catholic population. He welcomed the passing of the 'University of Dublin Tests Act' in 1873, which abolished remaining religious tests in the college, in preference to legislation that might have partitioned the endowments of the college among several denominational colleges and transferred its university powers to a nominated senate. 
Lloyd was a leading member of the general synod of the disestablished Church of Ireland and he contributed in the 1870s to debate on the revision of the church prayer book, particularly on the issue of absolution. His views on this subject, published in pamphlets entitled 'Doctrine of Absolution' (anonymous, 1871), and 'The Power of the Keys' (1873), were close to those of the evangelical, anti-sacerdotal wing of the church. 
Lloyd, like his father, may be regarded as a progressive educator of the nineteenth century. His scientific philosophy was firmly Baconian and his commitment to the scientific method and the central role of experiment was already evident in his 'Two Introductory Lectures on Physical and Mechanical Science' of 1834. He was primarily responsible, in 1850, for the introduction of the first science moderatorship (equivalent to Cambridge tripos) in experimental physics and was the founder of a tradition of scientific research, particularly in physics, within the University of Dublin. He contributed to the advancement of science and engineering education in the university, was instrumental in the establishment of the school of engineering that opened in November 1841, and helped to create chairs of geology and mineralogy and of applied chemistry. His mature philosophy of education is revealed in a pamphlet, 'Brief Suggestions in Reference to the Undergraduate Curriculum in Trinity College', published anonymously in 1869, in which he stressed the importance of mental training, of preparation for professional life, and of a broad and varied curriculum combined with a freedom of choice for advanced students. He advocated that English language and literature, and the sciences, should occupy a more prominent place at the expense of mathematics and classics that had previously dominated undergraduate studies. 
Lloyd died at his residence, Provost's House, Trinity College, on 17 January 1881. He published, in addition to a circular for directors of magnetic observatories and university addresses and lectures, a total of eight textbooks or monographs and sixty-four papers (three jointly with others) on scientific topics (including reports to the British Association). A translation of his '''The progress and present state of physical optics'' (Report of the British Association for the Advancement of Science', 1834) was published in Berlin (1836). His more important publications include 'A Treatise on Light and Vision' (1831), 'The Elements of Optics' (1849), and 'Treatise on Magnetism, General and Terrestrial' (1874). 


@@@@@


doc= 16841


Lloyd, Jacob Youde William (1816-1887), antiquary, was the eldest son of Jacob William Hinde (died 1868) of Ulverston, Lancashire, afterwards of Langham Hall, Essex, and Harriet, younger daughter and coheir of the Revd Thomas Youde of Clochfaen, Montgomeryshire, Plas Madog, Denbighshire, and Rowley's Mansion, Shrewsbury. He was educated at Wadham College, Oxford (BA 1839, MA 1874), and was ordained deacon in December 1839. He became curate of Llandinam, Montgomeryshire. Between October 1841 and December 1842, he converted to Roman Catholicism, and then served in the pontifical Zouaves. In 1870 Pius IX conferred upon him the knighthood of the order of St Gregory. He was also a knight of the Saviour of Greece. 
On the death of his aunt in 1857 he succeeded to the estates at Clochfaen and Plas Madog, and in 1868 he changed his name from Hinde to Lloyd, the old name of the Clochfaen family, and assumed the Lloyd coat of arms. He was a generous landlord, and although a Catholic he restored the parish church of Llangurig at a cost of $10,000. He also gave financial support to Catholic causes. However, about 1875 -- possibly in the wake of promulgation of papal infallibility -- Lloyd renounced the title of chevalier, to which his membership of the order of St Gregory entitled him, and gradually became estranged from the Roman Catholic church. 
Lloyd was a keen antiquary and published several genealogical works, the chief of which is 'The history of the princes, the lords marcher, and the ancient nobility of Powys Fadog, the ancient lords of Arwystli, Cedewen, and Meirionydd, and many of the descendants of the fifteen noble tribes of Gwynedd' (6 vols., 1881-7). He also contributed to the 'Archaeologia Cambriensis' and the 'Montgomeryshire Collections'. Lloyd died unmarried on 14 October 1887 at Rock Cottage, Belgrave Road, Ventnor, on the Isle of Wight. 


@@@@@


doc= 16842


Lloyd, John (c.1475-1523), musician, is of unknown parentage and upbringing; the terms of his will and his early circumstances connect him with Caerleon and the Bristol region. By 1498-9 he was already sufficiently well connected to petition successfully for conferment of a corrody of Thetford Priory. From 1504 to 1508 he was employed by Edward, duke of Buckingham, as director of an ensemble of men and boy singers for his private entertainment. During 1509 he was admitted a gentleman of Henry VIII's Chapel Royal, an appointment held until death. 
In 1512 he obtained a corrody of St Augustine's Abbey, Bristol, and following the death of the abbot in June 1515 saw fit to foment dissension among the canons. Richard Fox, bishop of Winchester, wrote of 'the inordinat, hedye and unreligiose dealyng' of a troublesome clique, and claimed that 'Lloyd of the Kynges chapell is auctor of much of this busynesse' ('Letters', 79-80); Lloyd hoped to influence the choice of a new abbot and so earn himself a large fee in gratitude. Perhaps an unfavourable outcome left him stricken with contrition, since by January 1519, when he made his will, he had resolved to go on pilgrimage to the Holy Land. Having visited the tomb of Christ in Jerusalem, he returned in time to join the Chapel Royal at the Field of Cloth of Gold (1520). 
Lloyd's tombstone (minutely described by Strype) represented him as bachelor of music, though his award is recorded at neither English university. As 'Flude in armonia graduatus' he was the composer of three items surviving in a songbook of 'c'.1520 from the court of Henry VIII. All exhibit technical ingenuity. One is a straightforward vocal canon, three parts in one. Each of the others is a brief textless fantasia whose three written-out voices are all but self-sufficient, to which a fourth voice can be added through the solution of an encrypted instruction. Dart's attribution to Lloyd of the magnificent mass 'O quam suavis est' and its associated antiphon 'Ave regina celorum' seems unconvincing. Their pairing in a single presentation manuscript appears to constitute a submission for a doctoral degree, which Lloyd did not possess, and consideration of the encrypted attribution seems to point more convincingly toward Dr George Newton. Lloyd died on 3 April 1523, and was buried in the chapel of the Savoy Hospital, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 16844


Lloyd, John (1643/4-1682), poet, born in Wonston, near Winchester, Hampshire, was the son of George Lloyd, or Floyd (1597/8-1658?), rector of Wonston, and the younger brother of Nicholas Lloyd (1630?-1680). His family was of Welsh origin and besides Nicholas he had two other brothers (George and Edward) and three sisters. Three of his siblings died before him and it appears that his brother Nicholas only just managed to survive the smallpox which was raging while John was a student at Oxford. 
Lloyd entered Wadham College, Oxford (under the name Floyd), on 13 November 1662 aged eighteen, was fully admitted on 30 September 1663, received his BA in 1666, and graduated MA on 18 February 1669. On 20 May 1675 he was appointed vicar of Holyrood, Southampton. 
Despite his being ordained, Lloyd's real calling seems to have been poetry and music and he is reported to have 'shared the friendship and esteem of Addison' (Rose, 297). Lloyd achieved modest fame with his translation of 'The Song of Songs', which first appeared in 1681 in an allegedly plagiarized version. Apparently the author at first did not want the translation to be published: as Lloyd informs his readers in a foreword, the work was handed to a friend in London privately and was 'not intended to trouble the press', but was rather mysteriously 'borrowed... by a stranger, and printed without my leave... and not only so, but owned by that same person... for a thing of his own composure' (Lloyd, 'Shir ha shirim, or, The Song of Songs; being a Paraphrase upon the most Excellent Canticles of Solomon in a Pindarick Poem', 1682). This affront induced Lloyd to set matters right and the volume was published in 1682 under its proper author's name with a dedication to Lady Ann Newland, wife of Sir Benjamin Newland. There are several dedications to the author, including one signed 'Thomas Butler A.M.' as well as one by the author's brother George. The second edition of 1682 comprises Lloyd's translation 'The Hymn on the Works of the Six Days', dated 1681. This seems to be the only other work Lloyd ever published. He died at Southampton on 31 August 1682. 


@@@@@


doc= 16845


Lloyd, John (1641/2-1687), college head and bishop of St David's, was born at 'Pentaine' (possibly Pendine/Pen-tywyn), Carmarthenshire, the son of Morgan Lloyd. He matriculated at Merton College, Oxford, aged fifteen, on 10 March 1657, graduating BA on 12 October 1659 and proceeding MA in 1662, the year in which he became a fellow of Jesus College, Oxford. He was presented to the living of Llan-dawg, Carmarthenshire, in 1668 (which he retained until 1687) and proceeded BD on 15 March 1670. He was made rector of the Pembrokeshire livings of Llangwm in 1671 and Burton in 1672. On 9 April 1672 he was chosen precentor of Llandaff. Lloyd was elected principal of Jesus College, Oxford, on 24 April 1673, probably on the recommendation of his predecessor, Sir Leoline Jenkins. He added to his clutch of degrees and preferments by proceeding DD in 1674 and by becoming treasurer of Llandaff on 10 May 1679. 
Lloyd served as vice-chancellor of the University of Oxford from 1682 to 1685. Anthony Wood was not overly impressed, describing him as 'a clown, pedag[ogue], sot, not speak Latin' ('Life and Times of Anthony Wood', 3.27). Humphrey Prideaux also expressed reservations: 'I doubt how he may acquit himself of it; he is an honest good man, but of a temper too mild for a governor' ('Letters of Humphrey Prideaux', 133). Nevertheless Lloyd, who could look to the support of Jenkins (now secretary of state), was thought to be a good man to strengthen the authority of the tory university over the town's whig magistracy. He undoubtedly played a crucial part in the assertion of loyalist Anglican values within and by the university. He urged the composition, and presided over the promulgation, of the much publicized decree of convocation of July 1683 which upheld the subject's duty of obedience to lawful authority, and whose condemnation of dissident opinions was followed by the public burning of offending books -- among them Hobbes's 'Leviathan' and books by Richard Baxter, John Owen, John Milton, and Cardinal Bellarmine. 
Lloyd's loyalty to the Stuart regime was rewarded when he was consecrated bishop of St David's on 17 October 1686, in company with bishops Cartwright of Chester and Parker of Oxford. However, he returned to Oxford sick, and died of a 'dropsy' in the principal's lodgings at Jesus College on 13 February 1687 ('Life and Times of Anthony Wood', 3.212); he was buried in the college chapel two days later. Evidently unmarried, his will divided his estate between his two executors, both members of Jesus College, William Bevan MA and John Laugharne BA, who became tory MP for Haverfordwest between 1702 and 1715. 


@@@@@


doc= 16846


Lloyd, John Augustus (1800-1854), engineer and surveyor, the youngest son of John Lloyd of King's Lynn, Norfolk, was born in London on 1 May 1800. He was educated successively at private schools at Tooting and at Winchester, where he was taught some basic science. On a visit to Derbyshire he carried out a survey of the Wirksworth mines. The peace of 1815 prevented his obtaining a commission in the army as he had wanted, and he was sent out to his elder brother, who was king's counsel at Tortola (Virgin Islands). There John spent his time surveying and learning Spanish and French. After crossing to South America he presented an introduction, which had been given him by Sir Robert Ker Porter, artist and sometime British consul in Venezuela, to Simon Bolivar, the liberator of Colombia; he served for some years on Bolivar's staff as a captain of engineers, and ultimately attained the rank of lieutenant-colonel. In November 1827 Lloyd and Captain Maurice Falmarc, a Swedish officer in the Colombian military service, were granted permission by a rather reluctant Bolivar to survey the Isthmus of Panama and report on the best means of inter-oceanic communication. Bolivar was keen to encourage commerce among Central and South American countries, having in 1826 visited Panama as convenor of a conference which, among other things, promoted such trade; but, although he approved in theory of inter-oceanic communication, in practice he was not persuaded by any proposed schemes. 
Work on the survey began in May 1828, but their progress was arrested by disturbances at Cartagena, where in helping to restore order Lloyd was severely wounded and narrowly escaped death. The survey was ultimately completed under immense difficulties, including heavy rain, dense forests, and attacks by the followers of General Sarda, the enemy of Bolivar. Lloyd and Falmarc recommended using the rivers and constructing a railway and canal to link the oceans. Theirs was the first canal proposed to suggest Limon Bay as the Atlantic terminus, a plan included in most subsequent schemes and finally carried out with the building of the present canal. Lloyd suggested the use of British convicts to construct the link. Soon afterwards he appears to have returned to England. His report on his survey appeared in 'Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society' (1830, 59-68), with supplementary information in the 'Journal of the Royal Geographical Society' (1, 1830, 69-101). On 11 March 1830 he was elected a fellow of the Royal Society. He was then employed, under the joint direction of the Board of Admiralty and the Royal Society, in determining the difference of level in the Thames between London Bridge and the sea. His report appeared in 'Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society' (1831, 167-98). 
In 1831 Lloyd went out to Mauritius, where he was appointed colonial civil engineer and surveyor-general. He arrived at Port Louis on 31 August 1831, and soon afterwards made a daring ascent of the Peter Botte (Pieter Both) Mountain, which was 823 metres high and previously regarded as unassailable. He recounted the adventure later in the 'Journal of the Royal Geographical Society', volume 3. During his twenty years' service in Mauritius he carried out many useful public works, including a breakwater for the inner harbour, the custom house, a patent slip for vessels of 600 tons, the colonial observatory, iron bridges, district churches, hundreds of miles of macadamized roads, and a trigonometrical survey of the island and the adjoining islets. He also compiled a new map of Madagascar, with a memoir, published in the 'Journal of the Royal Geographical Society', volume 20. He left the island on 4 April 1849, and reached Europe by way of Ceylon. He made his way to Norway, and afterwards travelled through Poland, where he was temporarily detained by the Russian authorities at Cracow. On his release he visited the Carpathians, Vienna, the Tyrol, and France, and inspected the observatories 'en route'. 
Lloyd became an associate of the Institution of Civil Engineers in 1849, and served on the council. His paper on the 'Facilities for a ship canal between the Atlantic and Pacific' ('PICE', 9, 1849-50, 58ff.) was awarded the Telford medal. 'There was nothing', he wrote, 'but the climate and the expense to prevent a canal being cut from one sea to the other of sufficient depth to float the largest ship in her majesty's navy' (ibid., 60). 
In 1851 Lloyd was special commissioner charged with organizing displays of manufacturing and industrial products for the Great Exhibition. He performed his work with indefatigable industry and by way of reward was appointed British charge d'affaires to Bolivia on 4 December 1851. A paper which he wrote there on the mines of Copiapo, Chile, was published in the 'Journal of the Royal Geographical Society' (1853, 23, 196-212). 
After the outbreak of war with Russia, Lloyd started on a mission to persuade the Circassians to support the British side. He was detained in the Crimea after the battle of the Alma to collect information, and died at Therapia of cholera on 10 October 1854. He left a widow, Fanny Drummond Lloyd (died 28 Sept 1856), and family. Two of his sons were officers in the British army. 
Lloyd was a man of immense energy and of much scientific aptitude. He published several papers, including those on Panama ('Journal of the Royal Geographical Society', 1, 1931, 69-100); and on Mauritius ('Astronomical Society's Monthly Notices', 3, 1833-6, 186-94; 'Geological Society's Proceedings', 3, 1842, 317-18; 'Proces Verbaux, Societe d'Histoire Naturelle, Mauritius', 1846, 155-6). His 'Papers relating to proposals for establishing colleges of arts and manufactures for the industrial classes' was published privately in 1851. He made many drawings of Madagascar, and charts, mostly of South America. 


@@@@@


doc= 16847


Lloyd, Julius (1830-1892), Church of England clergyman and author, eldest son of Francis Lloyd, manufacturer, of Norbiton, Kingston upon Thames, Surrey, was born on 10 September 1830 and was educated at the New Proprietary School, Blackheath. He was admitted as a pensioner to Trinity College, Cambridge, on 11 May 1848, and elected a scholar on 3 May 1851, graduating BA in 1852 as 22nd wrangler. In 1853 he was placed in the first class of the moral science tripos. On 30 May 1850 he was admitted to the Inner Temple, and in 1853 was president of the Cambridge Union. In 1855 he proceeded MA. He was ordained deacon in 1855 and priest in 1856 by the bishop of Rochester. On 23 September 1856 he married Caroline Fanny (1818-1894), daughter of William Voules of Windsor; their only son died at Cannes in 1879. 
Lloyd served curacies in succession at Brentwood, Essex (1855-7), St Peter, Wolverhampton (1858-62), Trysull, Staffordshire (1862-6), and St Peter, Pimlico (1866-8). In 1868 he became vicar of High Cross, Hertfordshire, and in 1871 incumbent of St John, Greenock. In 1880 he was presented by Bishop Fraser to the rectory of St Ann, Manchester, and in 1886 became vicar of Leesfield, Lancashire, rural dean of Oldham, and honorary canon of Manchester. Finally, in 1891, Lloyd was appointed by Bishop Moorhouse as canon residentiary of Manchester and rector of St Philip, Salford, where he was elected a member of the Salford school board. Bishop Fraser appointed him his examining chaplain in 1881, to which post he was reappointed in 1886 by Bishop Moorhouse. 
Lloyd was an effective preacher and a hard-working parish priest, of pronounced liberal views. In 1865 he was appointed select preacher at Cambridge, and published a collection of sermons, 'The Unity of God in Revelation' (1866). 
Lloyd also published other of his sermons; sketches of church history in Germany, Scotland, Africa, and France; and a history of the English church in biographical sketches. In 1877 he published 'Christian Politics: a Study of the Principles of Politics According to the New Testament', which put his views on the contemporary church in a historical context. In it he presented the moral principles of the church as the moral principles of the nation. He argued against disestablishment, holding that the title of Church of England helped to hold disparate elements together. Lloyd died at his home, Moorfield, Kersal, Manchester, on 27 May 1892 after addressing a Church Day Schools Association meeting in Manchester Town Hall. 


@@@@@


doc= 16848


Lloyd, Lodowick (fl. 1573-1607), writer and courtier, was the fifth son of Oliver Lloyd, lord of the manor of Marrington, and Gwenllian, daughter of Griffith ap Howel ab Ieuan Blayney of Gregynog. Nothing is known of his early life, but his works suggest that he was highly educated, being able to write in Latin and having a wide range of reference to numerous classical and biblical authorities. A number of Lloyd's early works are dedicated to Sir Christopher Hatton, including one of his most significant efforts, 'The Pilgrimage of Princes' (1573), a long advice book for princes, which is prefaced by an elaborate acrostic poem to Hatton. It is possible that Hatton may have been Lloyd's patron and helped to launch his career at court. Lloyd refers to himself as an 'old servant' of Hatton's in 'The First Part of the Diall of Daies' (1590). Lloyd also refers to himself as 'her Maiesties Seargeant at arms' in 'The Stratagems of Jerusalem' (1602), and evidently kept this post after James I ascended the throne. 
Lloyd appears to have been a notable figure at court. He was friendly with the printer and poet John Lane, who claims that Lloyd paid for the funeral expenses of Edmund Spenser, a story which seems unlikely and cannot be corroborated. He wrote an epitaph on Sir Edward Saunders in 1576, which was published as a broadsheet and included in a collection of poetry, 'The Paradise of Dainty Devices' (1576). He wrote prefatory verses, as Lodowick Flood, for Humphrey Llwyd's 'Breviary of Britain', translated by Thomas Twyne (1573), and William Blandy's 'The Castle, or, Picture of Pollicy' (1581), a work dedicated to Sir Philip Sidney. Edward Grant and Thomas Churchyard wrote prefatory verses to 'The Pilgrimage of Princes'. Lloyd's works were all dedicated to Elizabeth, James, Prince Henry ('The Jublie of Britaine', 1607), and Queen Anne ('The Choyce of Jewels', 1607), or to prominent courtiers such as Sir Robert Cecil ('The Stratagems of Jerusalem', 1602), and John Whitgift, archbishop of Canterbury ('The Consent of Time', 1590). Whether this indicates Lloyd's success in gaining influence in the highest circles in the land, or simply a hopeful ambition, is unclear. 
Most of Lloyd's works are collections of moralistic advice to princes, governors, and courtiers, relying heavily on classical and biblical examples (often the same ones). Lloyd exhibits a strongly protestant bias and warns of the dangers of Catholicism, notably in his poem, 'Certaine Englishe Verses, Presented unto the Queenes most Excellent Maiestie, by a Courtier' (1586), written after the exposure of the Babington plot. The most substantial of his compositions are 'The Pilgrimage of Princes' and 'The Consent of Time', a huge comparative history of the Jews, Egyptians, Greeks, Romans, French, Spanish, and other peoples, concluding with a history of the martyrs of the early church. Other of his works are clearly based on the substantial scholarship of these two books. Lloyd's output appears to have been erratic. After his first two works he published little until the early 1590s, and then nothing more until the early 1600s, culminating in five works published in 1607. This may indicate a busy career or other duties at court apart from his writing. 
A stationer, also called Lodowick Lloyd, kept a shop in Pope's Head Alley, Lombard Street, London, possibly a son or relative of the above. With Henry Crips he published the first London edition of Robert Burton's 'Anatomy of Melancholy' (1652) and, after moving to the Castle in Cornhill, published Matthew Stevenson's 'Poems' (1665). 


@@@@@


doc= 16849


Lloyd, Sir Nathaniel (1669-1741), college head, was born in the Savoy, London, on 29 November 1669, the eldest son of 
The eldest of eight sons, Nathaniel Lloyd was educated at St Paul's School and at Trinity College, Oxford, whence he matriculated on 9 April 1685. He was elected fellow of All Souls in 1689, graduated BCL on 22 June 1691, and proceeded DCL on 30 June 1696, in which year he was admitted a member of the College of Advocates on 21 November. He was appointed deputy Admiralty advocate, during the absence of Dr Henry Newton, on 15 November 1704 and was king's advocate from 1715 to 1727. 
Lloyd was knighted on 29 May 1710, and in the same year was incorporated at Cambridge University and admitted, on 20 June, master of Trinity Hall; he served as vice-chancellor of the university in 1710-11. Under his mastership the college chapel was remodelled and the principal court transformed by the addition of Palladian doorways, sash windows, and new dormers. Lloyd, who remained unmarried, was an aloof figure in college, and in later years lived mainly in his rooms in Doctors' Commons or in his house in Sunbury-on-Thames. He resigned as master on 1 October 1735. He died at Sunbury on 10 March 1741, and was buried on 8 April in Trinity Hall chapel, where a marble monument, bearing an inscription composed by him six years earlier, was erected in his memory. He bequeathed $3000 to rebuild the hall in a classical style, and $1000 to All Souls to complete the building of the Codrington Library. 


@@@@@


doc= 16850


Lloyd, Nicholas (1630?-1680), Church of England clergyman and scholar, was born, according to his own statement, at the parsonage house, Wonston, near Winchester, Hampshire, on 28 May 1630, and baptized the Sunday following, 30 May, the son of the Revd George Lloyd 
(Floyd; 1597/8-1658?)
. It has since been stated that he was born in 1634 at Holton, Flintshire, Wales. Lloyd's family was indeed Welsh in origin (George Lloyd's father, David Lloyd, was of Merioneth, Wales). Lloyd had at least three brothers (the poet John Lloyd, George, and Edward) and three sisters. His familial affections were strong, judging from his commonplace book, dated 1656, which contains Latin verses on the deaths of two sisters and, in 1655, his brother Edward. In April 1657 he himself may have narrowly escaped death from smallpox. 
Educated at home by his father until 1643, Lloyd was admitted scholar of Winchester College on 3 September 1644. He left on 26 September 1651 and matriculated at Oxford University, entering Hart Hall on 13 May 1652. On 20 October 1653 he was admitted scholar of Wadham College, where he had a distinguished career and lived, it appears, in the 'Second Middle Chamber from the Chapel' (Gardiner, 198). He proceeded BA on 16 January 1656 and MA on 6 July 1658 and held many offices at Wadham, including bursar, catechist, humanity lecturer (1659), university rhetoric reader (1665), and sub-warden (1666, 1670). He was also rector of St Martin Carfax, Oxford (1665-70). In 1665 Dr Walter Blandford, bishop of Oxford and subsequently of Worcester, appointed Lloyd his chaplain, and Lloyd accompanied him to Worcester in the early 1670s. 
A modest man, who respected and encouraged the scholarship of others, Lloyd was 'a deare and intimate acquaintance' of Oxford historiographer and antiquarian Anthony Wood ('Life and Times', 2.197). Between November 1669 and June 1670 the two were frequently together at Oxford taverns and coffee houses such as Pont's, Pinnock's, Mother Jeanses', the Fleur-de-lis, and the Crown. During this period Wood recorded over thirty shared evenings with Lloyd, many in company with William Thornton. To Lloyd, who highly praised the work, Wood submitted the manuscript of his history of the city and university of Oxford (first published in Latin translation, 1674). Unhappily for both men, and especially embarrassing for Lloyd, who personally extended the invitation to his friend, the warden of Wadham College, Gilbert Ironside, invited them to supper on 29 October 1674 and in the course of the evening toasted Lloyd in claret and proceeded to insult Wood and metaphorically roast Wood's book ('Life and Times', 2.296-7). 
In 1670 Lloyd published a revision and enlargement of Charles Estienne's compendious 'Dictionarium historicum, geographicum, poeticum'; this was the product of twenty years of Lloyd's labour, for which he drew on classical sources, the church fathers, and modern authors on geography and pagan antiquity. He 'made it quite another thing, by adding thereunto, from his great reading, almost as much more matter as there was before, with many corrections, &c.' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 3.1259). The first edition having quickly sold, Lloyd continued to revise and expand the work. Though appointed rector of St Mary's, Newington, Surrey, on 28 April 1673, he did not live there until 23 August 1677. He died from what his doctors described as 'a dropsy in the stomack' on 27 November 1680, the parish register recording that he and Herbert Rogers, parish clerk, 'both lay dead and unburied at the same time, Dec. 1, 1680' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Rawl. D32, fol. 22'r'; Burn, 112). Lloyd was buried in the chancel with no memorial, 'leaving then behind him, among those that well knew him, the character of an harmless quiet man, and of an excellent philologist' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 3.1259). His unpublished writings, chiefly commentaries and translations, were 'retrieved from being made Waste Paper' after his brother John's death (Aubrey, 5.140). Posthumously, in 1686, Lloyd's second edition of Estienne's dictionary (completed only shortly before Lloyd's death) was published. His extensive private library, consisting of 1088 volumes (159 theology, 428 philology and history, 18 medical, and 483 'English') and 297 pamphlets, fell under a London auction hammer on 4 July 1681. 


@@@@@


doc= 16851


Lloyd, Richard (1594/5-1659), Church of England clergyman, was the youngest of the five sons of David Lloyd, or Dafydd Llwyd (died 1619), of Henblas, Anglesey, and his (second?) wife, Catherine, daughter of Richard Owen Tudor of Penmynydd. His father was a biblical scholar, linguist, and poet, and his mother was also an accomplished poet. He and his brothers were educated by their parents at home. He matriculated from Oriel College, Oxford, on 3 April 1612, aged seventeen, and 'took degrees in arts' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 3.472) before he proceeded BD on 7 May 1628. Like two of his brothers he became a clergyman, and, at an unknown date, minister of Sonning and of Tilehurst, Berkshire. At some point he married Joan Wickins; their elder son, Richard, may have been the Richard Lloyd baptized at Tilehurst on 28 August 1625; their younger son, William Lloyd (1627-1717), the future bishop, was born at Tilehurst on 18 August 1627; they also had three daughters, who later married clergymen. When his sons matriculated at Oxford in March 1639, Lloyd was described as of Sonning, 'sacerd'. At an unknown date he remarried, but no details of his second wife are known. 
Anthony Wood says that during the civil war Lloyd was imprisoned four or five times because of 'the great affection and zeal he had for king Charles' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 3.472). He was imprisoned as a delinquent as early as February 1641. A Denbighshire nominee to the Westminster assembly on 25 April 1643, he was not included on the final list. At some unspecified date in the 1640s he spent a period in hiding in woods near Tilehurst to escape the attentions of parliamentary soldiers. During that decade he was sequestered and retired to Oxford where he taught a private school for several years in the parish of St Peter-le-Bailey; in December 1651 he was described as 'late of Englefield'. He published 'An English Grammar' (1652), 'Artis poeticae' (1652), and 'The Latine Grammar' (1653), and in 1654 he produced a combined English and Latin grammar entitled 'The Schoole-Masters Auxilaries'. In March 1656, described as 'of Maidenhead', he was lodging at the Queens Arms at Holborn Bridge, London, but he left London for Oxford on 1 April. He died in 1659 and was buried at St Peter-le-Bailey, Oxford, in June that year. 


@@@@@


doc= 16852


Lloyd, Sir Richard (1606-1676), lawyer and politician, was born on 23 February 1606, the first son of Evan Lloyd (died 1626) of Dulasau, Penmachno, Caernarvonshire, and Janet ('fl'. 1585-1630), daughter of Roderick ab Ieuan of Pennarth, Llanystumdwy, in the same county. He is probably the man of that name who entered Gray's Inn in 1618, matriculated from Wadham College, Oxford, in 1624, was called to the bar in 1635, and was made reader of Barnard's Inn in 1639. Having married Margaret (died in or after 1650), daughter of Ralph Sneyd of Keele, Staffordshire, on 4 September 1632, he was employed on missions abroad in 1635-6, after which the young lawyer seated himself at Esclusham near Wrexham in Denbighshire. 
In the late 1630s Lloyd was granted the reversion to the office of prothonotary and clerk to the crown in Denbighshire and Montgomeryshire. After attending Charles I during the first bishops' war he was appointed attorney-general for north Wales and sat for Newcastle under Lyme in the short parliament. It was in this capacity that he was called on by the earl of Bridgewater, lord president of Wales, for assistance in defending the council in the marches of Wales from the attacks of the House of Commons. Lloyd duly wrote treatises defending the council, including one against its proposed abolition. 
In 1642 Lloyd was forward in organizing support for Charles I in north Wales, assuring the king of the 'loyal professions' of the principality ('CSP dom.', '1641-3', 336). He was appointed a commissioner of array for Denbighshire and Radnorshire, and entertained the king at his house in Wrexham on 27 September and 7 October, receiving a knighthood on the latter occasion. An active commissioner of array in north Wales, he wrote in early 1643 of his desire to assist the royalists of Chester against those 'poisoned by the industry of the factious and seditious preachers' (Tucker, 56-7). About this time he was also raising a regiment for the king, probably of dragoons. 
For a time after 1643 Lloyd is inconspicuous in records, but regains prominence after his appointment as governor of Holt Castle in Denbighshire by April 1645. He and his garrison were obdurate in their resistance to parliament's advances, but were eventually forced to capitulate, surrendering the castle on 13 January 1647. Under the articles of agreement he received very favourable terms, being allowed to go into exile and having his estate of $300 per annum granted to his wife and children, though he was excluded from the pardon. Lloyd apparently settled in Calais, and does not appear to have troubled the interregnum governments. 
At the Restoration Lloyd became chief justice of the Brecon circuit, which helps account for his election as member for Radnorshire in 1661. Although not a prominent member, he continued to advocate the cause of the council in the marches, presenting a memorandum in 1661 calling for its re-establishment. He died on 5 May 1676 and was buried in Wrexham parish church, where a memorial was erected in his memory. As he died intestate his estate was subject to litigation between his daughters and his grandson, Richard, Esclus Hall eventually falling to the heirs of his son-in-law Sir Henry Conway. 


@@@@@


doc= 16853


Sir Richard Lloyd (c.1634-1686), judge, and his wife, Elizabeth, daughter of John Jones, an apothecary. Richard Lloyd was the fourth son of the parliamentary colonel Andrew Lloyd (died 1663) of Aston, Shropshire, and Margaret Powell of Whittington Park, Shropshire. Having been educated in Shrewsbury he was admitted to Gray's Inn in 1655 and became an advocate at Doctors' Commons in 1664. As a fellow of All Souls, Oxford, he proceeded BCL (1659) and DCL (1662). He was Admiralty advocate (1674-85) and chancellor of the dioceses of Lichfield and of Durham. A tory and an Anglican, he sat as MP for Durham city in the parliaments of 1679-81, 1681, and 1685; he was knighted on 16 January 1677. He was dean of the arches in 1684 and a judge of the high court of Admiralty in 1685-6. He died on 28 June 1686 and was buried in the church of St Benet Paul's Wharf, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 16854


Lloyd, Richard (1764/5-1834), Church of England clergyman, was the younger son of John Lloyd, rector of Thorpe, Derbyshire, and curate of Wrexham, Denbighshire, and his wife, Mary. After attending Wrexham grammar school, he was admitted pensioner to Magdalene College, Cambridge, on 26 June 1783, aged eighteen. He graduated BA as fourth junior optime in 1787, proceeded MA in 1790, and was elected a fellow. He was ordained deacon by the bishop of London on 18 May 1788, and priest on 4 July 1790. For some time he acted as assistant to the evangelical Revd Richard Cecil of St John's Chapel, Bedford Row. In 1797 he became vicar of Midhurst, Sussex, and on 12 December 1805 vicar of St Dunstan-in-the-West, Fleet Street. 
Lloyd was author of a treatise entitled 'Christian Theology, or, An Inquiry into the Nature and General Character of Revelation' (2nd edn 1804) and a 'Memoir' of his evangelical brother, the Revd Thomas Lloyd (1830). He also published sermons, and pamphlets on the Catholic claims, the duties of the clergy, education, and on the attempt in 1817 to institute an auxiliary to the British and Foreign Bible Society at Midhurst, engaging in a controversy with Edward Cooper concerning the Bible Society and the Church Missionary Society. Lloyd died at Peckham Rye, Surrey, in 1834. 


@@@@@


doc= 16855


Lloyd, Ridgway Robert Syers Christian Codner (1842-1884), physician and antiquary, born at Devonport on 20 December 1842, was the son of Francis Brown Lloyd, a west country doctor, who afterwards took orders, and his wife, Margaret, daughter of George Christian. He was educated at Bristol and Stratford upon Avon grammar schools, and proceeded to Guy's Hospital, where he became MRCS and LSA in 1866. He was house surgeon in the Peterborough Infirmary for three years, and in 1870 he bought a practice at St Albans. He was married to Catherine Rosa Scheriman Lloyd; they had at least one child. Lloyd died from typhoid fever at his house, Boroughfield, St Albans, on 1 June 1884, and was buried in the abbey churchyard there; his wife and one son survived him. 
Lloyd was a successful physician and a diligent antiquary. He studied the history of the abbey of St Albans, and was consulted by Henry Hucks Gibbs as to the restoration of the screen. He published 'An Account of the Altars, Monuments, and Tombs in St. Albans Abbey' (1873). He also wrote many papers on archaeological subjects, of which 'The Shrines of St. Albans and St. Amphibalus' (1872) and 'The Paintings on the Choir Ceiling of St. Albans Abbey' (1876) were published separately. He also contributed to 'The Lancet' and the 'British Medical Journal'. 


@@@@@


doc= 16856


Lloyd, Robert (bap. 1733, d. 1764), poet and playwright, was baptized on 7 May 1733 at St John, Smith Square, Westminster, London, the son of Pierson Lloyd DD (1704-1781) and his wife, Anne, daughter of the Revd John Maximilian De L'Angle, rector of Croughton, Northamptonshire. Pierson Lloyd, son of a Westminster victualler, was educated at Westminster School and Trinity College, Cambridge. On leaving Cambridge in 1726 he became an usher at Westminster School; in 1749 he was appointed under-master. He retired with a Lambeth DD in 1771. Forty-five years of schoolmastering did not prevent him from pursuing a successful career in the church. Ordained priest in 1730, he succeeded his father-in-law as rector of Croughton (1732-79), and held the first part of the rectory of Waddesdon, Buckinghamshire, from 1733 until his death. He published a volume of sermons in 1765. Long-standing connections with the archdiocese of York led to his appointment as prebendary in 1777 and chancellor in 1780. 
His son Robert was a Westminster schoolboy of brilliant promise: king's scholar, captain of the school in 1750, elected head to Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1751; his friend George Colman (1732-1794) was elected head of those proceeding to Christ Church, Oxford, in the same year. Despite a passion for literature rather than the mathematics and natural philosophy then dominant at Cambridge, Lloyd negotiated his years in college successfully, taking his BA in 1755 (MA, 1758). He remained in Cambridge for two years. His father would have urged Robert to enter the church, and to do so by winning a college fellowship. But Robert's real interest was poetry; as early as 1754 his Westminster friend William Cowper had hailed him as '
sole heir, and single, 

Of dear Mat Prior's easy jingle. 
('Epistle to Robert Lloyd')' Lloyd returned to London in 1757. His father then secured for him an appointment as usher at Westminster School. Teaching the rudiments of Latin verse to schoolboys was repugnant to him, however, and in 1760 he gave it up in order to devote himself to writing. He thus cut himself off successively from the two professions in which his father could assist him. 
Lloyd's fortunes as a literary man were bound up with those of his friend Colman. While still at Oxford, Colman had joined with a slightly older Westminster contemporary, Bonnell Thornton (1724-1768), in conducting a successful essay periodical, 'The Connoisseur' (weekly; 31 January 1754-30 September 1756); five numbers contain poems by Lloyd (67, 72, 90, 125, 135). When all three had returned to London in the later 1750s they formed the Nonsense Club, an association of seven old Westminsters. The other members were William Cowper, James Bensley, and probably Chase Price; the identity of the seventh is uncertain. The club's interests were literary; its characteristic activity was burlesque. Two examples survive. Lloyd and Colman collaborated on parodies of the learned Pindaric odes of Thomas Gray (1757) and the vapid efforts of William Mason (1756). In 1760, to draw attention to their fledgeling careers, they retrieved these burlesques and published them anonymously in a quarto entitled 'Two Odes'. 
The friends' ambition was to become associated with David Garrick and write regularly for Drury Lane. While Colman began to write plays, Lloyd published a poetical epistle, 'The Actor' (1760), nominally addressed to Thornton, but in reality an extended panegyric of Garrick as exemplar nonpareil of the actor's art. The poem was popular, reaching a fourth edition in 1764. Its graceful pentameter couplets express the mid-century fascination with theatrical performance, and particularly with Garrick's powers in both tragedy and comedy. Garrick's ability to make the audience feel with him leads Lloyd to mock those conventions of the theatre intended to act directly on the spectators, but he recognizes that the price a great actor pays for his intensity is impermanence; unlike the poet, he takes his art to the grave. George II died on 25 October 1760, and to mark the reopening of the theatres on 17 November Garrick substituted for the usual afterpiece a musical ode, 'The Tears and Triumphs of Parnassus', written by Lloyd. Apollo and the muses lament the death of the old king and then elegantly rejoice in the accession of George III. Colman's first play, 'Polly Honeycomb', was produced in December 1760; his second, 'The Jealous Wife', on 12 February 1761, with a prologue by Lloyd, spoken by Garrick. So far, Lloyd and Colman were establishing themselves satisfactorily in the theatre. 
Lloyd next sought regular literary employment. In April 1761 he took charge of the poetry section of 'The Library, or, Moral and Critical Magazine', a periodical edited by Andrew Kippis. He was assisted by his old Westminster friend Charles Churchill, who was now living in London. Kippis was on the staff of the 'Monthly Review', and it was probably through him that Lloyd became poetry reviewer for the 'Monthly'. His first assignment, in May 1761, was to review Churchill's 'Apology. Addressed to the Critical Reviewers' (24.340-42). Churchill had achieved a huge success in March with 'The Rosciad', which combined high praise of Garrick with severe personal attacks on Garrick's rivals and enemies. A crucial role in the narrative is played by a young hero identified as Lloyd (191-232). Churchill was unknown as a writer, 'The Rosciad' was published anonymously, and the 'Critical Review' surmised that the poem had been written by some combination of Colman, Thornton, and Lloyd. Colman and Lloyd issued denials. Churchill published a second edition with his name, and scarified the 'Critical's' reviewer in the 'Apology'. In his review Lloyd admired Churchill's genius for poetry, but regretted Churchill's penchant for satire and personal attacks. In two poems published in July, 'Genius, Envy, and Time', addressed to Hogarth, and 'An Epistle to C. Churchill', Lloyd defended his friend and the idea of genius unfettered by conventional restrictions with which Churchill justified his satire. 
Lloyd's employment by the 'Monthly Review' lasted only six months. In the autumn he wrote another lyrical afterpiece for Drury Lane: 'Arcadia, or, The Shepherd's Wedding', performed on 27 October 1761 in compliment to the king and queen on their nuptials. It received six further performances over the next month. It was to be his last theatrical venture for three years. In November 1761 Churchill published 'Night', an epistle addressed to Lloyd, a spirited defence of their shared devotion to late hours, imprudence, and unconventional opinions. It marks a shift of emphasis in Lloyd's literary and personal alliances, Colman and the theatre giving way to Churchill and dissipation. 
Churchill, who had not long since been in such financial straits that Pierson Lloyd had intervened to broker a composition with his creditors, was now showing that poetry could be profitable. Lloyd, seeking to realize some money from his writing as well as to establish a reputation, prepared a collected edition of his poems which appeared in 1762 as 'Poems. By Robert Lloyd, A. M.' He assembled a splendid list of subscribers, including fifty peers, two bishops, many fellows of Oxford and Cambridge colleges, and numerous old Westminsters, as well as Garrick, Hogarth, Johnson, Macpherson, Reynolds, Thomas Sheridan, Sterne, and the Warton brothers. His father's assistance is evident in the presence of the archbishop of York and a large number of names associated with York and the archdiocese. After the 'Author's apology', the poems are arranged chronologically, except that the Latin poems are grouped at the end. The Latin poems include exercises and ceremonial pieces from the Cambridge years, and a virtuoso rendering of Gray's 'Elegy'. The collection offers pleasant reading, for Lloyd had a real gift for elegant verse, but as the gathering of a decade's output it underlines the slenderness of his talent and his debilitating preoccupation with his status as a poet. As Thomas Lockwood has written, he projects a 'feeling of contempt for the world in which he finds himself, characteristically intermingled with a certain determined sense of his own inferiority' (Lockwood, 63). 
Kippis's 'The Library' ceased publication in May 1762. In September Lloyd was engaged as founder editor of a new periodical, the 'St James's Magazine', intended to repeat the success with which Garrick, Colman, Thornton, and others had launched a newspaper, the 'St James's Chronicle', the year before. No doubt his friends saw this as a way of assuring him an income. For his part, Lloyd hoped, not entirely in vain, that his literary friends would supply him with contributions. The drudgery of editorship wore him down, however, proving as inimical to poetry as schoolmastering had been. He undertook a number of anonymous translations: the first book of Voltaire's 'Henriade' for the edition by Smollett and Francklin (1762); Klopstock's 'The Death of Adam' (1763); Marmontel's 'Moral Tales' (3 vols., 1764-6, the third probably by his associate on the 'St James's Magazine' Charles Dennis). 
By 1762 Churchill was increasingly associated with John Wilkes. The appearance of Lloyd's 'The Poetry Professors' in Wilkes's 'North Briton' (October-November 1762) and the mildly obscene verse tale 'The New-River Head' dedicated to Wilkes (1763) placed him also firmly in Wilkes's circle. There was as yet no breach with older friends. When James Boswell called on Thornton on 24 May 1763, he met there Wilkes, Churchill, and Lloyd, 'so that I was just got into the middle of the London Geniuses' ('Boswell's London Journal', 266). Boswell subsequently wrote verses on Lloyd's nose as sign of his intemperance. 
The 'St James's Magazine' was not profitable, and in March 1764 Lloyd passed the editorship to William Kenrick. In April he was arrested for debt, and confined to the Fleet prison. Churchill gave him 1 guinea a week and paid for a maidservant while he was imprisoned, but other friends proved less helpful, and there was a complete breach with Thornton. Wilkes was now a fugitive in France, and political differences may have helped to isolate Lloyd. Churchill, on a visit to France to see Wilkes, died unexpectedly on 4 November 1764. The tale of Lloyd's taking to his bed with the words 'I shall follow poor Charles', never to rise again, is a sentimental misrepresentation. Rather, his prospects were improving. On 20 November he wrote to Wilkes about his editing of the second volume of Churchill's collected poems. On 28 November his comic opera 'The Capricious Lovers' was produced at Drury Lane with considerable success; it ran for nine nights, and Lloyd's text was highly praised in newspaper reviews. The profits of the third, sixth, and ninth nights went to the composer George Rush, but Lloyd's name was once again before the public. The play was published on 1 December with a dedication to Colman, who had arranged for its performance. Then, on 15 December 1764, Lloyd died of a fever in the Fleet prison. He was buried in St Bride's churchyard on 19 December. 


@@@@@


doc= 16857


Lloyd, Simon (1756-1836), Methodist preacher and Church of England clergyman, was the son of Simon Lloyd (1730-1764) of Plas-yn-dre, Bala, and Sarah (1727-1807), daughter of Thomas Bowen of Tyddyn, near Llanidloes, Montgomeryshire. His mother had joined the 'Family', or religious community, established by Howel Harris in 1752 at Trefeca. However, it is believed that most of her property was restored to her on her marriage, on 17 August 1755, to Simon Lloyd the elder, who was himself a gentleman of means and the representative of an old Merioneth family. 
After leaving Queen Elizabeth's School in Carmarthen, the young Simon entered Jesus College, Oxford, on 8 April 1775, and graduated BA in 1779. He entered holy orders, and obtained the curacies of Olveston, and then Bryneglwys and Llandegla in Denbighshire. He lost Bryneglwys in October 1783 for aligning himself too closely with the Methodists, in particular with his friend Thomas Charles of Bala, whose presence aroused a storm of indignation in the parish. He retained Llandegla until 1788 and was later curate of Llanycil until 1800, but for the remainder of his days he associated himself with the Calvinistic Methodist movement. In 1800 he was invited to become curate of Llanuwchllyn, and although the patron, Sir Watkin Williams-Wynn, eventually agreed, Bishop Horsley refused to sanction his nomination on the grounds of previous irregularities. 
Lloyd was already married by 1789. His wife was Bridget Price, of Rhydcolomennod, Cardiganshire, with whom he had eight children. Up to 1811 Lloyd was one of the three episcopally ordained priests in north Wales (Thomas Charles of Bala and William Lloyd of Caernarfon were the other two), who were allowed to administer the sacraments among the Methodists. After Charles's death in 1814, Lloyd edited two volumes of the Welsh magazine called 'Y Drysorfa'. He died at his residence, Plas-yn-dre, Bala, on 6 November 1836, and was buried in the family vault at Llanycil church, Merioneth. Although not a great preacher, Lloyd was among the foremost of the Methodists in north Wales. He was considered a good classical and biblical scholar, and was the author of a biblical chronology entitled 'Amseryddiaeth ysgrythyrol' (1817), said to be the result of thirty years' study, and 'Esboniad byr ar y Dadguddiad' (1828), a commentary on the Apocalypse of St John, which reached a second edition. 


@@@@@


doc= 16858


Lloyd, Thomas (1784-1813), army officer, was the third son of Thomas Lloyd of Gloucester, King's county, Ireland, MP for King's county (1768-90), and his wife, Jane, youngest daughter and coheir of Thomas Le Hunte. On 1 August 1797 he was appointed ensign in the 54th foot in Ireland, and was promoted lieutenant on 6 May 1799. He served with the 54th at Ferrol, in the Egyptian campaign of 1801, and at Gibraltar in 1802, during the mutiny there, when the steadiness of the 54th gained high praise from the duke of Kent. He became captain in the 6th battalion of the reserve in 1803, and in 1804 was transferred to the 43rd light infantry, then training under Sir John Moore at Shorncliffe. He served with the 43rd at Copenhagen, and throughout the Peninsular campaigns of 1808-10. Romantic stories of his daring at the outposts were current in the army. On 8 October 1810 he was promoted major in the Old 94th, and became lieutenant-colonel of it on 17 August 1812. He commanded the 94th at the battle of Vitoria, and fell at its head at the battle of the Nivelle on 10 November 1813. 
Lloyd appears to have been much loved by his men (Donaldson, 185-6, 193-5). The historian, Sir William Napier, wrote of him: 'In him were combined mental and bodily powers of no ordinary kind. Graceful symmetry, herculean strength, a countenance frank and majestic, gave a true indication of his nature, for his capacity was great and exceeding, and his military knowledge extensive, both from experience and study. Of his mirth and wit, well known in the army, it need only be said that he used the latter without offence, but so as to increase his ascendency... for though gentle, he was ambitious, valiant, and conscious of his fitness for great exploits. (Napier, 5.383-4)' 



@@@@@


doc= 16859


Lloyd, William (1636/7-1710), bishop of Norwich and nonjuror, was born at Bala, Merioneth, the son of Edward Lloyd (died 1685?), rector of Llangower, Merioneth. He was educated at Ruthin School for two years under Mr Chaloner, and was admitted to St John's College, Cambridge, on 23 February 1655, aged eighteen, graduating BA in 1659 and proceeding MA in 1662. 
John Evelyn, attending his parish church at Deptford, Kent, in August 1662, heard Lloyd preach a sermon and in August 1663 described him as 'our curate' (Evelyn, 3.361). Lloyd then spent some time ministering to the English factory at Lisbon, for in June 1670 the king asked that Lloyd, a 'chaplain in ordinary', be created DD by royal mandate, 'although wanting two years of his full standing, he having taken great pains' in Lisbon and being set to return to Portugal ('CSP dom.', '1670', 292). This was duly granted and in July he was described by Evelyn as 'preacher at Gray's Inn'. In December 1670 Evelyn described him as 'chaplain to his Majesty' (Evelyn, 3.552, 565). 
On 4 May 1672 Lloyd was collated a prebendary of St Paul's, and in February 1673 Evelyn described him as 'my Lord Treasurer's chaplain' (Evelyn, 4.3), a reference to Thomas Clifford, Lord Clifford. In March Henry Coventry, secretary of state, intimated that 'Dr. Lloyd of Battersea' ('CSP dom.', '1675', 472) would succeed to the vacant bishopric of Llandaff, and he was duly confirmed as such on 18 April 1675, the last Welsh-speaker to hold the diocese for two hundred years. In April a warrant was issued for Lloyd to hold his prebend in St Paul's and the rectory of St Andrew's, Llandaff, 'in commendam', but a successor was collated to his prebend in March 1676. As a bishop Lloyd proved to be a rigorous supporter of the Restoration church settlement, in both church and secular affairs. In 1676 he was instrumental in securing the dismissal from the Monmouthshire bench of a justice who was also a recusant. He was also tough on refractory clergy and diocesan officials, at one point imposing a sentence of greater excommunication on the principal registrar of the consistory court. By this date Lloyd had married his wife, Anne (died 1708), for matriculation records at Cambridge in 1691 suggest that their son John was born in this period. 
Lloyd was translated to the bishopric of Peterborough, being elected on 10 April 1679, and enthroned on 12 July. He was resident for at least part of the year at Acton, Middlesex, for two of his children were baptized there, a son, Edward, on 20 April 1680, and a daughter, Hannah, on 25 July 1682. In the House of Lords, Lloyd was a supporter of the court, voting on 23 November 1680 against moves for a joint committee with the Commons to debate the safety of the kingdom. Moreover Lloyd proved to be an energetic diocesan: in the four years 1679-83 he confirmed 7864 people and ordained 47 priests and deacons. He also suppressed conventicles with the aid of the local JPs, and threatened to present those not receiving the sacrament, thereby boosting the number of communicants. 
Lloyd was translated to Norwich, being elected on 11 June 1685, and enthroned (by proxy) on 23 July 1685. Lloyd was loyal to James II's government, attempting to persuade those dismissed from the commission of the peace to co-operate with the regime early in 1688. Nevertheless his firm commitment to the Church of England was such that only absence from London prevented Lloyd joining the seven bishops in their petition to James II to withdraw the declaration of indulgence. Upon his arrival in London he signed the petition and helped to organize their legal defence, even paying $5 towards their legal costs. 
Lloyd was one of the peers who petitioned James II in mid-November 1688 to allow parliament to meet. He opposed the revolution of 1688, voting in the Convention Parliament on 29 January 1689 for a regency. In February he brought the problems of loyalists into sharp relief with his acknowledgement that he was willing to pray for the royal family in general, but could not do so if he had to name King William and Queen Mary. Consequently he refused the oaths to the new monarchs, stopped attending the house of Lords, and in August 1689 was suspended from his diocese. As the date for the deprivation of those bishops who would not take the oaths drew nearer he remained close to Sancroft, no doubt endorsing the archbishop's refusal to make a move towards the government. He was deprived on 1 February 1690, although no successor was appointed for over a year. Lloyd was clearly popular with his clergy, even those taking the oaths, for in Norwich diocese they petitioned for the removal of penalties from the nonjuring bishops ['see also 'Nonjuring bishops]. Following the naval defeat at Beachy Head in June 1690, and consequent fears of invasion, on 4 August a mob attacked Lloyd's house in Old Street, London, forcing him to take his family into the Temple to find refuge. 
On 9 February 1692 Archbishop Sancroft signed a commission bestowing upon Lloyd full primatical authority. Thus, when Sancroft died in November 1693 Lloyd was his acknowledged successor. This proved to be important when there were disagreements over whether the nonjurors should perpetuate the split with the official church of England by consecrating their own bishops. Lloyd took part in the consecration of two new bishops (George Hickes and Thomas Wagstaffe) on 24 February 1694. In July 1695 he signed a letter supporting John Kettlewell's scheme for the relief of the suffering nonjuring clergy. In 1700 he opposed Bishop Thomas Ken's initiative to Archbishop Thomas Tenison to end the split in the church, writing that he was in favour of peace, 'but without quitting my principles for I'm persuaded that the principles for which I suffer are just and true, being founded upon the authority of the scriptures and the practice of the church' (Yould, 370). In 1703, when Bishop Ken decided to resign his diocese of Bath and Wells to George Hooper, who had been appointed to the see following the death of Richard Kidder, Lloyd chastised Ken for acting on his own, and angry letters were exchanged between the two men. 
Lloyd remained intransigent in his opposition to a reunification of the church once the deprived bishops had died or, in Ken's case, resigned their sees. Lloyd's wife was buried at Hammersmith on 19 June 1708. Lloyd died on 1 January 1710 after a fall and was buried at Hammersmith four days later. As the last of the deprived bishops, apart from Ken, his death allowed some prominent nonjurors, such as Henry Dodwell, Robert Nelson, and Francis Brokesby, to rejoin the national church. Lloyd's daughter, Hannah, survived him and was the recipient of some insurance money. 


@@@@@


doc= 16860


Lloyd, William (1627-1717), bishop of Worcester, was the son of Richard Lloyd (1594/5-1659), rector of Tilehurst and vicar of Sonning, Berkshire, and his wife, Joan, 'nee' Wicken; Richard Lloyd's family were of an ancient distinguished Welsh lineage. William Lloyd was born in Tilehurst rectory on 18 August 1627 and baptized on the 26th of that month. 
Lloyd was taught Latin, Greek, and Hebrew by his father at home and he entered Richard Lloyd's Oxford college, Oriel, at the age of eleven, where he matriculated on 25 March 1639, moving to Jesus College in 1640 and graduating BA on 25 October 1642. He then left Oxford, which was occupied by the king's forces in the civil war, and seems to have returned to Berkshire. When Oxford surrendered to parliament Lloyd returned there and graduated MA from Jesus College, of which he was a fellow, on 9 December 1646. In 1648 he was episcopally ordained deacon in Oxford, went back to Berkshire to act as tutor in a gentry family, may have paid visits to the royal court in Paris in 1651 and 1653, and was presented to the rectory of Bradfield in Berkshire. In 1653 he married a woman whose maiden name may have been Cheney and who died in 1654. By December 1654 he had resigned his claim to the Bradfield living rather than face a contest for it with a Cromwellian claimant. He was ordained priest, again episcopally, in 1656 and took up a private tutoring post in Oxford until 1659. In that year an apparent oddity in Lloyd's career -- given that his father was an ardent royalist, that he had undergone episcopal ordination and that he had reputedly paid homage to the exiled court -- arose: in an attempt 'to impose upon the royalists' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 1.xxxviii), Lloyd choreographed a fraud in which a London merchant was disguised as a patriarch of the Greek Orthodox church, to whom Oxford sympathizers were prevailed upon to do reverence. However, leading Oxford presbyterians were also gulled by this fraud into discussing with the suppositious patriarch a 'modell' (ibid.) of church government and this may have been part of the reason that, although in the short term Lloyd had to flee presbyterian wrath in Oxford, upon the Restoration his career prospered. 
In 1660 Lloyd was nominated for a prebend in Ripon; he took up the office in person, after a protracted spell of ill health, on 3 June 1663, and in July 1666 was made a chaplain-in-ordinary to the king. In 1667 Lloyd added BD and DD to his Oxford degrees and began a career as an anti-Catholic publicist with a work calling into question the contribution that recusants had made to the royal cause during the civil wars, 'The Late 'Apology in behalf of the Papists',... Answered'. A rapid series of ecclesiastical promotions now followed: vicar of St Mary's, Reading, in 1668 (until 1676) and in the same year a string of appointments appropriate to his Welsh ancestry -- vicar of Llan-fawr in Merioneth, archdeacon of Merioneth, and rector of Llandudno, Caernarvonshire. His prospects steadily improving, he cemented his clerical alliances on 3 December 1668 with a marriage to Anne Jones (1646-1719), daughter of the subdean of Westminster. He consolidated his Welsh preferments with the deanery of Bangor in 1672, published three anti-Catholic works including 'A Seasonable Discourse... in Opposition to Popery' in 1673, extended his holdings to London with the acquisition of the prebend of Caddington Minor in St Paul's in the same year, was made canon residentiary of Salisbury in 1674, and gave up his St Paul's prebend in favour of the vicarage of St Martin-in-the-Fields, the hugely overpopulated Westminster parish, where he was inducted on 6 December 1676 and served as a conscientious incumbent. In the year of his appointment, in 'Considerations Touching their True Way to Suppress Popery', he argued that toleration given to Catholics who would abjure the pope's infallibility and deposing power would weaken the English Romanists by dividing them. The proposal for selective indulgence for those Catholics won the approval of the Catholic duke of York. Deeply unpopular with fellow clerics as a court protege, between November 1677 and January 1678 Lloyd served as leading chaplain in the Netherlands to York's daughter Mary, following her marriage to the prince of Orange. 
The alleged murder by Catholic extremists of the St Martin's parishioner Sir Edmund Berry Godfrey on or after 12 October 1678 allowed Lloyd as vicar to deliver, on the 31st of the month, a funeral sermon of uncompromising anti-popery: 'God keep England from your bloody religion' (Tindal Hart, 29); he subsequently played an active part in the prosecution of the alleged murder, attended one of those accused of the crime, Berry, to his execution, and has been convincingly identified by his leading biographer, Tindal Hart, as Charles II's confidential intermediary in the follow-up to the Godfrey affair, possibly keeping back features of Berry's confessions that might have embarrassed the court. The conferment on him of further Welsh benefices, a prebend at Llandaff, in March 1679, and the vicarage of Llanefydd in 1680, might fit such speculations. It seems likely that in order to protect his reputation for protestantism he refrained from coming forward to discredit the evidence, as he had the knowledge to do, of the informer Turberville against the accused Catholic peer Lord Stafford in 1680: the Stafford execution redounded to the benefit of the crown by identifying Shaftesbury and the whigs with blood lust. Lloyd, who in August 1680 was commissioned by the secretary of state with espionage against subversives in Reading, put his foot on the first rung of the episcopal ladder with his elevation to the bishopric of St Asaph on 3 October 1680, taking up residence, after attending the House of Lords over the winter, on April 1681. A series of Welsh livings newly acquired in the 1680s compensated the new bishop for the modest St Asaph stipend in return for which he had surrendered all his other benefices. 
Ambitious careerist as he clearly was, Lloyd had already shown in his tenure at St Martin's that he could apply himself conscientiously to his clerical duties. In impoverished St Asaph, which had had an easy-going episcopal regime under the previous diocesan, he was determined on sweeping reforms, including the recovery of the diocese's alienated real estate. He announced his intention of holding his confirmations using the Welsh language and constantly sought improvements from his clergy, carrying out ordinations regularly, aiming to raise depressed stipends and improve educational levels, and to secure attendance on parsons' duties in person and exact record keeping of the conditions of their parishes, as well as requiring strict standards of sobriety, honesty in the charging of fees from the laity, administration of the sacraments, and rigour in the use of excommunication and of sabbath observance. 
With religious repression in the tory reaction rising in England from the time of Lloyd's taking up his duties in St Asaph he used discussion with, rather than repression of, dissenters in his diocese -- with Quakers on 22 September 1681 and 6 August 1682, and with presbyterians on 27 September 1681 and 28 August 1682. His preferred policy was one of public disputation and private conference to win dissenters back to the communion of the Church of England, while he established relations of real respect with individual figures such as the Quaker Richard Davies and the presbyterian Philip Henry. However, by 1682 he was assuring Archbishop Sancroft that he was energetically prosecuting religious dissidents, and in the repressive royalist and tory mood of the reaction to the whig Rye House plot in 1683 adopted the full-throated language of anti-nonconformity, demanding the rigorous enforcement of the penal laws. Amid all his storm of activity as a bishop, Lloyd the scholar found the time to complete for publication in 1684 his 'History of the government of the church as it was in Great Britain, when they first received the Christian religion', a defence of the episcopal governance of the early British church. 
The accession of James II, who distrusted Lloyd for his prosecution of those implicated in the Popish Plot, put his career on standby, though in 1685-6 he canvassed all vacancies, impending and actual, on the bench of bishops. James's switch to the adoption of religious toleration in 1687 presented the bishop of St Asaph with a dilemma. As he showed when he cordially welcomed French protestant refugees into his bishopric in the wake of the revocation of the edict of Nantes in 1685 -- filling up his ordination lists with the names of their clergy and bestirring his own priests into contributing to the relief of the exiles -- he could be eirenic in his attitude to protestants, but the toleration of recusants which loomed so large in James II's two declarations of indulgence, of 1687 and 1688, was beyond consideration for the anti-Catholic Lloyd. A meeting of opponents of the second, April 1688, declaration chaired by Sancroft on 12 May 1688 identified Lloyd as one of the bishops to be called to London to take part in the petition to the king against the enforced reading by the clergy of the Church of England of the toleration manifesto: he speedily arrived in the capital -- at the home of the tory Anglican leader, the earl of Clarendon -- on the 16th and rapidly joined the opposition to the king's plans. He was, after Sancroft, the second of the seven bishops to sign the petition that was delivered in person to James on 18 May and, in the archbishop's absence from the actual delegation, he took a leading role in the presentation, handing it to the king and attempting to deflect James's wrathful accusation that the petition hoisted the standard of rebellion with the protest, 'We have adventured our lives for your Majesty, and would loose the last drop of our blood rather than lift up a finger against you' (Tindal Hart, 99). He went on to argue with the king by pointing out that the dispensing power, the constitutional foundation on which the declaration rested, had been declared illegal by parliament under both Charles II and James himself. Though Bishop Compton of London rather than he was probably responsible for leaking the petition to the printers, it may have been Lloyd who followed up the confrontation with the king with a letter advising all ministers of the Church of England to abstain from reading the declaration. James's decision to imprison and prosecute the bishops was implicit in the interview of the evening of 18 May. 
Having returned to St Asaph, Lloyd had to come back to London for an appearance before the privy council on 6 June and again took a defiant stand towards the king, insisting on the bishops' common law right not to incriminate themselves and boldly refusing James's command that the accused accept bail, which 'may be prejudicial to us' (Tindal Hart, 105-6): of all the bishops, it was Lloyd's attitude that made it impossible to maintain the claim put forward in the petition composed by Sancroft that they proceeded from no 'want of duty and obedience to your majesty' (Tindal Hart, 97). Indeed, by the time of his imprisonment in the Tower, which he shared with his brethren from 8 June, Lloyd may already having been looking towards an Orange regime -- with an overthrow of popery, church reform, and an overture to the protestant dissenters. London's popular anti-popery unerringly centred on Lloyd as its chief hero among the bishops, singling him out for acclamation when the seven were bailed on 5 June. Regularly linking up with Clarendon in London, Lloyd followed the acquittal of the bishops in king's bench on 30 June by returning to his diocese. 
By 7 October Lloyd was back in the capital, conferring with Clarendon but having kept away from discussions between James and the other bishops which were intended to produce concessions on James's part in the light of Orange's impending invasion. In November, though, he was active in promoting a petition to James to summon a free parliament, a plea that the king found unacceptable. The day after James's departure on 10 December, Lloyd was a signatory to an address drawn up at the London Guildhall and appealing to Orange to 'rescue the nation' (Tindal Hart, 115), and in December 1688 (when he was acting as an intermediary between Orange and the bishops) and January 1689, increasingly under the influence of Gilbert Burnet, he was becoming convinced that, in departing, James had forfeited his throne. Even so, he seems to have been absent from the vote in the Lords on 29 January on whether to confer the crown or a regency on James's behalf on William and Mary of Orange. He was hedging his bets in the early weeks of the year, but by mid-February he was commenting on Orange as a kind of acceptable usurper; he soon took the oaths of allegiance to the new sovereigns and began to commend them vigorously to other clergy. Lloyd attended the coronation and performed the absent Sancroft's primatial task of announcing Mary as queen to the congregation. His appointment as lord high almoner to Mary put him in charge of dispensing her charity to claimants, especially the still long queue of civil war victims. He went on to honour his standing commitment to an understanding with the nonconformists by helping to prepare a bill of comprehension (which was aborted). If Lloyd had had any reservations about an Orange settlement, he overcame them decisively once it was achieved and, although late in 1689 and early in 1690 he was trying to find a formula to keep the nonjuring clergy in post, he represented one of the polarized wings in a now politically much divided Church of England. Although into the early 1690s he continued to try to persuade colleagues to accept the new king and queen his participation in the consecration on 31 May 1691 of John Tillotson in succession to the displaced nonjuror Sancroft confirmed his breach with the elements of the church that distrusted James's policies but acknowledged him as their irremovable king. He shored up his rejection of James by an absolute disbelief in the legitimacy of his son, born in June 1688. 
Lloyd's many services to the king and queen, which included the publication of 'A Discourse of God's Ways of Disposing of Kingdoms' (1691), a defence of the revolution, and of sermons which underlined the king's role as an agent of godly reformation, merited him appointment to the vacant see of Coventry and Lichfield, to which his appointment was confirmed in October 1692. He left St Asaph in a thoroughly reformed condition and applied to Coventry and Lichfield policies of friendship to dissenters but also, it was alleged, extreme, arbitrary, divisive, and bureaucratized discipline within the clergy and of litigious behaviour to the laity. And, whatever Lloyd's preference for using methods of persuasion and argument towards dissenters, he was acutely aware of the weakness of the established church's position after the 'Toleration Act'. What was to be done where parishioners took their infants to be baptized by nonconformist ministers, he complained to his colleague Bishop Stillingfleet of Worcester. How was he to deal with the ministers? 'For to punish those Parishioners would be to drive them from the Church & so to fill their Congregations' (Rose, 172-3). 
In April 1695 Lloyd was appointed to a new commission to advise William on crown appointments in the church and from 1697 (when he refused ordination to the future high tory tribune William Sacheverell) he took a leading part in the investigation of irregularities alleged against his successor at St Asaph, Thomas Jones, suspended from office in 1701. The deprivation from St David's of the opponent of the revolution Thomas Watson (1637-1717) for alleged gross misconduct into which Lloyd had helped conduct enquiries, preceded by a few days Lloyd's own formal induction into his new see of Worcester on 8 August 1699. 
While the acquisition of wealthy Worcester (with remission of first fruits to the crown conceded by William III) represented the pinnacle of Lloyd's life as a clerical careerist, it was not necessarily the most suitable bishopric for him to serve. The new bishop may not have had insuperable problems with the dissenters of Worcestershire, who were especially entrenched in the county town, but he was less well adapted to the county's quite numerous Catholics, whose numbers were growing through conversions in the early eighteenth century. Even more ominously, Worcestershire, and especially its clergy, had marked high tory, and indeed Jacobite, leanings from which they were inclined to regard Lloyd -- despite his characteristically close attention to the physical, moral, and educational state of the diocese -- as a Williamite time-server and as one of the false brethren who betrayed the church to revolution principles. From his very entry into the diocese a lay inspirer of repudiation of him was the tory knight of the shire in parliament, Sir John Packington, who helped in the distribution of a bitter pamphlet attack on Lloyd. The latter retaliated in 1701 by co-ordinating a mass address of Worcestershire signatories pledging to eject Packington at the next general election. In 1702 it was reported that Lloyd 'charges his Clergy in his visitation every where, upon theyr canonicall obedience, not to give theyr votes for Sr J Pak' (Holmes, 'British Politics', 29), but the campaign, in the altered party political circumstances of the new reign of Anne, rebounded back on the bishop when the Commons denounced his 'malicious, unchristian and arbitrary' interference in the election and successfully demanded his dismissal from the position of lord almoner. 
Lloyd continued to campaign in Worcestershire elections, for example in 1707, while in 1710 he ordered his clergy to refrain from ringing church bells to mark the triumphant progress in the shire of Sacheverell (whom he came to fear would succeed him), but he was increasingly immersed in his long-standing study of biblical chronology and prophecy, relating texts of 'Daniel' and 'Revelation' to events taking place, and to be expected, in his own day. By that time this kind of speculation seemed an old-fashioned intellectual pursuit which tended to be ridiculed as 'but his dotages' and he as 'Old Mysterio', a crazed, obsessed, and fanatical seer (Tindal Hart, 236). Nevertheless Lloyd was both a profound scholar himself and an encourager of learning in others, as well as an active diocesan bishop and regular preacher. He died at Hartlebury Castle, Worcestershire, on 30 August 1717 and was buried on 10 September at the church of Fladbury, of which his son William was the incumbent. 


@@@@@


doc= 16861


Lloyd, William Forster (1794-1852), political economist, was born at Bradenham, Buckinghamshire, the fourth son of Thomas Lloyd (died 1815), rector of Aston-sub-Edge, Gloucestershire, and his wife, Elizabeth, 'nee' Ryder (died 1814). He was the younger brother of Charles Lloyd (1784-1829), bishop of Oxford. Educated at Westminster School (captain in 1811), he was elected to a studentship at Christ Church, Oxford, in 1812. He graduated BA in 1815, with a first class in mathematics and a second in classics. He proceeded MA in 1818. He was Greek reader in 1823, mathematical lecturer at Christ Church until the end of 1824, and filled the Drummond chair of political economy in 1832-7. He published 'Prices of Corn in Oxford in the Beginning of the Fourteenth Century' (1830). His lectures as Drummond professor, on checks to population (1832), the notion of value (1833), the poor laws (1834, 1836), the justice of poor laws (1836), and on rent (1836) were also published, and were gathered together in 'Lectures on Population, Value, Poor-Laws and Rent' (1837). He was elected fellow of the Royal Society in 1834. 
Lloyd relinquished his Christ Church studentship on his marriage, at Hackney on 6 July 1837, to Eleanor, daughter of Augustus William Bode. Although in holy orders, he held no preferment, but lived on his property, Prestwood, Missenden, Buckinghamshire, apparently in poor health. He died there on 2 June 1852. Although he was a comparatively obscure figure by the time of his death, his work was rediscovered in the early twentieth century by the American economist E. R. A. Seligman, who suggested that Lloyd had anticipated the marginal utility theory of value. His work has been described as 'a distinguished technical contribution' to economic analysis, exemplifying a distinct Oxford approach to political economy (Hilton, 47, 50). Concerned with the plight of working people during the transition to a manufacturing economy, he defended the right of the poor to poor relief, and criticized the optimistic view of the market economy promoted by some Oxford contemporaries. While they made little impact on public policy in his lifetime, Lloyd's writings remained of posthumous interest: the example of individual farmers over-grazing common land, used in his 1833 lectures on population, influenced the twentieth-century biologist Garrett Hardin's article on 'The tragedy of the commons' (1968). 


@@@@@


doc= 16862


Lloyd, William Watkiss (1813-1893), classical and literary scholar, the second son of David Lloyd of Newcastle under Lyme, was born at Homerton, Middlesex, on 11 March 1813. He was educated at the grammar school in Newcastle under Lyme, and made so much progress that the master, the Revd John Anderton, offered to contribute towards the fees of a university course. At the age of fifteen, however, he was placed in the counting-house of his cousins' tobacco manufacturing firm, Messrs John and Francis Lloyd, at 77 Snow Hill, London, where he stayed, rising to become a partner, until he retired from business in 1864. For a period of thirty-six years his days were devoted to uncongenial duties and his nights to books. At one time he lived at Snow Hill, and for many years never left London. With an inborn love for learning he added to a solid basis of Greek and Latin a wide knowledge of modern languages and literatures, as well as of ancient art, history, and archaeology. To these pursuits every leisure hour, even to the close of his life, was applied. The first-fruit of his studies was a historical and mythological essay entitled 'The Xanthian marbles: the Nereid monument' (1845), followed by other contributions on subjects of Greek antiquities, some printed in the 'Classical Museum'. In 1854 he supplied certain 'Arguments' to Owen Jones's 'Apology for the Colouring of the Greek Court in the Crystal Palace'. In the same year he was elected a member of the Society of Dilettanti, chiefly through the friendly offices of Monckton Milnes (afterwards Lord Houghton). Until his death he 'was one of the principal guides and advisers of the Dilettanti in their archaeological undertakings' (Cust, 187, 206), and acted temporarily as secretary and treasurer in 1888 and 1889. 
As a labour of love Lloyd supplied essays on the life and plays of Shakespeare to S. W. Singer's edition of the poet published in 1856 (2nd edn, 1875). The essays show acute criticism and thorough knowledge of Elizabethan literature, and were collected by the author in a private reprint (1858, and reissued without the life in 1875 and 1888). A memoir on the system of proportion employed in the design of ancient Greek temples was added by him to C. R. Cockerell's 'Temples of Jupiter Panhellenius at Aegina and of Apollo Epicurius', published in 1860. The subject was also treated in 'A general theory of proportion in architectural design and its exemplification in detail in the Parthenon, with illustrative engravings' (1863), a lecture delivered before the Royal Institute of British Architects on 13 June 1859, and his most original work. His literary interests then turned in a different direction, and he published 'The Moses of Michael Angelo: a Study of Art, History, and Legend' (1863), followed by 'Christianity in the Cartoons, Referred to Artistic Treatment and Historic Fact' (1865), in which artistic criticism is coupled with a free treatment of religious matters, and 'Philosophy, Theology, and Poetry in the Age and Art of Rafael' (1866). In 1868 he married Ellen Brooker (died 1900), second daughter of Lionel John Beale, and sister of Lionel Smith Beale. Ancient Greek history and art were the subjects of his next two publications: 'The History of Sicily to the Athenian War, with Elucidations of the Sicilian Odes of Pindar' (1872), and 'The Age of Pericles: a History of the Politics and Arts of Greece from the Persian to the Peloponnesian War' (1875), the second a complete conception of the social life and art of Greece at its highest point. In 1882 he delivered four lectures on the 'Iliad' and 'Odyssey' at the Royal Institution, of which he acted as one of the managers from 1879 to 1881. He was elected a member of the Athenaeum in 1875, and for many years was an active member of the committee of the London Library. He was a correspondent of the archaeological societies of Rome and Palermo. 
Lloyd died at 43 Upper Gloucester Place, Regent's Park, on 22 December 1893 in his eighty-first year, survived by his wife, a son, and a daughter. Watkiss Lloyd was a remarkable instance of a lifelong devotion to learning, stamped by disinterested self-denial. Without a university training, and never recognized by any academic body, he had the strong qualities and some of the weaknesses of the self-taught. His books manifest conscientious industry, originality, and sound scholarship; but while his judgement was solid and his thought clear, he was not endowed with the faculty of expressing his ideas in attractive literary form. Power of condensation and artistic arrangement of materials were wanting. One half of his life was passed in solitude, but during the last half he mixed in the world, and the angularities of the student became softened. He was a charming talker, modest, unpedantic, and a staunch friend. In personal appearance he was tall and impressive; even to the end he was strikingly upright in carriage, and showed few outward signs of his advanced age. Lloyd produced a large number of other publications, including books and articles on ancient and modern architecture, Homer, Pindar, and Shakespeare (all of whose plays he believed were written in blank verse). He also left a large number of unpublished manuscripts, several of which he bequeathed to the British Museum. 


@@@@@


doc= 16863


Lluelyn, Martin (1616-1682), poet and physician, was born on 12 December 1616 in London, the ninth child (and eighth son) of Martin Lluelyn, whose wife's name is unrecorded. Perhaps the father was the Marten Lewellen, steward of St Bartholomew's Hospital, who in 1609 owed $52 10's'. to John Harvey. Harvey's famous brother Dr William Harvey facilitated the repayment of the loan, although the steward continued to struggle with debt (Keynes, 60-61). 
Martin Lluelyn was baptized on 22 December 1616 in St Bartholomew-the-Less, West Smithfield, the church associated with the hospital. Like so many poets of the age, he attended Westminster School. On 25 July 1636 he matriculated from Christ Church, Oxford. There he belonged to a circle of 'the choicest wits in the University, as Mr. 'Cartwright', Dr. 'Lluelin', Mr. 'Gregory', Mr. 'Waring', &c.' (Lloyd, 598-9). The patron of those scholars and poets was Brian Duppa, dean of the college and chaplain to Archbishop Laud; they all retained powerful royalist and high-church sympathies. From 1637 until 1643 Lluelyn contributed verses to several of the Oxford miscellanies commemorating royal occasions and extolling important personages. He graduated BA in 1640 and MA in 1643. 
During the civil war Lluelyn joined the royalist army, attaining the rank of captain by 1646, the year his 'Men-miracles, with other Poemes' was published. Prefacing the collection were seven commendatory poems, including ones by his fellow Oxonians John Fell and John Birkenhead. Four of the poems compliment Lluelyn by comparing him with his friend the poet William Cartwright, who had died in 1643. 
The burlesque poem 'Men-miracles', a contemporary recalled, 'came forth into the World with great applause' (W. Winstanley, 'Lives of the... Poets', 1687, 201). Laced with mock pedantry and satire directed at presbyterians and parliamentarians, its 395 hudibrastic couplets present 22 kinds of monsters such as fantastic travellers' tales describe. 'Men-miracles' was said to have been 'written on purpose to please the Duke [James, Duke of York] into learning' (Lloyd, 598). 
The collection of 1646 also contains fifty-six shorter poems -- lyric, satiric, occasional. Lluelyn's five carols 'sung to His Majesty' have received particular scrutiny and praise (Wallerstein, 102-10; Loxley, 178-80). Other poems survive, in seventeenth-century manuscripts, with musical settings by John Wilson and others. A song beginning 'I felt my heart and found a Chillnesse coole' has appeared, without attribution, in collections of John Wesley's hymns (Wesley, 2.10). Lluelyn's short poems have been reprinted sporadically in anthologies, beginning with the 1650 edition of 'Wit's Recreations'. 
Also in 1646 a play, 'The Witney Wake', was presented at Oxford, the last such cavalier entertainment before the city's surrender to parliamentary troops in June. A description of the play with texts of the songs, published that year, gives the author as 'Mr. Loyd, Student of Christ Church in Oxford, and a Captaine of that Garison'; Lluelyn's authorship was established only in 1968 (Cutts, ''Wickham wakened'', 448-56). Perhaps it was the same play that the war-depleted university hoped to present before the new king in July 1661, 'made by Dr. Llewellyn, but they are so in want of actors, that they fear being obliged to make use of the Red Bull players, now at Oxford' ('CSP dom.', '1661-2', 32). 
Ejected from the university by the parliamentary visitors in 1648, Lluelyn practised medicine in London, applying 'his genius as much to physic, as before he had to poetry', his acquaintance Anthony Wood remarked (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 4.42). The political situation notwithstanding, Lluelyn was granted the DM degree from Oxford on 15 July 1653. On 24 September he was admitted a candidate of the College of Physicians; he was made a fellow on 27 May 1659. By the 1650s he had married, though his wife's name is unknown. They had a son Martin (1652-1729), who became an army officer, and a daughter Lettice. 
During the interregnum Lluelyn continued to write poetry, including commendatory poems for the posthumous Latin works of his old Oxford friend John Gregory (1650), for the posthumous plays and poems of Cartwright (1651), for William Harvey's 'Anatomical Exercitations' (1653), and for Richard Whitlock's 'Zootomia' (1654). At the Restoration, an event on which he published a 130-line panegyric, Lluelyn was appointed physician to the king, as well as principal of St Mary's Hall and a visitor of the University of Oxford. 
Lluelyn married Martha, daughter of George Long of Penn, Buckinghamshire, on 5 August 1662. In 1664 the family moved from Oxford to Buckinghamshire -- first, apparently, to Amersham, where a son, George (1668-1739), was born; he became a musician and clergyman. Then the family lived in High Wycombe, where a son, Richard, was born (about 1672), later referred to as 'Dr Richard Lluellyn' (Greaves, 276). Other children of that marriage were named Maurice, Martha, and Mary. In Wycombe, Lluelyn continued to practise medicine. On 9 September 1671 he was sworn burgess and alderman, and on 28 September he was elected mayor, a position that he occupied for only a year. According to Wood he 'behaved himself severe against the fanatics' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 4.43). Lluelyn published a satire, 'Wickham Wakened' (1672), 'in Rime Dogrell', in response to his controversy with a Quaker faction. He was chosen to deliver an address to the king on behalf of Wycombe on 24 August 1681. 
A memoir of his Wycombe friend Isaac Milles, probably written by Milles's son John, characterized Lluelyn as 'an eminent and very learned Physitian... universally esteem'd by all that knew him... A Man of singular Integrity of Life and Manners, and of the most comely and decent Gravity and Deportment' (Milles, 43-4). Lluelyn died in Wycombe on 17 March 1682 and was buried there in the north aisle of the church; his long epitaph in Latin was written by Isaac Milles. 


@@@@@


doc= 16864


Gruffudd Llwyd, Sir (d. 1335), soldier and administrator, was the son of Rhys ap Gruffudd (died 1284) and a great-grandson of Ednyfed Fychan (died 1246), seneschal to Llywelyn ab Iorwerth, called Llywelyn the Great (died 1240). Gruffudd's forebears had ties of service with the thirteenth-century princes, but his father had served Edward I in the wars of 1277 and 1282-3. Rhys died in 1284, leaving his estates, including Tregarnedd, Anglesey, and Dinorwig, Caernarfon, and his share of lands at Llanrhystud, Cardigan, and Llansadwrn, Carmarthen, to his son. Gruffudd joined Queen Isabella's household and, a yeoman of the king's household by 1283, he soon began a long but not unbroken association with the crown as its leading servant in north Wales. In 1294-5 he served in the forces engaged in suppressing the rebellion of Madog ap Llywelyn but before the end of 1295, 'by the malice of his enemies' according to his own account (Edwards, 'Sir Gruffydd Llwyd', 600), he began an imprisonment lasting six months. Whatever the reason for his detention, service in Flanders in 1297, when he led an infantry force from north Wales, was a means of earning renewed royal confidence in his fidelity. Thereafter he frequently served as a commissioner of array in north Wales, raising forces for Scotland, and he is found in attendance on the prince of Wales during the campaigns of 1301 and 1306. Knighted by 1301, he served terms as sheriff of each of the counties of Anglesey, Caernarfon, and Merioneth. 
Gruffudd Llwyd played an important role in the difficult situation which confronted Edward II in 1315-16. An army under Edward Bruce waged a forceful and destructive campaign in Ireland, and the Scots' emphasis on their kinship with the Irish raised fears that the Welsh, too, might be involved in a broad challenge to English authority. Commissioners sent to Wales to provide for the defence of the land were instructed to communicate with influential members of the Welsh community and were specially urged to consult Gruffudd Llwyd. He subsequently took part in discussions with the king's council at Clipstone, Nottinghamshire, 'concerning the state of the land of Wales' (Smith, 'Gruffydd Llwyd', 465), and these formed the basis of ordinances issued at the Lincoln parliament early in 1316 to meet Welsh discontent. Their promulgation was prompted by rebellion in Glamorgan, but it was feared in council that insurrection, fomented perhaps by intervention on the part of the Scots, might spread to other parts of Wales. Forces from north Wales raised for service in Scotland under Gruffudd Llwyd's leadership were turned back at Chester, on information transmitted by his chaplain, because they might be needed at home in the event of attack from Ireland. 
Gruffudd appears to be one upon whose judgement and influence the king's council relied, but even at this time of conspicuous service he endured a long imprisonment which probably began with his detention at Rhuddlan in December 1316. In a petition of 1318 he asked that he might know the charges against him, on account of which he had already been incarcerated for eighteen months. The reasons for his detention are never stated, and the problem is made more intriguing by the existence of letters by Edward Bruce and Gruffudd Llwyd, derived from the papers of the seventeenth-century antiquary Robert Vaughan. Bruce made an appeal, based on the common ancestry of the Scots and the Welsh, for a combined endeavour by which the two peoples would be released from English oppression. While his incentive to extend the armed struggle to Wales is evident, Gruffudd's reply, promising a Welsh response to a Scots intervention, is difficult to understand. Whether he was inveigled into a positive reply, possibly by adversaries bent on discrediting him, or whether this was a serious aberration on his part is impossible to determine. Gruffudd's letter was written swiftly after Roger Mortimer of Chirk (died 1326) resumed the office of justice of Wales, and an animosity engendered during Mortimer's first period in office, and intensified upon his return to Wales, may explain his action. 
Their antagonism was undoubtedly an influence which mattered greatly during Edward II's conflict with his baronial opponents in 1321-2. Mortimer and those associated with him won support among the Welsh communities of the marcher areas, but his alienation of the leaders of native society in the crown lands, where he had exercised authority as justice, remained a decisive influence. Between November 1321 and February 1322 Gruffudd Llwyd launched vigorous assaults on the marchers' positions and thereby contributed much to the king's triumph over his adversaries. He may well have been exacting retribution for earlier injustices. 
Gruffudd was prominent in royal service in the period 1322-6, and he was one to whom Edward turned for aid upon Roger Mortimer of Wigmore's return to the realm, with Queen Isabella, in September 1326. The king's capture in the Welsh march enabled Mortimer to establish a hold on the administration of the crown lands. Writs were issued summoning Welsh representatives to the parliament at which Edward would be deposed, but they met with a resistance that was particularly pronounced in Merioneth, where Gruffudd Llwyd was sheriff. There was a Welsh conspiracy to release Edward from Berkeley Castle, and Gruffudd Llwyd was one of thirteen imprisoned at Caernarfon on account of their reaction to the king's deposition. In 1331 with Gruffudd's support a close associate, Hywel ap Gruffudd, brought an action in the king's bench against William Shalford, alleging Shalford's complicity in the murder of Edward II. Gruffudd is not known to have been active thereafter, and when summoned for service in Scotland in 1335 he was excused, possibly on grounds of ill-health. He was dead by 12 July 1335. Gruffudd Llwyd married Gwenllian and had two sons: Gruffudd, who died in 1322 while serving in a force led to Scotland by his father; and Ieuan, a cleric, later archdeacon of Anglesey, who succeeded to Gruffudd Llwyd's estates. According to the genealogies he also had seven daughters. 
Older accounts, on the basis of a mistaken impression of the events of 1321-2, depict Gruffudd Llwyd as a Welsh patriot in resolute opposition to English authority. Even so, the poet Gwilym Ddu, in two poems composed during Gruffudd's imprisonment in 1316-18, one of them indicating confinement at Rhuddlan, expressed his grief at the injustice inflicted upon his patron by the English. Casnodyn, in a poem to Gwenllian, prayed God's help to secure her husband's release from iron fetters. 


@@@@@


doc= 16865


Gruffudd Llwyd (fl. 1380-1420), poet, was the son of Dafydd ab Einion Lygliw and nephew to the poet Hywel ab Einion Lygliw. He was a native of the parish of Llangadfan in Powys, and most of his patrons were noblemen of mid-Wales. A number of learned references and a smattering of Latin in his poems suggest that he had some ecclesiastical education. He was also learned in traditional Welsh lore, and took pride in his bardic status, declaring that he was not one of the 'vain minstrels'. The poet Rhys Goch Eryri was one of his bardic pupils and composed an elegy on his death. Fewer than twenty of Gruffudd's poems have survived, and although he lived through the Glyn Dwr rebellion there is no mention of it in his work. However, one of the two poems he addressed to Glyn Dwr does express a sense of resentment at the oppression of the Welsh, and the sombreness of his work in general can be seen to reflect the mood of the years leading up to the rebellion. 


@@@@@


doc= 16866


Llwyd, Huw (c.1568-c.1630), Welsh-language poet and soldier, was the third son of eight children born to Dafydd Llwyd ap Howel and his wife, Catrin. According to an elegy by Huw Machno the father died in 1623, and by then Huw Llwyd was his heir. Huw Llwyd is almost invariably associated with Cynfal Fawr, a farmhouse in the parish of Maentwrog in Merioneth. He served in a regiment in the English army, probably under the command of Roger Williams. He composed an 'englyn' (a four-line strict-metre verse) describing the victuals he tasted in England, France, and the Netherlands. Machno's elegy suggests that Llwyd settled in Cynfal after campaigning overseas. 
Llwyd married the daughter of Hendre Mur (also referred to as Mur Castell), a farmhouse within 1 mile of Cynfal. Morgan Llwyd (1619-1659), a famous Welsh author, may have been Llwyd's grandson, or even his son. Llwyd probably built part of the house that is today known as Cynfal Fawr. He mentions one peculiarity of the house, namely that water flowed 'brightly' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Welsh e10, 8) through its parlour. 
In a poem of 1630 Huw Machno describes Huw Llwyd's Cynfal. He refers to Llwyd's dividing the house more skilfully and turning the water through the parlour. The poem also gives a fascinating insight into Huw Llwyd's interests by listing the contents of his room. There he had his books, his ointment boxes, his 'doctor's gear', his buckler and sword, his yew bow and quiver of arrows, cage, gun, flask, fishing rod, hunting horn and hunting staff, nets, his spying glass, and chess and draughts sets (Davies, xviii). The soldier's accoutrements are here, clearly enough. Then there are his ointment boxes and doctor's gear: add to this his work on 'old natural remedies' (NL Wales, Peniarth MS 123) and it can be understood why he had a reputation as a sorcerer and why stories about his 'magic' powers are found to this day in his locality. 
Then there is Llwyd's hunting and fishing gear. It comes as no surprise to learn that Huw Llwyd composed a number of poems related to hunting. There is his poem in response to 'englynion' composed by Morys Berwyn on behalf of Owen Elis to ask for two hounds, and his poem addressed to Thomas Prys of Plas Iolyn asking for a couple of hounds: '
which draw in the sweet air 

through their jowls as the fair babble of beautiful bells. 
(NL Wales, MS 12731, 53-4)' His best-known poems are two that he composed to 'The Fox'. In the first of these the poet addresses the fox, describes him, and is then advised by him about the way of the world. The advice given is cynical, pessimistic, and Machiavellian: '
and today, he who lives an honest life 

is, in the world's reckoning, a fool. 
(Parry, 242-3)' He explains that it is only by doing evil that a man may prosper. Llwyd's second poem to the same fox is a very different poem. By now the fox is old and weary, and is plagued by a bad conscience. He tells the poet that the best treasure of all is a 'good conscience' (NL Wales, Llanstephan MSS 133, 243a). 
It is unfortunate that these two poems cannot be dated, but the second was obviously composed later than the first. Does that indicate that Llwyd had attained some kind of religious conviction? Or were the two poems, by original intent, meant for moral instruction? It is interesting to note that one of Morgan Llwyd's constant obsessions was man's good conscience: is the fact that his father, or grandfather, also felt, probably later on in his life, that nothing could be compared to a good conscience mere coincidence? Not many poems are attributed to Llwyd, but most of the other -- short -- poems that he may have composed are meditations on death, and man's service to God. It appears as if Llwyd's early exuberance as a poet later gave way to a more meditative and religious turn of mind. 


@@@@@


doc= 16867


Llwyd, Humphrey (1527-1568), antiquary and map maker, was born in Denbigh, the only child of Robert Lloyd and Joan, daughter of Lewis Piggott. He could claim descent through his father from Harry Rossendale, a henchman and grantee of the earl of Lincoln in the late thirteenth century. Llwyd was educated at Oxford, graduating BA in 1547-8 and proceeding MA from Brasenose College in 1551. In 1553 he entered the service of Henry Fitzalan, twelfth earl of Arundel, remaining as a member of his household for the rest of his life. (One tradition, probably dating from Anthony Wood, maintained that Llwyd was physician to Arundel: this is now disputed.) Probably through the earl's influence, he represented East Grinstead in Elizabeth's first parliament of 1559 and sat for the Denbigh boroughs from 1563 to 1567. Llwyd married Barbara (died 1609?), sister to John, the last Lord Lumley, Arundel's son-in-law, a man of wealth and culture, and had with her four sons and two daughters. 
By 1563 Llwyd was probably living most of the time in Denbigh, within the walls of the castle, and was elected one of the two borough aldermen. For a year between early spring 1566 and late spring 1567 he was with Arundel in Italy, having travelled via Antwerp, Brussels, Augsburg, and Milan to Padua, with a visit to Venice. It was in Antwerp, on the return journey, that Richard Clough of Denbigh, Sir Thomas Gresham's agent in Antwerp, introduced Llwyd to Abraham Ortelius, the map maker, who invited him to assist in examining old place names and who sought Llwyd's advice on a map of Britain: it was a propitious meeting. 
Llwyd inherited a respect for the distinguished literary traditions of his native locality together with the humanist thinking and antiquarian interests that had penetrated there. Oxford had brought him into firsthand contact with new modes of thought and, although his religious persuasion remains uncertain, the protestant theory of the distinction of the early British church was certainly to his liking: John Bale, William Salesbury, and Llwyd were among the first to elaborate upon this. His close association with Arundel and Lumley opened up the world of books and manuscripts to him. Llwyd was the possessor of an impressive library of broad interest, representing the most up-to-date and best continental scholarship: together with the collections of Arundel and Lumley it was to be bought by James I for his son Henry and was to form the basis of the Royal Collection now in the British Library. 
No copy exists of the earliest of Llwyd's works: it is known only from a reference in a letter written by Robert Davies to Anthony Wood (Bodl. Oxf., MS Wood F41, fol. 46), in 1690, 'An Almanacke and Kalender, conteynynge, the daye houre, and mynute of the change of the Moone for ever, and the sygne that she is in for these thre yeares, with the natures of the sygnes and Planetes'. No copy exists, either, of Llwyd's translation into English of 'De auguriis' by the Italian Renaissance author Agostino Nifo: it was in manuscript in Lumley's library in 1609. Of greater impact was the 'Cronica Walliae a Rege Cadwalader ad annum 1294' which Llwyd completed on 17 July 1559. This was an English adaptation of 'Brut y tywysogyon' ('The chronicle of the princes'), the consummation of medieval Welsh historiography based on the 'annales' kept by ecclesiastics and religious since the eighth century. Llwyd's work opens with a description of Wales by Sir John Price: this work and the rest of the 'Cronica' are amplified by Llwyd from manuscript and printed sources (among them Matthew Paris and Nicholas Trevet) together with oral traditions and Llwyd's own glosses. Sir Henry Sidney, lord president of the council in the marches of Wales, encouraged his chaplain Dr David Powel of Ruabon to prepare an adaptation of the 'Cronica' which existed in manuscript. Powel's work appeared in 1584 under the title 'Historie of Cambria, now Called Wales' and although he recognized in his introduction that Llwyd's text contained 'imperfections, not onelie in the phrase, but also in the matter and substance of the historie', it remained the standard work on the history of Wales down to 1282 until Sir John Edward Lloyd's 'History' was published in 1911. 
Llwyd published a number of other significant works. 'De Mona druidum insula... epistola' was the letter sent by Llwyd to Ortelius, dated 5 April 1568, and published by Ortelius in his atlas 'Theatrum orbis terrarum' (1570). The work, according to Llwyd, was derived from reading, experience, travel and a knowledge of the Welsh tongue. Llwyd also wrote the 'Commentarioli Britannicae descriptionis fragmentum', a short historical and geographical description of Britain which he dispatched to Ortelius on 3 August 1568; it was published in Cologne in 1572 and is dedicated to Ortelius. It was translated by Thomas Twyne under the title 'The Breviary of Britayne' and published in 1573. It was the first attempt to compile a 'chorographia' of Britain as a whole. Central themes of Llwyd's work are his defence of Geoffrey of Monmouth (particularly countering the attacks of Polydore Vergil), and his belief in the integrity of the early British church. 
Llwyd was also noted as a map maker. 'Cambriae typus' was the map of Wales that Llwyd sent to Ortelius with the 'Commentarioli... fragmentum', acknowledging that it was 'not beutifully set forth in all poynctes, yet truly depeinted'; it was printed for Ortelius as a supplement to the 1573 edition of his 'Theatrum orbis terrarum'. 'Cambriae typus' has many inaccuracies but it was a great improvement on earlier maps. Llwyd's map was printed fifty times between 1573 and George Horn's 'Accuratissima orbis delineatio' of 1741. At the same time Llwyd had dispatched to Ortelius his map of England and Wales, and this too was published by Ortelius in the 'Additamentum' of 1573 under the title 'Angliae regni florentissimi nova descriptio'. Here, despite inaccuracies, the main features are extremely well delineated. 
In addition, Llwyd left two works in Welsh. One was a copy made by the poet Gruffudd Hiraethog of a pedigree of Llwyd's kinsman Foulk Lloyd of Foxhall, tracing him back to Harry Rossendale and declaring with pride: 'nid wyf yn kredv vod llawer yngwynedd allan ddangos mor vath sikrwydd am i bonedd ir yr amser hwnnw' ('I do not believe that many in Gwynedd can declare such certainty of their gentility since that time'). The other was a treatise on heraldry in the hand of Hiraethog's pupil Wiliam Llyn who claims that Llwyd had compiled it 'o gymvlliad ['sic'] wmffre llwyd o dref ddinbych ai Tynnodd o ffrangec ac ieithoedd eraill' ('from the compilation of Humphrey Llwyd of Denbigh town who translated it from French and other languages'). 
Llwyd died on 21 August 1568, having contracted a fever before returning home from the continent, and was buried in the north aisle of Llanfarchell, Denbigh's old parish church. He had made his will on 5 August 1568: in it, he expresses deep concern for the well-being of his children. His books were to be kept safe 'tyll they or some one of theim come to yeares of discretion to Judge what a treasure they have lefte theym...'; but there is no evidence that his children were to pursue their father's scholarly interests. Llwyd's widow married William Williams of Cochwillan, Caernarvonshire: they had five children. Later, a monument of alabaster was placed in Llanfarchell bearing an epitaph 'of Humfrey Lloid Mr of arte. A famus worthy wight'. He is portrayed kneeling; there is a prayer desk covered with a carpet and a book before him and a sword at his side with three lines of musical notation below. 
The poet Gruffudd Hiraethog composed a Welsh eulogy noting Llwyd's industry, his learning, and the essential part he played in easing the passage through the parliament of 1563 of the act that enabled the translation of the 'Bible' into Welsh. Elegies were composed by two of Hiraethog's pupils, Lewis ab Edward and Wiliam Cynwal. Early in 1566 the Welsh humanist scholar and translator William Salesbury spoke of Llwyd as being 'the most famous 'Antiquarius' of all our countrey'. On the basis of information collected for his 'Athenae Oxonienses' of 1691-2, Anthony Wood describes him as 'a well bred Gentleman. He was a passing right Antiquary, and a Person of great skill and knowledge in 'British' affairs'. A portrait of Llwyd at the age of thirty-four, dated 1561, shows him to be a handsome man with a pointed beard wearing a black doublet, with a gold chain around his neck and holding a prayer book. It includes his coat of arms and his motto, which reads 'Hwy pery klod na golyd' ('Fame lasts longer than wealth'). 
A near relative of Llwyd, according to Wood, was 


@@@@@


doc= 16868


John Lloyd (c.1558-1603), classical scholar, born in Denbigh and educated at Winchester College and New College, Oxford, of which he was admitted perpetual fellow in 1579. He graduated BA (1581), MA (1584-5), BTh (1592), and DTh (1595). He married Isabell, daughter of Richard King of the parish of St Sepulchre, London. He became vicar of Writtle in Essex, a New College living, and died there in 1603. He was distinguished on account of the quality of his preaching and the distinction of his scholarship. He published 'Interpretatio Latina, cum scholiis in fluv'. 'Josephum de Maccabaeis, seu, De rationis imperio' at Oxford in 1590 and also 'Barlaamus de papae Principatu, Graece & Latine', again at Oxford, in 1592. He was brother of Hugh Lloyd, headmaster of Winchester College from 1580 to 1587. 


@@@@@


doc= 16869


Llwyd, Morgan (1619-1659), Independent minister and mystic, was born at Cynfal, a farmstead in Maentwrog parish, Merioneth, of a family of small squires renowned for literary prowess. A near relative, Huw Llwyd (c.1568-c.1630) who, some claim, may have been Morgan's father or grandfather, served as a professional soldier in the Low Countries before returning to provide a focus at Cynfal for the efforts of strict-metre poets who celebrated the hospitality and traditional hunting skills of its lord. 
Little definite is known of Morgan Llwyd's parentage and upbringing, beyond the fact that his mother's first name was Mary and that she lived until 1680. It is suggested that he was educated at Wrexham, to account for his coming under the influence of Walter Cradock, curate there from 1634. It was certainly in Denbighshire, according to his own account, that he was converted, possibly at Bromfield, and there are sufficient grounds to be confident that he followed Cradock to Llanfair Waterdine, Shropshire, although no certain link between Llwyd and the Harley family, patrons of godly ministers there, can be traced. It is not known when, or indeed if, Llwyd was ordained, but it is likely that he obtained some clerical appointment at Llanfair. Having moved with Cradock thence to Monmouthshire, Llwyd was married, to Ann, probably the sister of the wife of Edward Herbert of Magor, later MP for that county; and there he became associated in some way, on the eve of the civil war, with the Independent congregation at Llanfaches. 
We rely heavily on Llwyd's autobiography in verse, 'Hanes rhyw Gymro', for what may have been his military postings, rather than wanderings, during the civil war. With the other Welsh Independent ministers of south-east Wales, Cradock and Henry Walter, Llwyd left the county in the face of the mobilizing royalist forces, and saw something of Glamorgan, Gloucester, and Somerset. It is impossible to ascribe precise dates to his movements, but his appearances in Portsmouth, London, Kent, and Pembrokeshire tell us that he accompanied the forces of parliament, and that he must have sailed to south-west Wales early in 1644. It cannot be shown that he was ever formally a chaplain, but he was probably among the Welsh ministers at Portsmouth who petitioned parliament in July 1644; Llwyd tells us that he was in southern England for a second time. From this point, he probably became attached to the force of Sir Thomas Myddelton, which had been formed to reduce north Wales to the will of parliament. The House of Commons, with the approval of the Westminster assembly of divines, sent Llwyd and Ambrose Mostyn to Myddelton as approved Welsh-language preachers, and it was by means of this service that Llwyd returned to Denbighshire, to minister at Wrexham, Myddelton's headquarters, in 1647. Before this, however, he may have been acquiring a reputation for preaching an egalitarian message. The 'Floyd' who preached to the troop of Major Robert Huntingdon, in the New Model horse regiment of Oliver Cromwell at Aston Rowant, Oxfordshire, in June 1646, sounds like Morgan Llwyd. 
Wrexham was home to Llwyd from 1647, and he held a state-provided stipend there from 1656, but always ministered as if to a gathered congregation. He did not confine himself solely to pastoral duties, and in the summer of 1651, with fellow preachers Jenkin Jones and Vavasor Powell, rode north with troops they had raised to contribute to the war of the Commonwealth against the Scots. This brief return to military activity, co-ordinated by Colonel Thomas Harrison, represented the high point of Llwyd's millenarian convictions. To combat the Scots, he broke off from his duties as an approving minister under the act of February 1650 for the 'Propagation of the Gospel in Wales'. Llwyd's field of evangelistic activity was all over north Wales, as far west from Wrexham as the Llyn peninsula, where, he tells us, he lost his voice in preaching. These itinerant duties were undertaken in tandem with his work at Wrexham. After the 'Propagation Act' was not renewed beyond April 1653, and in the early years of the Cromwellian protectorate, puritan clerical opinion in Wales divided between those in support of the principles and policies of the government, including the principle of state maintenance, and those against, who either moved towards the Quaker movement or who stayed within more formal theology as Independents or Baptists. Llwyd was courted by both sides; his name appeared on 'A Word for God', the petition hostile to Cromwell and mainly inspired by Vavasor Powell, but his marginal comments on a copy of the petition were critical of the certainties of Powell's denunciations. Although there was a hint of contempt for Llwyd in the account by George Fox of how he had reduced him ('the priest') to tears by his testimony, the Wrexham minister was in fact attracted to what he called 'the book in every man', the 'fountain which springs' in everyone, the quietist possibilities of interpreting the Saints' disappointments. These tendencies alienated Llwyd both from his former ally, Powell, and from the naturally less sympathetic Richard Baxter. Although he did not sign it, Llwyd was more in tune with the counter-petition, 'The Humble Representation and Address', orchestrated by his former mentor, Cradock, and endorsed by his brother-in-law, Edward Herbert. In May 1656 both Colonel Philip Jones and Colonel John Jones were keen to see Llwyd properly maintained at Wrexham, and the minister did indeed accept state maintenance, proof that his shared perspectives with the Quakers were not without limitations. Llwyd's ministry was to last only another three years; his health evidently gave him concern in May 1658, when he made his will, and he died a little over a year later, on 3 June 1659, at Wrexham, where he was buried at Rhos-ddu burial-ground. 
In his theology Llwyd was always a radical protestant, but his early association with Cradock suggests that in his early ministry he was preaching an orthodox message. By 1648 he was evidently much affected by millenarian perspectives on public affairs, deepened by his own military service, which inclined him towards a particularly hostile view of Charles I: '
The law was ever above kings 

and kings above the law 

unhappy Charles provokt the lambe 

to dust he must withdraw. 
('Gweithiau Morgan Llwyd', ed. Ellis and Davies, 1.55)' This interest in Fifth Monarchist ideas distanced him from Cradock, who rejected the combativeness of Vavasor Powell, as well as that of Llwyd. In the early 1650s he was forced by the disappointments of the scheme for propagating the gospel, and the failure of the nominated assembly of 1653, to adopt gradually a more cautious view of the potentialities of state power for ushering in the kingdom of Christ. His writings provide evidence that he was attracted to internalized notions of spirituality from at least as early as 1653-4, and in the later 1650s such notions became more prominent in his thought. They found expression both in his flirtation with Quaker theology and in the rich but often obscure lexicon of images he drew from the German mystic Jakob Boehme. Cradock was no more in sympathy with these developments, antinomian though he was, than he had been with his former pupil's millenarian phase, and others, including Colonel John Jones and Richard Baxter, cautioned him about his glorying in impenetrable imagery or complex theology beyond the grasp of his audience or readership. By the time of his death Llwyd was rather isolated in the context of the Welsh ministry, but his correspondence with thinkers as diverse as Samuel Hartlib, Peter Sterry, and Richard Baxter ensured that he never became cut off from religious and intellectual developments of his day. 
Llwyd was a prolific writer in both English and Welsh, although the works published in his own lifetime did not include any of the extensive free-metre verse, much of it on millenarian themes, which remained in manuscript in his papers. Of his verse, only the work on astrology for a popular audience, 'Gwyddor uchod' (1657), was published. In general, Llwyd preferred the English language for his thoughts on public themes, such as the significance of the execution of Charles I, which he celebrated in the verses he called (old style) '1648'. These short stanzas, comparable in form with metrical versions of the 'Psalms', and thus suitable to be set to simple tunes, dwelt on the need for godly 'differing brethren' to seek reconciliation. In them, Llwyd saw the recasting of the British nations after 1649, the abolition of the monarchy, and set-backs suffered by the Catholic powers of Europe all as evidence of the impending kingdom of Christ. He relied heavily on ideas of inversion in these stanzas; the commission for the propagation of the gospel in Wales was proof that a once spiritually barren and politically and socially unsophisticated people were now instruments of God's will: 'the last is first' ('Gweithiau Morgan Llwyd', ed. Ellis and Davies, 1.28). Llwyd's Welsh poetry is generally more reflective and more spiritual. He uses a range of metres, including the traditional 'englyn' and 'cywydd', to a greater range of effects than his English verse achieves. Public themes are largely eschewed in favour of subtle paraphrases of scripture and spiritual reflections, in which the ballad form predominates. 
It is on Morgan Llwyd's prose works, however, that his modern reputation rests. He used Welsh for his prose addresses to the Welsh people. They are marked by a sense of urgency and a deep sympathy for the common people of the country, whom he considered, with other contemporary puritan commentators, to be 'asleep' and needing an awakening to spiritual life. He made his publishing debut in 1653-4 with three of these, 'Llythur ir Cymru cariadus', 'Gwaedd ynghymru yn wyneb pob cydwybod', and most famously, 'Dirgelwch i rai iw ddeall ac i eraill iw watwar', which Llwyd shortened to 'Arwydd i annerch y Cymru' ('A sign to address the Welsh people'), but which is better known today as 'Llyfr y tri aderyn' ('The book of the three birds'). 'Llyfr y tri aderyn' is the most inventive and persuasive of them: ten editions of it appeared between 1714 and 1898, and several, under the auspices of the University of Wales Press, have been published in the twentieth century. The book takes the form of an allegorical, tripartite discussion between three birds, the raven, the dove, and the eagle, who meet after the flood. For Llwyd, as for Boehme, whose writings may have supplied him with the idea, Noah's ark was a type of Christ and the true church. In the allegory, the raven represents formalism in religion, the dove the true (gathered) church, and the eagle state power or, more specifically, the godly prince or magistrate, from which the true church can expect protection. The raven of formalism is protean: 'I can turn about with every wind, and I scent my prey afar off... whatsoever opinions the high and mighty ones may hold, I can approve them, if only I get peace in my eyrie' (Llwyd, 'Book of the Three Birds', 198). The eagle of state authority advocates teaching before coercion: 'The gimlet of instruction must precede the hammer of rule and regulation lest the wood be split, or the nail be bent' (ibid., 201). The work foreshadows the author's later flirtations with the ideas of the Quakers: 'The law of nature teacheth men to follow the light that is in them' (ibid., 211). Llwyd is unable to sustain the central, original, three-sided discussion, which he abandons midway through the book in favour of a more familiar catechistic format. Part of this loss of imaginative confidence may be attributed to the uncertainties of political power in early 1654, the date to which the book might best be ascribed. Nevertheless, 'Llyfr y tri aderyn' provided the Welsh reading public with a volume as compelling, passionate, and accessible as the work in English of John Bunyan was to be. Llwyd adapts the theory of Geoffrey of Monmouth on the special relationship between the British Isles and the early church for Wales and his own times: 'This is the island which first received the gospel in the time of Lles, the son of Coel. Here, some say, was born Helen and her son Constantine. The Welsh, others say, were the first to discover America. Britons have been steadfast unto death in behalf of the true faith. (ibid., 213)' A recurrent theme in this and Llwyd's prose and poetry works was that the Welsh had a special part to play in the dawning golden age of the gospel: 'The dawn has broken, and the sun is rising on you. The birds are singing: wake (O Welshman) wake' ('Gwaedd ynghymru', 'Gweithiau Morgan Llwyd', ed. Ellis and Davies, 1.128). Llwyd went on to translate two works of Boehme's for the Welsh-language reading public: 'Yr ymroddiad' (translated 1654 and published in 1657) and 'Y discybl ai athraw o newydd' (translated 1655 and also published in 1657). 
Of Llwyd's two published English prose works, which appeared in 1655, 'An Honest Discourse' is the most interesting. Like 'Llyfr y tri aderyn', it is structured as a dialogue, this time between three men: citizens past, present, and future. It has a greater sense of political immediacy, and in effect establishes a dialogue with the content of Vavasor Powell's intemperate 'A Word for God' about the nature of the protectorate of Oliver Cromwell. 'An Honest Discourse' also resumes themes left unexplored in 'Llyfr y tri aderyn'. None of Llwyd's English prose works, including the unpublished 'Where is Christ?', has any particular literary distinction in format or language, however, in contrast to his Welsh prose, in which a range of images, drawn from nature, and especially from the changing seasons, combines with Llwyd's emphasis on the spiritual complexities of relationships between the Trinity and the individual soul of man. His attempts to explain and explore these mysteries take him well beyond the orthodox Calvinism of his age and have given him the label 'mystic'. Had he lived beyond 1659 he might have found eventually a natural spiritual home among the Quakers, although there was nothing simple, and much that was deeply intellectual and theologically avant-garde, in his thought. 
A number of Morgan Llwyd's Welsh prose works were republished in the following century to satisfy the needs of a Welsh reading public stimulated by Methodism. At the end of the nineteenth century his published work, and much of his unpublished writing in manuscript, was brought together in two volumes of 'Gweithiau', published by the University of Wales and intended for the new class of readers brought into existence by the curriculum of the new university colleges. Llwyd's work, or at least 'Llyfr y tri aderyn', has since become a staple of undergraduate Welsh studies. A third volume of his writings was published by the University of Wales Press in 1994, making available, in particular, manuscripts among the Plas Iolyn collection housed at the National Library of Wales. 


@@@@@


doc= 16870


Llwyd, Richard (1752-1835), poet, was born at the King's Head, Beaumaris, Anglesey, the son of John Llwyd, a small coast trader, and his wife, Alice. The early death of his father from smallpox left the family in financial difficulties, and so, after an education of nine months at the free school at Beaumaris, at twelve years of age Llwyd entered the domestic service of a gentleman in the neighbourhood. He used every spare moment, however, for his self-improvement. By 1780 he was entrusted with the duties of steward and secretary to a Mr Griffith of Caerhun, near Conwy, then the only acting magistrate in that district. 
Llwyd finally acquired a competency, retired to Beaumaris, and published there his best-known poem, 'Beaumaris Bay' (1800), with many historical and genealogical notes. 'He came to be considered an authority on Welsh heraldry and genealogy' ('DWB'), and as a result was received into many aristocratic households. Through these connections, he managed to secure Royal Literary Fund grants for Richard Robert Jones (Dic Aberdaron) and David Thomas (Daffyd Ddu Eryri), among others. His other productions were 'Gayton Wake, or, Mary Dod; and her List of Merits' (1804) and 'Poems, Tales, Odes, Sonnets, Translations from the British' (2 vols., 1804). He became known as the Bard of Snowdon as a result of his literary pursuits. 
Early in 1807 Llwyd moved to Chester, and in 1808 he visited London, where he made the acquaintance of Owen Jones, William Owen Pughe, and others. He returned to Chester, and in May 1814 married Ann (died 1834), daughter of Alderman Bingley of that town. Llwyd was a strong Welsh patriot, and in 1824 was made a member of the Honourable Society of Cymmrodorion. Llwyd died at his home, Bank Place, in Chester, on 29 December 1835, and was buried at St John's Church. On the south side of the church wall a tablet was placed to his memory. A collected edition of his works, with a memoir and portrait, was published in 1837. 


@@@@@


doc= 16871


Llywarch ap Llywelyn (fl. c.1180-c.1220), poet, was the chief court poet of Gwynedd. He held lands and a mill, probably by Llywelyn ab Iorwerth's gift, in Rhos is Dulas. His father was presumably named Llywelyn, but nothing more is known of his family history; he himself hints that his forebears were not poets. The sobriquet attributed to him resulted from a daring reference to casting pearls before swine in a poem rebuking Gruffudd ap Cynan; however, doubt has been cast on the identification of Llywarch with Prydydd y Moch. Of Llywarch's poetic output thirty works survive, a total of 1780 lines. His earliest extant poems (probably of 'c'.1180) were addressed to Dafydd and Rhodri ab Owain Gwynedd. His chief patron, however, was Llywelyn ab Iorwerth, for whom nine poems survive, tracing the fortunes of that redoubtable prince from 'c'.1183 to 'c'.1220. Others of his poems are addressed to some of Llywelyn's client princelings. Llywarch also composed an intriguing poem to the ordeal by fire, and a light-hearted 'awdl', which purports to be that of an ardent lover, for Gwenllian ferch Hywel of Gwynllwg. 


@@@@@


doc= 16872


Llywarch Hen (supp. fl. late 6th cent.), legendary hero, the subject of an important cycle of early Welsh saga poetry, is known from the Welsh genealogies as one of the 'men of the north' ('gwyr y gogledd'), from an unspecified British kingdom among those not yet under Anglian domination. He was a descendant of Coel Hen, and first cousin on the male side to the important historical and saga figure Urien Rheged. Hagiographical and pseudo-historical traditions from pre-Norman Brycheiniog make the men first cousins twice over, with both their mothers said to be the daughters of the eponymous Brychan Brycheiniog. Llywarch's epithet, Hen ('the Aged'), may have had dynastic significance, but in literature he is treated as the archetype of the querulous old man. The main body of the cycle of poetry, once accompanied by a lost narrative, probably dates from the ninth century, although antiquarian additions were made to the end of the middle ages. 
In the early modern period Llywarch was believed to be the author of all of the poetry of this type, and information extracted from it is responsible for the fantastical biography of Richard Thomas, followed in other sources, which gave Llywarch a lifespan of over 150 years. Modern scholarship, chiefly that of Ifor Williams, has restored Llywarch to his proper role as subject of part of the poetry. Events in the poetry follow the downfall of Urien Rheged in the north, but the main part, concerning the loss in battle of all of Llywarch's twenty-four sons, is set in Wales, perhaps originally in Brycheiniog. Llywarch is therefore an example of a northern figure whose legend has been transferred to Wales, and there is no evidence that the poetry preserves any genuine historical traditions. 
The earlier genealogies of the northern heroes generally end about Llywarch's generation. Later antiquarian collections sought to codify the list of Llywarch's sons, drawing names from various sources apart from the poetry, and reaching a total of well over thirty. Even the sons named in the earliest poetry must be suspect as possible inventions. Several families in Wales claimed descent from one or another of Llywarch's sons, most notably that of Merfyn Frych who became king of Gwynedd 'c'.836 from an outside base of power. This has led to various theories about Merfyn's dynasty and the Llywarch Hen poetry. It has been argued that Llywarch was a figure created by Merfyn's 'propagandists' in order to link him with the famous Urien Rheged, or that Merfyn's family had a special role in the genesis, dissemination, and preservation of the poetry, again because it stressed the family's close ties to Urien. However, there is no evidence that this genealogical link was made at an early date; the son involved is not prominent in the surviving poetry, and there is no overt political gain to be seen from the connection. The vagueness of traditions about Llywarch's enormous family of heroes allowed for much grafting onto his family. The Gwynedd link appears to be only one of many made in medieval Wales in a spirit of antiquarian speculation, and for the glory of making a claim on a character famed in literary story, and for his northern ancestry. 


@@@@@


doc= 16873


Gruffudd ap Llywelyn (d. 1063), king of Gwynedd and of Deheubarth, was an aggressive and powerful ruler of Gwynedd from 1039 to 1063 and, after a series of attempts to secure the south, he ruled Deheubarth from 1055 until his death. 
Gruffudd's father, Llywelyn ap Seisyll (d. 1023), was a man of obscure parentage. While Seisyll cannot be linked with any known lineage, later genealogies suggest that Llywelyn's mother was Prawst, a descendant of Rhodri Mawr of Gwynedd (844-878). Llywelyn himself married into the ruling dynasty of Deheubarth; his wife, Angharad, was the daughter of Maredudd ab Owain ('r'. 986-99). The brief record of his career shows him to have been active in north and south Wales. In the north, in 1017 or 1018, he defeated and killed Aeddan ap Blegywryd, who has been identified as a usurper seeking to rule Gwynedd, or (since his name does not occur in any royal genealogy) as a powerful local figure who had to be won over or subdued by any legitimate claimant. From 1018 Llywelyn was ruler of Gwynedd. In south Wales an Irish adventurer, Rhain, claiming to be a son of Maredudd ab Owain, seemed likely to establish himself as the ruling prince until Llywelyn defeated him in battle at Abergwili in 1022. The sources do not establish whether Llywelyn was then acting as a representative of the southern dynasty of Hywel Dda, or as an aggressive ruler of the northern kingdom pursuing ambitions in Deheubarth. In what was clearly a year of crisis, each version of the 'Brut y tywysogyon' records a flattering encomium of his quality. 
His death in 1023, which was noted without further comment, marked a temporary eclipse of his dynasty. In that year the old line of Gwynedd was re-established when Iago ab Idwal became ruler. He held power until he was killed and replaced by Gruffudd ap Llywelyn in 1039. Writing many years later, in the 1180s, Walter Map drew on border traditions and presented Gruffudd growing up as a spineless youth, lacking in confidence and drive. His sister, seeking to urge him to action, reproached him, as the only son and heir of his father, for his lack of purpose. By 1039 that phase had passed. Gruffudd may have been, as the 'Brenhinedd y Saesson' claims, responsible for the death of Iago. Certainly, as soon as he became king of Gwynedd, Gruffudd was involved in battle with the men of Mercia whom he defeated at Rhyd-y-groes on the Severn. Whether he or the Mercians took the initiative in seeking that encounter is not known. For the next sixteen years his main objective was to make himself master of Deheubarth, but he was thwarted by the resilience and resistance of the two princes ruling south Wales, Hywel ab Edwin, between 1039 and 1044, and Gruffudd ap Rhydderch, between 1044 and 1055. Twice, in 1039 and 1041, he defeated Hywel but failed to take his kingdom. In 1041, after the battle of Pencader, he captured Hywel's wife and 'took her as his own' ('Brut: Peniarth MS 20', 13). He was himself captured by a Scandinavian force in 1042. Hywel made alliance with the Scandinavians -- the Ostmen -- based in Ireland, but, as the 'Brut' makes clear, Gruffudd overcame them and finally defeated and killed Hywel in 1044. He could not prevent Gruffudd ap Rhydderch from establishing himself as king in Hywel's place. 
There was heavy fighting between the northern king and Gruffudd ap Rhydderch and his brother, Rhys, in 1045. In the following year Gruffudd ap Llywelyn allied with an English earl, Swein son of Godwine, and they campaigned together in Wales. It is generally assumed that this alliance was an attempt to dislodge his rival in the south. The struggle for power was checked by a crisis, little short of a disaster, within Wales. The men of Ystrad Tywi attacked Gruffudd ap Llywelyn's bodyguard -- his 'teulu' -- and about 140 of them were killed. It was a great loss: Gruffudd had the strength to seek revenge in Ystrad Tywi, but not to renew hostilities on a large scale, and the southern prince was left undisturbed for a number of years. A raid on Herefordshire in 1052, extending as far as Leominster, was attributed to him by John of Worcester; it remains inherently unlikely, though John's claim cannot lightly be put aside. With the deaths of Rhys ap Rhydderch in 1053 and of Gruffudd ap Rhydderch in 1055, the southern kingdom could not produce a strong candidate, and Gruffudd ap Llywelyn could establish himself as ruler of Wales. 
From 1055 to 1063 Gruffudd was primarily concerned with relations with England. His policy was, in part, a continuation of the aggressive policy pursued on the English frontier by Gruffudd ap Rhydderch and, in part, a reaction to political events in England. In 1055 AElfgar, son of Leofric, earl of Mercia, was forced into exile in the course of a power struggle between the earls of Wessex and Mercia. AElfgar countered by recruiting a fleet from the Scandinavians settled in Ireland and by forming an alliance with Gruffudd ap Llywelyn, who was the most prominent leader of the combined force. The defence of the southern frontier had been entrusted to Ralph de Mantes, earl of Hereford, who relied on castles and knights, on the continental pattern. When the attack came the English defence collapsed and Ralph's army suffered heavy casualties. Hereford was taken; the town and its cathedral were destroyed by fire, and Gruffudd returned to Wales with substantial plunder. Reinforcements were brought from all over England under Harold, earl of Wessex, but he was content to refortify Hereford, and to negotiate at Billingsley peace terms which, all too soon, were compromised. Leofgar, the new bishop of Hereford, one of Harold's clerical followers, was secular and belligerent in outlook. In June, 1056, he led an army against Gruffudd, and was soundly defeated, again with heavy losses. 
His action put Earl Harold's integrity at risk, and peace was restored only by calling on Earl Leofric and Ealdred, bishop of Worcester, and ultimately on King Edward. Despite his military dominance, Gruffudd accepted by a formal oath that he would be a faithful under-king, perhaps content with recognition by the English of his territorial and other acquisitions. Walter Map recorded an anecdote which demonstrates a generous trait in Gruffudd's character. The two rulers faced each other on opposite banks of the Severn, waiting for the other to make the first move. When Edward the Confessor set out from Aust in a small boat, Gruffudd leapt into the river to meet him and carried him on his shoulders to the shore. The Mercian-Welsh alliance was strengthened by a marriage between Gruffudd and Edith ['see 'Ealdgyth], daughter of Earl AElfgar. It was called into action again in 1058, when AElfgar and Gruffudd were once more linked with a Norwegian fleet, but the 'Anglo-Saxon Chronicle' does not make explicit the cause or the development of this obscure episode. 
Nor are the events of 1062 wholly clear. Earl AElfgar was the recipient of a royal writ late in the summer of 1062, and apparently died soon afterwards. At Christmas, Earl Harold was sent on a surprise attack on Gruffudd's court at Rhuddlan, but the prince escaped by sea. A campaign and blockade mounted in the summer of 1063 by Earl Harold and Earl Tostig left him with less hope of survival. He moved inland, and was killed in August by enemies in Wales. His head was taken to Earl Harold, and ultimately delivered to Edward the Confessor. Gwynedd and Powys were given to his half-brothers, Bleddyn and Rhiwallon, who ruled as client kings, and in the south the old dynasty of Deheubarth was restored. 
Of his family little is known. He had a liaison with the wife of Hywel ab Edwin, taken as part of the spoils of war in 1041. He married Ealdgyth, daughter of Earl AElfgar, and they had a daughter, later the wife of Osbern fitz Richard; their daughter married another marcher lord, Bernard de Neufmarche. Walter Map wrote of a wife of great beauty whom Gruffudd loved; that may be a reference to Ealdgyth, noted for her beauty. No sons were recorded in any genealogy, but two sons are named in chronicle sources, Maredudd and Ithel ('recte' Idwal), both of whom died in 1069. An Owain ap Gruffudd who died ten years earlier may have been a third son. 
Gruffudd's reign was important for Wales. Territorial gains which he had made along the northern frontier as far as Bistre, (Bishopstree, near Mold), and which he and Gruffudd ap Rhydderch had made in the south, extended Welsh rule eastwards. He had a court poet, Berddig, who was given three rills, with five plough teams in Gwent. There were substantial losses after his final defeat and death. His alliance with Mercia gave him greater influence in English affairs than any other Welsh ruler of the eleventh century. In terms of English domestic politics it also made him a dangerous figure in the eyes of the earls of Wessex and Northumbria, and for that he eventually paid a heavy price. He gave Wales unity for a brief eight years. When the writer of the 'Brut' praised him as 'the head and shield of the Britons' ('Brut: Peniarth MS 20', 15), he was looking at the past. At no point in Gruffudd's reign could the possibility of the succession of a Norman king in England be identified as a future problem for Welsh princes. He disappeared from the scene before the Norman invasion of England in 1066 produced new and potentially dangerous problems for Wales. When that threat emerged, the country had returned once more to its traditional pattern of multiple kingship and disruptive rivalries. 


@@@@@


doc= 16874


Llywelyn ab Iorwerth (c.1173-1240), prince of Gwynedd, was the son of Iorwerth Drwyndwn 
(Iorwerth Flatnose; died 'c'.1174)
, son of Owain Gwynedd (d. 1170), and his cousin Marared, daughter of Madog ap Maredudd (d. 1160), king of Powys; according to one tradition Iorwerth was excluded from the succession to the kingship of Gwynedd because of a physical disability. 
Llywelyn was born 'c'.1173, possibly at Dolwyddelan in Nant Conwy, and may have been brought up in Powys. According to Gerald of Wales he had begun to challenge his uncles Dafydd ab Owain Gwynnedd and Rhodri ab Owain Gwynedd ['see under 'Hywel ab Owain Gwynedd] at the time of Gerald's journey through Wales in 1188, when Llywelyn would have been about fifteen (although Gerald describes him as being 'about twelve years old'); the poet Prydydd y Moch suggested that his military career had begun when he was no more than ten. 
In 1194, according to the Welsh chronicle 'Brut y tywysogyon', Llywelyn joined Rhodri and his cousins, the sons of Cynan ab Owain Gwynedd, in a successful bid to expel Dafydd from the eastern half of Gwynedd, leaving Dafydd with only three castles. Two poets refer to a battle near Aberconwy in which Llywelyn appears to have defeated Dafydd and in which Rhodri was also involved; this action was followed by the ejection of Rhodri from Anglesey and Prydydd y Moch mentions Llywelyn's victories at Porthaethwy and Coedana on the island. Gerald saw his success as a divine judgment, since Dafydd and Rhodri were considered by the church to be the offspring of an incestuous marriage. In 1197 Llywelyn captured Dafydd; his release was negotiated by the justiciar, Hubert Walter, and he died in exile in England in 1203. 
On 6 January 1199 the castle of Mold was captured from the earl of Chester's seneschal and on the same day, according to Prydydd y Moch, Llywelyn won a victory in Arfon, almost certainly over his cousin Gruffudd ap Cynan ab Owain Gwynedd; it may be significant that Llywelyn's two charters to the Cistercian abbey of Aberconwy were dated two days later. In these charters he styled himself 'Prince of all north Wales' and dated them in the tenth year of his principate, although a recent study has suggested that they are not contemporary. Gruffudd took the Cistercian habit in the abbey and died there in 1200; in 1201 his brother Maredudd was ejected from Llyn and Eifionydd 'because of his treachery' ('Brut: Hergest'), thereby completing Llywelyn's conquest of Gwynedd. 
In September 1199 John, the new king of England, took Llywelyn under his protection and confirmed him in the possession of his lands. John was seeking to secure a balance of power between Llywelyn and Gwenwynwyn (died 1216?) of southern Powys, who had succeeded his father, Owain Cyfeiliog, in 1197; as lord of Glamorgan in right of his wife, John understood Welsh politics. In December 1199 he also took Gwenwynwyn and Gruffudd ap Cynan under his protection, although the latter's political career may have been over by that time; as Llywelyn's power increased, however, there seems to have been a desire to reach an accommodation and after negotiations a treaty was concluded on 11 July 1201. This was the first written treaty between a Welsh ruler and the king of England and in it Llywelyn and the magnates of Wales swore fealty to John and undertook to do homage to him on his return from France; the prince would retain his territorial gains and would have the choice of English or Welsh law to settle disputes over land. 
Llywelyn and Gwenwynwyn clashed for the first time in August 1202 when the former invaded Powys with a large army. War was averted by the intervention of mediators; the 'History of Fouke le Fitz Waryn' credits Fulk (III) Fitzwarine with bringing hostilities to an end after the prince had seized Mechain and Mochnant. Llywelyn did homage to John on the latter's return from France in the summer of 1204, and it was probably in the following spring that he received a sign of royal favour when he married the king's illegitimate daughter Joan. With an earlier partner, Tangwystl, the daughter of Llywarch Goch, he had had a son, Gruffudd ap Llywelyn (d. 1244), and a daughter, Gwenllian, but this relationship was not recognized by the church as a valid marriage. He was certainly seeking a politically advantageous match at this time; in April 1203 he had received a papal dispensation to marry the widow of his uncle Rhodri, a daughter of the Manx king, Ragnvald (died 1229), but that marriage did not take place, nor is there any evidence to corroborate the statement in one of Innocent III's letters that he had been married to a sister of the earl of Chester. The marriage to Joan was a dynastic opportunity not to be missed; their children would be part of the European royal and aristocratic network, which would in turn elevate the Gwynedd dynasty to a higher status than the other Welsh ruling houses. John presented his son-in-law with the manor of Ellesmere, Shropshire, previously given by Henry II to Dafydd on his marriage to Emma of Anjou in 1174. 
Llywelyn's opportunity to assert his mastery beyond Gwynedd came in 1208 when the lands of Gwenwynwyn, prince of southern Powys, were confiscated by the king on the pretext that Gwenwynwyn had attacked the lands of one of his marcher neighbours. Llywelyn promptly moved into Powys. He then entered Ceredigion, attacking Maelgwn ap Rhys (died 1231), the member of the Deheubarth lineage who was an ally of Gwenwynwyn. In spite of his opposition Llywelyn installed Maelgwn's nephews in part of the territory. Llywelyn was demonstrating his capacity to exploit the misfortunes of other Welsh dynasties and the fissures within their ranks for his own purposes. John took an indulgent view of these activities and in 1209 Llywelyn joined his campaign against William the Lion of Scotland and was at Norham on 4 August when William submitted; this was the only occasion on which a ruler of Gwynedd joined a king of England on a military expedition outside Wales. 
By 1210 Llywelyn was the dominant figure in Wales, but his relations with the king now deteriorated; it is possible that William (V) de Briouze had persuaded him to take advantage of John's absence in Ireland between June and August 1210, but, if so, this was an error of judgement. An army commanded by the earl of Chester invaded Gwynedd and the castle at Deganwy, demolished by Llywelyn, was rebuilt by the earl. John's triumphant return from Ireland seems to have been followed by a decision to move against the prince; in November 1210 Gwenwynwyn's lands were restored to him and the following spring all the other Welsh rulers were summoned to Chester. This involvement may have reflected an increasing fear and suspicion of Llywelyn's power of which John was able to take advantage. The first royal expedition entered north Wales in May 1211. Llywelyn fell back on the natural fortress of Snowdonia; the royal army, faced with a lack of supplies, was forced to withdraw to Chester, but in July a further expedition set out from Oswestry and in a lightning campaign swept into Gwynedd, capturing the bishop of Bangor in his own cathedral, holding him to ransom, and burning the town. Joan's intercession secured terms for Llywelyn and on 11 August 1211 he submitted to the king. He had to surrender the Four Cantrefs (the land between the Conwy and the Dee), along with the commote of Edeirnion, to hand over hostages, including his son Gruffudd, and to pay a heavy tribute of cattle and horses. He also agreed that if he and Joan had no heir his lands would pass to the crown, which suggests that their son Dafydd ap Llywelyn (d. 1246) had not yet been born. 
This was the nadir of Llywelyn's career, but he soon recovered. The other Welsh rulers had seen John as the defender of their independence but he soon showed that he had every intention of retaining a presence in Wales by building castles. Llywelyn and Joan spent Easter 1212 with him, but by the end of June war had broken out again and now most of the Welsh rulers, including Gwenwynwyn, were on the prince's side. The Four Cantrefs, apart from the castles of Deganwy and Rhuddlan, were reconquered. John now planned a major campaign to deal with Llywelyn once and for all; he had been preparing an expedition to recover Normandy and Anjou, lost to the French in 1204, and had built up a system of alliances, including the emperor Otto IV, but this was now postponed and an army was assembled at Chester in August. Nothing came of this project, however; the king was warned, by Joan according to some sources, of a baronial plot to hand him over to the Welsh or to kidnap him. The campaign was abandoned, although some Welsh hostages were executed and there was an attempt to persuade the sons of Dafydd and Rhodri to claim lands in Gwynedd. 
The planned expedition to France gave this war a European dimension. Philip Augustus of France was in close touch with the pope, Innocent III, who, from his dealings with Gerald of Wales earlier in the century, knew something of Welsh affairs. Philip offered Llywelyn an alliance, sealing his letter with his golden seal, a particular mark of respect; Llywelyn's dignified answer, in which he spoke for all the Welsh rulers and undertook not to make any treaty with the English without Philip's agreement, survives in Paris. Innocent absolved Llywelyn, Gwenwynwyn, and Maelgwn ap Rhys of Deheubarth from their oaths of fealty to John, urged them to make war on him and released their lands from the interdict imposed on the English church in 1208. John's enemies saw the advantage of backing the Welsh cause. 
The capture of Deganwy and Rhuddlan in 1213 completed the conquest of the Four Cantrefs. Then, on 15 May 1213, John made his peace with the papacy and became a papal vassal; this meant that the Welsh no longer enjoyed papal support but on Innocent's instructions a truce was arranged which lasted through 1214. After his defeat at Bouvines on 27 July John was faced in England with growing baronial discontent and this led to attempts to secure the support of the Welsh leaders. But when civil war broke out in 1215 Llywelyn joined the barons and in May took Shrewsbury; the key figure in this alliance may have been Giles de Briouze, the bishop of Hereford, whose brother Reginald was to marry the prince's daughter Gwladus. On 15 June 1215 John was forced by the barons to grant 'Magna Carta', three articles of which related to Wales; these concerned the resolution of territorial disputes, the release of Welsh hostages, including Llywelyn's son Gruffudd, and the restoration of the charters given by the Welsh in 1211 as security for peace. 
The grant of the charter was followed by the renewal of hostilities, the excommunication of the king's opponents, and the baronial invitation to Philip Augustus's son Louis to take over the English throne. In December 1215 Llywelyn, accompanied by most of the Welsh rulers, invaded south-west Wales, taking Carmarthen, Cardigan, and several other castles. At an assembly of Welsh rulers at Aberdyfi in 1216 he shared out the reconquered lands among various members of the Deheubarth dynasty; this event marked his emergence as prince of Wales to all intents and purposes and the other rulers may have done homage to him. The same year saw the defection of Gwenwynwyn, persuaded by John to change sides, despite his recent homage and written pledges of loyalty; he was expelled from Powys by Llywelyn and died in exile later the same year. 
The death of John on 15 October 1216 and the accession of the young Henry III marked the beginning of the end of the English civil war and the gradual desertion of Llywelyn's allies as they made their peace. The baronial leaders had invited him and Alexander II of Scotland to a meeting at Northampton to choose a new king, but there was no response; both rulers probably understood the potential implications of their attendance. In the summer of 1217 Llywelyn led a further invasion of south Wales which resulted in the surrender of Swansea; Haverfordwest was saved from attack by the intervention of the bishop of St David's. The civil war ended with the treaty of Lambeth on 11 September 1217; the Welsh were offered inclusion in its terms, but as these involved the surrender of all their territorial gains they were unacceptable. Further negotiations followed and at Worcester in March 1218 Llywelyn did homage to the king and his gains were confirmed; he was given the custody of Carmarthen and Cardigan until the king came of age and of southern Powys during the minority of Gwenwynwyn's sons. In the same year he made his peace with the earl of Chester. 
The peace of Worcester was a cessation of hostilities rather than a treaty, but it underlined Llywelyn's supremacy; he did homage on his own on behalf of all the Welsh rulers and this symbolized his main objective for the rest of his reign. He had imposed his overlordship on the other rulers; now he sought to have this overlordship recognized by the English crown in a formal treaty. He would do homage on behalf of all the rulers and they would do homage to him. When he died his successor would inherit this position and thus a treaty would create a single Welsh principality recognized by the crown. 
Llywelyn's other objective was to secure the undisputed succession of his and Joan's son, Dafydd. At a council at Shrewsbury in May 1220, attended by Pandulf (died 1226), the papal legate, Hubert de Burgh (died 1243), the justiciar, and the archbishop of Canterbury, Stephen Langton (died 1228), Dafydd was recognized as his heir. This was confirmed by the pope in the summer of 1222; Llywelyn had informed Honorius III that he wished to abolish the Welsh custom whereby an illegitimate son was entitled to a share of the inheritance and that he had therefore ordained that Dafydd, his son born in wedlock, would succeed him. This meant the disinheriting of Gruffudd, but the fact that Dafydd was related through his mother to so many royal and aristocratic houses made him the natural choice. Honorius strengthened Dafydd's position further in April 1226 when he declared Joan legitimate, probably at the instance of her half-brother Henry III; in the same year the other Welsh rulers swore fealty to Dafydd and at Michaelmas 1229 he went to London and did homage to the king as his father's heir. 
Llywelyn was on friendly terms with Ranulf (III), earl of Chester, and in 1222 his daughter Elen married the earl's nephew and heir, John the Scot. But his position was not unchallenged; the regent William (I) Marshal, earl of Pembroke, had died in 1219 and his son was making life difficult for his Welsh neighbours around his lordship of Pembroke. In August 1220 Llywelyn led an army into south Wales, ostensibly to remove local Welsh rulers from marcher lands; having done this he marched into what is now Pembrokeshire, destroyed two castles, and burned Haverfordwest. There was no immediate response, but on 15 April 1223 the earl of Pembroke returned from Ireland and took Cardigan and Carmarthen. Llywelyn sent his son Gruffudd to deal with the earl, but a battle near Carmarthen was inconclusive and Gruffudd, short of supplies, returned to Gwynedd. In September Llywelyn besieged Builth after attempts at reconciliation with the earl had failed. Hubert de Burgh now assembled an army, advanced into Wales, and began work on a new castle at Montgomery; Llywelyn raised the siege of Builth, and in October 1223 he and the other rulers submitted to the king and he agreed to relinquish the lands in Shropshire that he had occupied earlier that year. 
When Falkes de Breaute, one of John's old henchmen, defied the king in July 1224 he sought the aid of the earl of Chester and of Llywelyn. Henry III ordered Llywelyn not to receive Breaute and in a dignified reply the prince informed the king that, as an independent ruler, he could, like the king of Scotland, receive anyone he liked in his own lands (although he had undertaken at Worcester not to receive the king's enemies). But his relations with the crown at this time were generally good and there seems to have been some attempt to conclude a permanent agreement; Llywelyn and Henry met at Shrewsbury in September 1224 and again in August 1226, although both meetings were inconclusive. The legitimization of Joan may have been a sign of royal goodwill. 
On 27 April 1228 the castle and lordship of Montgomery were granted to Hubert de Burgh, who began to clear the nearby forests. The Welsh response was to besiege the castle. In August the king and Hubert set out to relieve it; Joan met Henry at Shrewsbury and arranged a truce, but at the same time some of the leading marcher lords had been summoned to Montgomery. Hubert began building a castle in Ceri; this was a threat to Llywelyn's control of the adjacent cantref of Arwystli and he moved swiftly. The royal campaign was an ignominious failure; the army had to withdraw and Henry undertook to demolish the castle in Ceri, for which Llywelyn agreed to pay him $2000. One of the leading marcher lords, William (V) de Briouze, had been captured by the Welsh and a ransom of $2000 was negotiated; he was released early in 1229, having agreed with Llywelyn that his daughter Isabella should marry Dafydd and that Builth should be her dowry. Llywelyn was now in an even stronger position and in 1230 he began to style himself prince of Aberffraw and lord of Snowdon, rather than prince of north Wales; the first surviving record of the use of this title is in a charter dated 1 May 1230 (Aberffraw in Anglesey was the principal seat of the kings of Gwynedd). He may have been reluctant to call himself prince of Wales until that title had been confirmed by the crown in a formal treaty. 
In the spring of 1230 William de Briouze visited Llywelyn's court to make the final arrangements for the marriage. During his earlier captivity there he appears to have had an affair with Joan and they were now discovered by Llywelyn. Both were imprisoned; the king knew of this by 20 April, when he ordered Briouze's castles to be secured. On 2 May, Briouze was hanged at Crogen near Bala; Llywelyn informed his widow and his brother-in-law that 'the magnates of the land' had insisted on the execution. There were no repercussions; Llywelyn's relations with the crown and with his marcher neighbours were unaffected and the marriage went ahead. It may have been generally felt that Briouze had received his just deserts for his abuse of Llywelyn's hospitality. 
The war that came in 1231 stemmed from the ambition of Hubert de Burgh, who had built up an extensive accumulation of lordships in south Wales, including Cardigan and Carmarthen, granted to him in 1229, the overlordship of Gower, and the custody of the lands of Gilbert de Clare, earl of Gloucester, who died in 1230. On the death of William de Briouze's brother-in-law the earl of Pembroke in April 1231, de Burgh was given custody of all the Briouze lands. This made him the virtual ruler of south Wales and it was regarded by Llywelyn as a serious threat. War was expected; on 20 May 1231 the sheriffs of the border counties and some marcher lords were ordered to see that no food or arms were supplied to the Welsh. On 27 May Llywelyn's representatives met the king at Worcester, but at the beginning of June war broke out, precipitated, according to one chronicler, by the execution of some Welsh prisoners. In the ensuing campaign Llywelyn burned Montgomery, Radnor, Hay, and Brecon and took the castles of Neath and Kidwelly; the Deheubarth lords Maelgwn Fychan (died 1257) and Rhys Gryg (died 1231) burned Cardigan and captured the castle. In late July Henry III led an army into Wales and rebuilt the castle of Painscastle, but at the beginning of winter he withdrew and on 30 November a year's truce was agreed. On 30 September the justiciar of Ireland had been ordered to summon the magnates there to join the campaign and to land in Anglesey the following summer but nothing came of this. 
The year 1232 saw the fall of Hubert de Burgh and the rise of Peter de Rivallis, who acquired most of Hubert's Welsh lands; the same year saw the death of Ranulf of Chester, who was succeeded by Llywelyn's son-in-law John the Scot. Another son-in-law, John de Briouze, died the same year and Peter de Rivallis was granted the custody of his lordship of Gower. In 1233 Richard Marshal, earl of Pembroke, clashed with the new regime in England and resorted to arms; Llywelyn joined him and attacked Brecon, while early in 1234 the Deheubarth lords mounted an unsuccessful attack on Carmarthen. But there were pressures for peace, led by Edmund Rich, the new archbishop of Canterbury, and on 6 March 1234 a truce was agreed at Brocton in Shropshire. This was followed by the fall of Peter de Rivallis and the rehabilitation of Pembroke who, however, died on 15 April. The pact of Middle, agreed at the Shropshire village of that name on 21 June, was a truce for two years and a return to the situation at the outbreak of the war. The truce was renewed annually until Llywelyn's death, so that while he lived there was no further war with the king. 
Llywelyn was still anxious to secure a permanent settlement; from 1232 onwards there is a considerable body of correspondence relating to Anglo-Welsh relations but, despite various expressions of goodwill on both sides, substantive negotiations never took place. Henry seems to have been determined not to recognize Llywelyn as prince of Wales in a formal treaty. Llywelyn was also faced with the problem of Gruffudd, who had been excluded from the succession. This was a long-standing problem; father and son had clashed in 1221, when they came close to war, and this had led to the confiscation of Meirionydd and Ardudwy, which Gruffudd had held. Relations had improved by 1223 when Gruffudd was given command of the army that faced the earl marshal's challenge, but in 1228 he was imprisoned in Deganwy, where he remained until 1234. Llywelyn appears to have granted him southern Powys, the patrimony of Gwenwynwyn, possibly to be held as an apanage; he granted lands there to the Cistercian monks of Strata Marcella in 1226. 
The year 1237 was particularly difficult for Llywelyn. On 2 February Joan died at Aber; she was buried at Llan-faes in Anglesey, where her husband founded a Franciscan friary in her memory. Joan had been a great support and strength to Llywelyn, especially in his dealings with her father and her half-brother. A further blow was the death in the same year of the earl of Chester, John the Scot, without an heir; according to Matthew Paris, John was poisoned by his wife, Llywelyn's daughter Elen, but there is no other evidence of this. The political implications were serious; Chester reverted to the crown, which meant that a reliable ally on Llywelyn's eastern border was replaced by the king. Matthew Paris has two other pieces of information about Llywelyn in 1237; in that year the prince suffered a stroke and he also approached Henry III to secure a treaty. Negotiations took place and Llywelyn even promised military service and to put his lands under the king's protection. His interest in such a settlement was attributed by Paris to the rivalry of Gruffudd and Dafydd, which was threatening the stability of the principality. There is no other evidence of such an offer, but there was some talk of negotiations in 1237 between the king and Dafydd, to lead to a possible settlement. 
By now all parties were contemplating a Wales without Llywelyn. In spring 1238 the prince summoned the other rulers to do homage to Dafydd. This came to the king's attention and on 7 March letters were sent to the rulers and to Llywelyn and Dafydd forbidding this; at the same time several leading marcher lords were summoned to meet Henry at Oxford to discuss the matter. A meeting was eventually held at the Cistercian abbey of Strata Florida on 19 October 1238 and here the assembled rulers did fealty to Dafydd but not homage; this assembly might have been the occasion of Llywelyn's effective abdication and the investiture of Dafydd as his successor, the object being to strengthen Dafydd's position in the face of an increasing threat from Gruffudd and his supporters. According to 'Brut y tywysogyon' Dafydd took Powys from his brother immediately after the Strata Florida meeting; the same source claims that he imprisoned him in 1239, although Matthew Paris states that this happened after Llywelyn's death. 
Llywelyn ab Iorwerth died at Aberconwy Abbey on 11 April 1240, having taken the Cistercian habit on his deathbed; he was buried in the abbey. He stands out as one of the greatest rulers of independent Wales and he is remembered as Llywelyn Fawr or Llywelyn the Great; the title seems first to have been used by Matthew Paris. Having started from nothing, he ended his days as prince of Wales in all but name, having achieved this position entirely through his political and military ability. His reign saw great changes in Gwynedd, particularly in the field of native law; these were aimed at strengthening the position of the prince. The relationship of the prince of Gwynedd with the other Welsh rulers was permanently transformed; in future the only choice open to them was to be the vassals of the prince or of the king of England. The military needs of Llywelyn led to the building of castles to defend the borders of Gwynedd and the heartland of Snowdonia at Castell y Bere, Cricieth, Dolbadarn, Deganwy, and Ewloe. To provide an army for his campaigns grants of land to be held by military service were made to faithful servants, particularly to his steward Ednyfed Fychan ['see under 'Tudor family, forebears of (per. c.1215-1404)]. He was a generous patron to the church; the Cistercians of Aberconwy, Basingwerk, and Cymer benefited from his munificence and he was instrumental in refounding some native monastic communities as houses of Augustinian canons. He was also generous to the poets; the leading Gwynedd court poet, Prydydd y Moch 
(Llywarch ap Llywelyn, 'fl'. 1180-1220)
, composed nine poems to him and the greatest of these, the 'Canu mawr' ('Great Song'), was probably composed in 1213 to celebrate his victories, particularly the final reconquest of the Four Cantrefs. Other poets who sang to him included Cynddelw Brydydd Mawr ('fl'. 1155-1195) and Dafydd Benfras. 
There is little information about Llywelyn himself, though the antiquary Edward Lhwyd, writing at the end of the seventeenth century, referred to a biography of Llywelyn and Dafydd in the library of Corpus Christi College, Cambridge; its fate is unknown. Prydydd y Moch referred to his stature, but this may have been no more than one of the attributes of the ideal ruler. The same poet suggested that he cared nothing for fine clothes or gold or silver, but this could be intended to emphasize his generosity. Other poems refer to battles or campaigns for which no other evidence survives, but which must have been familiar to the poet's audience. The fate of William de Briouze suggests the response of a man who had trusted and depended on his wife. 
Llywelyn and Joan had one son, Dafydd, and at least four daughters. Three of the daughters married into marcher families; Gwladus's first husband was Reginald de Briouze, the father of William; after Reginald's death in 1227 or 1228 she married Ralph Mortimer (died 1246) and it is through her that the modern English royal family traces its descent from Llywelyn. Elen married John the Scot, and Margaret, or Marared, married first John de Briouze, lord of Gower, and, after his death in 1232, Walter Clifford (died 1263). The fourth daughter, Susanna, does not appear in the pedigrees; in November 1228 she was put by the king in the care of Nicholas de Verdon and his wife and that is the only reference to her. Tangwystl's daughter, Gwenllian, married William de Lacy and survived until 1281. According to the 'History of Fouke le Fitz Waryn' and the Chester annals, Llywelyn married again some eighteen months before his death, his wife being Eva, the daughter of Fulk (III) Fitzwarine, but this is unconfirmed elsewhere. The marriages of his daughters suggest a consistent policy of creating close ties with some of his marcher neighbours in the interests of stability. 
Llywelyn's two aims were to secure the undisputed succession of Dafydd and to have his predominance in Wales recognized by Henry III in a formal treaty, but in both he was finally unsuccessful. Gruffudd never seems to have been reconciled to being passed over for the succession and many may have supported him as 'mab y Gymraes' ('the Welshwoman's son'); there may have been some hostility to Joan as a daughter of the king of England, and it may be significant that she is not mentioned by any contemporary poet. Although he had brought most of native Wales under his control, everything he had achieved depended in the end on the force of his personality and the strength of his arm. There was no institutional framework to sustain it, with the result that within a month of his death Dafydd was summoned to Gloucester and forced to concede the homage of the other Welsh lords to the king. Henry III could do nothing while Llywelyn lived because of the position he had attained, but he would not allow this position to be inherited by Dafydd, nor would he recognize its permanence by treaty. In the short term Llywelyn, despite his achievements, might be said to have failed; nevertheless, his career showed what could be done by an able and ambitious Welsh ruler and he made a single Welsh principality a political possibility. During his life and largely through his efforts native Wales had changed beyond recognition. 


@@@@@


doc= 16875


Llywelyn ap Gruffudd (d. 1282), prince of Wales, was the second of four sons of Gruffudd ap Llywelyn (d. 1244) and his wife, Senana, and grandson of Llywelyn ab Iorwerth (c.1173-1240). Llywelyn ab Iorwerth was succeeded as prince of Gwynedd by his younger and legitimate son Dafydd ap Llywelyn who, in response to the challenge presented by his elder and bastard brother, Gruffudd ap Llywelyn, immediately placed him in prison. Owain, Gruffudd's eldest son, shared his father's captivity. The younger sons Dafydd ap Gruffudd and Rhodri, who were not yet of age, were placed in the custody of Henry III as sureties for their mother's good faith in an agreement made with the king by which she sought to secure her husband's release from Dafydd ap Llywelyn's prison. Llywelyn, who was probably now aged about nineteen, is not mentioned in the record of Senana's negotiations with the king, and he appears to have acted independently at this time. By a charter probably given in the summer of 1241, when his father and Owain were transferred to Henry's custody, Llywelyn ceded all claim upon the Mortimer lordships of Maelienydd and Gwrtheyrnion in eastern central Wales, an indication that Ralph Mortimer already recognized the young man's capability and considered it prudent to obtain the release. Llywelyn established lordship in Dyffryn Clwyd, one of the Four Cantrefs of Perfeddwlad, that part of Gwynedd which lay east of the Conwy. When in 1244 war broke out between Dafydd ap Llywelyn and Henry III, Llywelyn soon identified himself with his uncle's cause. He was thus placed in a strong position when, on 25 February 1246, Dafydd died without an heir. Owain returned from England, but he could do no more than agree to a division of the patrimony between Llywelyn and himself, an arrangement confirmed by Henry III in the treaty of Woodstock on 30 April 1247. 
Owain and Llywelyn were confined to Gwynedd Uwch Conwy, the land centred on Snowdonia west of the Conwy, yielding Perfeddwlad to the king. By 1253 their brother Dafydd ap Gruffudd was asserting his right to a share of the inheritance. Henry took his fealty and urged his elder brothers to provide for him 'according to the custom of Wales'. Owain may have been prepared to accept the adjustment, but Llywelyn was determined to resist a further partition. He made certain proposals to the king 'concerning his brothers', possibly urging that provision be made for Dafydd, and perhaps Rhodri, in Perfeddwlad. No solution was found by negotiation and the issue was resolved by armed conflict in June 1255 when Owain and Dafydd were defeated by Llywelyn at the battle of Bryn Derwin. The vanquished brothers were imprisoned, and Llywelyn consolidated his hold upon Gwynedd Uwch Conwy in its entirety. In November 1256, after a pause of sixteen months, Llywelyn extended his power over the whole of Perfeddwlad except for the two castles of Diserth and Deganwy. Aided by the support of the inhabitants, who nurtured grievances against the officers who had served the king and the Lord Edward, Llywelyn was able to liberate the land by a swift campaign. Henry, insufficiently attentive both to the dynastic problems of Gwynedd and the difficulties confronting the communities of the Four Cantrefs, and unable to appreciate the possibility of a link between them, found his entire settlement of north Wales undermined. With his annexation of Meirionydd immediately afterwards Llywelyn completed the reintegration of the patrimony of his grandfather. Owain would spend another twenty years in confinement, but Dafydd, released before the advance into Perfeddwlad, was given an estate in that area, to be held as a tenant of his brother. 
Llywelyn moved without delay to establish a broad supremacy over the lands of other Welsh rulers, endeavouring to do so less by armed might than by drawing the rulers into a military alliance that he then sought to transform into a political association. Advancing southward to Deheubarth (south-west Wales) he won support in Ceredigion with the adherence of Maredudd ab Owain. In Ystrad Tywi he was already assured of the goodwill of Maredudd ap Rhys Gryg, who had joined him for the advance into Perfeddwlad. Together they secured possession of Ystrad Tywi to the exclusion of Maredudd's kinsman and adversary, Rhys Fychan. Rhys, however, quickly repaired to Llywelyn, leaving a royal army brought to his aid by Stephen Bauzan in June 1257 to suffer defeat at Cymerau, and he was reinstated in his portion of Ystrad Tywi. Maredudd thereupon transferred his loyalty to the crown and, after a return to Llywelyn's allegiance and a second defection, he was convicted of infidelity before the prince's council in 1259. Thereafter he acknowledged Llywelyn's supremacy only with the greatest reluctance. The prince was able to withstand Henry's campaign in the summer of 1257, when the king advanced to Deganwy and then withdrew, and improved his position when Gruffudd ap Madog of Powys Fadog (northern Powys) adhered to him. In Powys Wenwynwyn (southern Powys) Gruffudd ap Gwenwynwyn remained loyal to the crown, leaving his lands exposed to annexation by Llywelyn. The Welsh rulers, with very few exceptions, were leagued with him, and Matthew Paris was among English observers deeply impressed by the new unity established in Wales under the inspired leadership of Llywelyn ap Gruffudd. 
The Welsh chronicle 'Brut y tywysogyon' records that early in 1258 Llywelyn held an assembly of the magnates of Wales who swore an oath of allegiance to him. It is likely that each of them did homage to Llywelyn and that he thereby established a formal bond with the great majority of those who exercised lordship in the several parts of Powys and Deheubarth. The agreements had the support of the bishops of Bangor and St Asaph, who consented to apply ecclesiastical censure in the event of a breach of faith. In an agreement with a group of Scottish nobles in 1258 Llywelyn used the style 'prince of Wales', and although it would be some time before he used the title on a regular basis its use in that year reflects the emergence, from the initial military alliance, of a new political entity in the prince's lands. 
In the period 1258-62 Llywelyn concentrated upon a quest for a peace treaty by which the king would recognize the political relationships that had now been created in Wales. The central issue was Llywelyn's plea that the homages of the Welsh princes, which historically had belonged to the king of England, should be granted to himself, and that he alone should do homage to the king. With Henry confronted in 1258 by a baronial opposition whose demands were reflected in the provisions of Oxford, the time might have seemed propitious for a Welsh diplomatic initiative and envoys were sent to the Oxford parliament. But there was little prospect of securing a settlement favourable to the prince, not least because marcher lords -- several of whom had been victims of Llywelyn's aggression -- held powerful positions in the royal council. Twice in 1260 Llywelyn launched an attack upon the royal castle of Builth to coincide with renewed diplomatic initiatives. He created consternation in the king's council and secured an extension of the truce first arranged at Oxford, but the peace treaty on which he set his mind remained elusive. After Henry reasserted his authority in 1261 their exchanges became more cordial and Llywelyn, commended for his restraint at the time of turmoil in the realm, was given some reason to believe that the king was serious in his declared readiness to discuss peace terms as well as a truce. The king's position is revealed more clearly, however, in letters written during his stay in France in July 1262 when, upon hearing rumour of the prince's death, he indicated his resolve to terminate the hegemony established by the prince of Gwynedd, and to restore the traditional and direct relationship between the crown and each of the lords of Wales. Llywelyn evidently sensed the king's true feelings. By the end of 1262 he had resumed armed conflict with a series of forceful campaigns in the Welsh march calculated to promote his continuing quest for a definitive peace treaty. It was at this time that he began to use regularly the style 'prince of Wales and lord of Snowdon'. 
Llywelyn's movements were concentrated first on Roger (III) Mortimer's lordship of Maelienydd, and then upon the lordship of Brecon and its environs as far as Abergavenny. While he intended a military response Henry indicated his readiness for negotiation, but the prospect of a peace settlement diminished in the spring of 1263 when Edward, upon his return from Gascony, intervened in the march in association with the prince's implacable opponent, Roger (III) Mortimer. No major campaign materialized even so, and the only tangible result of Edward's activity was an agreement with Dafydd ap Gruffudd upon his defection from Llywelyn. The summer saw considerable turmoil in the march. The prince's forces were engaged in a new offensive in the western portion of the lordship of Clun (that is, Tempsiter or Dyffryn Tefeidiad) about the time of Simon de Montfort's return from France. For a brief period Montfort supporters with territories in the Welsh march, including Roger de Clifford and Hamon L'Estrange, attacked royalist positions in the area. Gruffudd ap Gwenwynwyn, lord of Powys Wenwynwyn, seized the opportunity created by the disorder to resolve a dispute with Thomas Corbet over possession of the area known as Gorddwr on the right bank of the upper Severn. But, when Montfort's transitory adherents returned to the king's allegiance, Gruffudd was left bereft of marcher allies and negotiated an agreement with Llywelyn formalized by an act of homage and fealty on 12 December 1263. 
Overt collaboration between the forces of Llywelyn and Montfort is indicated from the early months of 1264 with a joint attack on Mortimer's castle of Radnor. Llywelyn provided valuable aid upon Montfort's advances to Montgomery in July and to Worcester in December, when the presence of the prince's forces west of the Severn forced their opponents into submission. There is, however, no indication that any formal agreement of a political nature was made in the period when Montfort controlled the government of the realm. A treaty was made only in June 1265, and by then Montfort's power was crumbling. Envoys of Montfort, who was at Hereford, and those of Llywelyn, encamped at Pipton in the lordship of Brecon, negotiated an agreement sealed by Llywelyn on 17 June and issued in the king's name three days later. For a fine of $20,000 Henry granted Llywelyn the lordship of all the barons of Wales, and the principality of Wales, to be held by the prince of Wales and the heirs of his body. Several of Llywelyn's annexations in the march were conceded to him. He may have been sceptical, however, that anything of permanent value would come of the agreement, and he may have endorsed the terms only as a basis for a treaty to be made when the king was able to act of his free will. Within days of the completion of the agreement, ordered government under Montfort's direction ceased. Though the earl moved to the Welsh march, there is no indication that he attempted to link up with Llywelyn's forces and, turning back to cross the Severn, he went to meet his death at Evesham. 
Agreement between Llywelyn and the king would need to form part of a broader settlement of the problems that confronted the realm of England following civil war. Cardinal Ottobuono, the papal legate, found his mediation made difficult by deeply discordant views among the magnates over the treatment of the Montfortians. It was only when this issue had been resolved, following Gilbert de Clare's armed intervention in London on behalf of the 'disinherited', that Henry, on 24 July 1267, indicated his wish to open negotiations with Llywelyn. Envoys of king and prince were at work at Shrewsbury by late August, but after three weeks, when conduct of the negotiations was entrusted to Ottobuono, no treaty had been made. Agreement was finally reached on 25 September and four days later Llywelyn did homage to Henry at Rhydwhiman, the ford on the Severn that marked the frontier in the neighbourhood of Montgomery. By the treaty of Montgomery (29 September 1267) Henry granted Llywelyn and his successors by hereditary right the principality of Wales and the right to be called prince of Wales. He was granted the homage of all the Welsh lords of Wales, with the single exception of Maredudd ap Rhys Gryg. Llywelyn was required to pay 25,000 marks for the treaty, and a further 5000 marks if the king were ever to concede Maredudd's homage; 5000 marks were due immediately or by Christmas and the remainder in instalments of 3000 marks a year. Possession of Gwynedd was implicit in the king's grant, and the inclusion of the Four Cantrefs of Perfeddwlad was specifically stated. The homage of the Welsh lords, the key clause of the treaty, conveyed to Llywelyn overlordship of the several lands of the former principalities of Powys and Deheubarth. Llywelyn was required to cede his conquests, except that he was permitted to hold Gwrtheyrnion, Builth, Brecon, Ceri, Cedewain, and Whittington, lands which together represented a considerable extension of his authority into the march of Wales. He would be allowed Maelienydd if he could establish his right to it, and both the lands granted to him and others to which he laid claim could be made subject to legal process according to the custom of the march. Within his principality he was required, by a clause 'specially ordained', to provide for Dafydd ap Gruffudd, either by restoring what he had held before his defection or by making further provision in accordance with the decision of named magnates of Wales, or, if necessary, by doing justice according to the laws and customs of Wales in the presence of men who would inform the king of the decision. The treaty contained several clauses that were potentially contentious, but Ottobuono felt able to commend it as an honourable settlement which brought hope of an enduring peace between two peoples who had been in prolonged conflict. 
Only ten years after Llywelyn won formal recognition as prince of Wales the principality was dismembered, leaving him to make peace with Edward I on humiliating terms. Historians have often sought to explain the reversal in his fortunes by emphasizing the prince's intransigent attitude to the crown after Edward's accession at the end of 1272. Edward, however, left the kingdom upon a crusade in August 1270 and was away until August 1274, a four-year period which saw a marked deterioration in Llywelyn's relations with the royal government. Problems arose in the march, partly the result of Llywelyn's intervention with armed force in Gilbert de Clare's lordship of Glamorgan. His claim to the homage of Gruffudd ap Rhys of Senghennydd was emphatically rejected by Clare, who rightly held that Gruffudd was a mesne tenant of his marcher dominion. Clare was incensed at a decision by Edward to endorse Llywelyn's parallel claim to the homage of Maredudd ap Gruffudd, who held his lands as a tenant of Clare in the lordship of Caerleon. Clare embarked on the construction of Caerphilly Castle in 1268 and, upon Edward's departure for the crusade, seized the opportunity to resolve the problems in Caerleon and Senghennydd unilaterally. By 1272 Llywelyn had been forced to withdraw from Glamorgan with nothing to show for a prolonged and costly enterprise. To the north of Glamorgan lay the lordship of Brecon where Humphrey (VI) de Bohun sought to reassert authority in a land formally conceded to the prince in 1267, and Llywelyn had to take stern measures to retain the fidelity of some of his Welsh tenants there. With Roger Mortimer now a regent of the realm, Llywelyn feared that Bohun and other marchers would gain the support of the king's council in their attempts to reassert their position. Exchanges over Llywelyn's building of the castle of Dolforwyn in his lordship of Cedewain, and over Mortimer's work at Cefnllys in Maelienydd, reveal the animosity between the two men. 
Llywelyn's failure to appear at the ford of Montgomery to swear fealty to the king in January 1273 may have been less a discourtesy to Edward than a reflection of his distrust of those who were then representing the English king's authority. Llywelyn's failure to meet his financial obligations under the treaty of Montgomery became a matter of concern even before Edward's accession. Late and piecemeal delivery of the sum due at the end of 1270 may point less to a refusal to pay as a matter of principle than to an inability to meet the required payments. There is some indication that Llywelyn's financial resources were inadequate to meet the demands made upon them, particularly the costs incurred by the needs of war, which included castle building at Dolforwyn and Ewloe. Evidence assembled after his death points to the severity of his rule over the communities of his patrimony of Gwynedd, upon whose resources he was very largely dependent. Complaints made by the bishop of St Asaph similarly suggest rigorous financial exaction on the part of the prince, and relations between them were strained. Both Canterbury and the papal court, particularly in the time of Gregory X, were made aware of the internal conflicts of the principality of Wales. The most threatening occurrence was a conspiracy on the part of Dafydd ap Gruffudd and Gruffudd ap Gwenwynwyn to kill the prince. During April 1274, in proceedings before the prince's council at Dolforwyn, Gruffudd ap Gwenwynwyn was convicted of infidelity. His lands were forfeited but were in large part promptly restored by the prince's grace, and it is not certain that Llywelyn at that stage knew the full extent of the conspiracy, unless he was anxious to avoid any open admission of the seriousness of the threat he had encountered. The full story may not have emerged until much later in the year when Owain, son of Gruffudd ap Gwenwynwyn, held as a hostage for his father's good faith, made a full confession. It was only then that Dafydd came to be questioned, but before proceedings were initiated against him both he and Gruffudd fled to England. Edward had by then returned to England, and his decision to give the fugitives refuge in his realm had far-reaching implications in Anglo-Welsh relations. 
Llywelyn was invited to Edward's coronation in August 1274 but did not attend. Of more consequence would be his response to a summons to do homage to the king, a call to Shrewsbury by 2 December 1274. He was given only a month's notice and the date was then brought forward by a week before Edward, on account of an abscess, cancelled the arrangement at very short notice. His inability to fulfil the engagement, which leaves unresolved the question of Llywelyn's willingness to attend, certainly caused a fateful postponement. Within days full knowledge of the conspiracy had been revealed, and before the end of 1274 Edward had given the plotters the shelter of his realm and a base from which they harried the prince. Llywelyn thus received his second summons, to come to Chester by 22 August 1275, at a time of greatly increased tension. The Welsh chronicle records that Llywelyn refused to meet Edward because the king was maintaining the two fugitives who had conspired to kill him. Llywelyn was close by the frontier while Edward was at Chester, and messengers passed between them. But no meeting took place and, at Treuddyn on 11 September, Llywelyn made a statement of his position in a letter to Pope Gregory. The essential issue was Edward's decision to provide sanctuary for his two faithless vassals, linked with the fact that he was summoned to do homage at a place to which it was unsafe for him to go, among men who had plotted his death. He was prepared to come to a safe place, as long as the king abided by the terms of the treaty of 1267 and ensured that breaches of the truce were corrected. There would be three more summonses to do homage, but the issues that would lead to war in 1277 were, with one exception, already formulated: Llywelyn had failed to fulfil his duties to the king, and he had not met his obligations under the treaty of 1267; he made war in the marches to the damage of the king's realm. The remaining issue was Llywelyn's decision to marry Eleanor de Montfort (d. 1282). Negotiations, in which Welsh Dominicans played a key part, led to a marriage by proxy before Eleanor left the convent at Montargis for her voyage to Wales in December 1275. She sailed with her brother Amaury, but her ships were intercepted on the high seas, probably near the Isles of Scilly. Edward attributed the capture to divine providence, but it may have reflected the surveillance of the Montforts that Edward had initiated following the murder of Henry of Almain by Simon de Montfort's sons at Viterbo in 1271. In letters to the pope Edward emphasized the dangers that the marriage created for the security of England. There can be little doubt that Llywelyn arranged the marriage in the immediate aftermath of Edward's decision to receive the conspirators, and that he did so in retaliation against the king's action. 
Formal condemnation of Llywelyn was made by king and council on 11 November 1276 when Llywelyn's proposals were rejected. Archbishop Kilwardby, who had attempted to engage the prince in discussions during the summer, withheld sentence of excommunication to give Llywelyn an opportunity to make his submission to the king. Llywelyn is known to have presented further proposals on two occasions early in 1277, but to no effect. By the spring, excommunication had been pronounced, and military operations were set in train in the march and in Powys and Deheubarth, where Edward was able to wean the Welsh lords from their loyalty to Llywelyn. The king launched the main offensive against Gwynedd in late July, with the declared objective of appropriating the prince's entire patrimony and sharing its possession between Owain ap Gruffudd, Dafydd ap Gruffudd, and himself. The main royal army advanced to the Conwy and another force occupied Anglesey. Llywelyn, despite some defections from among the men of Gwynedd, prepared for a long siege. From September, however, the forces confronting the prince were gradually reduced and a settlement was negotiated. Edward made provision for Dafydd in Perfeddwlad, and at the beginning of November a document was drawn up by which Llywelyn acknowledged Dafydd's hereditary right in Gwynedd Uwch Conwy, while Edward declared his willingness to allow Llywelyn to hold the land for his lifetime. These key agreements were embodied in the treaty of Aberconwy on 9 November 1277. Llywelyn was allowed to retain the style prince of Wales, with the homage of five minor lords. His broader principality was destroyed without its mention in the treaty, and he ceded the Four Cantrefs. Owain ap Gruffudd was released from prison and given land in Llyn, and financial provision was made for Rhodri. Neither was accorded the concern shown for Dafydd, who would succeed to his share of the patrimony at Llywelyn's death. A fine of 50,000 marks by which Llywelyn secured the king's grace was immediately remitted, but the prince was held to his outstanding obligations under the terms of the treaty of Montgomery and his annual payment for Anglesey. Llywelyn swore fealty at Rhuddlan on 11 November. Before Christmas he went to London where he did homage and attended to matters of detail arising from the treaty. Edward and Llywelyn met again at Rhuddlan in September 1278, and final arrangements were made for the celebration of Llywelyn's marriage to Eleanor de Montfort at Worcester on 13 October. Edward gave the bride in marriage and provided the wedding feast. 
Early in 1278 Llywelyn initiated proceedings before royal justices to claim against Gruffudd ap Gwenwynwyn the cantref of Arwystli and part of Cyfeiliog, lands he had retained following the legal process against Gruffudd in 1274 and then ceded in war. Llywelyn, acting in accordance with the terms of the treaty of Aberconwy, which allowed for the use of Welsh or marcher law as appropriate, wished to proceed by Welsh law while Gruffudd preferred English law. After deliberations in council in 1279-80 Edward indicated that actions arising in Wales would be determined in accordance with the practice of his predecessors. Though Llywelyn pressed for a clear indication of the king's intentions, and Archbishop Pecham offered a highly critical estimate of Welsh law, Edward refrained from any elaboration. Llywelyn appears to have sought a procedure by which the case would be resolved by the judgment of Welsh judges ('ynaid', 'iudices'). Unwilling to consent to a procedure which would in effect take judgment away from his justices, Edward was at the same time reluctant to expose himself to the political repercussions of an explicit rejection of Llywelyn's demands. Llywelyn had placed the king in a difficult dilemma, but it is by no means certain that he was using the proceedings over Arwystli as a pretext for renewed conflict. An agreement with Roger Mortimer on 9 October 1281, by which the old adversaries set aside their differences, does not suggest impending conflict but indicates Llywelyn's wish, in the event of a successful outcome of the Arwystli case, to accommodate Mortimer's claims to lands that bordered on the cantref. Edward's anger at Llywelyn's recent action in reopening the Arwystli case is suggested in November 1281 by his more clearly declared support for Gruffudd ap Gwenwynwyn, and a hardening of his attitude is at the same time indicated in his appointment of Reynold de Grey as justice of Chester, an office that carried responsibility for Perfeddwlad. Signs of greatly increased anxiety may be recognized in letters of Llywelyn and Eleanor early in 1282. 
Renewed conflict, which broke out with Dafydd's attack on Hawarden Castle on Palm Sunday (22 March) 1282, is best understood, however, as the outcome of the grievances not of Llywelyn but of Dafydd, along with those of other princes, and the discontent of communities who had a vexed experience of royal administration in Perfeddwlad. In a statement to Pecham late in 1282 Llywelyn said that he had no knowledge of the intention of those who went to war. But, he told the archbishop, after reciting the suffering endured by his people, no one should marvel that he had given his consent to those who began the war. It is not certain that Llywelyn joined the resistance at an early date, and he may not have committed himself to the conflict for some weeks, possibly not before Eleanor died giving birth to their daughter, Gwenllian, on 19 June. Even so, the record of Pecham's intervention in November, designed to persuade Llywelyn to submit to the king's will, establishes the prince's unquestioned leadership of the forces in rebellion by then. He was already besieged in Snowdonia, with Anglesey and Perfeddwlad lost, and his position was desperate. But in written statements made in anticipation of Pecham's coming, Llywelyn provided a reasoned account of the considerations that had brought his people to war, and rejected the archbishop's pleas that he submit himself to the king's will. He supplied Pecham with a substantial dossier embodying his complaints and those of his fellow princes and several communities. 
Pecham, who found the king unwilling to countenance these submissions, made his way into Snowdonia for discussions with Llywelyn, probably at the prince's court at Aber or in its environs. He returned to find Edward still bent upon securing an unconditional surrender and he could do no more than secure a statement of the proposals that the magnates would put to the king if Llywelyn were prepared to submit. Nothing would be conceded concerning Anglesey or Perfeddwlad; Llywelyn and his people would be treated mercifully and the prince would be offered honourable maintenance, in fact an earldom, in England. In rejecting the proposals Llywelyn referred to his distant predecessors the Trojan founders of Britain, and emphasized both his ancient inheritance and the status accorded him by the mediation of the papacy in 1267. He would not renounce his responsibility to his people and leave them exposed to the rule of a king in whom they had no confidence. Even as the archbishop conducted his discussions with the magnates upon his return from Llywelyn the English army in Anglesey made an unsuccessful attempt to force a crossing of the Menai Strait and, when the archbishop terminated his mediation with a vigorous denunciation of those in rebellion, preparations were made for a new offensive. 
Llywelyn's decision to depart from Gwynedd and take an army to the march of Wales has left historians perplexed. Already besieged in his redoubt in Snowdonia there were, however, military reasons for a major diversion of his opponents' resources. But there is a possibility that Llywelyn was drawn to the march by subterfuge. The continuation of 'Brut y tywysogyon' records, in a statement that precedes its account of Llywelyn's departure, that 'then there was effected the betrayal of Llywelyn in the belfry at Bangor by his own men' ('Brut: Peniarth MS 20', 120). The precise meaning of the statement is uncertain, but the circumstances in which he met his death strongly suggest that he was lured to Cilmeri, in the neighbourhood of Builth, by a ruse in which Edmund Mortimer played a key role. Llywelyn's movements were closely monitored by English field commanders, and there can be no doubt that securing his death was a prime object of their endeavours. The account of Walter of Guisborough, describing a battle in which the Welsh, defending a bridge, were attacked upon their flank by a force that had forced the river upstream, does not carry conviction. The Welsh chronicle and several English chronicles, among which that of the Premonstratensian house of Hagnaby is particularly informative, point to Llywelyn's coming at Mortimer's behest to take the homage of his men, and then a fierce and prolonged battle in which the prince was separated from his forces and killed. He died on 11 December 1282. A report by John Pecham, carrying an intriguing reference to a treasonable letter disguised by false names found on Llywelyn's person, strongly suggests conspiracy among the marcher barons. 
Llywelyn was decapitated and his head was sent to Edward and displayed to his troops before it was taken to London and, crowned with ivy, placed upon a pole at the Tower. The statement in the chronicle of Bury St Edmunds that his body was buried in the Cistercian abbey of Cwm-hir is not corroborated by any other writer but, given Pecham's keen inquiry into the truth of a report to that effect, is probably correct. His daughter, Gwenllian, was removed to the Gilbertine nunnery at Sempringham where, made a nun against her will according to the Welsh chronicler, she spent her days. She died at the nunnery in 1337. After Llywelyn's death his brother Dafydd ap Gruffudd assumed the title 'prince of Wales and lord of Snowdon', and maintained the struggle until his capture in the summer of 1283. Llywelyn's triumphs were celebrated by the poets Dafydd Benfras and Llygad Gwr, and his death inspired elegies of great eloquence by Bleddyn Fardd and Gruffudd ab yr Ynad Coch. The text of the chronicle 'Brenhinedd y Saesson' relates that after the death of Llywelyn 'all Wales was cast to the ground' ('Brut: Saeson', 259). His death, and the virtual extinction in the war of 1282-3 of the princely lineages, brought an era in the history of Wales to a close. 
Llywelyn ap Gruffudd was not to be accorded extensive historical remembrance in the centuries following his death. Although there are occasional allusions to him in the poetry of the later middle ages, the profound sense of loss expressed in the elegies was not to be sustained. Gwenllian was his only child and consequently the prince left no lineage that might have stimulated the interest of the genealogists. More telling still was the fact that, with the extinction of the princes at the conquest, the historical writing represented by 'Brut y tywysogyon' came to an end. Thereafter it was Geoffrey of Monmouth's 'History of the Kings of Britain' that prevailed in the nation's awareness, and the distant figures of legendary history tended to excite greater interest than the historical persons of a more recent past. The work of Humphrey Llwyd and David Powel in the sixteenth century ensured that the memory of the princes was restored, and these scholars were the founders of a new tradition in Welsh historical writing. Their work, which accorded an appropriate place to Llywelyn ap Gruffudd's achievement, greatly influenced later writers, but in the eighteenth century Theophilus Evans and William Williams of Llandygai still expressed their regret that the princes were not better remembered. Fuller historical discussion came with the work of William Warrington in English, and Thomas Price and Gweirydd ap Rhys in Welsh; Llywelyn was also commemorated in epic poetry and in patriotic verse set to music. Even so, he was never to share the fame enjoyed by Owain Glyn Dwr, and efforts to raise by public subscription a memorial at Cilmeri, close by the place where he fell, came to nothing. An obelisk was eventually raised by the generosity of an Englishman, Stanley Bligh, squire of a neighbouring estate. 
Authoritative discussion came with the publication of J. E. Lloyd's 'History of Wales' (1911), but the descriptive nature of the work meant that Llywelyn's achievement in realigning the princes' allegiance so as to create a new political unity in Wales, and his unique success in establishing a relationship with the crown of England which reflected that change, remained largely unexplained. Moreover, the fact that Lloyd's narrative was in effect cut short at 1277 deprived his work of the advantage of being derived from the evidence relating both to the subsequent disputes over Welsh law, and to the considerations that led to renewed conflict in 1282, sources that contribute quite significantly to a study of the manner in which Welsh national identity was given political expression in this period. Modern historical investigation owes a great deal to the discussion embodied in the introduction by J. G. Edwards to 'Littere Wallie' (1940), in which Llywelyn's activities were regarded as an attempt to overcome the problems caused by the 'chronic decentralization' characteristic of government in thirteenth-century Wales. The contractual relationships that Llywelyn established with the princes of Powys and Deheubarth were portrayed as a means of achieving a measure of coherence in Welsh political affairs never previously attained. Llywelyn's image as a warrior prince, so beloved by generations of historians, now receded as he emerged as an architect of the nation's political institutions, though a prince whose political judgement was still subject to close scrutiny. 
A subsequent broadening of the range of studies of thirteenth-century Wales, with attention given to law texts and poetry, military organization and castle building, the economy of the prince's dominion and his relations with those whom he ruled, has led to a sharpened historical awareness both of the extent of the change in Welsh politics and society, and of the predicament in which Llywelyn found himself in his relations not only with his royal and marcher opponents but also with the princes and communities of his own nation. The exultation and denunciation characteristic of earlier interpretations have by now been moderated in favour of a critical assessment of his efforts to bring a cohesive influence to bear upon a highly fractionized country, and of his ability, albeit for a brief period, to comprehend the territories under Welsh lordship in the unifying political structure represented by the principality of Wales. 


@@@@@


doc= 16876


Llywelyn Bren (d. 1318), rebel leader, was a man of large possessions and great influence in Glamorgan, where he held lands in Senghennydd and Meisgyn; his name may be translated as Llywelyn of the Wood. The earls of Gloucester were lords of Glamorgan, and were accustomed to rule their dominions with the help of the local lords, whether Welsh or English. Llywelyn's family had periodically resisted the earls, and his father, Gruffudd ap Rhys, had also supported Llywelyn ap Gruffudd, prince of Wales, in the 1260s. After the death of Gilbert, the last Clare earl of Gloucester, at Bannockburn in 1314, Glamorgan fell to the king as the guardian of the three sisters and heiresses of the deceased earl. Edward II's appointment of custodians of the lordship caused resentment, especially at a time of great famine; although Bartholomew Badlesmere (died 1322) was conciliatory and returned some of Llywelyn Bren's ancestral lands and allowed his son to take office in Glamorgan, Payn Trubleville of Coety, one of the English lords of the Vale of Glamorgan, was appointed in July 1315 and acted harshly. Trubleville at once removed Llywelyn Bren and other officials to make way for his friends. Llywelyn angrily denounced Trubleville, who thereupon accused him before the king of sedition. Against the advice of his wife, Lleucu, Llywelyn went to the king's court, seeking reconciliation. But Edward II, who also faced Scottish intervention in Ireland, rejected his complaints and issued threats. Llywelyn was formally summoned to appear before the parliament at Lincoln, which assembled on 27 January 1316, but instead he returned to his own country, and, having taken counsel with his friends, rose in revolt. The quarrel was partly local, but it was also part of the longer struggle between English conquerors and Welsh lords. It reflected too the determination of the crown to curb the special privileges of the marches; the ending of Clare rule offered an opportunity to do this in Glamorgan. 
Llywelyn began his revolt on 28 January 1316 with an attempt to surprise Caerphilly Castle while the constable was holding his court outside the walls. Llywelyn took the constable prisoner, and burnt the town, but failed to capture the main works of the castle. A large force of Welsh from the hills joined Llywelyn and six of his sons. Trubleville had no means of resisting such a force as the Vale of Glamorgan and several towns, including Cardiff, were devastated; an enormous booty was conveyed to the mountains. Edward was now at Lincoln, where, owing to Llywelyn's revolt, many of the most important magnates were absent from the parliament and little business was done there. Edward appointed Humphrey (VII) de Bohun, earl of Hereford and lord of the neighbouring marcher lordship of Brecon, to be captain of an army to put down the revolt. Hereford soon gathered together an overwhelming force. The neighbouring marchers, including Roger Mortimer of Wigmore and his uncle, Roger Mortimer of Chirk, Henry, duke of Lancaster, William Montagu, and the husbands of two of the Clare heiresses, Hugh Audley and Roger Damory, joined him with forces from the border shires, Cheshire, and north Wales, and even some Welsh soldiers came from west Wales. The armies converged on Caerphilly from Brecon, Cardiff, and Monmouth in March. Llywelyn, despairing of further resistance, offered to submit if his life, limbs, and property were spared. However Hereford would accept nothing but unconditional surrender, though he agreed to plead Llywelyn's case with the king. When the English army approached the mountain fastnesses of the rebels, Llywelyn told his followers that he had been the cause of the revolt, and that it was right therefore that he should perish rather than they. He therefore went down from the hills, and at Ystradfellte (18 March) surrendered himself and two of his sons to Hereford, who sent him to the king. 
By early May 1316 Llywelyn, his wife, and five sons were imprisoned in the Tower of London. A commission of inquiry and punishment was already at work in Cardiff on 4 April, when Payn Trubleville was confirmed as custodian of Glamorgan and authorized to dispossess Welsh tenantry. But later in the month more conciliatory counsels prevailed; he was replaced by John Giffard, and many rebels were received into the king's peace. Hereford and the Mortimers urged that Llywelyn should not be too severely dealt with, and it was afterwards alleged that the king had agreed to act upon their advice. On 21 May Llywelyn's lordship of Senghennydd was granted to a loyal Welshman, Runus Bwl. Large herds of 1700 cattle belonging to the rebels -- more than half Llywelyn's -- were rounded up, and Llywelyn's personal possessions (including his archives and several books, three of them in Welsh) were seized in Llandaff Cathedral where they had been deposited. But the Despensers were becoming all-powerful with King Edward, and the younger Despenser, as the husband of one of the Gloucester coheiresses, hoped for the renewal of the Gloucester earldom in his favour; in November 1317 he secured the lordship of Glamorgan. He seized Llywelyn's estates, carried off Llywelyn to Cardiff Castle, and caused him to be tried, condemned, hanged, drawn, and quartered in 1318; he was buried in the Grey Friars at Cardiff. In the charges brought against the Despensers at the time of their first fall in 1321, the judicial murder of Llywelyn Bren takes a conspicuous place, and it was evidently resented by marcher lords like Hereford. The sons of Llywelyn were taken into Hereford's service in 1321-2, but they remained excluded from their father's inheritance until the disturbances in south Wales that attended the final fall of the Despensers and the deposition of Edward II. They then were released and resumed possession (1326). Their names were Gruffudd, Ieuan, Meurig, Roger, William, and Llywelyn. On 11 February 1327 the government of Isabella and Mortimer formally restored to them their father's lands, 'of which they had been fraudulently dispossessed by the younger Hugh le Despenser' ('CPR', '1327-30', 39-40). Their mother, Lleucu, received an allowance from the earl of Hereford at Brecon until 12 April 1349. 


@@@@@


doc= 16877


Llywelyn Sion (c.1540-c.1615), Welsh-language poet and copyist, was born to unknown parents at Llangewydd, in Laleston, near Bridgend, Glamorgan. He was a pupil of Thomas Llywelyn of Y Rhigos, Glamorgan, and possibly of Morgan Powell, a priest at Laleston. Llywelyn Sion went on to play an active role in contemporary Catholic life as poet, copyist, and recusant, for which he was summoned before the courts at least six times between 1587 and 1593. As a poet, he composed in the fixed and free metres of Welsh verse, but left only fourteen poems, the quality of which compares unfavourably with that of earlier Glamorgan poetry. Known to have undergone formal instruction in the art of copying, he became one of the foremost Welsh scribes of his age and transcribed manuscripts for members of the Glamorgan gentry, having access to many major libraries. Thirteen of his manuscripts are extant: eight are collections of poetry, four of prose, and one of genealogies. The one now known as Llanover B 9 (Aberystwyth, NL Wales) is a compendium of religious verse, much of which was published in two volumes entitled 'Hen gwndidau' (1914) and 'Hopkiniaid Morganwg' (1909). Three characteristically long, narrow books, known as the 'Long Book of Shrewsbury', the 'Long Book of Llywarch Reynolds', and the 'Long Book of Llanharan', represent his most important writings. He preserved a number of important medieval texts and also copied the sole surviving complete version of the anonymous 'Y Drych Cristianogawl', the most valuable Welsh Roman Catholic text of the Tudor age. Although very industrious, he was not the most meticulous of copyists, and his work contains many errors. He was, however, responsible for preserving much of Glamorgan's medieval and sixteenth-century literary heritage, which was probably what led Edward Williams (Iolo Morganwg) to depict him as one of the principal shapers of Iolo's mythical Glamorgan. Llywelyn Sion died about 1615. 


@@@@@


doc= 16878


Lobb, Stephen (d. 1699), nonconformist minister, was the son of Richard Lobb ('fl'. 1652-1672) of Liskeard, Mill Park, Warleggan, and St Neots, Cornwall, high sheriff of the county in 1652 and MP for St Michael in 1659. His early years are obscure but on 16 April 1672 Lobb received a licence as a presbyterian under the declaration of indulgence to preach in his father's houses at Kenwyn, near Truro, and Mylor, near Falmouth. He married Elizabeth (died 1691), daughter of the Independent minister Theophilus Polwhele of Tiverton, Devon, and his wife, the daughter of the Independent pastor William Benn. (It is possible that Elizabeth was the playwright E. Polewheele.) Their children included Stephen (died 1720), who conformed and became chaplain of Penzance Castle; Theophilus Lobb (1678-1763), who began his ministerial career at Guildford, Surrey, and later became a physician and fellow of the Royal Society; Samuel (died 1760), rector of Farleigh Hungerford, Somerset; and a daughter who married John Greene, Independent pastor at Great Baddow, Essex. Lobb's brother Peter (died 1718) was also an Independent minister. 
About late 1678 Lobb wrote a lengthy letter to Richard Baxter concerning justification by Christ's imputed righteousness, a position Baxter generally found agreeable, but on 13 January 1679 he defended himself against Lobb's charge that he was insensitive to the 'tolerable weaknesses' of others (Keeble and Nuttall, 2.202). Although Baxter responded favourably to the suggestion of Samuel Annesley and Thomas Vincent that he accept Lobb as his assistant, this proved unworkable when the latter omitted the creed, the Lord's prayer, and the decalogue in the service. 
In the early 1680s Lobb published his first works, including a refutation of antinomians, 'The Glory of Free-Grace Display'd' (1680), to which John Owen contributed a preface. Responding to Edward Stillingfleet's 'The Mischief of Separation' (1680), Lobb and the presbyterian John Humfrey wrote 'An Answer to Dr. Stillingfleet's Sermon' (1680), insisting that dissenters were not schismatics and proposing that gathered congregations be comprehended in the Church of England. Samuel Thomas came to Stillingfleet's defence in 'The Charge of Schism Renewed' (1680), but Lobb and Humfrey held their ground in 'A Reply to the Defence of Dr. Stillingfleet' (1681), averring that differences among protestants were minor. When Stillingfleet insisted in 'The Unreasonableness of Separation' (1681) that dissenters conform, Humfrey and Lobb replied in 'A Modest and Peaceable Inquiry' (1682), arguing that it was 'unreasonable to beat the Drum, or sound the Trumpet for a Protestant Civil-wordy-War' (p. 1). Appealing to the sanctity of conscience, Lobb called for comprehension or indulgence in 'The Harmony between the Old and Present Non-Conformists' (1682). 
After being ordained by Independents and presbyterians in the spring of 1681, Lobb was elected pastor of the Independent church to which Thomas Goodwin and Thankful Owen had ministered. He was convicted of preaching at conventicles in the summer of 1682, yet in October he participated in meetings in London to resolve cases of conscience. JPs and constables raided his meeting-house near Swallow Street, Piccadilly, in December 1682, destroying its furnishings, and again in January 1683, when they arrested two fellow ministers, William Pearse and Marmaduke Roberts. 
As the government investigated the Rye House plot in the summer of 1683 the conspirator Zachary Bourne confessed that he had approached Lobb to help recruit men in the London area, but that the latter was concerned that too many were cowardly and would not rebel. Nevertheless, he allegedly promised to seek the release of two members of his congregation who would be helpful in recruiting. On 6 July the privy council ordered his arrest, but he was not captured until early August. Two others with ties to the conspirators, Edward Massey and Norwich Salisbury, implicated Lobb in the scheme to enthrone Monmouth, and the duke himself confessed that 'all the considerable Nonconformist Ministers knew of the Conspiracy', including John Owen (TNA: PRO, SP 29/434/98). Lobb also knew William Carstares, one of the Scots discussing a co-ordinated insurrection in Scotland on Argyll's behalf. Although Lobb probably knew consideration was being given to an uprising on Monmouth's behalf, the government opted not to prosecute, presumably because it doubted the credibility of Massey and Salisbury. Lobb was released, but the government ordered his rearrest as a dangerous person in October 1683, on suspicion of treason in April and May 1684, and again as a dangerous person in October 1684. His troubles inspired the anonymous satire, 'A Dreadful Oration Deliver'd by... Stephen Lobb'. 
Lobb was probably the person who corresponded with Baxter between March and June 1684 about occasional conformity and ecclesiastical polity, and he may have written 'Bellarminus junior enervatus' (1684), defending Owen from Baxter's attack. In 'The True Dissenter' (1685) he offered a plan for protestant union based on a national church, with oaths of supremacy (excluding liturgy and polity) and allegiance; liberty of conscience; a role for bishops as officers of the crown; and a provision allowing people opposed to oaths to post bonds. After Charles Morton emigrated to New England in 1685, Lobb, Francis Glascock, and William Wickins taught the students in his nonconformist academy. Following Lobb's pardon for treasonable offences in December 1686 he became so close to James II that he was called 'the Jacobite Independent'. On 30 April 1687 he and other Independents gave the king a statement of thanks for the declaration of indulgence, and the following January James, seeking nonconformist support, had him circulate a report that Anglicans had offered to suspend the penal laws and the test for Catholics as long as they remained in force for protestant dissenters. In May Lobb and William Penn unsuccessfully attempted to persuade nonconformists to submit another declaration of thanks for the indulgence's renewal. Lobb preached before the lord mayor at Grocers' Hall in September. 
In 1690 Lobb helped found the Common Fund to assist needy ministers and train new ones, and in March 1691 he helped establish the Happy Union of Presbyterians and Independents in the London area, hoping to end 'our Pernitious, shamefull strifes' (Keeble and Nuttall, 2.326). From the outset, the union experienced internal strife, partly because of the controversy triggered by republication of Tobias Crisp's antinomian sermons in 1690. Daniel Williams issued a critique in 'Gospel-Truth Stated' (1692), and the following year Lobb published 'A Peaceable Enquiry', profusely citing church historians, Reformation authors (especially Luther), and John Owen to repudiate antinomianism and Socinianism. When Williams was removed from the Pinners' Hall lectures and other Presbyterians resigned in protest, Lobb was appointed to one of the vacancies in February 1695. Williams blamed him for the rupture, especially for misrepresenting his views in a critique commissioned by London Independents. When John Humfrey commented on Lobb's manuscript, Williams retorted in 'An Answer to Mr. J. Humphrey's Second Printed Letter' (1695). The crux of the debate was whether Christ became sinful for the sins of others, as Lobb asserted. He replied to Williams in 'A Letter to Doctor Bates' (1695) and more generally in 'A Report of the Present State of the Differences', accusing his opponents of Socinianism. This elicited refutations from Vincent Alsop, 'A Faithful Rebuke' (1697), and Williams, 'An Answer to the Report' (1698); the latter castigated Lobb's 'Report' as a ''grand peice of Art and Misrepresentation'' (sig. A3'v'). Lobb responded to Alsop in 'A Defence of the Report' (1698) and 'A Further Defence of the Report' (1698). Both sides appealed to Stillingfleet and Jonathan Edwards, both of whom responded by defending Williams. Accused of antinomianism, Lobb and his colleagues asserted their orthodoxy in 'A Declaration of the Congregational Ministers' (1699). Responding to Lobb's plea to view the 'Declaration' favourably, Williams wrote 'An End to Discord' (1699), finding further debate inexcusable. However, the Independent Isaac Chauncy came to the defence of Lobb in 'Alexipharmacon' (1700), which castigated Stillingfleet's criticism of him. 
Lobb, who was living in Middlesex prior to his death, died of a seizure at the London house of the Independent George Griffith on 3 June 1699. In his funeral sermon Thomas Goodwin of Pinner praised him as 'a Man of a discerning, penetrating Spirit, of great strength of mind' (Goodwin, 28). 


@@@@@


doc= 16879


Lobb, Theophilus (1678-1763), physician and nonconformist minister, born in London on 17 August 1678, was the son of the nonconformist divine Stephen Lobb (d. 1699), and his wife, Elizabeth (died 1691), the daughter of Theophilus Polwhele (d. 1689), nonconformist minister at Tiverton, Devon. Despite an early interest in medicine he was educated for the ministry under the Revd Thomas Goodwin (1650-1716), at Pinner, Middlesex. In 1702 he settled as a nonconformist minister at Guildford, Surrey, and there received some medical instruction from a local physician. About 1706 Lobb moved to Shaftesbury, Dorset, and began to practise as a physician. Seven years later he settled at Yeovil, Somerset, and established a successful medical practice, although he still continued to act as a minister. Dissensions in his congregation at Yeovil induced him in 1722 to move to Witham, Essex. On 26 June of that year he was created MD by the University of Glasgow, and was admitted FRS on 13 March 1729. In 1732 Lobb received a call from the congregation at Haberdashers' Hall, London, but, as his ministry did not prove acceptable, he appears to have decided about 1736 to devote himself to medicine. However, he continued to publish religious works concerning morals and portents. These include 'A brief defence of the Christian religion, or, The testimony of God to the truth of the Christian religion' (1726); 'Sacred declarations, or, A letter to the inhabitants of London, Westminster, and all other parts of Great Britain on the account of those sins which provoked God to send and continue the mortal sickness among the cattle, and to signify by the late awful earthquakes that his anger is not turned away' (published anonymously, 1750); and 'Letters on the Sacred Predictions (with a Letter upon the Public Reading of the Scriptures)' (1761). 
On 30 September 1740 Lobb was admitted a licentiate of the Royal College of Physicians, and then practised only in London. On 21 May 1762 a patent was granted to him 'for a tincture to preserve the blood from diziness, and a saline scorbutic acrimony'. Lobb's medical writings ranged from treatises on ailments in particular to the practice of physic in general. They include 'A Treatise of the Small-Pox' (1731); 'Rational Methods of Curing Fevers' (1734); and 'Letters Concerning the Plague, Shewing the Means to Preserve People from Infection' (1745). 
Lobb first married, on 28 January 1702 at Egham, Surrey, Frances (died 1722), daughter of James Cooke, physician, of Shepton Mallet, Somerset, and second, in 1723, 'a lady', who died on 2 February 1760. No children survived him. He died in the parish of Christ Church, London, on 19 May 1763, and was buried in Bunhill Fields. The profit from the sale of the tincture he left to his niece Elizabeth Buckland. In 1767 the Revd John Greene of Chelmsford, Essex, his brother-in-law, published 'The Power of Faith and Godliness Exemplified in some Memoirs of Theophilus Lobb', consisting principally of extracts from Lobb's diary. 


@@@@@


doc= 16880


Loch, David (d. 1780), shipowner and writer, is a figure about whose early life nothing is known. He graduated from being a shipmaster to become one of the leading merchants at the port of Leith, claiming to have sent, in the course of his career, some hundreds of ships to the Baltic and to the continent. He had, therefore, considerable firsthand knowledge of Scotland's trade, which he put to good effect. 
In the 1770s Loch wrote a series of well-argued pamphlets which, reworked with additions, he gathered into a three-volume work, 'Essays on the Trade, Commerce, Manufactures and Fisheries of Scotland' (1778). This covers a wide range of topics from British trade in general to the need to complete the Forth and Clyde Canal, then stalled for want of the necessary finance. The work provides a sympathetic account of Ireland's trade and of the penalties under which Irish traders laboured, and a supplement on what Loch called 'the unhappy dispute with the American Colonies' (Loch, 1.xli). In addition Loch describes the state of fishing in the highlands and islands, based on personal reconnaissance, and the condition of east coast fishing towns, which he knew from having made a tour of inspection in August and September 1778. 
In the second volume the 'Tour through the trading villages of Scotland' provides a thorough account of the manufacturing being carried on in some 140 Scottish towns and burghs, from Alloa to Whitburn. Loch sought out statistical detail as to the value of output and the numbers employed in the leading trades, his work in many respects anticipating that of Sir John Sinclair's 'Statistical Account of Scotland' (1791-9). Dundee, for example, he describes as having a population of about 14,000, of whom 2800 were linen weavers; the town had three tanneries, a large thread manufacture, and a thriving economy. Loch's 'Tour', however, is no mere accounting exercise: his descriptions are enlivened by a keen eye for the social consequences of economic growth. The prosperity of Paisley, for example, he finds reflected in the maidservants' being allowed free time every Thursday evening to go dancing: 'this practice promotes matrimony and contributes much to inspire in the minds of the people a desire to be neat and clean in their dress. The men marry here when they are twenty, the girls at seventeen' (Loch, 2.52). 
The issue which most concerned Loch in all his writings, however, was the need to encourage Scotland's woollen industry, at a time when much official help was being given to the linen manufacturers. He pointed out how much flax had to be imported from either Holland or the Baltic, which made the linen industry, in his words, both 'exotic' and 'precarious'. Loch was all too aware of the risks of the trade, having been taken prisoner by a French privateer on one of his voyages back from the Baltic during the Seven Years' War. By contrast, he argued, Scotland could provide all the raw wool it needed for manufacture from domestic sources, were more attention given to improving the home supply by way of prizes for sheep-breeding. The force of his arguments and of his expertise were recognized in 1776 when the Edinburgh-based board of trustees appointed him their chief inspector for both fisheries and woollen manufactures, a position he held until his death. In July of the same year the Convention of Royal Burghs, in which Loch served for several years as member for the fishing town of Dunbar, underscored his worth by passing a special motion thanking him for his zeal in promoting the manufactures of Scotland. He died on 14 February 1780 at St Anne's Yards, Holyrood, Edinburgh. 


@@@@@


doc= 16881


Loch, Granville Gower (1813-1853), naval officer, born on 28 February 1813, was the second son of James Loch (1780-1855) of Drylaw in Midlothian and his first wife, Ann (died 1842), youngest daughter of Patrick Orr; he was the brother of George Loch and of Henry Brougham Loch, first Baron Loch. He entered the navy in February 1826, passed his examination in 1832, and was promoted lieutenant on 23 October 1833. After serving on the home station and in the Mediterranean he was promoted commander 28 February 1837. From 1838 to 1840 he commanded the 'Fly' (18 guns) on the South American and Pacific stations, and in 1841 the steamer 'Vesuvius' in the Mediterranean. He was promoted captain on 26 August 1841, then went to China as a volunteer, and at the capture of Chinkiang Foo (Zhenjiang Fu) served as an aide-de-camp to General Sir Hugh Gough. He afterwards published his journal as 'The Closing Events of the Campaign in China' (1843). 
From 1846 to 1849 Loch commanded the frigate 'Alarm' (26 guns) in the West Indies; in February 1848 he was sent to the coast of Nicaragua to demand and enforce redress for certain outrages, and to obtain the release of two British subjects who had been carried off from San Juan by the military commandant. The government at the time seemed to be in the hands of the army, and, without delay, Loch proceeded up the river in the boats of the 'Alarm' and the sloop 'Vixen', with a total force of 260 men. The enemy had occupied a strong position at Serapaqui, defended not only by the nature of the ground and built obstructions, but by a 5 knot current which kept the boats under fire for an hour and a half before the men could land. The fort was then captured and demolished, the guns destroyed, and the ammunition thrown into the river. The British demands were conceded and a treaty was arranged: on Palmerston's recommendation Loch was made a CB on 30 May 1848. 
In 1852 Loch commissioned the frigate 'Winchester' (50 guns) to relieve the 'Hastings' as flagship in China and the East Indies. It was the time of the Second Anglo-Burmese War. Shortly after arriving at Rangoon, Admiral Austen died of cholera; the commodore was off the coast, and command on the Irrawaddy devolved on Loch. His task principally involved keeping the river clear and driving the Burmese out of positions they occupied on its banks. At the beginning of 1853 a dacoit chief, Nya-Myat-Toon, had brought together a strong force, stockaded a formidable position at Donabew, stopped the traffic, and repelled an attempt to drive him away. Loch in person led a joint naval and military expedition against him, landed, and threaded his way by a narrow path through thick jungle. They found the stockade on the farther bank of a steep ravine, in attempting to cross which they were repulsed with heavy losses. On 4 February Loch was shot through the body and he died two days later. He was buried at Rangoon, beneath a stone erected by the officers and men of the 'Winchester'. A monument was erected to his memory in St Paul's Cathedral. He was unmarried. 


@@@@@


doc= 16882


Loch, Henry Brougham, first Baron Loch of Drylaw (1827-1900), colonial administrator, born on 23 May 1827 at Drylaw, Midlothian, Scotland, was the son of James Loch MP (1780-1855), of Drylaw, and his wife, Ann (died 1842), the daughter of Patrick Orr. His brother was the naval officer Granville Gower Loch (1813-1853). He entered the Royal Navy in 1840, but left it as a midshipman in 1842 and was gazetted to the 3rd Bengal cavalry in 1844. Although he was only seventeen, he was chosen by Lord Gough as his aide-de-camp, and in that capacity served through the Sutlej campaign of 1845. In 1850 he was appointed adjutant of the famous irregular corps Skinner's Horse. On the outbreak of the Crimean War his gift for managing Asian soldiers led to his being selected in 1854 to assist in organizing the Turkish horse in Bulgaria. He served throughout the war, and at its close was singled out for the employment which was destined to close his military career. In 1857 James Bruce, eighth earl of Elgin, was dispatched on a special embassy to China to arrange the final terms of settlement of the Second Opium War, then in progress, and Captain Loch was attached to his staff. He was present at the taking of Canton (Guangzhou) on 28 December and the seizure of Commissioner Ye, and he subsequently proceeded with Lord Elgin on his mission to Japan. In 1858 he was sent back to England with the treaty of Yeddo, concluded by Great Britain with that country. In 1860 the failure to obtain the ratification of the treaty of Tientsin (Tianjin) with China led to Lord Elgin being again sent out as minister-plenipotentiary. Mindful of Loch's services, he took him with him as private secretary. In conjunction with Harry Smith Parkes, Loch conducted the negotiations which led to the surrender of the Taku (Dagu) forts and he shared in the advance on Peking (Beijing). 
On 18 September Loch formed one of the small party which was seized by Chinese officials on returning from Tungchow (Tongzhou), where they had been to arrange the preliminaries of peace. Loch had actually made his way through the enemy's lines to the British camp and had given warning of the intended arrests, but he chivalrously returned in order to try to save his comrades. For three weeks he endured the most terrible imprisonment, loaded with chains, tortured by the gaolers, and herded with the worst felons in the common prison. His situation was the more deplorable as he could not speak Chinese with any fluency. Fortunately the loyalty and determination of his fellow prisoner Parkes led first to the amelioration of his condition, and eventually to their joint release, only ten minutes before the arrival of an order from the emperor commanding their execution. On 8 October they rejoined the British camp, but, with the exception of a few Indian troopers, the rest of the party -- French, British, and native -- died in prison from maltreatment, and Loch himself never fully recovered his health. In 1869 he published his 'Personal Narrative of Occurrences during Lord Elgin's Second Embassy to China'. 
In 1860 Loch was sent home in charge of the treaty of Tientsin. The following year he finally left the army and was appointed private secretary to Sir George Grey, who was then secretary of state at the Home Office. On 7 May 1862 he married Elizabeth Villiers (1841-1938), the niece of the fourth earl of Clarendon; they had two daughters and a son. In 1863 Loch was made governor of the Isle of Man, a post which he occupied until 1882. In 1880 he was appointed KCB. He was transferred in 1882 to a commissionership of woods and forests and land revenue, and his career outside the somewhat narrow bounds of the British civil service seemed at an end. In 1884, however, Gladstone sent him to Australia, as governor of Victoria. He was made a GCMG on 24 May 1887. During his five years' tenure of this post his kindness and tact endeared him to the population, and he left a legacy of philanthropic and cultural projects behind him when in 1889 the marquess of Salisbury, the Conservative prime minister, chose him to succeed Sir Hercules Robinson, who had just completed his first term of office as governor of the Cape and high commissioner in South Africa. 
It was during Loch's residence at the Cape that Anglo-Boer hostility first began to assume the threatening proportions which led to the war of 1899. In Cape Colony itself matters were peaceful enough, owing to the temporary combination of Cecil Rhodes with the Afrikaner-Bond Party. There were few constitutional difficulties, and Loch found himself generally in accord with his constitutional advisers and able to work with them with little friction. Outside the borders, however, the elements of unrest were beginning to ferment, and Loch had inadequate knowledge of South African problems to enable him to master the situation. He was impressed, however, with the scale of Rhodes's conceptions, and with the danger to British paramountcy that would inevitably attend any expansion of the Transvaal republic. He therefore assisted the expeditions which led to the occupation of Mashonaland and Matabeleland, and he allowed the Bechuanaland police force to be sent up to threaten the Matabele (Ndebele) from the west on the outbreak of the war of 1893. One of his major objects was to bring Rhodes's British South Africa Company under greater imperial control, but in this he was largely unsuccessful. In 1891 he did, however, help to establish the separate existence of the Bechuanaland protectorate, which later evolved into Botswana. 
A striking episode in Loch's South African career was his mission to Pretoria, in 1894, to interfere on behalf of the British subjects who had been commandeered by the Boers in their operations against Mmalaboho or Malaboch, the Xananwa chieftain. He was successful in obtaining the abandonment of the claim of the Boer government; but it was thought he had not pressed the British case with sufficient vigour. It was the rough treatment accorded to President Kruger at Johannesburg on this occasion, in contrast with the enthusiastic reception accorded to the high commissioner, which persuaded Loch that a 'coup d'etat' by British Transvaalers, with subsequent imperial military backing, was feasible. The Colonial Office vetoed this secret project, but it reappeared in modified form, after Loch's departure, as the Jameson raid. 
Earlier in his term of office Loch had succeeded in putting strong pressure on President Kruger to prevent the incursions to the north and west of immigrant Boer trekkers and roving filibusters. During negotiations on Swaziland he had, however, made to the Transvaal government an offer of access to the sea coast on condition that the president should moderate his attitude of hostility and join the Cape customs union, which Kruger refused. 
Loch's Transvaal policy failed locally to create the impression of any great strength or decision. Fortunately his term of office expired at the beginning of 1895, and he left South Africa before the disasters of the Jameson raid. In spite of his bearded, patriarchal appearance, his fiery cavalryman's temperament would probably have let him down in circumstances that required a cool head. 
On his return to England he was raised to the peerage in July 1895 as Baron Loch of Drylaw, but he took small part in politics, though he did vote with the Liberal Unionists. When, in December 1899, the reverses to the British army in Natal and Cape Colony at the hands of the Boers gave rise to the call for volunteers from Britain, Loch threw himself heartily into the movement, and took a leading share in raising and equipping a body of mounted men who were called, after him, Loch's Horse. He lived to hear of the occupation of Pretoria, but his health had been failing, and he died of heart disease after a short illness, at his home, 23 Lowndes Square, London, on 20 June 1900. He was buried on 25 June at Stoke by Clare, Suffolk. 
His son, Edward Douglas, second baron, entered the Grenadier Guards and served with distinction in the Nile expedition of 1898 and in the South African War; he received a severe wound in the latter campaign. He also served throughout the First World War, during which he became major-general and was awarded several decorations. 


@@@@@


doc= 16883


Loch, James (1780-1855), lawyer and estate commissioner, was born on 7 May 1780 at Drylaw, near Edinburgh, the eldest son of George Loch (1749-1788), landowner, and his wife, Mary Adam. His mother was daughter of John Adam of Blair, Kinross-shire, and sister of lord chief-commissioner William Adam, of the jury court. The Drylaw estate had to be sold in 1786, and Loch was one of seven children who were all under eight years of age when their father died. He was brought up at Blair Adam estate under the care of his uncle, where he learned most of his knowledge about agriculture and estate administration. 
Loch studied law in the rationalist milieu of Edinburgh University and was much influenced by the philosophy of Adam Smith through the teaching of Dugald Stewart. He was at the centre of a glittering circle of students and was a member of the Speculative Society in 1798 and its president in the following two years. He was admitted as advocate in Scotland in 1801 and called to the English bar in Lincoln's Inn on 15 November 1806. Abandoning law after a few years of conveyancing practice, he worked as private secretary to George Tierney at the India board. He was involved in political activity and wrote a provocative article for the 'Edinburgh Review' in 1804. A vigorous and effective worker in the interest of the whig party, he was offered entree to a political career but made a clear decision, as early as 1810, to abandon politics and follow his vocation in the management of landed estates. 
In August 1812 Loch became estate commissioner of the marquess of Stafford (first duke of Sutherland in the year of his death in 1833), whose estates represented the greatest accumulation of wealth in Britain at that time. Subsequently Loch supervised the estates of the second duke, and the duchess of Sutherland. He was also auditor and adviser to Lord Francis Egerton, afterwards earl of Ellesmere; to the Bridgewater trustees; to the earl of Carlisle; to the trust estates of the earl of Dudley (from which he was discharged on account of his support for the 'Reform Bill'); and to Viscount Keith. He was responsible for estate policies over large parts of England and Scotland, which made him remarkably influential in the improvement and modernization of agricultural and industrial property across Victorian Britain. 
Loch was married first in 1810, to Ann (died January 1842), youngest daughter of Patrick Orr of Bridgeton, Kincardineshire. They had nine children, including Granville Gower Loch; his sons were involved mainly in service to the empire in India and beyond, notably Henry Brougham Loch, who was much respected as governor of both Victoria and of the Cape and also served as high commissioner for South Africa. Loch married second, on 2 December 1847, Elizabeth Mary, widow of George Macartney Grevill, of the 38th foot, and eldest daughter of John Pearson of Tettenhall Wood, Staffordshire. His second wife predeceased him on 29 December 1849. 
Loch was widely regarded as the finest barrister-auditor of his day, and he worked on almost equal terms with his aristocratic employers. The dowager duchess of Bedford was told that 'she could not possibly have a better or more able adviser' (Spring, 89). Loch's contemporary Ralph Sneyd described him as 'Loch the infallible' (ibid.). He was in great demand as an adviser on most matters. He gave evidence before the select committee on public works in Ireland in 1835. He was an expert in entail and family law. In all his administrative work he gave extraordinary attention to detail. On the Sutherland estates he regarded his task as maintaining the long-term position of the family, as opposed to short-term gains. He believed that the conservative strength of the aristocracy derived from its responsibility for the 'great sinews of improvement' (Richards, 26). 
Loch's career was most publicly known for his part in the great and controversial changes implemented on the highland estates of the Sutherland family from 1812 onwards. The policy predated Loch but he gave it greater clarity and direction. He presided over some of the largest clearances and then spent much of his life in defence of the consequences. He believed that the highlands had been locked in feudal squalor and its people effectively enslaved under the old highland middlemen. They had been kept poor and were ravaged by recurrent famine. His mission was to release the resources of the highlands and open the region to trade and improvement. This meant the removal of the tacksmen, the introduction of commercial sheep-farming, and the relocation of the small tenantry to the coasts. His management of the Sutherland estate was excoriated as 'the Loch policy' for its inhumanity to the people who were ousted from the inland districts and replaced by sheep. The removals often required strong-arm methods which generated widespread opprobrium. Since Loch became the principal apologist for the Sutherland clearances he also attracted much of the public abuse. None of this was diminished by his advocacy of emigration programmes to relieve population congestion in the west highlands. He attempted to deter improvident marriage and population growth by refusing to allow the subdivision of smallholdings. 
Loch was much hurt by what he regarded as the 'lies' told about the Sutherland highlanders. He was critical of the middle levels of the new highland society who gave too little leadership to the people at large. He published an account of the Sutherland policies in 1820 and a privately printed memoir of the duke of Sutherland in 1834. He travelled a great deal between the estates and visited Sutherland virtually every autumn. He centralized decision making for the estate as a whole and employed professional agents on the individual estates. Most of the evictions were over by 1830 but small evictions were still in train in the 1850s where tenants fell into arrears. Beneath Loch was an elaborate management structure with estate agents and sub-agents. They were instructed to comport themselves in a particular way since they 'must be the principal gentlemen of the district, capable of acting as a deputy Lt and JP, and be very kind and forbearing to a most worthy excellent set of poor tenants, who require to be much encouraged in their most praiseworthy exertions of improvement. (Loch to Lockhart, 24 March 1827, NL Scot., MS 926)' During the course of his lifetime Loch held many public offices. These included being a director of the English Historical Society, seal keeper of the Old Quay Navigation Company, governor of the Forth and Clyde Canal, commissioner of the Caledonian and Crinan Canal, and director of the Grand Junction Railway. In addition he was active in scientific and educational circles, being elected a fellow of the Geological, Statistical, and Zoological societies; and he was a member of the committee of the Society for the Diffusion of Useful Knowledge. One of the founders of London University, for many years he served on its council and associated bodies. He was a director of the Liverpool and Manchester Railway, and of the Birmingham and Liverpool Canal. He also served in Scotland as commissioner of highland roads and bridges and as deputy lieutenant of Sutherland. 
In 1827 Loch entered parliament for St Germains in Cornwall, in the whig interest, which he held until 1830; he was then returned without opposition for the Wick burghs. There he was regularly re-elected until 1852, when he was defeated by Samuel Laing (119 to 80 votes in a climacteric election). He regarded himself as one of the architects of the 'Reform Bill' and was close to Lord John Russell during its passage. Although he worked for committees of the house, he declined more direct involvement in politics and government. 
James Loch died on 28 June 1855 at his house at 12 Albemarle Street, London, and was buried in the Brompton cemetery. The duke of Sutherland erected a monument in his memory at Uppat (overlooking Dunrobin Castle), where he spent much of his time. An inscription on it praised Loch's 'virtuous labour for the land he loved' (P. G. Loch, 254). Loch's son George (1811-1877) succeeded him in the Sutherland management. 


@@@@@


doc= 16884


Lochore, Robert (1762-1852), poet, was born at Strathaven, Lanarkshire, on 7 July 1762. He became a shoemaker at the age of thirteen, and ultimately he conducted a successful business of his own in Glasgow. On 7 June 1786 he married in Paisley Isobel Browning, a native of Ayrshire. Lochore's local interests and his literary tastes brought him into contact with Robert Burns, who became a close friend. About 1797 he published an elegiac pastoral on Burns's death entitled 'Patie and Ralph'; in later life he often told of having seen Burns reproved on the cutty-stool by the Revd Auld. Generous and philanthropic, Lochore founded the Glasgow Annuity Society and assisted other institutions for the public good. 
Lochore wrote verses throughout his life, and he composed in his eighty-eighth year his spirited 'Last Speech of the Auld Brig of Glasgow on being Condemned to be Taken Down'. In 1795-6 he published 'Willie's Vision' and 'The Foppish Taylor', and about 1815 he published anonymously 'Tales in Rhyme and Minor Pieces, in the Scottish Dialect'. His song, 'Noo, Jenny, lass, my bonny bird', has been attributed to Burns. He used the vernacular dexterously, and his poems are valuable illustrations of Scottish life and character. For a time, about 1817, he edited the 'Kilmarnock Mirror' for his son. Lochore died at Glasgow on 27 April 1852, leaving unpublished an autobiography and various Scottish tales and poems. 


@@@@@


doc= 16885


Locke, John (1632-1704), philosopher, was born on 29 August 1632 at Wrington, Somerset, the elder of the two children of John Locke (1606-1661), attorney, and his wife, Agnes (1597-1654), daughter of Edmund Keene of Wrington. 
Locke was born into a family of very minor -- indeed marginal -- gentry. His father was the eldest son of Nicholas Locke (1574-1648), a clothier who had prospered in his trade and invested his profits in land, mostly in the vicinity of Pensford, a village some 10 miles east of Locke's birthplace and 7 miles south of Bristol. It was here that Locke appears to have spent his childhood with his brother, Thomas, born on 9 August 1637. His father had not entered the cloth trade, but had become an attorney, and served as clerk to the justices of the peace for the county. He also acted as a steward for a much richer and more powerful family of local gentry, the Pophams, from whom he leased part of his land. 
Locke's family had puritan sympathies, and after the outbreak of the civil war his father served as a captain in one of the parliamentary armies. The commander of his regiment was Alexander Popham, MP for Bath, who was able to reward his steward by recommending his son for a place at Westminster School. Locke entered Westminster in 1647, and was made a king's scholar in 1650; his fellow pupils included John Dryden, Robert Hooke, and Christopher Wren. The curriculum was centred almost entirely on the ancient languages, including Hebrew for the most academically proficient pupils. Locke seems not to have greatly enjoyed his schooldays. Though his father had disciplined him quite severely as a child, he had relaxed as his son grew older, and it is likely that Locke resented the flogging that was so frequent at Westminster. Forty years after leaving he alarmed the young son of Edward Clarke with accounts of what happened there, and recommended to Clarke that if his son continued to be difficult he might be sent 'to Westminster or some other very severe schoole' ('Correspondence', 4.397) until he was more pliant and willing to learn from his tutor at home. 
In May 1652 Locke was elected to a studentship at Christ Church, Oxford, the last in a list of six. It was a position tenable for life and was broadly equivalent to a fellowship in one of the other colleges, though it gave no part in the government of Christ Church, which was the preserve of the dean and the canons. The records at Christ Church do not indicate when he came into residence, but he matriculated on 27 November. The dean of Christ Church was John Owen; Locke's tutor was Thomas Cole, subsequently a nonconformist divine. 
During the civil war Oxford had been the king's headquarters, and after its surrender the university was purged of its more open and intransigent royalists. The academic curriculum remained almost entirely unaffected by all this turmoil. Locke acquired an intense and enduring dislike of the scholastic method of disputation, and of the logical and metaphysical subtleties that went with it. He took care to fulfil the unexacting requirements for his degrees (BA, 14 February 1656; MA, 29 June 1658), but otherwise seems to have spent a good part of his time reading lighter literature -- plays, romances, and letters, much of it translated from French. While still an undergraduate he contributed two poems to a volume of university poetry, 'Musarum Oxoniensium 'Elaiophoria'' (1654), his first publication. 
It is unclear whether at this stage of his life Locke had any definite intention about what career to pursue. He was admitted to Gray's Inn in December 1656, but nothing seems to have come of this. Another possibility was medicine. Several of Locke's notebooks show that in the late 1650s he started taking extensive notes from a large number of medical works; the quantity and character of this material indicates something more than casual interest. He may not have decided firmly on a medical career, but he was almost certainly investigating it as an option. 
The study of medicine led by an easy transition to natural philosophy. Exactly when Locke first became acquainted with the ideas of the new mechanical philosophy is not easily determined. There seems to be no evidence that he had any links with the group of innovators associated with John Wilkins at Wadham College, the nucleus of the future Royal Society, and if he had read anything by Descartes during his first years at Oxford there is no trace of it among his papers. By May 1660 he had made the acquaintance of Robert Boyle, who probably introduced him to these new ideas. Locke augmented his continuing medical studies with a thorough course of reading in mechanical philosophy, starting with Boyle's recently published 'New Essays Physico-Mechanical Touching the Spring of the Air' (1660). He also read widely among Descartes's works, concentrating in particular on the physical material in the later parts of the 'Principia philosophiae', and read at least some of Gassendi's 'Syntagma philosophicum'. 
Locke's attention was, however, by no means held solely by medicine and natural philosophy. The rather precarious political stability achieved by Cromwell was rapidly eroded after his death in September 1658. Locke's letters to his father ('Correspondence', 1.82-3, 136-7) express a profound disenchantment with visionary politics and a strong desire for peace and security. He welcomed the return of Charles II, and contributed a poem of fulsome flattery in another university collection, 'Britannia rediviva' (1660). Unlike several of his fellow students at Christ Church, he survived -- apparently without difficulty -- the post-Restoration visitation of the university. In December 1660 Locke's father fell ill, and though his son returned quickly to Somerset and discussed the case with several local doctors, nothing could be done; he died on 13 February, leaving the residue of his much depleted estate to Locke and his brother. His mother had died some years earlier, on 4 October 1654; her son retained a memory of her as 'a very pious woman and affectionate mother' (Fox Bourne, 1.13). 
In the last months of 1660 Locke wrote a short treatise in the form of a scholastic disputation entitled 'Whether the civil magistrate can lawfully determine the use of indifferent things in reference to religious worship'. It was directed against a colleague of Christ Church, Edward Bagshaw, who had recently published a work denying the magistrate's power. Bagshaw's position was that God had left indifferent things -- those neither commanded nor prohibited by divine law -- to the conscience of the individual believer. Locke replied that it was because they were indifferent that they lay within the scope of the magistrate's authority. After 1667 he was to adopt a position much closer to Bagshaw's; in 1660 he seems to have been motivated above all by fear of the disorder that he was sure would result from failure to impose uniformity. 
Locke added a preface in the late spring of 1661 and secured a publisher, but in the end nothing appeared; much had happened in the six months or so since the work had been started, and it was clear that the new parliament intended to restore traditional prayer book worship with only minimal changes, and to enforce compliance with it. 
The tract against Bagshaw was followed in 1661-2 by two further tracts, each written in Latin and set out in disputation form. The first of these discussed and rejected the Roman Catholic position that it is necessary that the scriptures should have an infallible interpreter; the second was a more general and abstract defence of the thesis already argued against Bagshaw. These writings remained unpublished until the twentieth century; all that appeared was a contribution to another official volume of poetry, 'Domiduca Oxoniensis' (1662), compiled to celebrate the arrival in England of Charles II's bride, Catherine of Braganza. 
At this stage in his career Locke seems to have been well regarded by the governing body of Christ Church, and in particular by the dean, John Fell. In October 1663 Fell and two of the canons signed a certificate testifying to Locke's orthodox beliefs and moral probity. Such a testimonial was required by a candidate seeking ordination, and it appears that in the autumn of 1663 Locke was seriously considering this; he was dissuaded by his friend John Strachey, who could not see Locke as a country parson, and urged him to have confidence in his ability to make his own way in the world. 
One manifestation of this official favour can be observed in Locke's appointment to a succession of teaching posts at Christ Church: praelector in Greek (1661-2), praelector in rhetoric (1663), and censor of moral philosophy (1664). Many of the duties of this last post were disciplinary, but its holder was also required to preside over scholastic disputations. One standard subject for discussion was the theory of natural law; a set of eight disputations by Locke himself survives and has been published under the title 'Essays on the Law of Nature'. These disputations provide the fullest account of a topic which is central to Locke's thought, but which he never again discussed in detail. The 'Essays' argue that natural law exists and is of universal and perpetual obligation, but it is neither inscribed in our hearts by God nor discoverable from human consent or tradition. Our knowledge of it is founded ultimately on the experience of our senses, which provide us with the evidence required to establish the existence of a wise and benevolent creator from the order manifest in the world. 
In the spring of 1661 Locke was made a tutor at Christ Church, and for the next six years was responsible for the welfare and education of a succession of pupils, of whom twenty-two can be identified. He took charge of their money, supervised their purchases, and helped impart to them the same kind of education that he had himself received a decade earlier. Locke's pupils form an unremarkable group. With the possible exception of Sir Charles Berkeley, none rose to any great eminence in either church or state, or in the world of learning. John Alford and Sir Charles Berkeley became MPs but neither achieved much of note at Westminster. Edward Pococke continued his father's work as an orientalist, Morgan Godwyn has a place in the history of the anti-slavery movement, and Corbet Owen achieved a minor and unenduring fame as a Latin poet. The only one of his former pupils with whom Locke remained on close terms was George Walls, who looked after Locke's affairs at Christ Church in his absence, and later accompanied him on his travels in France. 
Throughout this time Locke continued reading widely in medicine and natural philosophy. He took detailed notes at Thomas Willis's lectures on medicine, given at Christ Church in 1661-2, and in 1663 attended a class in chemistry given by the German chemist Peter Stahl. It was here that he attracted the attention of that acerbic chronicler of Oxford life Anthony Wood, who described him as 'a man of turbulent spirit, clamorous and never contented... while every man besides, of the club, was writing, he would be prating and troblesome' ('Life and Times', 1.472). It is a vivid picture but one that may be coloured by later political estrangement. 
In the winter of 1663-4 Locke's brother Thomas died. They seem not to have been very close (no letters between them survive), and Locke did not return to Somerset until the end of March; he paid his brother's widow $220 for the portion of the family land which Thomas had inherited. Locke himself remained single. Throughout his life he enjoyed feminine company, and during the early 1660s engaged in sentimental correspondence with several young women in Oxford, but none of his friendships seems to have come close to a proposal of marriage. A passage in the 'Essay Concerning Human Understanding' (bk 2, chap. 21, section 34) reveals Locke's later opinion of the married state: ''It is better to marry than to burn', says St. 'Paul'; where we may see, what it is, that chiefly drives Men into the enjoyments of a conjugal life'. Locke seems to have been able to resist sensual temptations: perhaps the only reference to any sexual activity on his part occurs in an early but undated letter sent by a friend, Francis Atkins, to which Atkins added a postscript: 'My service to thy bedfellow, for so I think shee is at this time' ('Correspondence', 1.40), and even this may be no more than conjecture. Locke himself gave nothing away. 
After Locke had finished his term as censor of moral philosophy he occupied no further university offices, and though he remained a tutor he took no new pupils. He had steadily been rising in seniority through the ranks of students at Christ Church: from the start of 1665 he was among the twenty most senior, and as such would normally have been required to take orders; that he was able to retain his studentship without doing so suggests the continued favour of the dean, but his position remained precarious. 
Towards the end of 1665 a new opportunity presented itself. Sir Walter Vane was being sent to Cleves on an embassy to the elector of Brandenburg, and Locke was offered the post of secretary. The mission left England in November and returned three months later. As a venture in diplomacy it proved unsuccessful, but it is clear from Locke's letters that he greatly enjoyed his first journey abroad. The experience of living in a community in which the members of different churches lived together without provoking disorder may also have helped change his mind about the practicability of religious toleration. 
Once back in Oxford, Locke resumed his studies in chemistry and medicine. He was particularly interested in the physiology of respiration, and had for some years been closely following the work being done by Boyle, Hooke, and others. It was probably about this time that he drafted a short work on the purpose of respiration; this was written in the form of a scholastic disputation and may have been produced as part of a plan to become a bachelor of medicine. In the event it remained unused, and Locke did not obtain the degree until nearly ten years later. 
In the summer of 1666 a chance meeting altered the entire course of Locke's life. Anthony Ashley Cooper, then Lord Ashley and subsequently earl of Shaftesbury, had been chancellor of the exchequer since 1661. He had come to Oxford to visit his son, an undergraduate at Trinity College. Ashley was not in good health; his physician in Oxford was David Thomas, a fellow of New College who was Locke's chief collaborator in his chemical experiments, and it was through Thomas that they first met. Each was favourably impressed by the other, and by the time Ashley left Oxford the beginnings of an enduring friendship had been established. In the autumn Locke paid a visit to London, and with Ashley's help procured a royal dispensation permitting him to retain his studentship at Christ Church without taking orders. With his position in Oxford now at least temporarily secured, Locke was able to consider a new career. At the beginning of April 1667 he packed up his belongings and left Oxford. After a trip back to Somerset to see old friends and collect his rents he travelled to London, arriving early in May. He was given accommodation in Exeter House in the Strand, Ashley's London residence; he stayed there for the next eight years. 
Locke's earliest responsibilities as a member of Ashley's household are not known with certainty. According to the third earl of Shaftesbury, Locke acted as tutor to his father, the future second earl, who had now left Oxford (Fox Bourne, 1.203). Nothing in the young Anthony Ashley Cooper's later career suggests that he would have been a particularly rewarding pupil, and though responsibility for him would have added to Locke's educational experience, it would also have left him ample free time. Locke was closely involved in the negotiations that preceded the young man's marriage in September 1669 to Lady Dorothea Manners, daughter of the earl of Rutland. Their eldest child, the future third earl, was born in February 1671; his grandfather took control of his upbringing, and Locke was later given the task of overseeing his schooling. 
Locke's activities in London remained as varied as in Oxford. He continued to read extensively in medicine, but could now supplement what had hitherto been an almost exclusively theoretical education with clinical experience. Soon after arriving at Exeter House he got to know the physician Thomas Sydenham, the author of a new and controversial account of treating infectious diseases, 'Methodus curandi febres' (1666). Locke accompanied Sydenham on his rounds and kept records of his methods of treatment. Soon the two men were collaborating closely. Among the Shaftesbury papers there are two short medical essays in Locke's hand, 'Anatomia' (1668) and 'De arte medica' (1669); though sometimes attributed to Sydenham, they are more likely to have been written by Locke. Both works expressed a profound scepticism about our capacity to discover the nature of disease, and advocated a purely empirical approach to medical practice. Locke paid Sydenham public tribute in a Latin poem included in the second edition of 'Methodus curandi febres' (1668). Years later Sydenham repaid the compliment in the preface to his 'Observationes medicae' (1676) by praising Locke's acute intellect, steady judgement, and simple manners. 
Locke's increasing medical knowledge was put to good use in summer 1668. Ashley's generally poor health had been growing worse, and on 12 June he underwent a novel and extremely risky operation to drain an abscess on his liver. After a period of convalescence he made a good recovery. The medical papers relating to the operation (TNA: PRO, PRO 30/24/47/2) suggest that Locke's role was primarily that of a co-ordinator and supervisor of nursing care, but the original idea for the operation may have been his, and according to Locke himself, Ashley believed that Locke had saved his life ('Correspondence', 2.662). 
Locke also continued to pursue his scientific interests. In November 1668 he was elected a fellow of the Royal Society, but though he was quickly appointed to a committee for experiments and twice served on the council (1669-70, 1672-3), he seems to have attended few meetings and to have contributed little to the work of the society. His one communication to the 'Philosophical Transactions' during these years (24 May 1675) was a letter on poisonous fish sent to him by a correspondent in the Bahamas. 
Just as Locke's hitherto largely theoretical approach to medicine had been broadened by his association with Sydenham, so his rather academic interest in politics was modified by the experience of living in the household of one of England's most remarkable politicians. Within a year of coming to London he had written 'Essay Concerning Toleration', in which he rejected the position he had taken in 1660 and advocated the toleration of all purely speculative opinions, giving the magistrate the right to intervene only when civil order was at risk. The work was not published until 1876, but it survives in four manuscript copies and was presumably circulated among Ashley and his associates. Locke also developed an interest, hitherto absent, in economic questions. The outcome was a treatise, 'Some of the Consequences that are Like to Follow upon Lessening of Interest to 4 per cent', begun in 1668 and further added to in 1674. Nothing was published at the time, but Locke kept the manuscript and made use of it later. 
In 1669 Ashley involved Locke in the affairs of the recently founded colony of Carolina. In August of that year the first group of settlers left England, taking with them an elaborate set of laws, the 'fundamental constitutions of Carolina'. It is unlikely that Locke was the sole author of this but there is evidence that he had a hand in the original drafting, and he was certainly involved in suggesting alterations and improvements. Locke continued to serve the lords proprietors of the colony in a secretarial capacity until 1675, taking minutes at their meetings and handling much of the correspondence with the newly arrived colonists. He also had a financial interest in other colonial ventures, including the Bahamas Company and the Royal African Company. 
When he went to London, Locke's annual income was usually about $100, two-thirds of which came from his land and the remainder from Christ Church. Since the autumn of 1668 Ashley had been augmenting this with a half-yearly payment of $40. Two years later an opportunity arose to shift the burden to the public revenue. Locke was appointed a registrar to the commissioners of the excise at an annual salary of $175; $60 of this went to pay a clerk, who presumably performed most of the duties required. Locke lost this useful source of income in the spring of 1675, but he was able to use the wealth he had accumulated to purchase an annuity from Shaftesbury, which yielded $100 a year. For an outlay of $700 this was a bargain, though it was to cause some friction with Shaftesbury's family after his death. 
Locke saw less of Sydenham after 1670, and for the next few years spent rather less of his time reading works on medicine. He was engaged in a new set of enquiries. The origins of the 'Essay Concerning Human Understanding' are described with tantalizing brevity in the epistle to the reader with which the work begins. There Locke recalls how, at an unspecified but clearly distant time in the past, he and a group of five or six friends had met in his chamber to discuss some other quite remote topic, and had rapidly found themselves entangled in a mass of wholly unanticipated perplexities. It then occurred to Locke himself that they should turn their attention to the capabilities of the human understanding; he therefore set down 'some hasty and undigested thoughts on a subject I had never before considered', which he took along to the next meeting. 
Two surviving works allow these events to be dated. Locke was busy with the first of these, 'Intellectus humanus cum cognitionis certitudine et assensus firmitate', in the summer of 1671. Despite its title, the work (now generally known as draft A) is in English, and its first few pages may well be derived from the hasty and undigested thoughts taken to the meeting in his chamber. A longer and considerably more polished work, 'An essay concerning the understanding, knowledge, opinion and assent' (draft B), was begun later in the same year. Both works remained unfinished, and both left unsolved the main problems that had led to their being started. Locke seems not to have resumed systematic work on philosophy until 1676, when he was in France. 
Between 1672 and 1675 much of Locke's time was spent on administrative activity of various kinds. In March 1672 Ashley was created earl of Shaftesbury, and in November was appointed lord chancellor. A considerable quantity of ecclesiastical patronage came with the office, and the work this entailed was entrusted to the secretary for presentations. Locke held this post until Shaftesbury was dismissed in November 1673. Perhaps in anticipation of this, Locke had in the previous month been made secretary to the council for trade and plantations; in December he became treasurer as well. These posts were far from sinecures, and the work they entailed added to Locke's already considerable knowledge of colonial matters. He held them until the council itself was dissolved in December 1674; the combined salary of $600 per annum was never paid. 
At the beginning of 1675 Locke's position had become worryingly insecure: he had lost or was about to lose all his government employment, and his patron was out of office and out of favour. His studentship at Christ Church was irregularly held and its retention depended on a royal dispensation revocable at any time. In February Locke returned to Oxford -- it seems to have been only his second visit in nearly eight years -- and took the degree of bachelor of medicine; later in the year he managed to secure one of the two medical studentships that the college offered, thereby relieving himself of any obligation to take holy orders. For the time being at least his position at Christ Church was safe. 
On 14 November Locke crossed to France for a visit that in the end lasted nearly three and a half years; he was accompanied by George Walls, his former pupil. Locke's ostensible motive for travelling was his health -- he was already suffering from an ailment of the lungs, probably asthma and chronic bronchitis, that was to trouble him for the rest of his life -- but he may have had another reason as well. At the beginning of the month an anonymous pamphlet attacking in vehement terms the policy of the king's chief minister, the earl of Danby, had appeared on sale in London. The authorship of 'A Letter from a Person of quality to his Friend in the Country' has never been definitely established, but it undoubtedly came from Shaftesbury's circle, and probably from his household. In 1720 it was attributed to Locke by Pierre des Maizeaux, perhaps on the basis of information from the third earl; Locke probably had a hand in its composition, though it would not always have expressed his own opinions. 
On arriving in France, Locke began to keep a journal, a practice he continued until the end of his life. In later years the number of entries grew smaller, especially after 1689, but the well-filled volumes covering the years in France make it possible, for the first time in Locke's life, to construct an almost day-by-day account of his movements and activities. Locke's journal is not an intimate document comparable with Pepys's diary, but it does reveal many aspects of his character: a love of travellers' tales, a concern with recording minute items of factual information, and a very careful attitude towards money. 
Locke travelled from Calais via Paris and Lyon, and on 4 January 1676 arrived at Montpellier, where he stayed for over a year. He quickly engaged a tutor to teach him French for one hour a day and began reading books in that language. Locke had been to France before -- in the autumn of 1672 he had spent a few weeks in Paris -- but though he may have acquired some ability to communicate in French, he could not yet read the language with any ease; there are no citations made before 1676 from any French books among his papers. Philosophy in France was increasingly being written in the vernacular, and by learning French, Locke gained access to philosophical debates from which he had previously been excluded. His journal shows that he was thinking hard about philosophy and about how his own views differed from those of the Cartesians. 
Two fellow countrymen whom Locke met in Montpellier were Thomas Herbert, later earl of Pembroke, the future dedicatee of the 'Essay Concerning Human Understanding', and Denis Grenville, archdeacon of Durham. Grenville was a weak and unhappy man who had come to France to escape his bishop, his creditors, and his manic-depressive wife; he attached himself to Locke, who treated him with considerable forbearance and sent him letters filled with sensible advice on recreation and devotion. 
Early in 1677 Locke agreed to act as tutor to Caleb, the son of Sir John Banks, a prosperous London merchant. In March he left Montpellier and travelled in a leisurely manner to Paris by way of Toulouse and Bordeaux, arriving there at the beginning of June. Initially his duties were expected to last for only a few months, but in the event he and Caleb remained in Paris until their return to England in 1679, apart from a journey together through provincial France in late summer and autumn 1678; a plan to visit Italy was reluctantly abandoned. 
In France two rival versions of the new mechanical philosophy had attracted supporters. Locke seems to have been far more interested in the thought of Descartes and of later Cartesians such as Malebranche than he was in Gassendi, though in Paris he became acquainted with two of Gassendi's followers, Francois Bernier and Gilles de Launay, both of whom presented him with copies of their own works. He also continued working on his philosophical enquiries. One of the manuscripts that he left behind in Paris in July 1678 was a folio volume described as 'Essay de Intellectu', which cannot be either draft A or draft B. Given Locke's known techniques of composition, it is virtually certain that quite substantial sections of the published 'Essay' were written while he was in France, though it can only be conjectured what they are. 
Two lesser works that Locke did complete while in France were both intended for private circulation within the Shaftesbury family. In the autumn of 1676 he translated three of the essays in Pierre Nicole's 'Essais de morale'; a manuscript containing these was presented to the countess after he returned to England. Locke also used the knowledge acquired during his travels to write 'Observations upon the Growth and Culture of Vines and Olives'; this was dedicated to Shaftesbury himself, who had thoughts of resettling French protestant refugees in Carolina. 
Other friends Locke made in France included the biblical scholar and antiquarian Nicolas Toinard and the librarian and savant Henri Justel, later a refugee in England. Many of his associates were protestants, and Locke recorded in his journal evidence of the restrictions imposed on the protestant communities by the increasingly intolerant government of Louis XIV. This experience cannot have lessened his aversion to absolute monarchy and to its supporters in England. 
Locke arrived back in England at the end of April 1679. Exeter House had been vacated and then demolished while he was away, and Shaftesbury had taken a lease of Thanet House in Aldersgate Street, immediately to the north of the City. Locke lived there for about half of the next four years, but he seems not to have been as closely involved with Shaftesbury's affairs as before; he spent a good part of his time either in Oxford or at the house of his friend James Tyrrell at Oakley, Buckinghamshire. At Christ Church his association with Shaftesbury had made him an object of suspicion to the college authorities: his movements were watched and attempts were made to entrap him in conversation, but nothing was discovered. As Fell later reported, Locke 'could never be provoked to take any notice, or discover in word or look the least concern; so that I believe there is not in the world such a master of taciturnity and passion' (Fox Bourne, 1.484). 
The England to which Locke returned was in a state of acute political crisis. The revelations of the Popish Plot had burst upon an already discontented nation in August 1678. The plot itself was a fabrication, but few of Locke's contemporaries were prepared entirely to discount the elaborate mendacities fabricated by Titus Oates and his associates. Locke's own views remain opaque; if he harboured any doubts, he seems to have kept them to himself. For the next four years, until his flight to the Netherlands as a refugee, Locke was to be concerned primarily, though never exclusively, with politics. 
Shaftesbury's grand design was to divert the succession away from the duke of York by forcing an 'Exclusion Bill' through parliament and then coercing the king into giving it his assent. Charles saw this as an assault on the monarchy, and was determined to resist with every means in his power. The turning point came in March 1681. Parliament had been summoned to Oxford -- Locke was roused from his sickbed to arrange accommodation for Shaftesbury and his associates -- but was dissolved within a week. As it became apparent that Charles had no plans to summon another parliament, the opposition split: some became inactive, or even changed sides; others, including Shaftesbury, began to think with increasing seriousness about the possibility of raising an insurrection. 
Charles rightly saw Shaftesbury as his most dangerous opponent, and was determined to crush him. On 2 July 1681 Shaftesbury was arrested and sent to the Tower, charged with treason. Shaftesbury could not be tried until he had been indicted by a grand jury, drawn from panels nominated by the sheriffs of the county in which the alleged offence had been committed. In London the sheriffs were Shaftesbury's close associates, who could be relied on to select like-minded jurors; the most worrying danger to Shaftesbury was that the judges would find a way to remove these jurors and replace them by others who would bring in a different verdict. Shaftesbury's associates did everything they could to assist his defence: Locke's contribution was to write a short tract on the power of judges to alter the composition of grand juries, which survives among the Shaftesbury papers. Shaftesbury remained in prison until 24 November, when a whig-nominated grand jury failed to find sufficient evidence for a prosecution to proceed. His release was greeted with wild celebration, but his position was far from secure. In June 1682 the government secured the return of two tories as sheriffs for London, and Shaftesbury knew that once they took office he would no longer be safe. At the end of September he went into hiding; two months later, after a planned insurrection had been aborted, he fled to Amsterdam, where he died in January 1683. His body was brought back to England and buried at Wimborne St Giles; Locke was among the mourners, and composed an elegant Latin epitaph. 
Shaftesbury's death denied the whigs their most determined leader, but not all his associates were disheartened. One group formed a plot to assassinate Charles and James on their way back from the races at Newmarket, at the Rye House near Hertford. No attempt was ever made, and early in June the plot was betrayed to the government; the arrests began on 21 June. 
It is very unlikely that Locke was involved with the assassination plot. None of the conspirators ever named him, and his movements in the weeks after the arrests started were not those of someone attempting to hide. He was, however, a known adherent of Shaftesbury, and even if he was not himself involved in the plot, he was undeniably acquainted with people who were, such as the barrister Richard West; he had therefore some reason for believing himself to be at risk. Locke spent much of July and the first half of August in the west country, visiting friends, putting his affairs in order, and arranging for money to be sent abroad. It is not known how and when he left England, but on 7 September he was in Rotterdam. 
Among the papers that Locke left behind in England were two closely related works on politics. One was an extended attack on the politics of Sir Robert Filmer. Filmer had died in 1653, but his main work, 'Patriarcha', was not published until 1680. It set out the patriarchal theory of politics in its most extreme and most vulnerable form. For Filmer we are not born free, but in a state of subjection to our parents and to the rulers whom God has set over us. Paternal and political power are ultimately the same: both descend from Adam, who had by right of fatherhood royal authority over his children, and this authority passed to his successors. Locke set out to demolish this theory not merely by severing the chain of argument at its weakest link, but by destroying every part that appeared vulnerable. He argued that Adam never possessed the kind of power that Filmer supposed, and that even if he had done, it could not have been conveyed to his posterity in any manner that could justify the titles of any of the monarchs now ruling. Filmer's theory required that Adam's power descended either by a form of primogeniture, so that at any time there was a single heir who was rightful monarch of the whole world, or to all his descendants -- that is, to everyone. 
The other work that Locke had written was a more general treatment of the origin, extent, and end of civil government, and formed the positive counterpart to the attack on patriarchalism: Locke saw that in order to change the way that people thought about politics, it was necessary not merely to demolish Filmer's theory but also to provide a credible alternative. Like Hobbes, Locke regarded the state as a human construction, established by an original contract, but while Hobbes saw the sovereign as possessing unlimited authority, Locke did not. Private property can be acquired in the state of nature, and property rights are not extinguished by the transition to civil society. When entering into society men agree to give up some of the powers which they had exercised in the state of nature, such as the power to punish breaches of the law of nature, but their doing this is not irrevocable. If a government attempts to exceed its powers, it breaks its trust, the government is dissolved, and its former subjects are at liberty to set up another in its place. 
For Locke it was absolutely essential to distinguish political from paternal power, and both from the despotic power exercised by a master over his slaves. Absolute monarchy, though claimed by its defenders as the only legitimate form of government, is inconsistent with civil society, and so no form of civil government at all. Any ruler who attempts to exercise an arbitrary power over the people 'is to be esteemed the common Enemy and Pest of mankind; and is to be treated accordingly' ('Two Treatises of Government', 2.230). Locke was careful to insist that he was not advocating rebellion -- the true rebels were those who invaded the properties and liberties of the people, not those who defended them -- but it was unmistakably a defence of a right of resistance. These were not views that could have been published openly in England during the last years of Charles II's reign, and Locke had very good reasons for keeping the existence of the treatise in which they were advocated as secret as possible. 
The dates of these two works have been the subject of some controversy. The attack on Filmer cannot have been started before 'Patriarcha' was published in the winter of 1679-80, and most of it was probably written soon afterwards. The second work was probably composed over a rather longer period, perhaps mostly in 1681-2, though any detailed account of its composition is necessarily speculative. Both works remained unpublished until 1689, when they appeared together as 'Two Treatises on Government'. 
Another polemical work dating from this period has remained unpublished. In 1680 the dean of St Paul's, Edward Stillingfleet, published a sermon directed against protestant nonconformists entitled 'The Mischief of Separation'; the next year he followed this with a longer treatise, 'The Unreasonableness of Separation'. Among Locke's papers (MS Locke c. 34) there survives an extended reply to both these works, partly in Locke's hand, partly in that of his manservant Sylvester Brounower, but mostly in the hand of James Tyrrell. It has generally been assumed that this work was a joint venture by Locke and Tyrrell, but recent analyses suggest that Locke was the sole author and Tyrrell was merely serving as his amanuensis while Locke was unwell. 
Though he deplored the persecution of the nonconformists, Locke was never one himself. His closest sympathies seem to have been with the latitudinarian Anglicans, such as Benjamin Whichcote and John Tillotson. In his later years he is known to have taken the sacrament in order to qualify for office under the 'Test Act' and to have at least occasionally attended the parish church at High Laver, but during the middle period of his life his attendance at any form of public worship is difficult to document, and may not have been at all frequent. 
Once in the Netherlands, Locke travelled immediately to Amsterdam, where he remained for nearly a year. The winter of 1683-4 was exceptionally cold, and Locke spent much of his time indoors reading medicine. One victim of the cold was a lioness from the zoo; Locke attended the autopsy, and met Philippus van Limborch, professor of theology at the remonstrant seminary in Amsterdam. Limborch's religious outlook was very close to Locke's own, and like Locke he detested persecution and the cruelties that accompany it. In August and September 1684 Locke spent six weeks travelling through the more remote provinces of the Netherlands, visiting Franeker, Groningen, Deventer, and Nijmegen. Between September 1684 and May 1685 he moved frequently between Amsterdam, Leiden, and Utrecht. 
Locke quickly made contact with several of the other English political exiles living in the Netherlands, and this was reported back to the English government. He was suspected of writing libellous pamphlets, and in November 1684 was expelled from his studentship at Christ Church. It is not certain that he contributed financially to the duke of Monmouth's ill-fated expedition, but he undoubtedly knew -- and indeed lodged with -- Thomas Dare, who was its paymaster. In the following May, a fortnight before the expedition sailed, his name was included in a list of exiles sent to the states general of the United Provinces with a request that they should be arrested. Locke went underground, and remained in hiding under a variety of aliases until May 1686. For most of this time he was in Amsterdam, but he spent part of the autumn across the border in Cleves, a town he knew well from his visit twenty years before; his presence there was reported back to London, but nothing could be done. 
Since coming to the Netherlands, Locke had resumed work on the 'Essay Concerning Human Understanding', and as it took shape he sent copies to his friends in England. In April 1686 he sent an unspecified portion, probably containing books 1 and 2; book 3 followed in August, and book 4 in December. By the end of 1686 the 'Essay' existed in a form fairly close to what was published in 1690. 
In winter 1685-6 Locke interrupted his labours on the 'Essay' to write another, shorter work. Louis XIV had revoked the edict of Nantes in October, removing the last remnants of toleration for the French protestants. The 'Epistola de tolerantia' was written after Locke returned from Cleves about the beginning of November. It was addressed to Limborch, who kept the manuscript and subsequently arranged for it to be printed. The Latin text was published anonymously at Gouda in April 1689, two months after Locke had returned to England. The 'Epistola' develops further the theory of toleration already put forward in the 'Essay Concerning Toleration' of 1667. Locke advocated the complete separation of church and state: states exist only to preserve their members' civil goods; churches are purely voluntary societies which are allowed to exercise discipline over their members, but which anyone can leave at any time without incurring any civil disabilities. Complete toleration should be given to every religious body whose doctrines are neither incompatible with civil society nor require their adherents to give allegiance to a foreign prince. 
Locke's last two years in the Netherlands were less eventful. In February 1687 he moved to Rotterdam to stay with Benjamin Furly, an English merchant of broadly Quaker beliefs who had been living there since the Restoration. Locke found Furly's company agreeable and his opinions sympathetic; a further attraction was access to the substantial library that Furly had amassed. Locke remained with Furly until his final departure for England. 
An acquaintance Locke had already made in Amsterdam was another refugee with unorthodox religious views, Jean le Clerc, a colleague of Limborch in the remonstrant seminary. In 1686 he began publishing a new periodical, the 'Bibliotheque Universelle et Historique'. The second volume (July) included a short piece by Locke, 'Une methode nouvelle, & facile de dresser des recueuils'; this took the form of a letter to Nicolas Toinard, and described in careful detail the method of organizing a commonplace book which Locke had been using since 1660. Apart from his poems, it was Locke's first publication: though not likely to arouse much excitement in the world of learning, it would certainly not cause any trouble. Locke also probably contributed a review of Newton's 'Principia' in March 1688; its contents correspond closely to notes among Locke's own papers, and there is nothing that suggests that the reviewer possessed any advanced mathematical knowledge. 
A slightly earlier number of the 'Bibliotheque' (January 1688) contained Locke's first publication of real importance, 'Extrait d'un livre anglois... intitule essai philosophique concernant l'entendement', a substantial abridgement (translated by le Clerc) of the already completed but still unpublished 'Essay'. Locke arranged for the printer to produce a stock of separate copies and had them circulated among his acquaintances in both England and the Netherlands. 
The success of William of Orange's expedition and the resulting flight of James II made it safe for Locke to come home. He returned on 12 February 1689, on the same ship that conveyed Princess Mary back to England. Locke was quickly offered a diplomatic post but unhesitatingly declined, mainly on grounds of health, but also because of an incapacity for the social side of diplomacy: 'I know noe such rack in the world to draw out mens thoughts as a well managed Bottle', he wrote to Lord Mordaunt, and he thought that it would be more in the king's interest 'to send a man of equall parts that could drinke his share, than the soberest man in the Kingdom' ('Correspondence', 3.575). Locke would probably have made a very good ambassador. After his death Pierre Coste testified to his 'obliging and benevolent manners which, supported by an easy and polite expression, a great knowledge of the world, and a vast extent of capacity, made his conversation so agreeable to all sorts of people' ('Works', 10.168); his enemies never denied his reserve and discretion. Locke did, however, accept the post of commissioner of appeals for the excise, which involved fewer duties and which brought in $200 per annum. 
Now that Locke was back in England it was not obvious where he was to live. He had lost his studentship at Christ Church, and though he drafted a petition for its restoration, he made no sustained effort to achieve this. In March he moved into the house of Mrs Rabsy Smithsby in Westminster; she was an old acquaintance who had looked after some of his books while he was in exile. Locke remained her lodger until the end of June 1690, when he moved to a nearby house occupied by Robert Pawling, a former mayor of Oxford whom he had known since the early 1680s. 
In the months that followed his return to England, Locke busied himself with preparing his two chief works for publication. The manuscript (or, almost certainly, manuscripts) that contained the 'Two Treatises on Government' had apparently been left in England, and a large portion of the attack on Filmer in the first treatise had been either lost or deliberately destroyed; Locke appears to have made no attempt to reconstruct it. The second treatise was probably lightly revised for the changed political situation, and a new preface praising 'our Great Restorer, Our present King William' was added. 'Two Treatises' was licensed for publication on 23 August, and appeared, with the date 1690 on the title page, in October. No author's name was given, and Locke never publicly acknowledged his authorship during his lifetime. 
During this period Locke was also adding final touches to the 'Essay Concerning Human Understanding'. The contract with the publisher was dated 24 May, and printing finished about the end of November. Like the 'Two Treatises', the 'Essay' was on sale before the beginning of its nominal year of publication. There was no name on the title page, but the dedicatory epistle was signed and Locke had no desire to conceal his authorship: he sent presentation copies to over forty of his friends and acquaintances, including Queen Mary, Newton, Huygens, and Boyle; Sydenham would have been included if he had not just died (29 December). Huygens and Newton were both recent acquaintances; Huygens soon returned to the Netherlands, but Locke kept in touch with Newton, the two corresponding mostly on problems of biblical interpretation. 
The 'Essay' attracted attention from the start, both favourable and unfavourable. Much of this was directed towards the most conspicuous and easily understood feature of the work, the denial of innate principles in book 1. This was unacceptable -- even shocking -- to many of Locke's readers, including the most profound of his early critics, Leibniz. For Locke the human understanding was initially like 'white Paper, void of all Characters' (bk 2, chap. 1, section 2): all the ideas which it subsequently contains are derived from experience, either external or internal. The account of how the mind puts together various complex ideas from the material provided by sensation and reflection occupies book 2, the longest in the 'Essay'. Book 3 is on words, which have meaning only by acting as signs of ideas; book 4 is on knowledge and opinion. At the beginning of the 'Essay', Locke had announced his intention 'to search out the 'Bounds' between Opinion and Knowledge; and examine by what Measures, in things, whereof we have no certain Knowledge, we ought to regulate our Assent' (bk 1, chap. 1, section 3). The second part of this was crucially important: Locke was no sceptic, but he entirely lacked the boundless intellectual optimism possessed by contemporaries such as Spinoza. He deliberately turned away from metaphysical questions about the nature of the mind and contented himself with trying to find out how it works. It is only when we have done this that we will be in a position to determine what falls within the scope of our understanding, and what does not. 
Many of Locke's doctrines were far from unprecedented: the denial of innatism, the empiricist account of concept acquisition and its attendant semantic theory can all be found in earlier authors, notably Hobbes, though Locke's account was far more thoroughly worked out, and such features as the distinction in book 3 between real and nominal essences were entirely new. Perhaps the most original aspect of the 'Essay' is, however, the conception of philosophy which it embodies. Locke abandoned the whole enterprise of first philosophy as practised from Aristotle to Descartes: he did not see himself as laying a metaphysical foundation on which natural philosophers could then build, but rather (as he put it in the 'Epistle to the Reader') 'as an Under-Labourer... clearing Ground a little, and removing some of the Rubbish, that lies in the way to Knowledge' ('Drafts for the Essay', 10). 
While Locke was revising the 'Essay' and 'Two Treatises', and seeing them through the press, an English translation was being prepared of the 'Epistola de tolerantia'. The translator was William Popple, a merchant of Unitarian views and a convinced advocate of religious toleration; Locke was friendly with Popple and had supplied him with a copy of the Latin original. Popple's translation, entitled 'A Letter Concerning Toleration', went on sale in the late autumn. It sold out quickly (a second edition appeared a few months later) and immediately aroused controversy. In April 1690 an Oxford clergyman, Jonas Proast, published a vigorous attack, 'The Argument of the Letter Concerning Toleration Consider'd and Answer'd'. Locke replied later in the summer with a short 'Second Letter Concerning Toleration'; he chose not to reveal his identity and wrote as a third party taking the side of the author of the original 'Letter'. The 'Second Letter' failed to satisfy Proast: a further attack, 'A Third Letter Concerning Toleration', appeared in February 1691, and provoked Locke into elaborating a very much longer reply. 'A Third Letter for Toleration' was completed in June 1692, and appeared in November. For the time being Proast made no response, and the controversy ceased. 
Shortly before Locke started work on the 'Second Letter', about April 1690, he drafted a short and untitled political tract now usually known as 'A call to the nation for unity'; it was sent to Edward Clarke, and remained among his papers. The tract was directed against those tories who were prepared to recognize William as king 'de facto', but not 'de jure'. Locke saw this as an evasion: if William was not king 'de jure' then he could only be a usurper, as his Jacobite opponents maintained. 
While working on his replies to Proast, Locke had also been thinking again about problems in economics. His concern with these matters had been revived in the summer of 1690 by the introduction into parliament of bills to reduce the legal rate of interest, and to devalue the silver coinage by increasing its nominal value. A part of 'Some considerations of the consequences of the lowering of interest, and raising the value of money' was written in 1690, but much of it was taken over almost unchanged from the unpublished tract that Locke had started in 1668. Locke continued to work on 'Some Considerations' during 1691, and it was eventually published rather hurriedly in December when another bill to reduce the rate of interest was placed before the House of Commons. 
In summer 1690 Locke paid an extended visit to Oates, a small moated manor house near High Laver in north Essex, the home of Sir Francis Masham; Masham's wife, Damaris, was the daughter of Ralph Cudworth, and had been a close friend and correspondent of Locke since before his departure for the Netherlands. In the early part of 1691 he was invited to stay as a permanent guest. Locke was to live at Oates for the remainder of his life, though in the 1690s he was forced to spend quite long periods in London attending to government business. 
Once the 'Third Letter for Toleration' was out of the way, Locke's thoughts turned to a less controversial work. While in the Netherlands he had begun sending Edward Clarke a series of letters giving detailed advice about the upbringing of Clarke's children. Most of 'Some Thoughts Concerning Education' was taken from these letters, though some new material was added. 
For Locke the central purpose of education was education into virtue, and this meant training in self-control: 'The Principle of all Vertue and Excellency lies in a power of denying our selves the satisfaction of our own Desires, where Reason does not authorize them' (section 38). Locke did not regard children as innately cruel or malevolent -- he thought the cruelty they frequently displayed as having been learned by bad example -- but he did see them as naturally wilful and selfish. This was not original sin in the traditional theological sense, but it was a long way from Rousseau's faith in the goodness of the uncorrupted human heart. 
Of all Locke's works, 'Some Thoughts' is perhaps the one that reveals most about its author. A reader of the 'Essay' might conclude that Locke had a prosaic mind, but it is only when he was writing about the education of children that the extent of his animosity towards poetry becomes apparent: 'if he [a child] have a Poetick Vein, 'tis to me the strangest thing in the World, that the Father should desire, or suffer it to be cherished or improved. Methinks the Parents should labour to have it stifled, and suppressed, as much as may be' (section 174). 

'Some Thoughts' was published in July 1693; it sold quickly and another virtually identical edition followed soon afterwards. A third edition, containing a substantial quantity of new material, came out two years later. This revised edition was the first work since the 'Essay' to be published in Locke's own name, and it helped add to his growing reputation. 
During the time that Locke was adding the final touches to 'Some Thoughts' and seeing to its publication, he was also thinking about new material for a second edition of the 'Essay'. John Norris had been the first author to publish any criticisms of the 'Essay', in some 'Cursory reflections', added at the end of his 'Christian Blessedness' (1690). Norris was an old friend of Lady Masham, and it was through her that he became acquainted with Locke. Initially friendly, their relations turned sour when Locke came to suspect that Norris had been prying into his correspondence. The first result of this was a bad-tempered fragment, entitled 'JL answer to Mr Norris's reflection', dated 1692. This was quickly followed by two rather more substantial pieces, 'Remarks upon some of Mr Norris's Books', and 'An Examination of P. Malebranche's Opinion of Seeing All Things in God', both probably dating from early 1693; these remained unpublished until 1720 and 1706 respectively. Despite its title, the 'Examination of Malebranche' began as an attack on Norris, as some passages omitted in the version published in 1706 show. At one stage Locke wondered about including some of this material in the second edition of the 'Essay', but on further reflection decided against doing so: a long polemic would have been out of place in a work that aimed quite deliberately at avoiding disputation and controversy. 
Some of the other new material in the second edition arose out of Locke's much more amiable relationship with a young Irish scientist, William Molyneux. Molyneux had referred to Locke in fulsome terms in the preface to his 'Dioptrica nova' (1692), and Locke, who was apt to estimate anyone else's capacity for philosophical thinking by the closeness of their ideas to his own, was most favourably impressed. A correspondence ensued which continued until Molyneux's death in 1698. Molyneux's most enduring legacy was a problem that he had originally proposed in a letter of 1688, but which Locke first mentioned in the second edition of the 'Essay' (bk 2, chap. 9, section 8): if someone born blind had learned to distinguish a globe and a cube by touch alone, and was then given sight, would that person be able to determine purely by sight which one was which? Both Locke and Molyneux thought that he or she would not. 
The second edition of the 'Essay' was published in May 1694. Apart from the changes already mentioned, the section in the chapter 'Of power' dealing with freedom was entirely recast, and there was a new chapter, 'Of identity and diversity', in which Locke equated personal identity with continuity of consciousness, and not with continuity of any spiritual substance. 
A second edition of the 'Two Treatises of Government' also appeared in spring 1694. Locke tried to correct the badly printed first edition, but its successor was still worse, much to his annoyance. One reason for its unsatisfactory quality was that though Locke was on friendly terms with the printers (Awnsham and John Churchill), he was so determined to conceal his identity that he conducted all the business relating to the edition indirectly, through Edward Clarke. A third edition, little changed from the second, appeared in 1698. 
Locke spent the early months of 1695 at Oates, working on two very dissimilar though not entirely unrelated projects. One concerned the liberty of the press. The 'Licensing Act' of 1662 required periodic parliamentary renewal to remain in force, and was due to lapse in 1695. Locke thought the act pernicious and prepared a paper outlining its defects. He also provided comments on a more liberal bill for regulating printing that Edward Clarke introduced into the Commons in March; though this never became law, the 'Licensing Act' was allowed to lapse and pre-publication censorship of the press ceased. 
Locke's other project was a work of apologetics, intended to set out 'the doctrine of our Saviour and his apostles, as delivered in the Scriptures, and not as taught by the several sects of Christians' ('Works', 7.188). 'The Reasonableness of Christianity' was published anonymously near the beginning of August 1695, and at once aroused controversy. The enterprise of presenting Christianity as reasonable caused little offence, but many readers regarded the version of Christianity advocated as unduly attenuated: a simple requirement of acknowledging Jesus to be the Messiah seemed to indicate sympathy with the anti-trinitarianism of the Socinians. Locke's earliest and most indefatigable antagonist was John Edwards, in 'Some Thoughts Concerning the Several Causes and Occasions of Atheism' (1695). Locke replied in a brief, anonymous 'Vindication of the Reasonableness of Christianity' published in November 1695. A much longer work, the 'Second Vindication', appeared in March 1697, in reply to a second assault by Edwards, 'Socinianism Unmask'd' (1696). 
However intemperately expressed, Edwards's suspicions about Socinianism were probably justified. Locke certainly had a large number of Socinian books in his library, and his private notes on the Trinity and the deity of Christ (MS Locke c. 43) suggest that he rejected both doctrines. Locke's caution is understandable: anti-trinitarian sects had been explicitly excluded from the protection afforded by the 'Toleration Act' of 1689. In public he was evasive, a stance not calculated to reassure his critics. 
In 1695 Locke was again busy with economics. The deterioration of the silver currency was becoming increasingly serious, and in January a committee was set up by the House of Commons to examine proposals for reform. In February, Locke published a brief pamphlet, 'Short Observations on a Printed Paper', originally written in 1693 in reply to an anonymous broadsheet by Thomas Neale. During the summer the situation grew steadily worse, so that Locke spent much of the second half of 1695 absorbed in monetary problems. The third edition of the 'Essay', which came out about December, was almost unchanged from its predecessor. In September, Locke was chosen, along with others including Newton and Wren, to supply the government with expert advice. His recommendation of recoinage without devaluation was finally adopted as government policy early in November, though it still had to be accepted by parliament. His last publication on economics -- 'Further Considerations Concerning Raising the Value of Money', a defence of these proposals -- appeared towards the end of December. It was the only one of Locke's writings on money to be issued in his own name. 
Locke spent the early months of 1696 resting at Oates after the exertions of the previous year. By June he was sufficiently recovered to attend the first meeting of the newly constituted Board of Trade, the successor of the council for trade and plantations to which he had been secretary in 1673-4. The secretary of the new board was the translator of the 'Epistola de tolerantia', William Popple; one of the clerks was Locke's former manservant Sylvester Brounower. The business generated by the board occupied a substantial part of Locke's time over the next four years, but it was not without its reward: the annual salary was $1000, and this time it was paid. Locke found himself dealing with problems as varied as linen manufacture in Ireland, the abortive Scottish colony in Darien, the suppression of piracy, and the affairs of the colony of Virginia. In October 1697 he presented a paper to the board on the problems of vagrancy and the reform of the poor law, advocating the suppression of begging, the setting up of workhouses, and the imposition of strict discipline on their inmates; the scheme was rejected by his fellow commissioners. Locke saw the growth of begging and vagrancy as caused by the relaxation of discipline and corruption of manners, but he was aware that at least some of the poor could not support themselves. Lady Masham reported that 'He was very charitable to the Poor except such persons as were Idle or Prophane, and spent the Sunday in the Alehouses, and went not to Church'. Locke's accounts show him frequently paying out small sums for the deserving (mostly elderly) poor. 
Much of the time that Locke could spare from the affairs of the Board of Trade was spent in pursuing a lengthy controversy with Edward Stillingfleet, now bishop of Worcester. Stillingfleet had read the 'Essay' soon after it first appeared, and (as he later acknowledged) had not seen it as endangering religion. It was the appearance in 1696 of John Toland's 'Christianity not Mysterious' that caused him to change his mind. Toland's unrelentingly rationalist approach to theology went well beyond anything Locke advocated, but it was quite apparent to Stillingfleet that his theory of knowledge was taken over without much modification from book 4 of the 'Essay'. It was this that led Stillingfleet to conclude his 'Discourse in Vindication of the Doctrine of the Trinity' with a criticism of both Toland and Locke. 
Stillingfleet's 'Discourse' was published in November 1696. Locke immediately set to work on a reply: 'A Letter to the Right Reverend Edward, Lord Bishop of Worcester' was dated 7 January 1697, and was on sale by mid-March. Stillingfleet's riposte, an 'Answer to Mr. Locke's Letter', was on sale at the beginning of May. Locke again responded quickly: 'Mr Locke's Reply to the Right Reverend the Lord Bishop of Worcester's Answer to his Letter' was dated 29 June and was published by mid-September; it also contained a brief reply to another critic, Thomas Burnet. Stillingfleet responded with his 'Answer to Mr. Locke's Second Letter', which he appears to have intended as his final contribution to the controversy. Locke prepared a massive rejoinder, considerably longer than its two predecessors put together: 'Mr Locke's Reply to the Right Reverend the Lord Bishop of Worcester's Answer to his Second Letter' was completed in May 1698, though not published until the end of the year. Stillingfleet was by then in no condition to respond. His health had broken down, and he died on 27 March 1699. 
The exchange of letters with Stillingfleet revealed in public Locke's defects as a controversialist, already apparent in the anonymous exchanges that had followed the 'Letter on Toleration' and the 'Reasonableness of Christianity'. Locke admired Hooker, but did not imitate his urbanity and sense of grand strategy; instead the reader is offered page after page of close-range pummelling, interspersed with episodes of sarcasm and bad temper. Locke was aware that he was prone to anger; in his life he seems to have kept this under control, but not always in his writings. 
Some of the issues raised in the controversy with Stillingfleet reappeared in the material added to the fourth edition of the 'Essay', which came out in December 1699; it was the last edition published during Locke's lifetime. Other major changes included two entirely new chapters: 'Of enthusiasm' and 'Of the association of ideas'. One planned addition, like the earlier 'Examination of Malebranche', grew too large and was turned into a separate treatise: this was 'The Conduct of the Understanding', which Locke began in April 1697. He continued adding material to it in the years that followed, and it remained unfinished at his death; his executors published it in 1706. The 'Conduct' is the only one of Locke's works that shows any clear evidence of having been influenced by Francis Bacon. A less easily dateable work from about this time is 'The Elements of Natural Philosophy', a short introduction said to have been written for the use of the Mashams' son Francis, which was first published in 1720. 
A French translation of the 'Essay' was published at Amsterdam in 1700; the translator was a young protestant refugee, Pierre Coste, who had already translated 'Some Thoughts Concerning Education' (1695) and the 'Reasonableness of Christianity' (1696). Coste had come to Oates in August 1697 as tutor to Francis Masham, and he was able to discuss his translation in detail with Locke. A Latin translation by Ezekiel Burridge appeared in 1701. Both these translations helped make Locke's philosophy more widely accessible to readers abroad. 
In June 1700 Locke resigned from the Board of Trade. He had long suffered from a weakness of the lungs, and found the cold and smoke of London in winter unbearable. In January 1698 he had been summoned to Kensington Palace for an interview with the king, apparently in order to be offered an important (though not certainly identifiable) post. By his own account the journey nearly killed him ('Correspondence', 6.307), and his health never fully recovered. 
The last four years of Locke's life were spent quietly at Oates, his visits to London becoming less frequent and very much briefer than before. He published nothing after the fourth edition of the 'Essay', though he continued to note down minor improvements, incorporated into the posthumous fifth edition (1706). When his health allowed he worked steadily on his last major project, 'Paraphrases and Notes on the Epistles of St Paul'. His intention was to publish the complete series by instalments, at three-monthly intervals; the first of these, on 'Galatians', was in proof by August 1704, but nothing appeared before his death. The completed parts, on 'Galatians', '1 and 2 Corinthians', 'Romans', and 'Ephesians', were published by his executors between 1705 and 1707. Two other works date from Locke's last years: 'A Discourse of Miracles' was written in 1702; an unfinished 'Fourth Letter on Toleration', a response to a belated reopening of the old controversy by Proast, was begun during the last months of Locke's life. Both were published in 1706. 
One close friend Locke made in his last years was Anthony Collins, the deist. Locke's letters to him are warm, even effusive, and Collins seems not to have made Locke aware of his own disbelief in revelation. Locke's last letter to him, delivered after his death, describes this life as 'a scene of vanity which soon passes away and affords no solid satisfaction but in the consciousness of doing well and in the hopes of an other life' ('Correspondence', 8.419). 
Early in 1704 Locke's health started to deteriorate, and by the summer he knew he might not have much longer to live. In April he drew up his will, and in September added a codicil acknowledging his authorship of the works he had published anonymously. During the summer he grew steadily weaker. He had previously enjoyed taking exercise by riding, but this was now beyond him; instead, a specially designed chaise was constructed in which he could be driven about. By October he was too frail even for this, and could only be carried out into the garden to sit in the autumn sun. His mind remained lucid until the end. He died peacefully sitting in the chair in his study on the afternoon of 28 October, as Lady Masham was reading the 'Psalms'. Three days later he was buried in the churchyard of the parish church at High Laver. 
Locke had never lived extravagantly, and he died a wealthy man. His estate included just over $12,000 in cash and easily realizable assets, some freehold land in Somerset subsequently sold for $615, and various personal effects including a library of over 4000 books and pamphlets. The main beneficiary of his will was a young lawyer who had been looking after Locke's affairs for some years, Peter King, the grandson of Locke's uncle Peter, his father's younger brother. King received the majority of the estate, including Locke's manuscripts and half his library; the other half, together with $3000, went to Francis Masham. Masham's share of the library was later dispersed, and few of the books that it contained are known to have survived. King became lord chancellor in 1725, and was raised to the peerage as Baron King of Ockham. His descendants, from 1838 earls of Lovelace, retained Locke's papers until the middle of the twentieth century; most are now in the Bodleian Library, Oxford. 
Locke's works were first published in a collected edition in 1714, and were reprinted at regular intervals until the 'twelfth' (actually thirteenth) edition of 1824. There were also frequent editions of individual works, especially the 'Essay Concerning Human Understanding' and 'Some Thoughts Concerning Education'. Locke's philosophy was immensely influential in the eighteenth century, not least in the universities of Oxford and Cambridge, where it soon replaced the scholastic doctrines in which Locke had been educated. The burden on undergraduates, and others, was lightened by an abridgement of the 'Essay' made by John Wynne of Jesus College, Oxford, in 1696, and reprinted frequently in the following century. 
Locke's political writings earned him a place in the whig pantheon, along with Milton, Harrington, and Algernon Sidney, but were less intensively studied. During the half-century from the death of Queen Anne (1714) to the end of the Seven Years' War (1763) the 'Two Treatises of Government' was reprinted only once, except in editions of the collected works. The rising tide of discontent in the American colonies gave the 'Second Treatise' a renewed relevance; it was frequently cited in debates on both sides of the Atlantic, and was published (without the 'First Treatise') in Boston in 1773, the first American printing. Locke's account of the origin and limits of government has continued to exert a profound influence on American political thought. 
The epistemological doctrines of the 'Essay' were subjected to acute criticism by other philosophers from Berkeley onwards, but this did little to shake their acceptability to the educated public. Locke was seen as having given a plain unmetaphysical account of the workings of the human mind that could serve as a complement to Newton's account of the physical universe. In the early nineteenth century Locke's standing began to decline: neither his doctrines nor his literary style appealed to a romantic sensibility more attuned to deep insights emerging from Germany, while thinkers faithful to empiricism were more likely to find what they needed in Bentham or in Bacon. In the later nineteenth and earlier twentieth centuries, as philosophy in Britain became increasingly professionalized, Bacon's reputation declined, but Locke's did not greatly revive: he was generally seen as a historically important but rather dull figure, a target for the nimbler intellects of Berkeley and Hume, though in the English-speaking world at least his position in the philosophical canon was never in jeopardy. Since 1950 his standing has steadily improved, partly through the stimulus to historical enquiry caused by the recovery of his papers, but mainly because of a revival in philosophical realism. 


@@@@@


doc= 16886


Locke, John (1805-1880), legal writer and politician, born in London, was the only son of John Locke, surveyor, of Herne Hill, Surrey, and his wife, Alice, daughter of W. Cartwright. He was educated at Dulwich College and at Trinity College, Cambridge, graduating BA in 1829 and MA in 1832. He was called to the bar at the Inner Temple in Easter term 1833, and became a bencher of his inn in 1857. He joined the home circuit and Surrey sessions, where he enjoyed a leading practice, and from 1845 to 1857 was one of the common pleaders of the City of London. In June 1857, having ceased to practise for some years, except as counsel to the commissioners of Inland Revenue, he was appointed a queen's counsel, and in 1861 became recorder of Brighton, an office which he held until 1879. Having unsuccessfully contested Hastings as a Liberal in 1852, he was elected for Southwark in April 1857, and held the seat until his death. In parliament he was a Liberal at the fringe of the Benthamite tradition, chiefly active on questions of local government and measures for improving the condition of the working classes. He introduced and passed a bill in 1861 for the admission of witnesses in criminal cases to the same right of substituting an affirmation for an oath as in civil cases. He married in 1847 Laura Rosalie, daughter of Colonel Thomas Alexander Cobbe of the East India Company's army; she was the first cousin of Frances Power Cobbe. They had at least one son, John Henry Locke. Locke was the author of a 'Treatise on the Game Laws' (1836), which went through five editions, and 'The Doctrine and Practice of Foreign Attachment in the Lord Mayor's Court' (1853). He died at his residence, 63 Eaton Place, London, on 28 January 1880 and was buried in the Anglican catacombs at Norwood cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 16887


Locke, Joseph (1805-1860), railway engineer, was born at Attercliffe, near Sheffield, on 9 August 1805, the fourth and youngest son of William Locke ('b'. 1770), colliery manager, and his wife, Esther, 'nee' Teesdale. He was educated at Barnsley grammar school, and from 1818 to 1820 was a pupil of William Stobart of Pelaw, co. Durham, a colliery viewer. In 1823 he was articled as a pupil engineer to George Stephenson at his works in Newcastle upon Tyne, and after the expiration of his time in 1826 stayed on with Stephenson, and was appointed one of his assistants in the construction of the Liverpool and Manchester Railway. He was involved in the debate over the form of motive power to be used on the new railway, and in 1829, with Stephenson, published a pamphlet entitled 'Observations on the comparative merits of locomotive and fixed engines, being a reply to the report of Mr James Walker', which finally settled the question in favour of locomotive engines. In 1834 he married Phoebe (1811-1866), daughter of John McCreery. 
Locke's first major project as a civil engineer after the completion of the Liverpool and Manchester was the first trunk railway line, the Grand Junction Railway between Birmingham and Warrington, for which he was to conduct the survey under the line's chief engineer, George Stephenson. The railway's directors were greatly impressed with Locke and indicated to him that they wished him to take sole charge of building the line, which angered Stephenson and led to a rift between the great engineer and his former pupil. A compromise of dividing work on the line between the two men was agreed; but Stephenson's tendency to delegate work to inexperienced assistants led to expensive mistakes and more ill feeling. In August 1835 Stephenson withdrew from the Grand Junction project, leaving the line's construction wholly in Locke's hands. His work on the Grand Junction established Locke's reputation for good engineering combined with economy and speed of construction, and he was soon in great demand as the pace of railway construction increased. Among the many lines he went on to construct in the British Isles the main line from London to Southampton (1836-40) stands out for its directness and fine civil engineering, while the line between Sheffield and Manchester (1838-40) and the Greenock, Paisley, and Glasgow line (1837-41), with their steep gradients, are examples of Locke at his most daring. Abroad, he constructed the line between Paris and Rouen (1841-3), and that between Rouen and Le Havre (1843), for which he was awarded the grand cross of the Legion d'honneur by Louis-Philippe. He also designed and supervised the construction of the line between Barcelona and Mattaro in Spain (1847-8) and the Dutch-Rhenish railway, completed in 1856. While working on the continent Locke took John Edward Errington into partnership in 1840, and together they constructed lines in Lancashire and north-western England, and many difficult lines in Scotland, including the Caledonian main line. They also constructed a line from Mantes to Caen and Cherbourg in 1852, for which Locke was created a chevalier of the Legion d'honneur by Napoleon III. Despite the heavy civil-engineering works on the Caledonian Railway main line its cost, including the stations, was a relatively modest $16,000 a mile. This economy resulted from the adoption of steeper gradients than had previously been thought suitable for railway locomotives, and proved that level track was not absolutely necessary to prevent a loss of power, especially given the continually improving performance of British locomotives during this period. Throughout his career Locke avoided undertaking very great and costly civil-engineering works, but he approached all his work with a dauntless determination to see the job through. He also had an unerring ability to select ideal collaborators, subcontractors, and assistants; a notable example was Thomas Brassey, whom Locke brought with him from the Grand Junction Railway to work on the Basingstoke to Winchester section of the London to Southampton line. 
In 1847 Locke purchased the manor of Honiton, Devon, and sat in parliament as a Liberal for the borough of Honiton from that date to his death. He seldom spoke in the house except on matters within his special knowledge, but engaged in many parliamentary struggles, and took part in the 'battle of the gauges', favouring Stephenson's narrower gauge over Brunel's broad gauge. 
Locke died suddenly at Moffat, near Dumfries, Scotland, on 18 September 1860. He was widely mourned; a window (since removed) was installed to his memory in Westminster Abbey, and an obituary in 'The Times' referred to him as having formed, with Robert Stephenson and Isambard Kingdom Brunel, the 'triumvirate of the engineering world'. Locke was always proud of his Yorkshire origins, and left a number of legacies to institutions in that county, notably Barnsley grammar school. His widow presented Locke Park to the people of Barnsley in his memory, and in 1866 his statue was erected there. 


@@@@@


doc= 16888


Locke, Matthew (c.1622-1677), organist and composer, is presumed to have been born in Devon, though attempts to link him with a Locke family resident in Exeter at the time have proved inconclusive. His date of birth is inferred from the inscription 'aetat 40 anno domini 1662' on a portrait given to the Oxford music school. He was a choirboy at Exeter Cathedral, where his teachers could have included the master of the choristers, Edward Gibbons, the organist John Lugge, and William Wake, who acted as Lugge's deputy from 1635 to 1642. After his voice changed Locke remained at the cathedral as a secondary, an intermediate grade between chorister and lay vicar. In 1638 and 1641 he carved his name or initials in the stone organ screen; on 29 September 1640 he was admonished for fighting, and in the same year he was twice paid for copying music for the cathedral. 
Locke's activities during the civil war are unknown. Exeter initially declared for parliament, but cathedral services seem to have resumed in September 1643, when the city again came under royalist control: Charles I, Henrietta Maria, and the prince of Wales all subsequently passed through Exeter and could have encountered Locke at this time. However, Locke's name does not appear in the Exeter protestation return of February 1642, either as one of those who had taken the oath or among the minority who refused, and he may already have left the city. Later he probably joined the exiled court at The Hague, as some Italian sacred music in BL, Add. MS 31437, was copied in 1648 'when I was in the Low Countreys' (fol. 29). 'The Close Hypocrite Discovered' (p. 10) describes him as 'a Papist' who had been 'in Arms amongst the Rebels in Ireland'. He had returned to England by 1651, when he composed his 'Little Consort' at the request of William Wake, and about the same time began his great scorebook, BL, Add. MS 17801, in which he collected and revised his chamber music for the rest of his life. 
By about 1655 Locke had married Mary (died 1701), daughter of the Catholic recusant Roger Garnons of Herefordshire. At least two children must have been born in the 1650s or early 1660s: the father of Locke's grandson John, executor of his grandmother's will, and Mary, who dealt with Locke's estate in 1677. In spite of religious and political differences, Locke became friendly with one of the parliamentary sequestration commissioners for Herefordshire, Silas Taylor, an enthusiastic amateur musician who provided him with a house in Hereford. Taylor's music meetings, in which Locke took a leading part, were suspected of being pretexts for assemblies of 'Papists and Delinquents' ('Close Hypocrite', 10). Much of Locke's instrumental chamber music was probably composed at this time, including the two-part consort 'For Seaverall Freinds', the bass viol duos dated 1652, and the 'Consort of Four Parts'; the title of 'The Flatt Consort for my Cousin Kemble' refers to a prominent Herefordshire recusant family to whom Locke may have been related by marriage. Locke's own beliefs came under investigation when on 22 March 1654 he walked to the gallows with a condemned murderer whose final action was to proclaim the Catholic faith. Five depositions concerning this event were taken at Hereford on 29 March and 3 April 1654, including that of Matthew Price, a participant in at least one of Taylor's music meetings, who alleged that about a year previously Locke had made a compromising remark in the course of an argument. Locke was accused only of being a Catholic, not of breach of the peace, and his conduct, however imprudent, seems to have been compassionate and courageous. 
In the mid-1650s Locke returned to London, where he became involved in the musical dramas which were the only form of public theatre permitted under the Commonwealth. He composed some of the music for William Davenant's 'The Siege of Rhodes' of September 1656 and also sang the part of the Admiral. In the same year John Playford published a revised version of the 1651 'Little Consort', and about this time Locke may have taken up a teaching post at a girls' school in Hackney, mentioned obliquely in his book 'The Present Practice of Musick Vindicated' (1673, 19). In 1659 he composed the score for a revival of James Shirley's 'Morall Representation' 'Cupid and Death', incorporating music written by Christopher Gibbons for the first performance in 1653. Locke appears to have formed friendships with a number of other musicians as well as Gibbons: he wrote a dedicatory poem for the 1659 edition of 'The Division Violist' by his 'dear friend' Christopher Simpson, in which he expressed a distrust of music theory later reflected in other works, and Samuel Pepys met him with Silas Taylor and either Henry or Thomas Purcell at a coffee house in Westminster on 21 February 1660. 
Locke's rapid advancement after the Restoration suggests that he was already highly regarded by Charles II, perhaps as a result of his activities in the 1640s. In June 1660 he was appointed composer in the private music and composer for the violins. The following year Locke wrote much of the music for Charles II's ceremonial progress through London on 22 April, the eve of his coronation. The collection of suites entitled 'The First Part of the Broken Consort' and the unfinished 'Second Part' must have been intended for the 'broken consort' at court, a chamber music ensemble which flourished in the early 1660s. Locke also composed anthems for the Chapel Royal and from 1662 onwards was organist of Queen Catherine's Catholic chapel, until 1671 at St James's Palace and then at Somerset House. This last appointment probably provided him with accommodation, as although he was said in 1669 to be 'of St Martin in the Fields' (Ashbee, 1.92) his name cannot be found in the rate books. In June 1664 one Margaret Pothero received 10's'. a week for lodging 'Mr Lock, organist, and his servants' for seventeen weeks (ibid., 55), at the same time as the Catholic viol player Paul Francis Bridges and John Harford, an organ blower, were lodged elsewhere, perhaps because all three were for some reason displaced from their usual apartments. 
During the plague year, 1665, Locke accompanied the court to Oxford, where several manuscripts were annotated by Edward Lowe, the professor of music. Locke's motet 'Ad te levavi oculos meos' was performed at the music school on Thursday 16 November; the previous week a new prelude and 'Gloria' had been composed, added to an existing 'Jubilate', copied in parts, and performed, all between noon and 3 p.m. Back at Westminster, an unfortunate incident occurred on 1 April 1666 when Locke's responses to the commandments for some reason went badly wrong in a Chapel Royal service. Although straightforward, Locke's setting departed from precedent by consisting of ten different responses instead of repetitions of the same music. After unfair criticism that the music was excessively difficult and unusual, Locke had the score printed with his comments as 'Modern church-musick pre-accus'd, censur'd, and obstructed in its performance before his majesty... vindicated by the author Matt. Lock' (1666). His reaction appears unnecessarily defensive, as his reputation does not seem to have suffered, and the most ambitious of his anthems, 'Be thou exalted', was performed in the Chapel Royal with great success on the 14 August following. A comparable lack of proportion marks Locke's side of a controversy about musical notation with Thomas Salmon, whose 'An Essay to the Advancement of Music by Casting Away the perplexity of Different clefs' (1672) is as inoffensive in tone as it is impractical in content. Salmon inadvertently provoked Locke by inviting him to write a commendation to his 'Essay', and Locke's published replies, 'Observations upon a Late Book, Entituled, an Essay to the Advancement of Musick' (1672) and 'The Present Practice of Musick Vindicated' (1673), respond to Salmon's suggestions as if they constituted a personal insult. The prefaces are respectively signed 'From my Lodgings near the Savoy' and 'From my Lodgings in the Strand', implying that Locke moved into new accommodation when the queen's chapel transferred to Somerset House. 
In 1673 Locke was paid $5 for composing an ode, 'Descende caelo cincta sororibus', for the Oxford 'act', or degree ceremony. The same year also saw the publication of 'Melothesia, or, Certain general rules for playing upon a continued-bass. With a choice collection of lessons for the harpsichord and organ of all sorts', an anthology edited by Locke containing the earliest surviving printed English instructions for realizing a figured bass. Locke had remained active as a theatre composer after the Restoration, and in the 1670s contributed to three important milestones in the development of English dramatic music: Elkanah Settle's 'The Empress of Morocco', including Locke's self-contained 'Masque of Orpheus and Euridice' (3 July 1673), Thomas Shadwell's version of 'The Tempest' (1674), with instrumental music by Locke, and Shadwell's 'Psyche' (27 February 1675), for which Locke wrote the vocal music and 'the Instrumental Therein Intermix'd'. Locke's sections of 'The Tempest' and 'Psyche' were published as 'The English Opera' in 1675. His final venture into publication was 'Tripla concordia, or, A choice collection of new airs in three parts, for treble and basse violins by several authors', advertised in November 1676 and probably supervised by Locke. 
A story related by Roger North may reflect a severe physical or mental decline suffered by Locke towards the end of his life, which may in turn explain why he did not make a will. North states that the Italian singers at the Somerset House chapel were so dissatisfied with Locke's performance that he was relegated from the great organ to a chamber organ, on which he played throughout the services, but there is no evidence of this situation in other sources, including the one surviving account book of Queen Catherine's household, from 1671/2 (Weale, xxix-xxxii). Locke died, probably in his lodgings in the Strand, London, in August 1677 and was probably buried in the Anglican churchyard at St Mary Savoy, given as his parish when probate was granted to his daughter Mary on 13 December. His widow, who renounced her right to the administration of his estate, was buried at St James's, Piccadilly, on 17 July 1701. For the last few years of her life she had occupied a property in James Street, near Golden Square, and a daughter, either Mary or another unknown child, was married to Matthew Scott of Pall Mall. These circumstances suggest that Locke's widow was financially secure, in spite of difficulties caused in his lifetime by late payment of his court salaries. 
Locke's importance to English music in the generation before Purcell cannot be overestimated. He composed significant works in every major genre: his 'Consort of Four Parts' was regarded by North, who did not know Purcell's fantasias, as the last masterpiece of the English polyphonic tradition, and he excelled in expressive, declamatory vocal writing, which he turned to dramatic effect in his theatre works and combined with counterpoint in his anthems. His achievement was recognized by Henry Purcell in an elegy published in the second book of John Playford's 'Choice Ayres' (1679), 'What hope for us remains now he is gone?', and several works survive in manuscripts copied by Purcell, Blow, and other discriminating musicians. Perhaps over-sensitive to criticism, Locke was often outspoken in defence of English music and his own works, but Lefkowitz's assessment of his character as 'vain, contentious and vindictive' ('New Grove') has little or no support beyond the polemics against Salmon. In 'Observations upon a Late Book' (p. 2) Locke expresses gratitude that the civil war interrupted his career and prevented the publication of his early music before he had 'become sensible of the vanity and impudency of it'. His autograph sources bear witness to rigorous editing and revision of mature works, and high standards of artistic, religious, and personal integrity seem to have been as prominent in his character as any more negative elements sometimes evident. 


@@@@@


doc= 16889


Lock, William (1732-1810), art connoisseur and patron, is believed to have been the natural son of William Lock (died 1761), MP for Grimsby, from whom he inherited considerable wealth, and Mrs Mary Wood (died 1785) of Cavendish Square, London. The suggestion that he was of the same family as John Locke the philosopher is not proved. On 13 January 1767 he married Frederica Augusta (1750-1832), daughter of Sir Luke Schaub (1690-1758). In 1749 Lock set out on the grand tour and in Venice met the landscape painter Richard Wilson, with whom he travelled to Rome. He now began to collect art: among his purchases were Claude's 'Embarkation of St Ursula' (National Gallery, London), antique statuary including a bronze version of the 'Discobulus' (Duncombe Park, Yorkshire), and terracotta models attributed at that time to Michelangelo. 
It was, however, as a friend and patron of contemporary artists and men of letters that Lock was most respected. At Norbury Park, near Mickleham, Surrey, which he bought in 1774, the Locks were generous hosts to French emigres, including Madame de Stael, who lived nearby at Juniper Hall; Fanny Burney, to whom Lock gave land for the building of Camilla Cottage on her marriage to M. d'Arblay, was a friend for life. So too was Thomas Lawrence, whom he introduced to the influential circle of J. J. Angerstein; his daughter Amelia married Angerstein's son John, MP for Camelford, in 1799. Lawrence first painted Lock in 1790 (Museum of Fine Arts, Boston, Massachusetts) and in 1829 he made a masterly portrait of Frederica Lock in old age (Nelson Atkins Museum, Kansas). The dining room of Lock's home, Norbury Park (which still stands), was painted with celebrated landscapes and 'trompe-l'oeil' effects by George Barret the elder, G. B. Cipriani, and B. Pastorini. Lock's features suggest a refined, almost ascetic character but his cellar was fine and noted for its Etna Tokay which was said to have aphrodisiac qualities. He died at Norbury on 5 October 1810. 
His elder son, 
His son, 


@@@@@


doc= 16890


William Lock (1804-1832), army officer, served as a captain in the Life Guards and was remarkable for his personal beauty. Lock eloped with Selina (1812-1892), daughter of Admiral Richard Delap Tollemache, formerly Halliday; they were married soon after, in Brighton, on 7 December 1829. He published some illustrations to Byron which were lithographed by V. de Villeneuve. He was drowned in Lake Como on 14 September 1832; his daughter, Augusta Selina, married successively Ernest, Lord Burghersh; the duke of Santo Teodoro; and Thomas de Grey, sixth Baron Walsingham. 


@@@@@


doc= 16891


William Lock (1767-1847), artist, was born in 1767. He distinguished himself as an artist of promise in his early years. Educated at the Revd William Gilpin's school at Cheam, he was also a pupil and -- like his father -- a friend of Henry Fuseli, who dedicated his lectures on painting to him. He is known principally for his mannered drawings in the Fuseli style, but he produced some paintings, and his 'Death of Cardinal Wolsey' was engraved in stipple by Charles Knight in 1797. Lock sold Norbury in 1819 and lived afterwards principally in Rome and Paris. He married in 1800 the beautiful Elizabeth Jennings ('c'.1781-1846), daughter of Henry Constantine (Dog) Jennings (1731-1819), a fellow collector. There was one son, William, and a daughter, who married Joseph Blake, third Baron Wallscourt. William Lock the younger died in 1847. 


@@@@@


doc= 16892


Locker, Arthur (1828-1893), novelist and journalist, was born at Greenwich Hospital on 2 July 1828, second son of Edward Hawke Locker (1777-1849) and his wife, Eleanor Mary Elizabeth Boucher (1793-1861), a daughter of the Revd Jonathan Boucher. Frederick Locker-Lampson was his brother. He was educated at Charterhouse School and, from 1847, at Pembroke College, Oxford, where he graduated BA in 1851. After graduation he worked for a year in a mercantile office in Liverpool. In 1852 he emigrated to Victoria, Australia, searching for gold. He did not succeed, and turned to journalism, also producing some tales and plays for an Australian audience. By 1856 he was back in England, where on 15 May, he married Mary Jane Rouse, daughter of John Wood Rouse of Greenwich, a lieutenant in the Royal Navy. 
Locker returned permanently to England in 1861, with the ambition of devoting himself to literature; a number of novels, set mainly in Australia, were later published, among them 'Sweet Seventeen' (1866), 'On a Coral Reef' (1869), and 'The Village Surgeon' (1874). In order to keep himself, he wrote extensively for newspapers and magazines, and in 1863 obtained a position at 'The Times', which he kept until 1870, when he was appointed editor of the newly founded illustrated newspaper 'The Graphic', owned by William Luson Thomas. He was an efficient editor, and encouraged young writers of promise. On 5 June 1890, his first wife having died, he married Catharine Sarah Carpenter, 'nee' Clulioth, a widow of forty-three. In December 1891 he retired because of ill health, and, after visiting Madeira and the Isle of Wight in the vain hope of recovery, died at 19 West Hill, Highgate, on 23 June 1893. 


@@@@@


doc= 16893


Locker, Edward Hawke (1777-1849), hospital administrator and watercolour painter, born at the parsonage house, East Malling, Kent, on 9 October 1777, was the fourth of the five surviving children of Captain William Locker (1731-1800) and his wife, Lucy (1746/7-1780), daughter of Admiral William Parry and granddaughter of Commodore Charles Brown. Locker was named after William Locker's patron Admiral Edward Hawke. He was educated at Eton College, and on 1 June 1795 entered the navy pay office as clerk (seaman's wages), a position which he held until about 1799. In October of that year he was appointed clerk to the Board of Control for affairs in India, and then to the board of naval enquiry. In 1804 he became civil secretary to Admiral Edward Pellew, Viscount Exmouth, and was with him during his commands in the East Indies (1804-9), in the North Sea (1810), and in the Mediterranean (1811-14). During this time he was a prize agent, engaged in the distribution of prize money, from which he himself derived considerable benefit. He was elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1811. 
In 1813, with Lord John Russell, Locker visited Spain during the Peninsular War, and carried dispatches to the duke of Wellington. His account, 'Views of Spain', was published in 1824, with illustrations after his own watercolours. In May 1814 he visited Napoleon at Porto Ferraio, Elba, later described by him in 'The Plain Englishman' (3.375). On 28 February 1815 he married Eleanor Mary Elizabeth (1793-1861), daughter of the Revd Jonathan Boucher, a former friend of George Washington. They lived at Windsor until 1819, when Locker was appointed secretary to the Royal Naval Hospital, Greenwich, where his father had ended his career as lieutenant-governor; in 1824 he became civil commissioner of the hospital. With Lord John Russell, John Wilson Croker (secretary to the Admiralty), the sculptor Sir Francis Chantrey, and Sir Thomas Lawrence, president of the Royal Academy, he was one of the twenty-four founder members of the Athenaeum and sat on its general committee. Locker was co-founder (with Charles Knight) of 'The Plain Englishman' (1820-30), a periodical designed to supply its readers with 'useful information, in place of [the] infidel and disloyal publications' ('Introduction', 'The Plain Englishman', 1824); he became the journal's editor. Its purpose was largely didactic and it advocated patriotism by lauding heroic deeds, including naval ones. Locker's friend the poet laureate Robert Southey was among its contributors. 
At Greenwich, Locker used his astute business sense to reform the administration of the hospital, including the lead and coalmining interests of its large Northumbrian estates, employing McAdam to construct new roads to improve communication and introducing many improvements for its tenants. In 1823 he submitted a proposal to establish in the Painted Hall in the Royal Naval Hospital 'a gallery of pictures commemorating the distinguished services of the Royal Navy of England'. This revived a scheme first put forward in 1795 by William Locker as a means of raising money for the hospital's charitable purposes, but his son's aims were predominantly didactic. The Naval Gallery received the approval of George IV: in 1824 he presented twenty-nine pictures from the Royal Collection, consisting mainly of portraits of naval commanders by Lely, Kneller, and Michael Dahl. In 1829, he added de Loutherbourg's 'Battle of the 1st June, 1794' and Turner's 'Battle of Trafalgar', the only painting by Turner to have been in the Royal Collection. His support was continued by his successor, William IV, and the collection was also augmented by gifts which Locker assiduously solicited from naval families, and from the British Institution; he also encouraged commissions and presented pictures himself. The Naval Gallery was, in effect, the first gallery of national history in the country and may be seen as part of the general programme to establish national art collections and to raise the artistic reputation of the capital. Locker wrote a substantial companion to the gallery, 'Memoirs of Celebrated Naval Commanders' (1832), illustrated with engravings of the collection. 
In 1936 the collection passed into the care of the newly formed National Maritime Museum of which it forms a principal component, although still the property of the hospital. Locker's own collection, dispersed after his death, was displayed in his apartments there and included 'excellent specimens of Thomas Lawrence, Wilkie, Prout, Edridge, Girtin, Turner, Alexander, Chinnery, Paul Sandby, Hearne, Nicholson, Cipriani, Cozens, and Lady Farnborough' (Locker-Lampson, 73). In 1823 he contributed works from his collection to the first loan exhibition at the Old Watercolour Society. His correspondence with Robert Southey, Walter Scott, William Wilberforce, Croker, Thomas Lawrence, David Wilkie, and others reveals a many-sided interest in the events of his day, and his opinion carried weight with his contemporaries in matters of art, literature, and religion. 
In 1844 Locker was forced to retire from his post at the hospital owing to 'mental failure' from which he was to suffer until his death at Iver, Buckinghamshire, on 16 October 1849. He was buried at Iver. Among his children were the poet Frederick Locker-Lampson (1821-1895), and the novelist and journalist Arthur Locker (1828-1893), who became editor of 'The Graphic'. E. H. Locker's watercolours can be found in the Victoria and Albert Museum and the British Museum in London, the National Maritime Museum at Greenwich, and the Victoria Art Gallery, Bath. 


@@@@@


doc= 16894


Locker, John (1693-1760), barrister and literary editor, was born in London on 27 August 1693, the eldest son of Stephen Locker, one-time clerk to the Leathersellers' Company. On 12 March 1707 John was admitted to the Merchant Taylors' School, London, from the Mercers' School. He matriculated at Merton College, Oxford, on 21 April 1711, stayed at Oxford for about two years, and entered Gray's Inn on 28 March 1719. He was called to the bar in 1724. He was a commissioner of bankruptcy and became clerk of the Leathersellers' Company on 2 June 1719 and of the Clockmakers' Company in 1740. He entered into membership of the Society of Antiquaries of London on 3 March 1737 and became a friend of a fellow member, William Bowyer, the learned printer. 
Locker married Elizabeth (died 1759), the eldest daughter of Edward Stillingfleet, rector of Wood Norton and Swanton in Norfolk and sister of the naturalist Benjamin Stillingfleet. Elizabeth and John Locker had nine children. Their second son, William Locker, Nelson's teacher, became lieutenant-governor of Greenwich Hospital, Kent. 
Dr Johnson described Locker as 'a gentleman eminent for curiosity and literature' (Nichols, 'Lit. anecdotes', 5.372-3). Some of his poems were published in 'The Constellation: Poems on Several Occasions' (1715), a miscellany of short pastorals, satires, and odes, and a translation of Virgil's first eclogue; he also translated into English part of Voltaire's history of Charles XII, which was published in 1732 as the 'History of Charles XII of Sweden'. He was also renowned for his skill in Greek, particularly modern Greek, which he is reputed to have acquired from a poor Greek priest found wandering lost in the streets of London. Locker took him to his house and maintained him for some years in return for which the priest provided instruction in the Greek language. 
The most notable of Locker's achievements, however, was the work he undertook with Robert Stephens, historiographer royal, on the manuscript letters of Sir Francis Bacon. When Stephens died in November 1732 his papers passed to Locker who prepared them for the press adding, in accordance with Stephens's direction, 'what else he thought fit from his Collection of Manuscripts which was more than he [Stephens] had intended at that time' (BL, Add. MS 4260, fol. 19'v'). This edition of Bacon's correspondence was published by Locker's friend Bowyer in 1734. Locker also made corrections to the fourth volume of John Blackbourne's edition of Bacon's works. These corrections, in Locker's hand, are extant in the copy of this volume housed in the British Library. 
Locker died in London on 30 May 1760 and was buried at St Helen, Bishopsgate, London. His collection of manuscripts was purchased by Thomas Birch in 1764 (BL, Add. MSS 4108 and 4258-4262). 


@@@@@


doc= 16895


Locker, William (1731-1800), naval officer, was born in February 1731 in the official residence attached to the Leathersellers' Hall, London, the second son of John Locker (1693-1760), the clerk to the company, and his wife, Elizabeth (died 1759), daughter of Edward Stillingfleet. He followed his father to Merchant Taylors' School and entered the navy on 9 June 1746 as captain's servant in the 'Kent' with a family relation, Captain Charles Windham (or Wyndham). After the latter's death Locker was moved to the 'Vainqueur' (Captain James Kirk) bound for the West Indies, and then to the 'Vulture' and the 'Cornwall', flagship of Charles Knowles, and was present at the capture of Port Louis. He then rejoined Kirk in the 'Elizabeth' and returned home. After the peace he made two or more voyages to India and China in the East India Company's service, but in 1755 he rejoined the navy as master's mate in the 'St George', then Admiral Sir Edward Hawke's flagship. He passed for lieutenant on 7 January 1756, and was taken by Hawke in the 'Antelope' when the admiral was sent out to relieve John Byng; he was promoted lieutenant to the 'Experiment' on 4 July, though Sir Edward seems to have had difficulty in having the appointment confirmed (Mackay, 155, 265), and thus he earned Locker's lifelong gratitude, expressed in the name of his youngest and best-known son, Edward Hawke Locker. 
In January 1757 John Jervis, then a lieutenant of the 'Culloden', was appointed to the temporary command of the 'Experiment' during Captain John Strachan's illness, and thus for two important months Jervis was Locker's shipmate. After an indecisive engagement with a large French privateer on 16 March, Jervis returned to the 'Culloden', and Strachan resumed command of the 'Experiment'. On 8 July, off Alicante, she captured the 'Telemaque', a privateer of 20 guns and 460 men. Trusting to this enormous superiority in men, the 'Telemaque' endeavoured to lay the 'Experiment' on board, and after two attempts partially succeeded. Only a few of the French were able to get on board, and these were immediately killed. Locker was ordered by Strachan to enter the 'Telemaque', a task which he carried out successfully. The result of this remarkable action was the loss of 235 Frenchmen killed and wounded, while the 'Experiment' lost only forty-eight. Locker himself suffered a wound in the leg. At the time he thought little of it; but he never completely recovered from its effects. 
In December 1758 Locker was moved, with Strachan, to the 'Sapphire' (32 guns); she was attached to the fleet off Brest through summer and autumn 1759, and Locker was present at the defeat of the French in Quiberon Bay on 20 November. He was taken by Hawke into his flagship, the 'Royal George', in March 1760 and, moving up in rotation, became first lieutenant in July 1761. On 7 April 1762 he was promoted to the command of the fireship 'Roman Emperor' and so began what Edward Hawke Locker was to describe as his father's happiest period of naval service. 
In 1763 Locker was appointed to the sloop 'Nautilus' and was sent to withdraw the British garrison from Goree in west Africa, as the peace restored it to France. After returning the garrison to England the 'Nautilus' was sent to the Jamaica station, visiting ports in the Gulf of Mexico and venturing up the Mississippi River. She paid off at Deptford on 8 March 1768, and, to indicate Admiralty approval, Locker was promoted captain on 26 May 1768. In 1770 he married Lucy, daughter of Admiral William Parry, and granddaughter of Commodore Charles Brown. She died in 1780, leaving two daughters, Lucy and Elizabeth, and three sons, William, John, and Edward Hawke. Possibly through his wife the family had interests at Addington, Kent, as well as a farm at Gillingham. From 1770 to 1773 Locker commanded the frigate 'Thames' on the home station, and in 1777 he commissioned the 'Lowestoft' for the West Indies. Horatio Nelson, then just promoted, was at the same time appointed one of the 'Lowestoft's' lieutenants, and remained with Locker for about fifteen months; he was at this time barely nineteen, and the stamp of Locker's teaching and of his experience of Hawke had a lasting effect. More than twenty years afterwards (9 February 1799) Nelson wrote to Locker: 'I have been your scholar; it is you who taught me to board a Frenchman by your conduct when in the Experiment; it is you who always told me 'Lay a Frenchman close and you will beat him;' and my only merit in my profession is being a good scholar. Our friendship will never end but with my life, but you have always been too partial to me. ('Dispatches and Letters', 3.260)' In 1779 Locker's health gave way and he was compelled to invalid, nor could he undertake any further active employment. In 1787, on the prospect of war with France, he was appointed to regulate the impress service at Exeter. In the Spanish armament of 1790 he commanded the 'Cambridge' as flag-captain to Vice-Admiral Thomas Graves, then commander-in-chief at Plymouth; and in 1792 he was for a short time commodore and commander-in-chief at the Nore. On 15 February 1793 he was appointed lieutenant-governor of Greenwich Hospital. 
Much of the interest in Locker derives from his role as a teacher, friend, and correspondent of Nelson. During his later years he compiled materials for a naval history, a task in which he was much assisted by Admiral John Forbes. Though unachieved, that project (according to its advertisement) was intended 'to rescue, by the products of unquestionable evidence, the characters of several worthy sea officers from false aspersions which have been cast on them by violence of party or the malice of individuals' (NMM, CLU/8). Locker himself had no literary experience, and subsequently handed his material to John Charnock who used it in writing his six-volume 'Biographia navalis' (1794-8). It was also at Locker's suggestion, and with prior help from him, that Charnock wrote his 'Life of Nelson'. Locker died at Greenwich Hospital on 26 December 1800. He asked to be buried in the family vault at Addington where he had previously erected a memorial to his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 16896


Lampson, Frederick Locker- (1821-1895), poet, was born on 29 May 1821 at the Royal Naval Hospital, Greenwich, Kent, where his father, Edward Hawke Locker (1777-1849), held the office of civil commissioner, an appointment gained in part through Frederick's grandfather William Locker, a naval captain and lieutenant-governor of the hospital from 1793. His mother, Eleanor Mary Elizabeth Boucher (1793-1861), was the daughter of the Revd Jonathan Boucher, vicar of Epsom, Surrey, a book collector and a former friend of George Washington. Frederick was the third child, and a younger brother was the novelist Arthur Locker (1828-1893). All were raised to revere their illustrious seafaring heritage, and were regaled with tales of Nelson over dinner, and surrounded by books and maps. 
Frederick was sociable, if not quick -- at the age of nine he could not yet read -- so rather than attend Eton College, his father's school, he pursued a nondescript education at various schools -- at Clapham in London, at Yateley in Hampshire, at Greenwich, and elsewhere -- before becoming, on 18 September 1837, a junior clerk in a colonial broker's office in Mincing Lane in London. He followed this uncongenial calling for some years. Then, on 30 March 1841, he obtained from Lord Minto, first lord of the Admiralty and son of the governor-general of Bengal, a temporary clerkship in Somerset House. On 12 November 1842 he was transferred to the Admiralty, as a junior in Lord Haddington's private office, and he subsequently became deputy reader and precis writer, which he enlivened by his ready wit and poetry. A rhyming version of a petition from an importunate lieutenant seems to have sent Lord Haddington into ecstasies, and Locker continued his career under Sir James Graham and Sir Charles Wood until ill health gained him a leave of absence on 23 May 1849, after which he toured the continent. 
On 4 July 1850 Locker made a brilliant match in Paris with Lady Charlotte Christian Bruce (died 1872), a daughter of Thomas Bruce, seventh earl of Elgin, who brought the Elgin marbles to England. Along with giving him an entree to royal circles -- he and his wife used to summer at Frogmore, as Lady Charlotte was friendly with Queen Victoria -- his marriage enabled him to quit government service, and in 1857 he published, with Chapman and Hall, his first collection of verse, 'London Lyrics', a small volume of ninety pages, which, under its various editions and revisions, constitutes his poetical legacy. Ironically, he had trouble having editors respond to his poetry, but he had an ally in Thackeray, who once told him 'I have a sixpenny talent (or gift), and so have you; ours is small-beer, but, you see, it is the right tap' (Locker-Lampson, 'My Confidences', 300). A second issue appeared in 1862, and in 1865 Moxon included a selection from its pages in 'Miniature Poets', illustrated by Richard Doyle. In 1868 another issue was privately printed for John Wilson of Great Russell Street, with a frontispiece by George Cruikshank. Eight further editions appeared between 1870 and 1893. In the United States 'London Lyrics' was printed in 1883 for the Book Fellows' Club of New York, with some fresh illustrations by Randolph Caldecott; and in 1895 the Rowfant Club of Cleveland, Ohio, named from Locker's home in Sussex, put forth a rare little volume of his verse, chosen by Locker himself, entitled 'Rowfant Rhymes'. The latter includes a preface by Austin Dobson and a poem by Robert Louis Stevenson. More reprints were put forward throughout the twentieth century, assuring Locker a place in England's literary history. 

'London Lyrics' was not Locker's only work, and in 1867 he published the anthology 'Lyra elegantiarum', composed of specimens of 'vers de societe' and 'vers d'occasion' gleaned from his ample experiences of high society. Although chronic ill health and dyspepsia made it impossible for him to follow any active calling, they did not prevent him from being a member of several clubs or enjoying the friendship of many distinguished people. Along with Thackeray, he was on intimate terms with Anthony Trollope, Tennyson, Lord Houghton, Lord Lytton, George Eliot, Dickens, Robert and Elizabeth Barrett Browning, Alexander William Kinglake, George Cruikshank, Alphonse de Lamartine, Franz Liszt, George Du Maurier, the royal family, and the shah of Persia, and he took great pains to see them introduced to his daughter Eleanor, who married Tennyson's son Lionel in 1878. In the meantime Lady Charlotte had died on 26 April 1872, and she was buried at Kensal Green. On 6 July 1874 Locker married his second wife, the children's writer Hannah Jane Lampson, the only daughter of Sir Curtis Miranda Lampson, first baronet (1806-1885), of Rowfant, Sussex, and he took the Lampson name in order to succeed to the family estate in 1885. At this time his wife was a more prolific writer than Locker, who was caught up in 'London Lyrics', but he did publish 'Patchwork' in 1879. 
Locker's general characteristics are well summed up by his son-in-law, Augustine Birrell KC, who became his principal biographer. Birrell said that Locker was 'essentially a man of the world; he devoted his leisure hours to studying the various sides of human nature, and drawing the good that he could out of all sorts and conditions of men' (Birrell, appendix to 'The Rowfant Library, a Catalogue'). As a poet he belonged to the school of Matthew Prior, Winthrop Mackworth Praed, and Thomas Hood. His chief endeavour, he said, was to avoid flatness and tedium, to cultivate directness and simplicity both in language and idea, and to preserve individuality without oddity or affectation. Thus, his work is always neat and clear, restrained in its art, and refined in its tone. Many of these characteristics may be glimpsed in the writings of his son, Godfrey Locker-Lampson, the eldest child of his second marriage. Oliver Locker-Lampson (1880-1954), his second son, became a commander in the Royal Navy, a war hero, and a member of parliament. 
Locker lived out his last years at his home, Rowfant, with his wife and children -- for along with Godfrey and Oliver he had two more children, his daughters Dorothy and Maud -- and it was for them that he wrote 'My Confidences', a mix of genealogy and reminiscences of famous people which was published by Birrell after Locker died. Birrell also put together a catalogue of his books, once known as the 'Rowfant library'. The catalogue comprises, in addition to its record of rare Elizabethan and other volumes, many interesting personal and bibliographical memoranda which he had collected, along with his Louis XVI furniture, old masters, Chinese porcelain, and east Asian antiques. After Locker's death at Rowfant on 30 May 1895, an appendix to the 'Rowfant Library' was issued, but the library itself was sold to an American bookseller in 1905 and dispersed. 


@@@@@


doc= 16897


Lockey, Rowland (c.1566-1616), painter and goldsmith, was born in London, the son of Leonard Lockey (died 1613), a crossbow maker and a freeman of the Company of Armourers who lived in Fleet Lane in the parish of St Bride, London. He was apprenticed to Nicholas Hilliard of the Goldsmiths' Company for eight years in 1581, so he was a freeman probably by 1589 and certainly before 1600, when his younger brother Nicholas began an eight-year apprenticeship with him. Rowland Lockey is commended by Richard Haydocke in the preface to 'A Tracte Containing the Artes of Curious Paintinge, Carvinge & Buildinge' (1598), his translation from the original by Giovanni Lomazzo, 'for oil and limning in some measure' (Kurz, 14); he is also mentioned by Francis Meres, in his 'Palladis tamia' (1598), among the eminent artists then living in England, and in Edward Norgate's 'Miniatura', in a list of artists who were competent in the use of crayons, or 'dry colours'. 
Lockey married Martha Juxe of St Bride's at the parish church on 2 February 1602; her father was Thomas Juxe (or Juckes), a freeman of the Grocers' Company practising as an apothecary. Lockey and his wife baptized four children between 1602 and 1608, from the records of which it is known that they were living in the parish of St Martin-in-the-Fields in 1605 and in St Dunstan-in-the-West by 1608. 
Lockey is recognized for his group portraits based on the painting 'The Family of Sir Thomas More' by Hans Holbein the younger made during his first visit to England in 1526-8 (destroyed; drawing, Offentliche Kunstsammlung Basel Kunstmuseum, Kupferstichkabinett); Lockey's painting in oils (1592), at Nostell Priory, Yorkshire, is a close copy. William Burton (1575-1645), the antiquary, wrote that at Lockey's house he: 'once saw a neat piece in oil, containing in one table the picture of Sir John More... and of his wife; and of Sir Thomas More, lord chancellor, his son, and his wife; and of all the lineal heirs male descended from them; together with each man's wife until that present year living. (Kurz, 15)' Although the women are wrongly identified this description corresponds very nearly to the painting (1593) at the National Portrait Gallery, London. It differs from Holbein's original by omitting members of the household who were not blood relatives (except Anne Cresacre, mother of the younger Thomas More) and including the descendants to emphasize their dynastic connection to the Elizabethan Mores and their continued adherence to Catholicism. A miniature of 1593-4 (V&A) shows a garden view not in the two paintings. 
In 1592 Hilliard and Lockey were paid for pictures for Elizabeth, countess of Shrewsbury. After her death her son William Cavendish, first earl of Devonshire, employed Lockey from 1608 to 1613 to paint more than thirty pictures, the majority of them copies, for Hardwick Hall, Derbyshire. These may have included Bess of Hardwick; Mary, queen of Scots; and James I (Hardwick Hall). The signed portrait of Lady Margaret Beaufort ('c'.1598) at St John's College, Cambridge, is also a copy by Lockey of an earlier work. A number of miniatures in Hilliard's style have been attributed to Lockey, and he may have designed the title page of the 'Bishops' Bible' (1602). 
John Langton became Lockey's apprentice in 1607 (freeman, 1616) and Raphe Blackmore in 1612; Lockey's stepbrother James Howson (died 1616) was named as an apprentice in his will. In February 1614 Lockey was taken into the livery of the Goldsmiths' Company. He spent his later years in the parish of St Dunstan-in-the-West and was among those who contributed to repairing and redecorating the church in 1615. He died within the parish in March 1616 and was buried in his old parish, St Bride's, on 26 March. 
In his will dated 15 February 1616 Lockey bequeathed everything but specified legacies to his wife, Martha. He left 20's'., to 'make him a Ringe', to John Davies of Hereford, who wrote a poem in his praise (epigram 258 in 'The Scourge of Folly', 1611); Lockey painted his portrait, now lost but possibly that engraved for Davies's 'The Writing Schoolemaster' (1636). 
He left his brother Nicholas 'all my Italian Printes and all my plasters' and the lease of the family home in Fleet Lane. In a lawsuit of 1617 Nicholas describes himself as a citizen and armourer of London but 'useinge and professinge for his livinge... the Arte and skill of lymeinge and drawinge of pictures' (Edmond, 97). A portrait (1620) of John King, bishop of London, attributed to Nicholas Lockey was engraved by Francis Delaram; there are at least eight known paintings of this type. He was still active in 1624. 


@@@@@


doc= 16898


Lockey, Thomas (1602?-1679), librarian and Church of England clergyman, was born to unknown parents, probably in 1602. He obtained a king's scholarship at Westminster School and in 1618 was elected to Christ Church, Oxford. He contributed to the Oxford collection of verses on the death of Queen Anne in 1619. He matriculated at Christ Church on 16 March 1621, graduated BA on 18 May 1622, and proceeded MA on 20 June 1625 and BD on 12 June 1634. Lockey was vicar of East Garston, Berkshire, until 1633, and he or a namesake held the prebendal stall of Thorney in Chichester Cathedral from 1639 to 1642, but he resided at Oxford, where he was noted as a college tutor and a preacher. It was his manuscript copy of Thomas Hobbes's 'Human nature' which Francis Bowman used to print a surreptitious edition of the work in 1650. In January 1651 a sermon preached by Lockey before the university offended the parliamentary visitors, and led to a ban on his preaching and deprivation of his tutorship. He thereupon left Oxford until the Restoration. 
On 21 July 1660 Lockey was made prebendary of Beminster Prima, and on 17 August of Alton Pancras, both in Salisbury Cathedral. On 28 September 1660 he was elected librarian of the Bodleian Library; two months later he proceeded DD. Lockey won the good opinion of visitors by his courtesy, but, according to Anthony Wood, was 'not altogether fit for that office' ('Life and Times', 1.335). Thomas Hearne wrote that he designed the catalogue of John Selden's vast library ('Remarks', 2.40). In a letter dated 15 July 1664 he wrote to Archbishop Sheldon of this 'accession of about 30,000 Authors, [that] I have by mine owne paynes disposed of in a Catalogue, to be inserted afterward in the general' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Tanner 338, fol. 180). His work was not well done or brought to completion, however, and his successor was left to employ others to catalogue the Bodleian afresh. On 8 September 1665 he received Clarendon, the chancellor of Oxford, and Clarendon's guest, the earl of Manchester, chancellor of Cambridge University, on their visit to the library, and delivered a Latin speech. This was his last function as librarian; he resigned the post on 29 November. 
When abroad in 1663, Lockey had been nominated to the fifth stall of Christ Church Cathedral, but was not installed until 12 July 1665; he exchanged it for the fourth stall on 6 July 1678; he had given $100 towards the rebuilding of Wolsey's quadrangle in 1660. Lockey died of a 'surfeit of cherries' on 29 June 1679 and was buried in the north transept of Christ Church Cathedral on 7 July. His epitaph says that, 'though he had been twice to Rome, his own country ever delighted him and his own faith'. Lockey had formed a substantial collection: at his death he had 247 'pictures' (perhaps mostly prints), about eighty 'statues', a quantity of rings and medals, and a telescope 'with some other mathematicall instruments', as well as a choice library of books (valued at $200) (Philip, 'Inventory', 84), all of which he left to his executor, Henry Killigrew, prebendary of Westminster. His goods were valued at a total of $652 13's'. 6died Hearne described him as a very curious, nice man, and 'reckon'd the best in the university for classical learning' ('Remarks', 2.40). 


@@@@@


doc= 16899


Lockhart, David (d. 1845), botanist, who was born in Cumberland, was a gardener in the Royal Gardens, Kew. In 1816 he became the assistant of Christian Smith, the naturalist of the Congo expedition under Captain James Kingston Tuckey. Lockhart escaped with his life, but suffered much from the fever that killed Tuckey and most of his crew. Two years later he was put in charge of the Colonial Gardens at Trinidad, then under the supervision of Sir Ralph Woodford; they were much improved by him. He visited England in 1844 with the view of enriching the Trinidad gardens, but he died in 1845 soon after his return to the island. A genus of orchids was named 'Lockhartia' after him by William Jackson Hooker but, being already named, was subsequently merged as 'Fernandezia'. 


@@@@@


doc= 16900


Lokert, George (c.1485-1547), logician and theologian, was born in Ayr, to John Lokkert and Marion Multray (died 1500). He entered the University of Paris, where he is first referred to in 1504 in the book of receipts of the German nation in the university, the 'nation' to which all Scottish students were assigned. Lokert studied arts, along with his half-brother John, under the Scot David Cranston at the College de Montaigu, and took his master's degree in 1505. In the same year he gave his inaugural lecture as regent in arts. With his theology studies underway he taught arts in the College de Rheims where he gave a full course of three and a half years, before returning to teach arts at Montaigu as a colleague of Noel Beda, John Mair, and David Cranston. In 1514, having taught a course on the 'Sentences' of Peter Lombard, he became bachelor of theology, and in that same year he published his first book, on 'notions', concepts with which we represent the world to ourselves. The book, much the most popular he wrote, went into seven editions during his lifetime. In 1516 he published an important edition of fourteenth-century writings on physics by Buridan, Thimon, and Albert of Saxony, and three years later he prepared the alphabetic table of contents of the fourth edition of Mair's commentary on the 'Sentences', thereby providing evidence for the good relations between himself and Mair. Also in 1519 Lokert was elected prior of the College de Sorbonne, the headquarters of the faculty of theology in the University of Paris. About this time he moved from Montaigu to the College de La Marche, where he lectured on logic; in 1520 he brought out a commentary on Aristotle's 'Posterior Analytics'. In that same year he was awarded a doctorate in theology. 
In 1521 Lokert returned to Scotland to take up a post as provost of the collegiate church of Crichton, in the village of Crichton, 6 miles south-east of Dalkeith. In December of the same year he was incorporated in the University of St Andrews, a move that seems to have been made as preparation for his election in February 1522 as rector of that university. In that post he deployed his skills to effect a grand revision of the examining procedures at the university, a revision that brought St Andrews quite closely into line with Paris practices. Lokert continued to publish works on logic during his three-year period as rector, bringing out in 1523 'De oppositionibus' (on the relations of contradiction, contrariety, and sub-contrariety), and around the same time publishing his 'De terminis' (on the nature and variety of terms). The following year saw his 'De sillogismis', a very detailed investigation of syllogistic reasoning. 
Near the start of 1525 Lokert returned to Paris to resume his fellowship of the College de Sorbonne and his membership of the faculty of theology. In addition he became head of the Scots College in Paris, a shadowy body founded in 1325 by David Moray, who as bishop of Moray had arranged for funds to be provided to enable scholars from his diocese to study in Paris. In January 1526 the then bishop of Moray, Robert Shaw, 'provydit Mr George Lokart, professor of theologie... then resident at Paris, ourseer of the studentis' of the Scots College (Durkan, 'George Lockhart'). Sadly none of the college papers of the period of Lokert's headship have survived. Other aspects of Lokert's work at this time are, however, well documented, especially his involvement in an attempt, masterminded by Noel Beda, administrative head of the faculty of theology, to have certain of Erasmus's works condemned as heretical. Lokert was one of the thirteen members of a commission established by Beda to investigate an attack by Erasmus on Beda. Lokert was in a difficult position, since Erasmus had the support of the king, Francois I, and Lokert no doubt felt his vulnerability as a foreign national criticizing a man whom the king was trying to attract to the newly founded College de France in Paris. 
By this time Lokert had ceased to publish new works, and it may have been the increasingly stressful circumstances at Paris, with bitter in-fighting at the faculty of theology, including potentially lethal charges of heresy, that caused this cessation and led eventually to his return to the west coast of Scotland. For a brief period, from 1533 to 1534, he was archdeacon of Teviotdale, and in March 1534 he was appointed dean of Glasgow, a post he held until his death. As dean he was required to be in Glasgow for six months each year and to preside over chapter meetings. He died on 22 June 1547. In 1542 he had arranged for an anniversary mass for the souls of his parents to be said in the church of St John the Baptist in Ayr; he had also arranged that such a mass be said on his own death for himself and his half-brother John. Additionally, the register of decisions of the Sorbonne for 8 June 1549 records that 'with the consent of all' it was agreed that on the day after Quasimodo Sunday (the Sunday after Easter) an obit was thenceforward to be said for 'our master Loquart' (Durkan, 'George Lockhart'). 
George Lokert was a logician of formidable power, who wrote with great lucidity on highly technical and complex issues. In particular, his analysis of propositions which contain two quantifiers relates in interesting ways to modern problems in logic, and can be used to resolve difficulties which were thought insoluble before the work of Gottlob Frege (1848-1925). But he was also a devout man on the conservative wing of the church. The Reformation and the encroachment of Renaissance humanism must have been deeply distasteful to him. He dedicated himself to the maintenance of the old order, and died some thirteen years before the new order took a firm grip on his native country. 


@@@@@


doc= 16901


Lockhart, Sir George, of Carnwath, Lord Carnwath (c.1630-1689), advocate and judge, seems to have been the second son of Sir James Lockhart (1588/1599-1674) of Lee in Lanarkshire, judge, and his second wife, Martha, daughter of Sir George Douglas of Mordington. His early years are obscure. He may have been the George Lockhart who assented for Lanarkshire to the tender for union in February 1652, and who signed the commission for the negotiation of union six months later, but he has frequently been confused with his brother-in-law, George Lockhart of Tarbrax, also in Lanarkshire. His first definite appearance in the record is at his admission to the bar on 8 January 1656. Perhaps at the instigation of his elder brother William Lockhart (1621?-1675), who had married Oliver Cromwell's niece and was ambassador to France, he was appointed advocate-general to the Commonwealth in June 1658. He was also appointed sheriff of Lanark, and in 1659 he represented Lanarkshire in Richard Cromwell's parliament. After the collapse of the Cromwellian government in Scotland he spent some time in composing a compendium of the law reports of Sir Alexander Gibson of Durie, which came to be widely used by other advocates after the Restoration. 
Whether Lockhart shared his brother's enthusiasm for the Commonwealth is unclear, but it was thanks to his royalist father that Charles II accepted his formal apology for serving the usurper before he was readmitted to the bar on 16 July 1661. He rapidly secured a reputation as the finest pleader of his generation. Sir George Mackenzie of Rosehaugh believed that he could be regarded as 'another Cicero', explaining that his technique was to arrange his arguments in such a way that they supported each other like the stones of an arch ('Works', 1716, 1.7). Sir John Lauder of Fountainhall maintained that when he spoke before his colleagues in court: 'he did so chain us, and with his tongue draw us all after him by the ears, in a pleasant gaping amazement and constraint, that the wonderfull effects of Orpheus' harp in moving the stones, seemes not impossible to ane orator on the stupidest spirit. ('Historical Notices', 1.80)' Gilbert Burnet, bishop of Salisbury, thought Lockhart 'the most learned lawyer, and the best pleader I have ever yet known in any nation' ('Bishop Burnet's History', 1.246). More formal and material recognition of his talents followed. He was knighted in 1663 and was elected dean of the Faculty of Advocates in 1672. Involved in most of the major cases of his time, he had made enough money by 1681 to buy the estates of Braidwood, Dryden, and Carnwath, all in Lanarkshire. It was from the third estate that he took his title as a lord of session when he received the ultimate accolade of his profession on 21 December 1685, being appointed president of the college of justice in succession to Sir David Falconer of Newton. 
It seems clear that Lockhart rose to the top of his profession more by virtue of his abilities than by any political manoeuvring. He had frequently appeared at the bar to defend religious dissidents, like those who had rebelled at Rullion Green in 1666 or had tried to assassinate the archbishop of St Andrews in 1668, and his performance on their behalf had always been as much fearless as eloquent and ingenious. In 1674 he had advised a client to appeal against a decision of the session to parliament. With the king's support, the affronted judges had disbarred Lockhart and his allies only to find that most of the other advocates were ready to withdraw from practice in sympathy. It had taken over a year for the deadlock to be broken and the administration of justice resumed, after which Lockhart had been admitted to the bar for the third time in his career on 28 January 1676. Three years later he had accepted a commission to appear in opposition to the government of the duke of Lauderdale before the king, and he had continued his forthright criticism of the regime as a member of parliament for Lanarkshire in 1681-2. Yet if James VII had thus been given cause to favour his promotion, he had been given less cause by Lockhart's determined defence of the earl of Argyll in 1682 and by his opposition to the toleration of Catholicism in the parliament of 1685-6. He evidently shared the commitment to the reformed faith that typified his home region, and was equally committed (though less typically among the advocates of his time) to doing his best for his clients. 
At an unknown date Lockhart married Barbara Gilmour, possibly the daughter of Sir John Gilmour of Craigmillar (d. 1671), president of the session. Following her death he married, on 2 September 1679, Philadelphia ('b'. 1655), daughter of Philip Wharton, fourth Baron Wharton (1613-1696). They had three children: George Lockhart (1681?-1731), Philip Lockhart (1689?-1715), and a daughter. On 31 March 1689 Lockhart was emerging from an Easter day service in the church of St Giles, Edinburgh, adjacent to the parliament house in which he had spent much of his professional career, when he was approached by John Chiesly of Dalry, a disgruntled litigant. Lockhart nodded and moved on, but Chiesly produced a pistol and shot him in the back. He died within minutes. His widow subsequently married Captain John Ramsey, and died in or after 1717. 


@@@@@


doc= 16902


Lockhart, George, of Carnwath (1681?-1731), Jacobite politician and memoirist, was the elder of two children of Sir George Lockhart of Carnwath (c.1630-1689), lord president of the court of session, and his second wife, Philadelphia ('b'. 1655, died in or after 1717), daughter of Philip, fourth Baron Wharton. His father was a successful lawyer and state servant who was murdered as he left Greyfriars Kirk on 31 March 1689. Lord Wharton intervened soon afterwards to have Lockhart's episcopalian tutor removed, and sent George and his brother, Philip Lockhart, to be educated in the household of Archibald Campbell, tenth earl and later first duke of Argyll, with whose sons, John (later second duke of Argyll) and Archibald (later earl of Ilay and third duke of Argyll), he formed a lifelong friendship. His mother, meanwhile, contracted a secret marriage with John Mair, a former army officer who later turned out to be a bigamist, and subsequently married John Ramsey, son of the former bishop of Orkney, who, with one of Lockhart's guardians, James Lockhart of Cleghorn, embezzled substantial sums from their ward's estate. These experiences apparently estranged him from his mother. In 1695 George exercised his right under Scottish law to choose his own guardians and effectively took control of his estate. One of his first acts was to negotiate his marriage to Euphemia Montgomery (1678?-1738), ninth child of Alexander, ninth earl of Eglinton, which was contracted on 13 April 1697. The marriage was apparently an affective one despite Euphemia's notorious pride and bad temper, and they had fifteen children, of whom eleven survived to adulthood. George managed his estates very ably and was a noted agricultural improver, as well as a modernizer of his main residence of Dryden in Edinburghshire. He also energetically exploited the coal on his estates and was one of the first Scottish mine owners to introduce a steam engine to pump water out of his coal pits. A haughty man assertive of his rights, he was neither an easy neighbour nor a popular landlord. None the less, his astute stewardship pushed the family's income up to $3750 per annum by the 1720s, placing them in the top echelon of Scotland's landed elite in terms of wealth. By 1700, if not earlier, he had also ceased to attend the kirk and become a committed episcopalian, inclining toward the anti-innovatory (later anti-usager) wing of that church. 
Lockhart's ideological beliefs revolved around his conception of himself as a quintessential Scottish patriot; his Jacobitism flowed from his belief that only a Stuart restoration could secure Scotland's independence and put the Scottish nation back in charity with God. Throughout his political career he correspondingly pursued both the return of the exiled dynasty and (from 1707) the restoration of Scotland's independence as though they were one. In the 1702 election he successfully stood as one of the commissioners for Edinburghshire, and was appointed a Scots privy councillor through the influence of his uncle Thomas, fifth Baron Wharton, one of the leaders of the English whig party. In spite of this he increasingly voted against the court in the Scottish parliament and aligned himself with the cavalier (Jacobite) party and the second duke of Hamilton. In December 1704 he was correspondingly dropped from the new commission of the privy council. In 1705, however, his uncle's influence secured him a place on the Scots commission nominated by Queen Anne to negotiate the treaty of Union. Lockhart only reluctantly accepted in order to supply his political allies with information on its deliberations. During the last session of the Scottish parliament he spoke and protested frequently against the 'Act of Union', and by November 1706 was actively involved in conspiracies to oppose it by force. When these came to nothing he retired to his estates and busied himself with horse-racing, hunting, and drafting his 'Memoirs Concerning the Affairs of Scotland', an account of Scottish politics from 1703 to 1708. Despite Hamilton's tergiversations over the Union, Lockhart remained attached to him and was involved in the Hamilton's party's preparations for a Scottish uprising to support the abortive French invasion of 1708. When it failed he escaped imprisonment only through the intervention of Lord Wharton, by then one of Queen Anne's senior ministers. 
In 1708 George successfully stood for Edinburghshire in the first elections to the British parliament and was one of only four Scottish MPs to align themselves with the tory minority at Westminster. Returned again in 1710, he was chosen by the Scots tories to represent them on the commission of accounts established by tory back-benchers in 1711 to expose graft and corruption under the previous whig ministry. Lockhart was a conscientious commissioner and fell out with several former allies as a result. He also played a leading role in lobbying English tory peers to vote in favour of the appeal by James Greenshields, an Episcopalian minister, against a sentence imposed by a kirk session in 1711, and in securing the passage of the 'Episcopalian Toleration and Restoration of Patronages Acts' of 1712. By then Lockhart had established himself as a leader in his own right among the more extreme Jacobite Scottish tories, though he remained personally attached to the duke of Hamilton until his death. In that year Lockhart also first tried to organize an explicitly Jacobite group among the back-bench tories. Though he failed on this occasion, he was increasingly recognized as an important friend by the exiled Stuart court, and was considered for a peerage there in 1713. During the malt tax crisis of that year Lockhart, despite being threatened with imprisonment in the Tower of London by the ministry, sought to use the anger felt by Scottish MPs and peers on the issue to bring on the repeal of the Union, and led a breakaway group in attacks on government legislation in the Commons to support moves to this end in the Lords. He was eventually restrained by instructions to support the ministry from the Jacobite court. Returned again for Edinburghshire in the 1713 election, he refused to align himself with either the Oxford or the Bolingbroke factions struggling for control of the tory party in 1714, and instead tried to exploit the crisis created by the queen's declining health to bring about a Jacobite restoration. He obviously did not achieve this, but, together with Sir John Pakington, MP for Worcestershire, did succeed in drawing together an explicitly Jacobite club of politicians with this as their objective. At this point, however, Sir David Dalrymple of Hailes, a whig and long-standing political enemy, obtained a copy of Lockhart's draft 'Memoirs'. George had loaned his manuscript to John Houston of Houston jun. who, without consulting him, arranged for it to be transcribed. The copyist then made an extra copy which he eventually sold to Dalrymple, who published it. Lockhart's acerbic character sketches, sedition, and indiscretions in the 'Memoirs' alienated friend and foe alike, and he was shunned by his former comrades throughout the election campaign which followed the death of Queen Anne, though he was ultimately never prosecuted because of the difficulty in proving a connection between the illicit copy on which the published version was based and his original text. Facing certain defeat at the poll in 1715, he withdrew at the last minute and thereafter devoted himself to estate management, memoir writing, and Jacobite conspiracy. 
Lockhart was consequently soon engaged in the preparations that preceded the 1715 rising, and, more owing to his public notoriety than his prominence in the Jacobites' plans, was one of the first to be arrested on 18 August. His friendship with the commander-in-chief in Scotland, the second duke of Argyll, secured his release on bail on 2 September, and he immediately resumed his plotting for a rising in the southern lowlands to take place when the Jacobite army at Perth advanced southwards. This resulted in his re-arrest on 13 October when William Mackintosh of Borlum's Jacobite force crossed the Forth, though Lockhart's brother Philip had by that time already led a troop of former officers, servants, and tenants out from Carnwath to join Viscount Kenmuir's rising at Moffat. George was then imprisoned in Edinburgh Castle until mid-January 1716, during which time he became seriously ill, and was released at the behest of the earl of Ilay. 
Lockhart was once more involved in Jacobite plotting by the summer of 1716, but his experiences in 1715-16 and the execution of his brother after the surrender at Preston henceforth made him so cautious about undertaking further attempts without substantial foreign support that he effectively contributed to the sabotaging of the Earl Marischal's rising of 1719 and aborting the projected campaigns of 1726 and 1727. Even so, with most of the leaders of the Scottish Jacobites imprisoned or in exile, he was one of the few active elite Jacobites left, and so quickly became a recognized leader in the Jacobite underground. In 1720 he suggested that James Stuart, the Old Pretender, appoint a committee of trustees to oversee his affairs in Scotland. This was done and Lockhart became its 'de facto' secretary. His main tasks were laying the groundwork for a future rising by fomenting popular discontent with the Union, for example after the Shawfield riots, and trying to keep the peace between rival Jacobite and Episcopalian factions, though he also played a leading role in Scottish tory efforts to negotiate an alliance with either the Argathelians or the squadrone to return tory candidates in the representative peers election of 1722. George tried to avoid becoming aligned with any of the numerous factions that plagued the Jacobite movement at this time, but his efforts to contain their rivalries were hampered by both their intransigence and his own gathering weariness of the twilight world of Jacobite conspiracy. This was further catalysed by Lockhart's distress at the very public quarrel between the Old Pretender and his wife, Clementina Sobieska, and correspondingly eased his passage out of active Jacobitism. This was finally occasioned by the interception of letters from the exiled court directed to him (possibly as a result of indiscretions by those opposed to him in concurrent disputes between usagers and anti-usagers in the Scottish Episcopalian community), followed by the capture of one of his couriers in March 1727. Forewarned by whig friends of his imminent arrest, Lockhart fled to the continent. There he was invited to take up a post at the exiled court, but declined and instead effectively severed his connections with the Jacobite cause by writing a scathing critique of the Old Pretender's conduct, which he directed to him personally. 
Allowed to return to Britain in 1728 at the intercession of Argyll and Ilay, Lockhart spent the next three years putting the finishing touches to his memoirs. These were written up at different times in three books: the 'Memoirs Concerning the Affairs of Scotland'; the 'Commentarys of George Lockhart of Carnwath', which covers the period 1708 to 1715; and 'A Register of Letters twixt the King and George Lockhart of Carnwath', which deals with 1716 to 1728. None was intended for publication within his lifetime, and all deal sharply with the politics and many of the personalities of the period. None the less, they have been found to be surprisingly accurate in almost all respects, and thus constitute one of the best sources for the politics of the era. All three were hidden after Lockhart's death, and came to light only in the early nineteenth century when the antiquary Anthony Aufrere, the husband of one of his descendants, published them in two volumes in 1817. 
Lockhart died at his house in Niddry's Wynd, in Edinburgh, on 17 December 1731 as a result of wounds received in a duel fought on or about 14 December. The cause was not publicly known and his family kept it so secret that historians have no idea of its cause or the identity of his assailant. According to his wish, he was interred in the family vault at Carnwath. Euphemia survived him by seven years, but nothing is known of her life beyond 1731. 


@@@@@


doc= 16903


Lockhart, Sir James, of Lee, Lord Lee (1588/1599-1674), judge, was the only son of Sir James Lockhart of Lee ('b'. 'c'.1553, died in or after 1635) and his second wife, Jane Weir (died 1599), of Stonebyres, Lanarkshire; his parents married in 1588. He himself married first Elizabeth Fairlie and second, probably by 1621, Martha Douglas of Mordington. Sir George Lockhart (c.1630-1689) of Carnwath seems to have been their second son. Lockhart had been knighted before 1629 when he was a gentleman of the privy chamber to Charles I. 
Lockhart was first elected to the Scottish parliament for Lanarkshire in 1628. On 20 June 1633 he was made lord of the articles. The same year his pension was excepted from the act of revocation and his lairdship of Lee confirmed, although his father was still alive, being recorded in December 1635 as being over eighty-two years of age. In 1638 Lockhart was appointed to supervise the subscription of the national covenant in Lanarkshire. He was not elected to parliament in 1641, and his commission was rejected by parliament in June 1644 and January 1645. However, even though he was not a member he engaged in the work of parliamentary interval committees from 1643, including the committee of war. Similarly he was named to the exchequer commission on 29 July 1644. On 2 July 1646 he was made an ordinary lord of session. Lockhart was a moderate royalist who supported the engagement with Charles I, and as 'an able' debater (J. R. Young, 196), he played an important role in the power struggle in March-May 1648, which saw the duke of Hamilton's views prevail over those of the marquess of Argyll. In the engager army Lockhart commanded a regiment at the battle of Preston in August 1648. Following the whiggamore raid and the installation of a more radical government in Edinburgh, Lockhart was deprived of office by the 'Act of Classes' in February 1649 and banished by the 'Act of Estates' in June 1650. His banishment was lifted in December 1650. A supporter of Charles II's invasion of England, he was surprised at Alyth in Perthshire on 28 August 1651 along with other members of the committee of estates and was carried as a captive to Broughty Castle and thence to London. He was confined in the Tower until his son, Sir William Lockhart (1621?-1675), a Cromwellian diplomat, procured his freedom on 27 May 1653. 
Following the Restoration, Lockhart was reappointed a lord of session, although his official appointment dated only from 5 April 1661. He appears to have supported the earl of Crawford's moderate presbyterianism in 1661, but he had little difficulty adapting to the new regime. In parliament he served as a lord of the articles in 1661-3 and was reputed to be one of the few sober men of the so-called drunken parliament. In 1662 he thought it unwise to eject non-episcopalian clergy when there were insufficient numbers of replacements. In 1669 he was again a lord of the articles. Lockhart was named lord justice clerk in 1671. He died on 10 March 1674. 


@@@@@


doc= 16904


Lockhart, John Gibson (1794-1854), writer and literary editor, was born on 12 June 1794 in the manse at Cambusnethan, Lanarkshire, Scotland, the eldest of five children of Dr John Lockhart (1761-1842), minister of the parish church of Cambusnethan, and his second wife, Elizabeth (died 1834), daughter of John Gibson, minister of St Cuthbert's, Edinburgh, and Margaret Mary Pringle. Lockhart had three brothers -- Laurence, Richard Dickson, and Robert -- and one sister, Violet; he also had a half-brother, William, by his father's first wife, Elizabeth Dinwiddie. 
In 1796 Dr Lockhart became minister of the college kirk of Blackfriars in Glasgow, so John Lockhart's formative years were spent in an urban and university atmosphere. He attended the grammar school in Glasgow, and in 1805, at the age of eleven, entered the University of Glasgow, where he excelled as a classical scholar, winning a Blackstone prize in Greek. In 1809 he was awarded a Snell exhibition to Balliol College, Oxford, and in 1813 he gained a first-class degree in classics. He mastered Greek and Latin and also learned German, Italian, Spanish, Portuguese, and French. He returned to Glasgow after taking his Oxford degree, and for two years he had no formal occupation but continued informally his voracious reading and his study of languages. During this period he wrote to his friend Jonathan Christie, several months before Scott's 'Waverley' was published, that 'the Scotch character has been neglected' (Lang, 1.72) in fiction. Lockhart hoped to fill that void with his own Scottish novel. A year later he contacted the publisher Archibald Constable, in Edinburgh, to enquire about publishing his novel of Scottish manners, although his plans did not immediately come to fruition. In 1815 he went to Edinburgh University to read law, and in 1816 he became an advocate. In Edinburgh he connected with the tory literati, particularly Constable's rival publisher, William Blackwood, and Walter Scott. On 29 April 1820 Lockhart married (Charlotte) Sophia (1799-1837), Scott's elder daughter. They had three children: John Hugh (1821-1831), Walter Scott (1826-1853), and Charlotte Harriet Jane (1828-1858). 
Lockhart, who was regarded by his contemporaries as a handsome man, had thick dark hair and was of slight build, with 'Hidalgo airs' (Lang, 1.16). In his youth he had periods of illness and suffered a hearing impairment, which undoubtedly exacerbated a reserved, even shy, personality. He was a tender, compassionate, loving person, who was quick to provide for his friends in need and suffered deeply in his family losses. Yet he was also fun-loving and witty, had a brilliant sense of humour, and enjoyed an opportunity for satire. In his memoir of Scott (1832) James Hogg called Lockhart a 'mischievous Oxford puppy... drawing caricatures of every one who came in contact with him' (Hogg, 75). His intellectual acumen and satirical bent were exercised freely in the early stages of his literary career in writing and editing for 'Blackwood's Edinburgh Magazine'. 
Lockhart began publishing in 'Blackwood's' with the first issue, in 1817. He considerably increased the scope and venom of Hogg's satire of the Edinburgh publishing industry, the 'Chaldee manuscript' (October 1817), which earned him the epithet Scorpion and resulted in a lawsuit against Blackwood. His attacks on Keats and 'Endymion' (August 1818) were so strong that he soon regretted them. He was involved with John Scott, editor of the 'London Magazine', in a dispute over his role in 'Blackwood's' that led to Scott's death in a duel with Lockhart's friend Jonathan Christie. However, by far the majority of Lockhart's articles were incisive, pertinent examinations of a broad range of literary publications of the day, including Greek tragedy and poetry; the poetry of Wordsworth, Coleridge, Goethe, and Byron; the fiction of Godwin and Brockden Brown; and the art of the novel in general. He eventually set the standard in literary criticism for the period. 
Lockhart's first book was a translation from the German of Frederick Schlegel, 'Lectures on the History of Literature' (2 vols., 1818); this was the result of a tour in Germany sponsored by Blackwood, where Lockhart met Goethe and other German writers. Both the tour and Schlegel's lectures had a significant influence on Lockhart's own writing, especially the literary criticism in 'Blackwood's' and his second book-length publication, 'Peter's Letters to his Kinsfolk' (3 vols., 1819). In this work of epistolary fiction Dr Peter Morris, a Welshman, travels to Scotland and connects with the important personages of the age. Penetrating and lively character sketches are the highlights of his letters to friends and relatives in Wales. As one of the most important chronicles of early nineteenth-century life in Scotland 'Peter's Letters' can be seen as the 'biography of a culture' (Hart, 46). 
Lockhart served for a short time in the yeomanry, and in 1820 was called to service to confront the radical uprisings in the west of Scotland. However, even his military service became an occasion for humorous, satirical poetry; written over a period of about four years, 'Songs for the Edinburgh Troop' was published in collaboration with Patrick Fraser Tytler in 1825. In 1821 Lockhart toured the northern circuit as an advocate and, as his letters to Sophia attest, collected scenes and characters for his fiction. The five years from 1821 to 1825 were among the most productive of his career. He published four new novels and revised one for a second edition, experimenting with a variety of techniques and themes; he edited, with notes and a life of Cervantes, Motteux's translation of 'Don Quixote' (5 vols., 1822); he published a collection of translations of Spanish poetry ('Ancient Spanish Ballads', 1823); he began his biography of Robert Burns, although it was not published until 1828; and he wrote more than 100 articles, review essays, and original poems for 'Blackwood's'. 
Lockhart's first novel, 'Valerius: a Roman Story' (1821), draws heavily on his classical education. Critics such as Andrew Lang and F. R. Hart admired its vivid and realistic portrayal of ancient Rome, yet the work is much more than a successful historical novel. Set in the context of the persecution of Christians under the rule of Trajan, 'Valerius' balances the good-humoured, sympathetic characters and images of classical Rome with scenes of inhumane and irrational treatment of good, well-meaning, but misunderstood Christians. The effect, though not recognized in Lockhart's time, was to offer a metaphor of reason and moderation to the early nineteenth-century covenanting debate instigated by Sir Walter Scott in 'Old Mortality' and taken up by James Hogg, John Galt, and others. Lockhart's second novel, 'Some Passages in the Life of Mr Adam Blair' (1822; 2nd edn, 1824), is generally regarded as his best. Based on a true story that Lockhart heard from his father, it is a bold portrayal of passion and adultery in the keeper of community virtue, the Presbyterian minister. It is also an unusual story of compassion, forgiveness, and restoration. Henry James, in 'Hawthorne', compared 'Adam Blair' with 'The Scarlet Letter', noting the analogies between the two and proclaiming each the 'masterpiece' of the author (Lockhart's 'Life of Scott' aside): 'Each man wrote as his turn of mind impelled him, but each expressed something more than himself'. An 'interesting and powerful little tale', Adam Blair: 'borrows a charm from the fact that [Lockhart's] vigorous, but not strongly imaginative, mind was impregnated with the reality of his subject. He did not always succeed in rendering the reality... But the reader feels that his vision was clear, and his feeling about the matter very strong and rich. (James, 112)' 
'Reginald Dalton' (1823) is Lockhart's Oxford novel; though not strictly autobiographical it draws heavily on his experiences as a student at Oxford, filtered through a decade of experience and remembering. 'The History of Matthew Wald' (1824), Lockhart's most ambitious and stylistically satisfying novel, is the story of a character's psychological journey through fragments of eighteenth-century Scottish life. More than any of his works 'Matthew Wald' probes the internal development of the human mind and soul as the protagonist interacts with and is influenced by the social circumstances in which he finds himself. 
In December 1825 Lockhart moved to London to be editor of the 'Quarterly Review', a position that he held until a year before his death. The 'Quarterly' had been established by John Murray in 1809 as a tory voice to counter the whig 'Edinburgh Review'. Lockhart's 'Blackwood's' experience had matured him as a critic and prepared him well for his editorial duties. He was a very active editor (sometimes to the displeasure of his authors) and shaped the 'Quarterly' into one of the most important periodicals of the late nineteenth century. Thomas Carlyle, who never published in the 'Quarterly', expressed his high regard for Lockhart's judgement even after 'Chartism' was rejected for publication in the review: 'I consider that your decision about that wild piece... was altogether what it should have been, what on the whole I expected it to be. Fraser is printing the thing now as a separate Pamphlet. Your negative was necessary to decide me as to that step... One has an equation with more than one unknown quantity in it; eliminate the 'Quarterly' 'y', there remains 'x' = printing as a pamphlet. ('Collected Letters', 11.230)' Lockhart was editor of the 'Quarterly' during the critical periods of debate on such major political issues as the Catholic question, the 'Reform Bill' of 1832, and corn law reform. Although many of the political articles were written by John Wilson Croker and Robert Southey, Lockhart successfully accomplished what he saw as his responsibility to keep it from falling into the hands of one tory faction or another. He enjoyed the politics of reviewing; he regularly attended parliament when it was in session and at one time even aspired to a seat in the House of Commons. In May 1830 he wrote to Scott for his advice: 'One can hardly live so continually among those gamesters as I have been doing without wishing to take a hand sometimes' (NL Scot., MS 3913, fols. 112-15). Lockhart noted that his income was $5000 per annum, which meant that he was capable of an independent voice. Although he never held public office, in 1843 he was made auditor of the duchy of Lancaster, a government patronage position that provided an annual income of $400. 
Lockhart also wrote for the 'Quarterly' and published an article or more in most of the issues under his twenty-eight-year editorship. He reviewed fiction and poetry, as well as historical and general interest works. In 1841 he published an article on copyright that had a significant influence on the development of copyright laws. The majority of his reviews focused on biographies, including such diverse subjects as Byron, Edmund Kean, Hannah More, David Wilkie, and Astley Cooper. He was also editor for many works published by John Murray, including all but the scientific volumes of the 'Family Library', for which he wrote the first number for the series, a two-volume biography of Napoleon (1829), a digest, or 'compendium', of Scott's 'Life of Napoleon' (1827). He was largely responsible for editing and writing notes for Murray's seventeen-volume edition of Byron's works (1833) and oversaw the publication of the series of historical and travel volumes published by Murray in the 1840s, the 'Colonial and Home Library'. The esteem in which Lockhart was held for his contributions to the literary achievements of the house of Murray is best expressed by Whitwell Elwin, whom John Murray asked to succeed Lockhart as editor of the 'Quarterly' and who was author of a collection entitled 'Lives of the Poets'. Elwin wrote to Murray: 'It might look like an attempt to bend the bow of Ulysses, or rather it would look like the assumption of being able to shoot with him' (John Murray archive, NL Scot.). 
Lockhart's best-known work, however, is his biography of Sir Walter Scott (7 vols., 1837-8; 2nd edn, rev., 10 vols., 1839; abridged and rev., 2 vols., 1848). From its publication it has been regarded, along with Boswell's 'Life of Johnson', as one of the most important works in the history of biography. In preparing the life of Scott, Lockhart collected personal anecdotes and letters from many of Scott's friends and acquaintances and added to them his own intimate knowledge of the man and his works to portray with the power of a successful novelist a character in vivid scenes of place and time. Though modern criticism has pointed out inaccuracies in Lockhart's details and considered his portrait of Scott idealized it is clear none the less that he attempted to present the near heroic regard in which Scott was held in his time. As Maria Edgeworth wrote to Lockhart in 1838: 'We thought it impossible any publication could raise Sir Walter Scott's talents or character in public opinion or in our private opinion more especially. And yet you certainly have done it without one word of puff or exaggeration or even full-faced eulogy. (NL Scot., MS 923, no. 57)' With his health failing and his eyesight growing weaker, Lockhart resigned the editorship of the 'Quarterly Review' in 1853. He travelled to Italy in October for the winter months to try to recover his health, but he experienced only a brief revival of his energies. He had what a doctor described as not a 'distinct disease' but a 'general decadence of the vital powers' (Lochhead, 298). He had known much loss over the previous two decades: the deaths of his wife, two of his children, his sister, his parents, all his wife's siblings, and his father-in-law. He spent the last weeks of his life at Abbotsford, Selkirkshire, Sir Walter Scott's estate on the River Tweed, in Scotland, with his daughter Charlotte Hope-Scott and her family. Charlotte was the only Lockhart child to marry or have children. In 1847 she had married James Robert Hope; they lived at Abbotsford, and after the death of Sir Walter Scott's son Walter they took the name Scott, as Charlotte was the last living lineal descendant of her grandfather. Lockhart died at Abbotsford on 25 November 1854; he was buried in Dryburgh Abbey, at the feet of Sir Walter Scott, as he had wished. 


@@@@@


doc= 16905


Lockhart, Laurence William Maxwell (1831-1882), novelist, was born in Inchinnan, Renfrewshire, the third son of the Revd Laurence Lockhart of Milton Lockhart, Lanarkshire ('b'. 1796), and his wife, Louisa, daughter of David Blair, an East India merchant of Glasgow. John Gibson Lockhart (1794-1854) was his uncle and his brother was the army officer Sir William Stephen Alexander Lockhart (1841-1900). In 1841 he was sent to school at Newington House, Edinburgh. After two or three years he returned home and was educated privately until he entered Glasgow University in 1845. He stayed there, with a year's interval, until 1850, when he entered Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge. He graduated BA in 1855 and MA in 1861. 
On 9 February 1855 Lockhart received a commission as ensign in the 92nd regiment (Gordon Highlanders). He joined his regiment at Edinburgh, went with it to Gibraltar, and landed at Balaklava on 15 September 1855. He was made lieutenant on 4 October and that winter he served at the siege of Sevastopol. The regiment returned to Gibraltar in May 1856, and Lockhart went to England on sick leave in 1857 and joined the depot in Scotland. During 1859 and 1860 he held a regimental appointment at Reigate, Surrey, and afterwards at Cambridge. In 1862 he joined his regiment in India, where it had been sent in 1858. He returned with it to England in 1863 and was promoted captain on 19 January 1864. He retired from the army in 1865. 
In March 1860 Lockhart had married Katherine Anne Russell (died 1870), daughter of Sir James Russell, of Ashiestiel, and his wife, Mary, daughter of Sir James and Lady Helen Hall of Dunglass. They had several children. Since his retirement he had been contributing to 'Blackwood's Edinburgh Magazine', and his first novel, 'Doubles and quits', was serialized there before being republished in its entirety in 1869. It was a light-hearted military comedy of errors which received mixed reviews. Personally, Lockhart was a renowned mimic, but Frederick Locker-Lampson describes him as in appearance and bearing also 'the typical horsey dragoon' (Locker-Lampson, 314-15). 
In the spring of 1870 Lockhart's wife died, and on 7 June he entered the 2nd Royal Lanark militia as major. In July he was appointed the 'Times' correspondent for the Franco-Prussian War. He was with the French army at the battle of Forbach, where he was frequently arrested and once almost executed owing to the fear of spies that the French had. This eventually caused them to ban foreign correspondents from their lines. However, shortly afterwards, Colonel Pemberton was killed by a stray bullet, and Lockhart succeeded him as correspondent with the Germans in the lines before Metz and the villages around Strasbourg. During this period he continued to write fiction. His second novel, 'Fair to See' (1871), and his final one, 'Mine is thine' (1878), were published in the same manner as his first, and each was generally agreed to be an improvement on the one before. 'The Times' (18 September 1878) called him 'humorous and thoughtful' ('The Times', 4). 
Conditions in the army were not good for Lockhart's health, and his chest was weakened. He was promoted lieutenant-colonel of the Lanark militia on 8 April 1877. From 1879 until his long-foreseen death he sought warm climates, and he died at Menton, France, on 23 March 1882. He was buried in the cemetery there. 


@@@@@


doc= 16906


Lockhart, Philip (1689?-1715), army officer and Jacobite sympathizer, was the younger child of Sir George Lockhart of Carnwath (c.1630-1689), lord president of the court of session, and his second wife, Philadelphia ('b'. 1655, died in or after 1717), daughter of Philip, fourth Baron Wharton. After his father's murder, Lord Wharton had Philip and his elder brother, George Lockhart (1681?-1731), sent to be educated in the household of Archibald Campbell, tenth earl and later first duke of Argyll. His mother subsequently married Captain John Ramsey, son of the former bishop of Orkney, who, with a guardian, James Lockhart of Cleghorn, embezzled substantial sums from George's estate, and presumably Philip's too. Little more is known of Philip's life. A handsome man, though apparently unmarried, he lived with his brother and was almost certainly an episcopalian. He does not appear to have owned any extensive properties. Lockhart served in Lord Mark Ker's regiment during the War of the Spanish Succession, but no record survives of his participation in any battles or campaigns. On Queen Anne's death he retired on half pay and in the summer of 1715 aided his brother in preparations for a Jacobite rising. On 12 October he joined Viscount Kenmure's rising with a troop of horse primarily composed of his brother's tenants and servants from Carnwath, and surrendered with the Jacobite army at Preston on 14 November. He claimed to have resigned his commission, but was court-martialled for desertion and shot on 2 December 1715. He died defiant, refusing to recognize the court that tried him or admit any guilt for his actions. 


@@@@@


doc= 16907


Lockhart, William (1621?-1675), diplomat and army officer, was the eldest son of Sir James Lockhart of Lee (1588/1599-1674) and his second wife, Martha Douglas of Mordington. Unhappy at school at Lanark, he played truant and at the age of thirteen ran away to Leith to sail to the Netherlands and enter the Dutch army. Tall and strong for his age, he was accepted, but soon went on to Danzig, where his relative Sir George Douglas protected him until he died in 1636. Lockhart escorted Douglas's body home from Pomerania, but remained restless and, funded by his mother, travelled across Europe to gain education. Having joined the French army, he caught the queen mother's eye and became captain of horse. 
When William Hamilton, earl of Lanark, raised a cavalry regiment for the covenanters in April 1644, Lockhart returned to Scotland as lieutenant-colonel. He married Margaret (died in or before 1654), daughter of Sir John Hamilton of Orbiston, justice clerk; they had one son. He served against Montrose and with Leslie in England until Charles I's surrender at Newark. The captive king then knighted him unofficially and used him as his emissary to the duke of Hamilton, to request Hamilton's intervention with the Scottish government on behalf of the defeated Montrose. Lockhart was then appointed commander of a cavalry troop on 29 January 1647 and colonel of horse for Lanarkshire on 4 May, serving on the county committee of war. He fought in the army sent against England under Hamilton in 1648 in support of the engagement with Charles I. First sent to Annan to protect Carlisle from Lambert, he then rejoined Hamilton for the Preston campaign. Unhorsed at Preston, he distinguished himself protecting Hamilton's retreat to Wigan and was one of his three commissioners to negotiate surrender at Uttoxeter. He was sent prisoner to Hull, but secured his release a year later on payment of $1000 and did penance in Scotland for supporting the engagement. His recall to service as general of horse on Charles II's arrival proved abortive, as Argyll sought to constrain him through a joint command with Baillie and Montgomery, and he refused to serve on those terms. When Charles invaded England, he offered his services as a volunteer; rejected, he indignantly declared that 'no king on earth should treat him in this manner'. 
In 1652 Lockhart threw in his lot with the English and after an interview with Cromwell in London was appointed a commissioner for justice in Scotland in May, subsequently being trusted to help negotiate the Anglo-Scottish Union. He was one of four Scots who sat in the nominated parliament of 1653 and subsequently represented Lancashire in both Oliver Cromwell's parliaments. He sat on the new commission for administering civil justice from June 1654, and was granted Kelso Abbey. His rise owed most to his surprise second marriage, to Cromwell's widowed niece Robina Sewster on 2 July 1654. There were five sons of the marriage, the eldest called Cromwell, and two daughters. Admitted to the Cromwellian elite, he was appointed to Cromwell's new Scottish council in May 1655 on a salary of $600 p.a. On 31 August he spoke 'very threatening things' to Johnston of Wariston condemning plans of the Protector leadership to promote a new covenant ('Diary of Sir Archibald Johnston', 7). He also became JP for Fife, Kinross, and Lanarkshire, and judge of the exchequer. 
Following the Anglo-French treaty of October 1655 Cromwell sought alliance with France against Spain, and on 29 February 1656 Lockhart was appointed as ambassador to France on a salary of $120 a month. His 'Instructions' required him to arrange a joint campaign in Flanders, preferably financed by France, and to secure protection of Huguenots from Catholic harassment. In France his Presbyterian background and earlier service in the country prompted suspicions about his ability to stir up subversion and he had to form a secret understanding with Mazarin to counteract the deep unpopularity of the negotiations in France, to combat 'devot' intrigue for Franco-Spanish peace, and to persuade the cardinal to surrender Dunkirk to Cromwell. Cromwell indicated his confidence by knighting him on 10 December when he reported back to London. 
The treaty was signed on 3 March 1657, agreeing a joint campaign against Dunkirk with France financing it and surrendering Gravelines as security if that was recaptured first. Lockhart had to accept the free practice of Catholicism in English-controlled territory, and persuaded Cromwell that this concession was essential for their strategic aims. He duly attended the campaign, taking command of the English force when Sir John Reynolds was drowned, and pressurized the dilatory French to carry out their undertakings. Mardyke, the first conquest, was handed over to the English, but was not properly supplied until Lockhart's protests led Cromwell to threaten withdrawal. On 4 June 1658 Lockhart commanded the English army with distinction at the French victory of the Dunes, leading them in a courageous charge up a sandhill, and on Dunkirk's surrender on 15 June he became governor with his own new cavalry regiment added to the garrison. A forceful administrator, he secured local supplies and English military equipment and stopped his zealous troops harassing the Catholic inhabitants. Cromwell sought to use his continental foothold to spread protestantism, and Lockhart secured the services of preachers such as Hugh Peter to assist his chaplain, Fuller, while warning Cromwell 'as Rome was not built in a day, so it will not be pulled down'. He continued to maintain good relations with Mazarin and counteract court intrigues, helped to arrange a joint naval expedition to Italy in 1658, and protested at Huguenot sufferings as in Montauban in 1657 and Nimes in 1658 despite Catholic resentment. He also assisted Cromwell personally in assessing the suitability of Lord Fauconberg as a husband for his daughter Mary. 
Cromwell's death saw no great changes, Lockhart continuing to report to Secretary Thurloe, but Richard Cromwell's deposition weakened English power. Lockhart accepted the restored republican regime, as reported to parliament on 18 May 1659, and returned to London. Despite suspicions of his fidelity he was reappointed ambassador in July on $600 a month and was sent to St Jean de Luz to attend the Franco-Spanish peace talks, though the more reliable Major Tobias Bridge served as his deputy in Dunkirk. But England's usefulness had ceased and he was 'coldly received', at least until Booth's rebellion failed. In October the council of state recalled him. Edmund Ludlow met him by chance at Sir Henry Vane's house in November; he 'very much lamented the divisions that were amongst us, affirming that if they had not provided an obstruction to him... we might have had what terms we could have asked for either from France or Spain'. Meeting Monck on his arrival, he was assured of the general's republicanism and back in Dunkirk ordered his officers to accept whatever arrangements parliament decided. Accordingly he refused large royalist bribes to hand Dunkirk over to Charles II, and loyally refused similar inducements from Mazarin, who purportedly promised him the title of marshal of France. 
With the restoration of Charles II, Lockhart was superseded at Dunkirk by Edward Harley on 31 May 1660, but through the intercession of the earl of Middleton was not proceeded against for his activities. He retired to his Scottish estates, where he was unpopular with his neighbours on account of his Cromwellian connections, and eventually lived with his wife's relations in Huntingdonshire. John Maitland, duke of Lauderdale, secured him royal employment with appointment as a 'secret councillor' for Scotland in September 1670, and a privy councillor in 1674. In June 1671 they secured the office of justice clerk for his aged father, whom he succeeded in 1674. Having raised 1000 men for the forthcoming campaign against Holland, in 1671 he was sent as ambassador to Brunswick and Brandenburg to secure their neutrality or co-operation, in the event unsuccessfully. According to Burnet, he was opposed to this assistance to Catholic France and served 'from a desire to be safe'. In March 1673 he was reappointed envoy to France, taking leave of the king on 1 April, and performed satisfactorily enough to be raised to full ambassadorial rank when he reported to Charles in October. His permission to draw up his own equipage and submit the bill later indicated his known probity. His return was delayed by troubles in his regiment. Back in France he funded the now exiled Clarendon. By April 1675 the duke of Monmouth was commiserating on news of his 'indisposition', and he died early in June. A later story attributed his demise to a pair of poisoned gloves, but Burnet reported that he had been 'languishing' and depressed at his mission for some time. His body was returned to Scotland on the yacht 'Merlin' for burial, after long delays occasioned by bad weather. His wife survived him. 
A 'gallant and sober person', according to Evelyn, adventurous in youth, and a courageous officer, Lockhart was also a skilful diplomat and a capable governor, loyal beyond expectations of personal advancement in 1660 and a lifelong promoter of international protestantism. An unapologetic careerist in developing his Cromwellian family connection, his fulsome flattery of Louis XIV and obsequious letters are also notable. 


@@@@@


doc= 16908


Lockhart, William (1819-1892), Roman Catholic convert and Rosminian priest, son of the Revd Alexander Lockhart (1788-1831), rector of Stone and Hartwell, Buckinghamshire, and his wife, Martha (died 1872), daughter of William Jacob (1761/2-1851), the statistician, traveller, and politician, was born on 22 August 1819. On his father's side he was a descendant of Alexander Lockhart, Lord Covington, and a cousin of John Gibson Lockhart. After education at Bedford grammar school he matriculated from Exeter College, Oxford, on 17 May 1838, and graduated BA in 1842. While still an undergraduate he felt the attraction of the Roman Catholic church, and confided his difficulties to his mother's friend H. E. Manning, who advised him, on graduating, to join the community at Littlemore then being established by J. H. Newman. However, he continued to be unsettled, and though he had promised Newman to wait for three years before making any move, he was received into the Roman Catholic church at Loughborough on 26 August 1843. He was the first of the Tractarians who went over to Rome, and the much publicized secession prompted Newman to resign his cure at Littlemore and to deliver his valedictory sermon, 'The parting of friends', in which Lockhart is disguised under the character of Orpah. 
Lockhart was received into the church by Luigi Gentili of the Institute of Charity, founded by Antonio Rosmini. He entered the same order at Ratcliffe College, Leicestershire, on 29 August 1843 and was ordained there on 19 December 1845; his mother had become a Roman Catholic earlier that year. Based at Ratcliffe until 1853, he travelled widely throughout England, Scotland, and Ireland as a missioner and retreat-giver. 
In 1854 Lockhart established a permanent mission at Kingsland in north London. In 1873 he was instrumental in acquiring for his order the disused church of St Etheldreda's, Ely Place, Holborn, originally built in the thirteenth century as the domestic chapel of the bishops of Ely. He remained at St Etheldreda's as rector until his death, though from 1881 he wintered in Rome as procurator for his order. Through the connection of his father's sister, the marchesa de Riario-Sforza, he had an entree to the Roman curia, and was frequently consulted by the pope on English affairs, but diffidence prevented him from seeking or obtaining high preferment. 
While at Littlemore, Lockhart had assisted Newman in the translation of Fleury's 'Ecclesiastical History' and begun the life of St Gilbert of Sempringham, later completed by J. D. Dalgairns. As a writer he is best known for his work on Rosmini, whose teaching he expounded in 'A Short Sketch of Modern Philosophies' (1882). In 1886 he published the second volume of a voluminous 'Life of Antonio Rosmini-Serbati', the first volume of which, by G. S. MacWalter, had appeared in 1883. As editor of 'Catholic Opinion' from 1867 to 1873, and of 'The Lamp' from 1871, he was a prolific journalist. He published three works of Catholic apologetics, and at the time of Newman's death in 1890 contributed reminiscences of the cardinal to several journals, including the 'Paternoster Review'. He was most influential, however, as a preacher and pastor, and was an ardent apostle of total abstinence. Lockhart died of heart failure at St Etheldreda's on 15 May 1892 and was buried at Ratcliffe College on 20 May. 


@@@@@


doc= 16909


Lockhart, William Ewart (1846-1900), painter, was born on 18 February 1846 at Eaglesfield, Dumfriesshire, the illegitimate son of Ann Lockhart ('b'. 1823), a domestic servant, and Thomas Ewart (1823-1881), a farm labourer. Raised by his maternal grandparents in Annan, at the age of fourteen he enrolled at the Trustees' Academy, Edinburgh. Lockhart also attended life classes at the Royal Scottish Academy where he was a pupil of Robert Scott Lauder and John Blake MacDonald. Lockhart contracted tuberculosis in 1863 and spent eighteen months recovering in Australia, thereafter spending most winters abroad. Spain became the inspiration of some of his best work, such as 'The Cid and the Five Moorish Kings' (watercolour version exh. Edinburgh International Exhibition, 1886; Perth City Art Gallery) and 'The Swineherd' (oil; exh. Royal Scottish Academy, 1885; McManus Galleries, Dundee). 
Lockhart settled in Edinburgh, and on 5 February 1869 married Mary Blake Will (1846-1934), his tutor's niece; they had four daughters and a son. He was a visitor at the Royal Scottish Academy, and became an associate of the academy in 1871 and a member in 1878. His reputation as a watercolourist rests mainly on his scenes of the Scottish east coast though nowhere is his expertise in this medium better seen than in 'Durham' (exh. Royal Scottish Academy, 1882; priv. coll.). However, the landscape painter John MacWhirter wrote in his obituary of Lockhart that 'He excelled in nearly all branches -- landscape, portraiture and semi-historical subjects. His manner was broad and daring in colour, but he could also be very minute and refined, especially in his architectural works' (MacWhirter). A number of Lockhart's works were reproduced as illustrations to editions of Scott, Burns, and Stevenson. 
Lockhart executed over four hundred paintings, twenty-nine of which were exhibited at the Royal Academy. He was made a member of the Society of Painters in Water Colours in 1878, and of the Royal Society of Engravers in 1881. He was president of the Scottish Arts Club from 1883 to 1888, and was the Royal Scottish Academy's representative as a trustee of the British Institution at the time of his death. In 1884 Lockhart moved to London, but was in Edinburgh in 1886 to escort Queen Victoria around the International Exhibition, which contained three of his best Spanish works, including 'Gil Blas and the Archbishop of Granada' (oil; exh. RA, 1879; NG Scot.). In 1887 the queen commissioned him to paint 'The Golden Jubilee Service in Westminster Abbey' (oil; Royal Collection), his most ambitious work, measuring 92 by 120 inches and containing 278 individual portraits. It took him three years to complete, but the trials of organizing sittings and of obtaining samples of fabrics and uniforms undermined his health. The picture was reproduced in photogravure and the sketch of it was bought by the French government. It brought him popularity as a portraitist: 'Speaker Peel' (oil; exh. RA, 1892), which won a medal at the Paris Salon of 1895, and 'A. J. Balfour' (oil; exh. Royal Scottish Academy, 1898; Glasgow Museums and Art Galleries) were two of his most acclaimed portraits. Lockhart was bitterly disappointed that he was not knighted for his royal service. Depression led to his admittance to Bethlem Hospital, where he died of pneumonia on 9 February 1900. He was buried in Brookwood cemetery, Woking, on 14 February. 


@@@@@


doc= 16910


Lockhart, Sir William Stephen Alexander (1841-1900), army officer, was born in Milton Lockhart, Lanarkshire, on 2 September 1841, fourth son of the Revd Lawrence Lockhart of Wicketshaw and Milton Lockhart, and his first wife, Louisa, daughter of David Blair, an East India merchant, and nephew of John Gibson Lockhart. His three elder brothers were John Somerville Lockhart, Major-General David Blair Lockhart of Milton Lockhart, and Laurence William Maxwell Lockhart, the novelist. Lockhart was educated at the University of Glasgow before starting a military career. In 1864 he married Caroline Amelia, daughter of Major-General E. Lascelles Dennys; in 1888 he married his second wife, Mary Katherine, daughter of Captain William Eccles, who survived him. 
Lockhart entered the Indian army as an ensign on 4 October 1858 at the age of seventeen, joining the 44th Bengal native infantry. He was promoted lieutenant (19 June 1859), captain (16 December 1868), major (9 June 1877), lieutenant-colonel (6 April 1879), brevet colonel (6 April 1883), major-general (1 September 1891), lieutenant-general (1 April 1894), and general (9 November 1896). 
Lockhart served in Oudh during the Indian mutiny with the 5th fusiliers in 1858-9, and then as adjutant of the 14th Bengal lancers in the Bhutan campaigns from 1864 to 1866. During the latter he distinguished himself on a reconnaissance to Chirung, demonstrating his skill at hill warfare, keen eye for ground, and skill at outpost and scouting duty. His services were acknowledged by the government of India. 
In the Abyssinian expedition of 1867-8 Lockhart was aide-de-camp to Brigadier-General J. Merewether, commanding the cavalry brigade, and taking part in the action of Arogee and the capture of Magdala. He was mentioned in dispatches. 
Lockhart was then appointed deputy assistant quartermaster-general with the Hazara field force, under Brigadier-General Alfred Thomas Wilde, during the Black Mountain expedition in 1868, for which he was mentioned in dispatches. Shortly afterwards he was awarded the bronze medal of the Royal Humane Society for rescuing two women from drowning in the Morar Lake, Gwalior, on 26 December 1869. 
Lockhart served ten years on the staff and was appointed successively deputy assistant and assistant quartermaster-general in the Bengal army. He also served twice in Achin in Sumatra between 1875 and 1877, the second time as military attache to the Dutch army, when he participated in the assault and capture of Lambadde, for which he was mentioned in dispatches, offered the Netherlands order of William, which he was not allowed to accept, and received the Dutch war medal and clasp. He contracted malaria, however, and returned to Singapore seriously ill. 
During the Second Anglo-Afghan War (1878-80) Lockhart was initially appointed road commandant in the Khyber Pass, safeguarding it from attack by the Afridis, then, in November 1879, assistant quartermaster-general at Kabul. He fought at Mir Karez, Takht-i-Shah, and around Kabul under Sir Frederick Roberts in December 1879, and was subsequently deputy adjutant and quartermaster-general to Sir Donald Stewart commanding in northern Afghanistan, returning to India through the Khyber Pass in August 1880. Lockhart was mentioned in dispatches and made a CB (military division). 
Lockhart was deputy quartermaster-general in the intelligence branch at headquarters between 1880 and 1885, apart from a trip to Achin to rescue the crew of the 'Nisero' in 1884. He then commanded the 24th Punjab infantry, but in June 1885 was appointed an envoy under the foreign department on a political mission to Chitral. He commanded a brigade during the pacification of Upper Burma from September 1886 to March 1887, for which he was mentioned in dispatches, thanked by the government of India, and made a KCB and a CSI. 
On his return to India, Lockhart commanded a second-class district in Bengal, but a severe attack of malaria compelled him to return home. For six months he was employed at the India Office preparing an account of his explorations in central Asia, and in April 1889 was appointed assistant military secretary for Indian affairs at the Horse Guards. Lockhart returned to India in November 1890 to command the prestigious Punjab frontier force, first as brigadier-general and then as major-general, until March 1895. He conducted a succession of punitive military expeditions against the transborder Pathan peoples inhabiting the hills bordering the Punjab, establishing a reputation as the Indian army's foremost expert on frontier warfare. Lockhart commanded the Miranzai field force in January and February 1891, the 3rd brigade of the Hazara field force in March and April, and the Miranzai field force again from April to June. He was mentioned in the governor-general's dispatch and was promoted major-general. Lockhart then commanded the Isazai field force in 1892 and the Waziristan expedition in 1894-5, was again mentioned in dispatches by the government of India, and was made a KCSI. In 1895 he was given the Punjab command. 
In 1897 Lockhart was placed in command of the 40,000 strong Tirah expeditionary force, after Afridis attacked British outposts along the north-west frontier during the most serious outbreak of resistance to British rule in India since the mutiny. During the difficult extended fighting in the inaccessible mountains of Tirah, he skilfully conducted punitive operations against elusive Afridi and Orakzai fighters, armed with modern rifles. Though for the most part consisting of guerrilla warfare, the campaign also included such bitterly contested engagements as the attack at Dargai and the withdrawal of the 2nd division down the Bara valley. For his services he received the thanks of the government of India, was made a GCB, and succeeded Sir George White as commander-in-chief in India in 1898. Lockhart was plagued by ill health, however, from diseases contracted during earlier military campaigns, and finally died at his residence, the Treasury Gate, Fort William, Calcutta, from malaria, complicating gout, on 18 March 1900. He was buried the following day at Fort William military cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 16911


Lockier, Francis (bap. 1669, d. 1740), dean of Peterborough, son of William and Hannah Lockier of Norwich, was born there and baptized at St Mary-in-the-Marsh, Norwich, on 25 March 1669. He was educated at the city grammar school under John Burton, and on 9 May 1683 was admitted subsizar of Trinity College, Cambridge, graduating BA in January 1687, MA in 1690, and DD in 1717, on the occasion of the visit of George I. On his first trip to London he 'thrust himself' into Will's to see the wits, and on his second visit to the coffee house contrived by a timely illustration to ingratiate himself with Dryden, whose friendship he retained throughout life (Malone, 1.478-9). 
Lockier accompanied Sir Paul Rycaut to the Hanse towns, and acted as chaplain and secretary to Lord Molesworth while he was in the Low Countries. For some years Lockier was chaplain to the English factory at Hamburg, and made an annual journey to Hanover to cultivate the acquaintance of George I. He mixed much in the world, was a good judge of character, knew the chief continental languages, and was brimful of anecdote. On the nomination of the archbishop of York, to whom the benefice had lapsed, he held (1693-1740) the valuable rectory of Handsworth, near Sheffield, and for nine years (1731-40) he was, by the gift of the earl of Holdernesse, rector of the adjoining parish of Aston. Through the personal favour of George I, to whom he was chaplain-in-ordinary, Lockier was appointed in March 1725 to the deanery of Peterborough, and he retained all his preferments until his death. When unable to reside regularly at Handsworth he engaged the services of a clerk in orders. He made some provision for the education of the poor in Handsworth, and while he was dean $600 was expended from the chapter revenues in removing the Benedictine arrangement, which extended two bays into the nave, and in fitting up the eastern section of the church as the ritual choir, leaving the lantern and transepts outside it. A further sum of $500 was spent on extensive repairs to the organ. 
From 21 July 1726 Lockier was a member of the Gentlemen's Society at Spalding, and he communicated an account of Sir Isaac Newton to this antiquarian society, which was later printed in Nichols's 'Literary Anecdotes' (1812-15, 6.101-2), and in Nichols's 'Illustrations of Literature' (1817-58, 4.17-18). His only publication was a sermon before the House of Commons on 31 January 1726. A rhyming account of the contemporary clergymen around Sheffield speaks of him as 'debonaire and civil, well read, and made complete by travel'. 
Lockier died in Peterborough on 17 July 1740 and was buried in the cathedral, where a tablet at the entry from the south choir aisle into the eastern chapel was erected. He bequeathed to Bishop Zachary Pearce his excellent library, except such books as the bishop already owned, which were given to the chapter library at Peterborough. He left a manuscript book of anecdotes which was burnt in accordance with his will, but several of his reminiscences of his friends Dryden and Pope were published in Joseph Spence's 'Anecdotes, Observations, and Characters, of Books and Men' (1820, 58 ff.). 


@@@@@


doc= 16912


Lockman, John (1698-1771), author and translator, was baptized on 3 March 1698 at St Paul's, Covent Garden, the son of Gerrard Lockman (died 1714) and his wife, Sarah (died 1742). According to his own statement he was born and spent his infancy in Petersham, Surrey ('London Magazine', 1735, 41), but most of his life was spent in London. It is not known where he went to school or what was his earliest occupation, but it is said that by dint of hard private study he became a tolerable scholar and learned to speak French by frequenting Slaughter's Coffee House (Hawkins, 516n.). On 11 November 1725 he married Mary Boucher at St Peter-le-Poer Church, Bishopsgate. 
In 1726 Lockman published 'A Description of the Temple of Venus at Cnidus', translated from the French, and over the following years he translated works of the marquise de Lambert, La Fontaine, Desfontaines, Le Sage, Marivaux, and King Stanislaus, as well as three substantial volumes of French travel writing. It was probably owing to his translation of Voltaire's 'La Henriade' (1728) that, to Johnson's irritation, he was called ''l'illustre Lockman'' in France (Boswell, 'Life', 4.6), though Lockman's 'Henriade' (1732), in very flat blank verse with copious anti-Roman Catholic notes, was less successful than his translations of Voltaire's 'Lettres philosophiques' ('Letters Concerning the English Nation', 1733) and 'Siecle de Louis XIV' ('An Essay on the Age of Lewis XIV', 1739). His translation of Charles Poree's Latin 'Oration' on whether the stage is a school for virtue (1734) was dedicated to Alexander Pope. 
Lockman was one of the team who, for 25's'. a sheet ($1.25 for four printed folio pages), compiled the 'General Dictionary, Historical and Critical', in ten folio volumes (1734-41), which incorporated Lockman's 'new and accurate translation' (BL, Add. MS 4254, fol. 116) of Bayle's 'Dictionnaire', as well as other articles by Lockman. Equally successful and more popular compilations by Lockman were his histories of England and of Rome in the form of question and answer, with parallel text in French and English, which were used as school books until long after their author's death: the copyright of his 'History of England' was worth over $100 in 1787 and its twenty-fifth edition appeared in 1811. It was said, perhaps with some exaggeration, that Lockman translated 'with general accuracy, more books for half a century together than any man of his time' ('GM', 314). 
Between 1730 and 1767 Lockman wrote about twenty separately published occasional complimentary poems, as well as others in newspapers and magazines; also he wrote songs for the theatre, prologues, and epilogues, usually for good causes. His more substantial theatrical works were 'David's Lamentation', an oratorio with music by William Boyce (1736), and 'Rosalinda', a musical drama with music by John Christopher Smith (1740), to which was prefixed an enquiry into the rise of operas and oratorios. 
Between 1756 and 1762 Lockman fruitlessly circulated proposals to publish his poems by subscription, though he assured Thomas Birch that this was 'not (Heaven be Praised) the effect of necessity' (BL, Add. MS 4312, fol. 233). Appointment as secretary to the council of the Free British Fishery, incorporated in 1750, had perhaps met Lockman's necessities: it certainly provided his motive for prose and verse pamphlets on the importance of the white herring fishery in 1750-51, and presents of verses and herrings to the future George III when he was governor of the Free British Fishery. In 1734 Lockman had complained to Birch of 'unmerited rebuffs from the world' and being 'compelled to labor day and night' (BL, Add. MS 4312, fol. 221), but, thanks, one supposes, to income from his fishery appointment and buoyant sales of the histories by question and answer, he published far less new writing after 1750 than before. 
For his gentle and inoffensive manners Lockman was nicknamed the Lamb by his literary acquaintances. Nevertheless, when Thomas Cooke 'abused his poetry to his face' Lockman, 'with a quickness not natural to him, retorted, 'It may be so; but, thank God! my name is not at full length in the DUNCIAD!'' ('GM', 314). Lockman died on 2 February 1771 in Brownlow Street, Long Acre; he was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 16913


Lockwood, Sir Frank (1846-1897), lawyer and politician, the second son of Charles Day Lockwood, stone quarrier at Levitt Hagg, near Doncaster, was born at Doncaster on 15 July 1846. In 1860 the family moved to Manchester, and in 1863 Lockwood entered the grammar school (having been previously at a private school at Edenbridge) under Mr Walker, afterwards headmaster of St Paul's School. In October 1865 he proceeded to Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge, where he took a pass degree in 1869. In 1869, having abandoned the idea of ordination, he entered Lincoln's Inn and he was called to the bar in January 1872. In 1872 he briefly joined the Kendals acting troupe as Daniel Macpherson. He then joined the old midland circuit, and attended sessions at Bradford, Leeds, and other places. During his early days at the bar the habit of drawing he had learned from his father grew upon him, and his rapid sketching in court of judges, witnesses, and litigants gave him occupation and secured him notice. For some of these early sketches he appears to have found a market; but in later life, though he still continued to sketch, he tossed them carelessly away. In September 1874 he married Julia, daughter of Salis Schwabe of Glyn Garth, Anglesey. His practice steadily increased, and from 1879, when, at the request of the presiding judge, he defended the burglar and murderer, Charles Peace, his name was always prominent. He took silk in 1882. 
In politics Lockwood was a Liberal. His first attempt to get into parliament, at King's Lynn, was unsuccessful, as also was his first contest at York in November 1883, when, however, he was beaten by twenty-one votes only. In October 1884 he became recorder of Sheffield, and in November 1885 he and his great friend Alfred Pease were elected for York, which city he continued to represent until his death. From 1885 to 1895 Lockwood led a very busy life both professionally and socially. 'His tall powerful frame, his fine head crowned with picturesque premature white hair, his handsome healthy face, with its sunshine of genial, not vapid good nature, made him notable everywhere. So powerful was this personality that his entrance into a room seemed to change the whole complexion of the company, and I often fancied that he could dispel a London fog by his presence. (Letter of Lord Rosebery, quoted in Birrell, 201)' In the Commons, though he took no active part in debate, Lockwood was a great figure, and his sketches depicting the occasional humours of that assembly were in much demand. During the vacation of 1894 Rosebery, to whom Lockwood was warmly attached, preferred Lockwood to R. B. Haldane for the solicitor-generalship when Sir Robert Reid became attorney-general. Lockwood was knighted on 20 November 1894. As solicitor-general, Lockwood played a central part in the prosecution of Oscar Wilde in 1895. The jury failed to reach a verdict in Wilde's first trial, and Lockwood himself led for the prosecution in the second. When Timothy Healy urged Lockwood not to proceed with the prosecution he replied 'I would not but for the abominable rumours against Rosebery' (cited in Ellman, 437). Lockwood was awkwardly placed personally in the affair, for it was his nephew by marriage Maurice Schwabe who had introduced Wilde to Alfred Taylor, the homosexual who procured rent boys for Wilde. Lockwood's final speech of prosecution, on 25 May, was a powerful indictment that helped secure the guilty verdict that imprisoned Wilde and removed the threat of further allegations being made against Rosebery. The election of 1895 restored Lord Salisbury to power, but owing to a difficulty about the scale of his successor's remuneration, Lockwood nominally remained solicitor-general until August 1895, when R. B. Finlay succeeded him. In the vacation of 1896 he accompanied Charles, Lord Russell of Killowen, the lord chief justice of England, to the United States of America. About May 1897 he became depressed, and convinced of his impending death, which exacerbated his depression. He had no other condition diagnosed. He caught influenza and died, aged fifty-one, at his house, 26 Lennox Gardens, Pont Street, Chelsea, on Sunday 19 December 1897. His wife and their two daughters survived him. 
Lockwood made no pretensions to be considered a learned lawyer, nor was he a consummate advocate; but his sound sense, ready wit, good feeling, and sympathetic nature, set off as these qualities were by a commanding presence and good voice, placed him in the front ranks of the bar, and easily secured him a large business. Both outside and inside his profession he enjoyed a large and deserved popularity. He drew frequently for 'Punch' and some of his sketches were published in 'The Frank Lockwood Sketch Book' (1898); his lecture 'The Law and Lawyers of Pickwick' was published in 1894. He had the unusual Victorian distinction of giving his name to a British island, Frank Lockwood's Island, off Mull. There are a memorial window and a tablet in York Cathedral. 


@@@@@


doc= 16914


Lockyer, Nicholas (1611-1685), Independent minister, was the son of William Lockyer of Glastonbury, Somerset. He matriculated from the notoriously puritan college of New Inn Hall, Oxford, on 4 November 1631 and graduated BA on 14 May 1633. Migrating to Emmanuel College, Cambridge, where his BA was incorporated in 1635, he proceeded MA in 1636. In June 1654 he returned to Oxford to take his BTh. 
Lockyer supported parliament at the outbreak of the civil wars and held the Independent position in the debate on church government. He was popular with the Commons and was occasionally asked to preach a sermon during days of fasting; an example of his preaching can be found in his sermon of 28 October 1646, where he spoke on 'Isaiah' 53: 10. The text, Lockyer said, was a divine promise of 'deliverance from all sorts of slavery and bondage' (Lockyer, 'A Sermon Preached'). He counselled that patience and obedience to God's word was the key to parliamentarian success. In particular he opposed a quick settlement for the sake of an ungodly peace. 
In 1649, after the execution of Charles I and the establishment of the republic, Lockyer was rewarded by Oliver Cromwell, who appointed him as one of his chaplains. He was also made a fellow of Eton College and the preacher at Windsor Castle. In 1650 he was presented to the living of Farnham Royal in Buckinghamshire. Lockyer's position as one of Cromwell's chaplains earned him political favour, and in January 1651 the council of state sent him to Scotland as a preacher to the parliamentary commissioners. He was perhaps not the most politic of choices; he caused great offence when he preached a sermon at Edinburgh in favour of congregationalism. This he published in 1652 as 'A Little Stone out of the Mountain'. The Scottish presbyterians were not content to let this insult go without notice and James Wood, a professor of theology at St Andrews, replied in 1654 alleging Lockyer's ideas to be 'counterfeit'. Despite this foray into controversy the majority of Lockyer's works were uncontentious, being works of puritan pietism aimed at the 'conversion of souls' ('Nonconformist's Memorial', 1.102). 
Lockyer became one of the preachers at Whitehall during the sitting of Barebone's Parliament in 1653, and in 1655 he was chosen as one of the commissioners for the approbation of public preachers. His honours were fully realized in February 1659 when he replaced Francis Rous as provost of Eton College. He was also the preacher at the London parishes of St Benet Sherehog and St Pancras, Soper Lane. 
Lockyer benefited financially from his association with Cromwell, having appropriated dean and chapter lands settled upon him and his heirs by the council of state. He chose to take the monetary value of the lands at ten years purchase instead of the land itself and used the $2100 that he acquired from the council to purchase the manors of Hambleton and Blackwell in Worcestershire. Although the protectorate council sought to reconvey the manors back to the state, Lockyer managed to keep the property. He also acquired Irish lands in Munster and corresponded with Henry Cromwell on their administration. 
As an ardent Cromwellian and Independent, Lockyer refused to conform to the royalist and Anglican Restoration and was expelled as provost of Eton in August 1660 to be replaced by General George Monck's brother, Nicholas. He took up the mantle of nonconformity and in September 1666 fled to Rotterdam to escape prosecution under the 'Act of Uniformity'. He had returned to England by 1669 and preached at a meeting at Bell Lane in Spitalfields. In 1670 he was again forced to flee to the Netherlands, for publishing 'Some Seasonable and Serious Queries upon the Late Act Against Conventicles', a pro-toleration tract that argued that the 'Conventicle Act' was against God's word, the constitution, and the principles of prudence and policy. Lockyer was not distracted by the threat of persecution, however, and the nonconformist minister Oliver Heywood heard him preach in St Michael Street, London, in January 1683. Despite his resolve, Lockyer's health began to fail at this time and he moved to Woodford in Essex, where he died on 13 March 1685. He was buried at St Mary, Whitechapel, Stepney. The name of his wife is unknown, but they had six children: a son, Cornelius, and five daughters, Aholiabah, Rebecca, Hannah, Elizabeth, and Abigail. 


@@@@@


doc= 16915


Locock, Sir Charles, first baronet (1799-1875), obstetric physician, was born at Northampton on 21 April 1799, the son of Henry Locock (died 1843), medical practitioner, and his first wife, Susannah Smyth. For three years he was resident private pupil of Benjamin Brodie, the influential surgeon to St George's Hospital, London, then attended lectures at the school of medicine in Great Windmill Street, and afterwards graduated MD at Edinburgh in 1821 with a 'Dissertatio medico inauguralis de cordis palpitatione', which was published in the same year and dedicated to a new mentor, Andrew Duncan. Just prior to this he had undertaken a journey to the continent. In 1822 he was a house pupil at the Westminster Lying-in Hospital. He became a licentiate of the Royal College of Physicians the next year. Brodie recommended Locock to devote himself to the practice of midwifery, and he was fortunate in receiving the support of Robert Gooch, who was retiring from practical midwifery and referred many of his patients to Locock. From a small practice based near Oxford Street, he rapidly rose to eminence, and for many years had the largest practice in London as an accoucheur. On 5 August 1826 Locock married Amelia (died 1867), youngest daughter of John Lewis of Southampton Place, Euston Square, London. In 1834-5 Locock lectured on midwifery at St Bartholomew's Hospital, and was for many years physician to the Westminster Lying-in Hospital. He was admitted a fellow of the Royal College of Physicians in 1836, and was a member of its council in 1840-42. In 1840 he was appointed first physician accoucheur to Queen Victoria, and attended at the births of all her children, using chloroform in later ones. Besides contributing seven articles to the 'Cyclopaedia of Practical Medicine' and another two to the 'Library of Medicine' (ed. A. Tweedie, 1840), he made a valuable contribution to medicine by the discovery of the efficacy of bromide of potassium in epilepsy, analysing fifty-two cases in 'The Lancet' (1857, 1.527-8). 
On his retirement in 1857 he was created a baronet, although he had declined the honour in 1840. He was president of the Royal Medical and Chirurgical Society in 1857, president of the Obstetrical Society of London, and was elected FRS in 1864, and created DCL (Oxon.) in 1864. He was a justice of the peace and deputy lieutenant for the county of Kent. He unsuccessfully contested the Isle of Wight as a Conservative in 1865. Locock was 'small in person and slight, firm and decided in manner, and to strangers undemonstrative to the extent of coldness' ('BMJ', 151). Locock, who worried about his health to the point of hypochondria, died on 23 July 1875. Sir James Paget described him as having great power of work and devotion to duty, keen insight, and great practical knowledge of the medical profession. He made quick, clear diagnoses, and his decisive manner inspired confidence and loyalty in his many patients. He was neither a scholar nor an innovator, but had many social qualities. Thus it was as much the personal as the professional regard in which he was held, together with the loyal patronage he enjoyed from an unusually early age, which ensured his success. Locock and his wife had five sons, of whom the eldest, Charles Brodie (1827-1890), succeeded to the baronetcy, and the third, Sidney (1834-1885), was the British minister resident in Serbia from 1881 until his death on 30 August 1885. 


