@@@@@


doc= 16916


Loder, Edward James (1809-1865), composer and conductor, was born in Bath, Somerset, on 10 July 1809, one of the seven children of the violinist John David Loder (1788-1846) and his wife, Rose, 'nee' Mills. About 1826 he was sent to Frankfurt am Main to study with his father's old friend, Beethoven's pupil Ferdinand Ries, who after several years' residence in London had just returned to the continent. A couple of years later Loder returned to England, and in 1830 he arranged the music for a production of 'Black-Eyed Susan' at the Theatre Royal, Bath. Shortly thereafter he travelled again to Germany with the intention of studying medicine, but, quickly changing his mind, he resumed his study with Ries. He married, in Bristol on 10 November 1831, Eliza Mary, 'nee' Watson (1811-1880), from whom he was later separated. About 1834 he returned to London and immediately received a commission to compose music for J. S. Arnold's play 'Nourjahad', recast as an opera, for the opening of the New Theatre Royal Lyceum and English Opera House after the fire of 1830. The production took place in July 1834, and Loder's music was considered its principal attraction. Unlike the usual English operas, which were primarily a succession of songs and ballads, Loder had attempted to make 'Nourjahad' a genuine musical drama, and, as such, it was well received by those contemporary critics who wished to see English composers emulating their serious German contemporaries. In little more than a year Loder produced three more works at the Lyceum, which did not, however, aspire to the same high aims; none the less 'The Dice of Death', with a libretto by John Oxenford, was moderately successful in 1835. 
Meanwhile, Loder had entered into an agreement with the music publishers Dalmain & Co. to supply a weekly series of compositions, and for the same firm he wrote his 'First Principles of Singing' in 1838 and 'A Modern Pianoforte Tutor' in 1839. Some of the songs composed to fulfil his contract with Dalmain were strung together to make the opera 'Francis I', which was produced at Drury Lane in 1838 with limited success; one song, however, 'The Old House at Home', achieved considerable popularity. Another opera, 'Little Red Riding Hood', intended for the inauguration of the regime of the impresario Hammond at Drury Lane, was not put into production, and two other stage works, 'The Foresters' and 'The Deer Stalkers', produced in 1838 and 1841, were unambitious. During this period, however, Loder was also working at more consequential compositions: a string quartet in E[flat] (apparently his fourth, though no trace survives of earlier ones) was performed several times at the Society of British Musicians, three sets of songs were published in 1837-8, and around 1840 he issued a number of collections of sacred music, outstanding among which was a set of nine 'Sacred Songs and Ballads' (1840) with texts by Desmond Ryan and dedicated to Sterndale Bennett. 
In 1846 Loder became music director at the Princess's Theatre, and in the same year he staged his 'romantic opera' 'The Night Dancers', composed to a libretto by George Soane that was based on the same German folk-tale that had provided the plot of Adolphe Adam's ballet 'Giselle'. More significant musically and dramatically than the other stage works he had written since 'Nourjahad', it was an immediate success with press and public, and within twelve months was produced in New York and Sydney. In London it was revived at the Princess's Theatre in 1850 and at Covent Garden in 1860. As well as its abundance of good melodic material, apparent in such numbers as the ballad 'Wake, my love', which was essential for a success in the English theatre, 'The Night Dancers' displays the masterly orchestration and genuine dramatic instinct that enabled Loder to create something worth while when he chose to exert himself. Fuller Maitland loftily described it in 1902 as having 'merits far beyond the trivial tunes with which Balfe caught the ear of his vulgar audiences' (Fuller Maitland, 42). Many of Loder's works at this time were connected with his duties at the Princess's Theatre; he contributed music to various productions, and in 1848 composed the operetta 'The Andalusian' and the ballad opera 'Robin Goodfellow', though neither of these displays the same level of commitment as 'The Night Dancers' or enjoyed comparable success. He put more effort into his 'operatic masque' 'The Island of Calypso', intended for the National Concerts in 1850 but not performed until 14 April 1852, when Berlioz conducted it at Exeter Hall. 
In 1851 Loder was appointed music director of the Theatre Royal, Manchester, where he spent his energies in composing, arranging, and conducting the music for the theatre's daily fare. By 1855 he had completed his opera 'Raymond and Agnes', originally announced for the Princess's Theatre for the 1849-50 season, and it was given its premiere in Manchester on 14 August. Despite its considerable musical and dramatic qualities, it was coolly received and sustained a run of only seven performances. A later production at St James's Theatre, London, in 1859 lasted no more than a week, despite enthusiastic reviews. The opera enjoyed an isolated revival at the Cambridge Arts Theatre, in an edition by Nicholas Temperley and Max Miradin, in 1966. 
Shortly after the Manchester production of 'Raymond and Agnes', Loder fell ill with a brain disorder that made it necessary for him to relinquish his Manchester post and return to London. A subscription to assist him was advertised in the 'Musical World' in 1856 and 1857, and performances of his works were facilitated by family and friends. These included the London staging of 'Raymond and Agnes'; a production of his last theatrical composition, the one-act operetta 'Never Judge by Appearances', given at the Adelphi on 7 July 1859; and the 1860 revival of 'The Night Dancers'. Shortly before his death, a set of 'Twelve Songs Sacred and Secular' was published by subscription for his benefit. On 13 October 1849, using the name Ernest Loder von Lowe, he married, bigamously, Louise Alice ('b'. 1827/8), daughter of Charles Forster, artist. The last four years of his life were largely spent in a deep coma, and Loder, living alone, was registered by a neighbour as having died at his lodgings, 101 Bolsover Street, London, on 5 April 1865. 


@@@@@


doc= 16917


Loder, George (1816-1868), conductor and composer, was born in Bath, the son of George Loder, a flautist, and his wife, Fanny Philpot, a piano teacher and the sister of the pianist Lucy Anderson. His uncle was the violinist and publisher John David Loder. In 1836 he went to the USA. After residing for some years in Baltimore, in 1844 he became principal of the New York Vocal Institute; he was also a prominent member of the Philharmonic and Vocal societies, which he had helped to establish there. He played the double bass for the Philharmonic Society for five seasons, and occasionally conducted the society's orchestra, a notable occasion being the first American performance of Beethoven's ninth symphony (20 May 1846). 
In 1855 Loder went to Australia with the soprano Anna Bishop, and settled in Adelaide as conductor of Lyster's opera troupe. In 1859 he was again active in London -- as organist, singer, conductor, and composer; on 11 June he conducted the revival of the opera 'Raymond and Agnes' by his cousin Edward Loder. In 1861 he published 'Pets of the Parterre', a comic operetta, which had been produced at the Lyceum and Adelphi theatres, and in 1862 'The Old House at Home', a musical entertainment staged also at the Adelphi. 
Loder's music was perhaps more popular in America than in Britain. 'The New York Glee Book' (1843), written for the New York Vocal Institute and reissued as 'The Philadelphia and New York Glee Book' in 1864, contains many of his original partsongs. He also published 'The Middle Voice', 'Twelve Solfeggi' (1860), and various individual songs and instrumental pieces both in England and America. Loder paid a second visit to Australia, and died, after a long illness, at Adelaide on 15 July 1868. 
His sister 


@@@@@


doc= 16918


Loder, John David (1788-1846), violinist, was born at Bath, the son of John Loder (died 1795), a musician. Loder was a member of a musical family long resident in Bath, and was himself at the head of his profession there for many years. After initially playing in concert orchestras, he appeared as the first violin in a string quartet at the New Assembly Rooms on 4 April 1800, and from 1799 to 1836 was a member, and for most of that time leader, of the orchestra of the Theatre Royal. Famous musicians from London often attended his annual benefit night at the theatre, and Angelica Catalani, the celebrated Italian soprano, appeared with him at a concert on 7 October 1821. It is reported that she returned her fee 'as a small tribute of regard for his private worth, and high professional skill' ('New Grove'). He left the theatre in 1836 after a disagreement, but returned in 1840-41. 
Among other engagements Loder was leader of the Yorkshire music festival (15 September 1825, alongside Franz Cramer, Mori, and Kiesewetter), soloist at the Gloucester music festival (1826), and leader at the Three Choirs festival (1826-45). He was also, from 12 May 1817, the first Englishman to lead the orchestra at the Philharmonic Society of London, which, according to Temperley, he appears to have done at least once a year. His business as a music publisher and seller of musical instruments operated from 46 Milsom Street, Bath, from around 1820 to 1835. He subsequently resided in London and, in 1840, became professor of violin at the Royal Academy of Music. He also performed in the Ancient Concerts, succeeding Cramer as leader in 1845. His thorough knowledge of orchestral and chamber music made his services especially sought after for the performance of new and intricate works. 
Loder's role as a successful teacher of the violin and viola should not be overlooked, and his 'General and Comprehensive Instruction Book for the Violin' ('c.'1824) was one of the first detailed and systematic English violin methods, appearing in a revised and enlarged version as late as 1911. Other works included violin duets (1837), a treatise on bowing (1842), and various arrangements. 
Loder died at Albany Street, Regent's Park, London, on 13 February 1846. He and his wife, a Miss Mills, the stepdaughter of the comic actor John Fawcett, had five sons and two daughters. The second son, 


@@@@@


doc= 16919


John Fawcett Loder (1812-1853), was a violinist and viola player, who became a successful music teacher and concert director in Bath. He was a member of various London orchestras and played viola in Blagrove and Dando's Quartet Concerts from 1842 until his death, which occurred suddenly in Hawley Crescent, London, on 16 April 1853. His younger brother Edward James Loder (1809-1865) was a successful composer, principally of theatrical works. 


@@@@@


doc= 16920


Lodge, Edmund (1756-1839), herald and biographer, was born on 13 June 1756, in Poland Street, London, the only surviving son of the Revd Edmund Lodge ('c'.1729-1781), rector of Carshalton in Surrey, and his wife, Mary Garrard, the daughter and sole heir of Richard Garrard of Carshalton. Nothing is known of Lodge's early life or schooling until the age of sixteen, when, on 29 November 1771, he was commissioned as cornet in His Majesty's Own (or 3rd) regiment of dragoons under the command of the earl of Albemarle. This may have been a precipitant decision, for Lodge was not happy in the army: the regiment report records his request for 'Leave to sell out' on 3 October 1772 (troop record, TNA: PRO, WO/12/564) and his resignation, one week later, on 11 October 1772. After this set-back, Lodge was slow to decide what path to follow. It was not until 22 February 1782 that he obtained the post of Bluemantle pursuivant-at-arms, one of the four lowest positions, in the College of Arms -- the ancient institution which functions as the official guardian and authenticator of pedigrees and armorial bearings. He was to spend the rest of his career as a herald and a genealogist. He rose through the ranks of the College of Arms, becoming Lancaster herald on 29 October 1793 and Norroy king of arms on 11 June 1822. His career as a herald was crowned when he was promoted to Clarenceux king of arms, the second in command at the College of Arms, on 30 July 1838. On 27 April 1808 he married Jane-Anne-Elizabeth Field (died 1820) at St George the Martyr, Southwark. 
In keeping with his antiquarian interests, which are manifest in a herald's work of tracing ancient pedigrees, Lodge was also elected a fellow of the London Society of Antiquaries on 15 March 1787 but, in practice, he made little mark on their proceedings or publications. Instead he developed as an independent antiquarian author working with commercial publishers, such as Harding and Lepard, on a number of luxury periodical publications which combined high quality engraved portrait heads of historical figures with Lodge's authoritative, 'pleasant and lucid' accounts of their lives ('Fraser's Magazine', 595). Due to the patriotic fashion for collecting engraved portraits of illustrious figures, most of these lives were of secondary importance to the engravings. This was true of 'Imitations of Original Drawings by Hans Holbein' (1792), with prints by Francesco Bartolozzi, and of 'Portraits of Illustrious Personages of Great Britain' (1814-34), advertised as 'an assemblage of highly furnished Engravings of the Portraits of Persons most distinguished for elevated rank or splendid talents' ('Lodge's Illustrious Portraits', prospectus). Despite the massive cost and extent of this project, which exceeded $40,000 and amounted to forty folio parts, Lodge's 'Biographical & historical memoirs' did not go unremarked. In 1828 Sir Walter Scott praised the 'vast consequence' of 'Mr Lodge's splendid work' ('Portraits & Memoirs', prospectus). Apart from a few literary reviews, including a preface to the works of Sir Charles Hanbury Williams, Lodge specialized in such historical memoirs, and, as one commentator explained in the 'Advertisement' to the 1849 edition of 'Portraits of Illustrious Personages': 'it is on the Biographies attached to the 'portraits' that his fame chiefly rests, and on them he expended his best energies'. Although Lodge was a prolific author, he was renowned for his painstaking slowness and for missed deadlines. 
As well as his formal and ceremonial duties as a herald, and his work at what he called 'book-making' (BL, Add. MS 33929, fol. 26), throughout his career he also took on private commissions to compile family trees; in 1808, for example, he completed one for the Kavenaghs at the apparently modest charge of a guinea. His generous and sociable nature, and his commitment to heraldic research, are further demonstrated by the fact that he was always willing to share his knowledge and do people favours. In a letter to Philip Bliss of 15 March 1814, he explained that: 'We of This College, are allowed, by ancient Custom, to make abstracts of Wills in the King's Office, a privilege denied to all other persons, and this fortunately, puts it into my power to save you the expence ['sic'] of a copy' (BL, Add. MS 34567, fol. 418). Another act of benevolence, which also reflects his elevated reputation in the field of genealogy, was his endorsement of the 'Annual Peerage' (1827-9), which was published under Lodge's name but was actually the work of Anne, Eliza, and Maria Innes. His literary achievements and public service were honoured when, in 1832, he was appointed a knight of the Royal Guelphic Order of Hanover -- an unsolicited distinction that gave Lodge great pleasure. 
Lodge died on 16 January 1839 at his house, 2 Bloomsbury Square, London, and was buried at St George's, Bloomsbury, on 24 January. His wife had died in May 1820, and as they had no children most of his estate was left to his unmarried sister, Mary Charlotte Lodge. An enthusiastic bibliophile, Lodge had built up an impressive topographical and heraldic library; this was sold by S. Leigh and Sotheby on 11 March 1839 and, according to their auctioneer's records, raised the sum of $361 4's'.6died Given that his position at the College of Arms made him the protector of the ancient privileges and properties of the aristocracy, it is not surprising that his obituary in the 'Gentleman's Magazine' commented on the high-tory bias that tinged all his historical writings. Nevertheless, his works were commended as original, perceptive, and an 'ornament to our literature' ('GM' [2nd ser.], 11.1, 434). 


@@@@@


doc= 16921


Lodge, John (1692-1774), archivist and genealogist, was born at Bolton-le-Sands, Lancashire, and baptized there on 22 January 1693, the son of Edmund Lodge, a farmer. He was educated at Clapham School, Yorkshire, under Mr Ashe, and entered St John's College, Cambridge, on 26 June 1716, graduating BA in 1719-20 and proceeding MA in 1730. He was ordained deacon at Lincoln on 12 June 1720 and priest at Ely on 23 September 1721. He received a licence to preach at March, Cambridgeshire, on 20 September 1722; a year later he was licensed curate there, and on 15 June 1725 schoolmaster. He afterwards settled in Dublin, where he issued his printed prospectus for his 'Irish Peerage' in 1742. In 1744 he published 'Report of the Trial in Ejectment of Campbell Craig', from notes in his own shorthand, which continued to be a feature in his manuscripts. In 1751, then living in Abbey Street, Dublin, he was appointed deputy keeper of the records in Bermingham Tower; in 1759 he became deputy clerk and keeper of the rolls, and was subsequently deputy registrar of the court of prerogative. He married, first, Miss Hamilton, who claimed kinship with the Abercorn family; and, secondly, Edwarda Galland. 
Lodge's chief work, 'The Peerage of Ireland' (4 vols., 1754), is a monument of industry, accuracy, and learning. Although now superseded in practical use by the second edition of Cokayne's 'Complete Peerage', it remains a mine of detailed information about the families connected with the peerage that is not otherwise available. When Mervyn Archdall was preparing his revised edition (published 1789) from Lodge's annotated copy of the 'Peerage', he found the experts completely baffled in their attempts to read the cipher Lodge had used for his notes, and was about to give up the task in despair when his wife discovered the key. 
In 1770 Lodge published anonymously 'The Usage of Holding Parliaments in Ireland', and in 1772, also without his name, a selection of state papers and historical tracts illustrating the government of Ireland during the reigns of Elizabeth I, James I, and Charles I, which he called 'Desiderata curiosa Hibernica'. 
Lodge died at Bath on 22 February 1774. Of his nine children, only one survived him: his son, the Revd William Lodge LLD (1742-1813), who became in 1790 chancellor of Armagh Cathedral. Since 1785 he had been the first librarian of the public library of Armagh, newly established by his munificent patron, Primate Richard Robinson, the creator of Georgian Armagh. Through him, some of John Lodge's books, with marginal notes and corrections, came into the library, but Lodge himself had earlier presented the primate with several important collections dealing with Armagh. In 1865 the librarian William Reeves, who later became bishop of Down and Connor, purchased Lodge's manuscripts from his grandson, William Robinson Lodge, rector of Killybegs. These included not only some of his grandfather's collections, but also the manuscripts he had inherited from Michael Ignatius Dugan (died 1768), a Dublin broker, among them manuscripts of Sir James Ware, Bishop Anthony Dopping, and Walter Harris, which thus greatly enriched the public library. 
Lodge's importance now lies principally in the abstracts and indices he made from the records in his care, which serve in some measure to replace the loss of the records in the destruction of the Public Record Office in Dublin in 1922. The most used of these collections, now in the National Archives of Ireland, were purchased by the government from Lodge's heirs in 1783, in return for annuities of $100 to his widow and $200 to his son, and a detailed catalogue was printed in 'The Fifty-Fifth Report of the Deputy Keeper of the Public Records... in Ireland' in 1928. Other significant parts of his collections will be found in the National Library of Ireland, the British Library, and the College of Arms. 


@@@@@


doc= 16922


Lodge, Sir Thomas (1509/10-1585), merchant, the son of William Littleton, also known as Lodge, and his wife, Joan Burleton, was born at Cound in Shropshire; his father's use of the name Lodge was attributed to his living at Le Lodge, Cresset (Cressage?), in Shropshire, and to his claimed descent from Odard de Logis, Baron Wigton, of Cumberland, in the reign of Henry I. He was apprenticed in London to William Pratt, in the Grocers' Company, in 1528. 
Lodge engaged in foreign trade in Antwerp and was an enthusiastic supporter of schemes for opening new markets in distant countries. He was a member of the Grocers' Company, and served as warden in 1548 and as master in 1554-5 and again in 1559-60. In 1561 he was president of St Thomas's Hospital. He played a role in the government of the city of London, being sworn in as alderman of Cheap ward in 1553 and being chosen as sheriff in 1559. He was one of those who signed a document accepting Lady Jane Grey as queen in 1553. 
Lodge married first Madwlyn (Magdalene) Vaughan (died 1548), sister of Stephen Vaughan, merchant. It was a brief marriage: begun about 1544, it ended with her death on 26 July 1548. In 1549 Lodge married Margaret Parker, who had 'well and truly served the said Sir Thomas Lodge in his house in the state of a mayden servant' (TNA: PRO, close rolls C54/463). She died on 26 April 1552, leaving him with daughters Sarah ('bap'. 1549) and Susan ('bap'. 1551), both of whom survived to a marriageable age. 
Lodge was elected lord mayor in 1562, and became the first mayor to ignore the ancient custom of being clean-shaven. It was to be an eventful year for him; on 8 March 1563 he was knighted, and in April a son was baptized. The latter was one of five sons (among them the dramatist Thomas Lodge (1558-1625)) and a daughter born of his marriage in 1552 to Anne Lane, 'nee' Loddington (1528-1579), the stepdaughter of Sir William Laxton, a member of the Grocers' Company and a former lord mayor. However, the same year he had to contend with the effects of an outbreak of plague, and he also fell foul of Edward Skeggs, purveyor to the queen, who seized twelve capons provided for the lord mayor's table. Lodge compelled him to return six and threatened to lock him up in Newgate, which led both men to much public posturing and complaints to their patrons. Lodge was chastised and fined, but, because of the plague, not punished further. 
The founding charter of the Merchants of Russia (the Russia Company) of 1555 names Lodge as among the first assistants to the governors, and by 1561 he was himself a governor. The Russia Company's interests were not limited to that region, and many members were keen to open trade with the Guinea coast of west Africa. Their first venture was in 1562; underwritten by Lodge, with Sir Lionell Duckett and others, three good ships sailed in October to Guinea to buy black Africans for shipment to the West Indies. 300 were sold there, and goods bought for sale in England when the ships landed in September 1563. This voyage is supposed to have inaugurated England's involvement in slave trading. 
According to the antiquary Arthur Agarde (1540-1615), Lodge was responsible for bringing German metal-workers to England to refine the base coins which Queen Elizabeth had sent to the Tower. Lodge told Agarde that when these men fell sick (probably from inhaling the fumes of arsenic given off by the base metal) they found relief by drinking from human skulls, which Lodge obtained from those exhibited on London Bridge, under a warrant granted by the council. 
Lodge seems to have been embroiled in later disputes; he was obliged to resign as alderman in 1566, and in 1576 was committed to Newgate for striking alderman John Braunche in the face. He suffered financial loss when one of his ships was seized by the French in a trade war, but the queen and the city tried later to help him. He died in February 1585 and was buried, with his first wife and her father, in St Mary Aldermary, in the vault of Henry Keble, 'whose bones were unkindly cast out, and his monument pulled down, in place whereof monuments are set up of the later buried' (Stow, 1.253). In his will, proved by his son-in-law Gamaliel Woodford, he describes himself as of West Ham, to whose poor he left $5, and he also possessed the manor of Malmeynes at Barking, Essex. He provided for a funeral sermon to be preached in the churches of St Peter, Cornhill, and St Mary Aldermary. 


@@@@@


doc= 16923


Lodge, Thomas (1558-1625), author and physician, was born in London, the second surviving son and third of seven surviving children of Sir Thomas Lodge (1509/10-1585), lord mayor of London, and his third wife, Anne 
('nee' Loddington; 1528-1579)
. The elder Thomas Lodge moved to London from Shropshire, was apprenticed to a grocer, and prospered. Anne was a stepdaughter of William Laxton, a grocer and former mayor of London, and the widow of William Lane, also a grocer, who brought both money and land to the marriage. Like other men of his time and position, Sir Thomas invested in overseas trading ventures and real estate. In 1563, the final year of his mayoralty, Sir Thomas went bankrupt, a scandal Stow records. Both the land his wife brought to the marriage and the properties he purchased survived the bankruptcy, as attested by lawsuits that continued throughout the lives of his sons, many of which have been traced by Charles Sisson. 
Five years old at the time of his father's bankruptcy, Lodge spent some portion of his childhood in the household of Henry Stanley, earl of Derby, a circumstance Lodge acknowledges with gratitude in the dedication to 'A Fig for Momus' (1595). The first definitive record of Lodge's education is his matriculation at the Merchant Taylors' School in 1571 as a 'poore scholar'. Three years later he went up to Trinity College, Oxford, where he received the BA in 1577. In the dedication to 'Rosalynde' (1590), Lodge states that Edward Hoby was his tutor and names Edmund and Robert Carey, sons of the earl of Hunsdon, among his Oxford friends. In 1578 Lodge entered Lincoln's Inn. There is no evidence that he ever practised law, his perennial involvement in lawsuits notwithstanding. The provisions of his mother's will, drawn in 1579, suggest that Lodge's disinclination to the profession was evident early on: if he does not continue a good student at Lincoln's Inn, the will states, his portion is to be divided among his brothers. Evidence does suggest that Lodge continued a social and probably a residential relation to Lincoln's Inn for some years; 'An Alarum Against Usurers' (1584) and 'Scillaes Metamorphosis' (1589) both include dedications to the gentlemen of the inns of court and as late as 'A Fig for Momus' (1595) the title-page advertises Lodge as 'of Lincolns Inne, Gentleman'. 
Lodge first entered print in 1579. 'An Epitaph on Lady Anne Lodge' was entered on the Stationers' register in December by Edward White, who had married Lodge's half-sister, Sara Lodge. A reply to Stephen Gosson's 'School of Abuse' (1579) survives in two copies, both lacking title-pages. Variously titled by others -- 'Honest Excuses', 'A Defense of Poetry', 'Reply to Gosson' -- the importance of Lodge's pamphlet arises less from its intrinsic merits than from its position as the first defence of poetry in the long series of exchanges focused on drama and the theatre. Gosson replied to Lodge's pamphlet in 'Plays Confuted' (1582) and Lodge to Gosson in the prefatory matter of 'An Alarum Against Usurers' (1584). From these exchanges it appears that licence to publish Lodge's initial pamphlet was denied, and it was privately printed and circulated. One may read in the 'Reply to Gosson' a sense of vocation when Lodge writes 'I affirme that poetry is a heavenly gift, then which I know not greater pleasure' ('Works', 1.19). 
In 1581 Lodge's supplication for the MA at Oxford was initially accepted and then, later that year, denied. In the interim a Thomas Lodge, gentleman, was called before the privy council to answer 'certain matters' and a Thomas Lodge was imprisoned at the king's bench, according to the confession of an anti-Catholic informant. The coincidence between these records and the appearance of a Lodge (and a Loddington, potentially a cousin on Lady Lodge's side) on a list of recusants living in Paris in 1580, together with clear evidence of Lodge's Catholicism later in life, has led biographers to speculate that matters of faith underwrote the refusal of the MA, the privy council matter, and the imprisonment. It is also possible, as Charles Sisson argues, that the privy council interest in Lodge, if indeed he is the same Lodge, concerns his entry into the controversy about the stage. The stronger circumstantial argument, however, rests on the premise of Lodge's Catholicism, especially given that both Trinity College and Lincoln's Inn were sites resistant to the Reformation and hospitable to recusants. This circumstantial argument acquires greater force for biographers because it also helps to explain the omission of Thomas Lodge from his father's will in 1583. 
Elaine Cuvelier's doctoral study of Lodge makes the strongest possible case for Lodge's early Catholicism and its determining impact on his life and writing. Arthur Kinney's discussion of Lodge's literary 'oeuvre' makes the contrasting case for a more general 'Christian humanism'. Lodge's Catholicism later in life is undisputed; after 1611 it also ceased to matter in significant practical ways, for 'Thomas Lodge, Dr. of Physike' was protected from prosecution for recusancy by order of the privy council. Assessment of the import of Lodge's Catholicism awaits both more extensive critical discussion of the work and a revisionist social history of the varieties of English Catholicism in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries. The poets and writers among Lodge's contemporaries, whether of protestant or Catholic sympathy themselves, do not remark on Lodge's religion. 
Sir Thomas Lodge died in 1585, the year after Thomas Lodge's 'An Alarum Against Usurers' appeared. The exclusion of Lodge from his father's will may have been the obvious strategy of a man of Sir Thomas's diminished financial standing who had other children to consider, for Thomas had received land as well as money by his mother's will, albeit under the control of executors, or it may have been a silent expression of disapproval for his son's life, or both. In any case, Thomas Lodge never came into the lands his mother left him, having granted them to his brother William in 1583 for ready money and in acknowledgement of debts already paid on his behalf by William. Lawsuits involving Thomas Lodge reveal that he was repeatedly in need of ready money and of sufficient credit to get it, and that allegations of unpaid debt to various tradesmen pursued him for thirty years. 

'An Alarum Against Usurers' offers an account of the practices by which a gentleman in need of ready money may be ruined and, in the event, forced into partnership with the usurer who ruined him. Although the correlation between Lodge's narrative and his life is obvious and tempting, the tone is reportorial rather than autobiographical even at those moments when the text approaches confession: 'truly gentlemen this that I write is true, I myselfe know the paymaster, naie more, I myselfe know certainly, that by name I can reckon among you some that have been bitten' ('Works', 1.18). The volume in which 'An Alarum Against Usurers' appeared also included a pastoral romance, 'The Delectable Historie of Forbonius and Prisceria', and a verse satire, 'Truth's Complaint over England'. The volume as a whole is dedicated to Philip Sidney and 'Forbonius and Prisceria' is obviously indebted to both Sidney's 'Old Arcadia' and Lyly's 'Euphues' in theme, style, and integration of verse into the narrative. Although most critics have treated the volume as a miscellany, Arthur Kinney argues that it forms a deliberate triadic structure, the circumstantial fiction of 'Alarum' contrasted by the marvellous in 'Forbonius' and the contrast itself enclosed by the experientially focused satire of 'Truth's Complaint', written in the tradition of Chaucer, Skelton, Wyatt, and Gascoigne. 
Between 1584 and 1589 Lodge wrote two plays, one in collaboration with Robert Greene, and made a sea voyage. In the dedication to 'Rosalynde' Lodge refers to a voyage made 'with Captain Clarke... to the islands of Terceres and the Canaries'. Scholars have offered various possible voyages: a sailing in 1586 of the 'Gold Noble'; a voyage in 1585 on the 'Roebuck'; and a voyage in 1590 on the 'Galleon Dudley'. Of these, the voyages made in 1585 or 1586 are most likely, but neither consensus nor any other evidence of Lodge's presence on any of the voyages has emerged. Lodge's play, 'The Wounds of Civil War', was, according to its title-page, performed by the Lord Admiral's Men. Both 'Wounds' and the play Lodge wrote with Greene, 'A Looking Glass for London and England', were printed in 1594. 'A Looking Glass' was first performed by either the Queen's Men or Lord Strange's Men; according to Henslowe's diary, it was revived by Lord Strange's Men and performed at the Rose in 1591 and 1592. Ferdinando Stanley, Lord Strange, was the son of Henry Stanley, the earl of Derby with whom Lodge spent some of his childhood. Charles Howard, the lord admiral, was uncle to Edmund and Robert Carey, Lodge's Oxford friends. 

'Wounds' tells the story of the Roman civil wars between Marius and Sulla. Drawn from the accounts of Appian and Plutarch, it is the earliest surviving example of a Roman history play from the Elizabethan repertory. Scholars have debated the question of Lodge's indebtedness to Marlowe or Marlowe's indebtedness to Lodge. Given the stiffness of the verse in 'Wounds', and the clumsiness of the plot, the current critical consensus is that Lodge's play predates 'Tamberlaine' and 'Edward II', owing debts to 'Gorboduc' by Thomas Norton and Thomas Sackville and to Gascoigne's plays, rather than to Marlowe's. 'Looking Glass' seems to have been a greater success. Not only was it revived on stage, but the quarto was reprinted five times between 1594 and 1617. The plot is drawn from the biblical story of Ninevah and Jonah, but London is the clear allegorical referent and the scenes of the sub-plot feature satirical representations of contemporary urban life. In 'Palladis tamia' (1598) Francis Meres named Lodge among 'the best for comedy' but no other plays survive. 
Lodge's position in the canon of English literature rests on the works published after 1589, particularly on his poetry and his narrative fictions. A volume called 'Scillaes Metamorphosis' (1589) contains a long verse narrative, 'Historie of Glaucus and Scilla', a 100-line poem, 'The Discontented Satyre', and fifteen 'sonnets' or short poems. 'Glaucus and Scilla' is an early and noteworthy example of the Ovidian minor epic poetry that was to become fashionable in the 1590s. Written in the six-line stanzas Shakespeare later used in 'Venus and Adonis', the story of Glaucus's unrequited love for Scilla and Scilla's belated response is told by a melancholy narrator whose presence in the poem lends it an ironic and arguably comic effect. The remaining poems in the volume are a mix of Horatian satires and 'sundrie sweet sonnets' that draw on French and Italian contemporaries and show Lodge experimenting with the possibilities of form, metre, and style. The volume seems to have sold slowly and was reissued with a new title, 'A Pleasant Historie of Glaucus and Scilla', in 1610. 

'Rosalynde: Euphues Golden Legacie', the best-known of Lodge's narrative fictions, was first published in 1590 and, by the time Shakespeare used it for 'As You Like It', had gone through four editions. Circumstantial evidence from the dedication to Lord Hunsdon suggests that it may have been written several years before and scholars have speculated that Robert Greene may have seen it through the press while Lodge was at sea. In any case, the pastoral romance with lyrics integrated into the narrative brings the formal work begun by 'Forbonius and Prisceria' to its full development. Arthur Kinney argues that the contrast achieved by the juxtaposition of the tract against usury and the romance of 'Forbonius' in the 'Alarum' volume is fully integrated in the narrative of 'Rosalynde' through its contrast between the cynical courtly world of Bordeaux and the pastoral forest of Arden. Lodge drew 'Rosalynde''s initial situation of the conflict between brothers upon their father's death and the wrestling match that eventually results in the exile of the second son from the fourteenth-century 'Tale of Gamelyn', but he developed the story away from bloody heroic revenge toward pastoral romance and euphuistic debate. The story is well-known from Shakespeare's use of it in 'As You Like It'. Alan Brissenden provides an extensive discussion of that use in the Oxford edition of the play. Donald Beecher's introduction to the annotated text published by the Barnabe Riche Society discusses 'Rosalynde''s relation to contemporary texts in terms of genre, style, poetics, theme, and character. Of all Lodge's works, 'Rosalynde' has attracted the most extensive critical attention, most of it focused through the lens of Shakespeare's play or through synthetic surveys of Elizabethan prose fiction. This critical attention shows how woven Lodge's work is into the literary culture of its time and how much work remains to be done tracing its affiliations (see, for example, 'Modern Philology', 95, 1998, 291-315). 
Between 1590 and 1596 Lodge published four more prose fictions: 'The Famous, True and Historical Life of Robert, Second Duke of Normandy' (1591), 'Euphues Shadow' (1592), 'The Life and Death of William Longbeard' (1593), and 'A Margarite of America' (1596). 'Euphues Shadow' clearly imitates Lyly's two 'Euphues' volumes, some twelve years after their completed publication. 'Robert, Duke of Normandy' (also known as 'Robin the Devil'), 'William Longbeard', and 'Margarite of America' all develop a sensational and often violent vision out of romance conventions, tempered, if at all, by an improbable spirituality or the presence of a hermit figure somewhat removed from violence. In 'Robert, Duke of Normandy', the title character spends his youth hurting, raping, and killing those he meets only to undergo a penitential conversion after receiving a mortal wound and being healed by a hermit. In 'William Longbeard' William's vicious career ends with his hanging, and in 'Margarite' the protagonist kills ten people, including himself. With the exception of 'Margarite', these fictions, if not dismissed altogether, have received little critical attention. One school of criticism suggests that in these late fictions Lodge is turning toward realism, either a psychological realism or a historiographical verisimilitude, an approach that positions the fictions in relation to the later development of the novel. A second line of argument sees an increasing preoccupation with problems of spirituality inflected by Lodge's Catholicism. 
In 1591 Lodge sailed from England in one of five ships under the command of Sir Thomas Cavendish who had successfully circumnavigated the globe three years earlier. Although all five ships reached Brazil and stayed there for two months, Cavendish's second voyage was a disaster. Many men, including Cavendish, and at least two of the ships, were lost and those men and ships that returned gained no wealth from the voyage. In the prefatory material to 'A Margarite of America' Lodge claims to have drawn the story from a Spanish manuscript found in a Jesuit library in Brazil and to have written it while 'at sea with M. Cavendish (whose memorie if I repent not, I lament not)' ('Works', 3.3). However plausible either claim, the prefatory material is signed 'from my house the 4 Maie 1596', three years after Lodge's return. Arguably Lodge's most interesting fiction, 'A Margarite of America', is set in the New World and tells the story of a diplomatic marriage intended to avert war between Mosco and Cusco. Margarite is a chaste, innocent princess blindly trusting her father's arrangements and her intended husband, the Cuscan prince, Arsachadus, an unregenerately Machiavellian figure well versed in impeccable courtly appearances. The Petrarchan and pastoral conventions of Lodge's earlier romances are integrated into a story of unrelenting depravity and violence that anticipates the world of Jacobean tragedies. Claudette Pollack has drawn attention to the text's indebtedness to Castiglione's 'Book of the Courtier' and Machiavelli's 'The Prince' and 'Discourses' ('Lodge's 'A Margarite of America': An Elizabethan medley', 'Renaissance and Reformation', 12, 1976, 1-11); Josephine Roberts argues that 'A Margarite' presents a dystopian vision of the New World, ('Lodge's 'A Margarite of America': a dystopian vision of the New World', 'Studies in Short Fiction', 17, 1980, 407-15); and Joan Pong Linton locates the text in relation to the 'romance of empire' explored by Spenser and Ralegh, arguing that Margarite is figured in ironic relation to Spenser's Una and Elizabeth I's investments in the politics and rhetoric of empire ('The Romance of the New World', 1998, 39-61). 
Between 1590 and 1596 Lodge also published four other prose works and two volumes of poetry. 'Catharos' (1591), 'The Devil Conjured' (1596), and 'Wits Miserie, or, The Worlds Madness' (1596) are all moral-philosophical writings: 'Catharos' a dialogue featuring Diogenes and two interlocutors, 'The Devil Conjured' a dialogue in which a Christian hermit counsels three young men, and 'Wits Miserie' a satirical treatment of the seven deadly sins. The fourth prose piece, 'Prosopopeia... the Teares... of Marie' (1596) explicitly declares its Catholic sympathies, using the figure of Mary to meditate on the sins of the world. 'Phillis' (1593) is a volume of short lyrics, mostly sonnets, some of which also appeared in the Elizabethan verse miscellanies 'Phoenix Nest' (1593), 'Englands Helicon' (1600), 'Belvedere' (1600), and 'Englands Parnassus' (1600). The verse miscellanies also contained poems from Lodge's prose romances and poems Lodge had not printed elsewhere. 'A Fig for Momus' (1596), Lodge's last volume of poetry, is a collection of epistles, satires, and eclogues modelled on the Roman satirists, especially Horace and Juvenal. Lodge's inclusion in the verse miscellanies attests to contemporary recognition of his accomplishments as a poet. Like the early Ovidian poem, 'Glaucus and Scilla', the late satiric collection, 'A Fig for Momus', has greater literary historical significance because it is an innovative exemplar. The poems of 'A Fig for Momus' develop the heroic couplet and anticipate the satires of the late 1590s. Although Lodge's satires were imitated by John Marston and Edward Guilpin, the compression of his line and the detached quality of his persona bring his poems closer to those of his Augustan successors than those of his contemporaries. 
In 1597 Lodge left England for France where he received a medical degree from the University of Avignon in 1598. In 1602 his medical degree was recognized by Oxford, though his application for a licence from the College of Physicians was denied. Between 1598 and 1610 Lodge practised medicine, at times in London and at times in the Low Countries and France. At some point within a few years of receiving his medical degree Lodge married Joan Aldred, 'nee' Ferneley ('b'. 1546, died in or after 1625), widow of Simon Aldred. Simon Aldred had been an agent for both the pope and Francis Walsingham, but Joan Aldred evidently remained a constant Catholic, serving in the household of the countess of Arundel after separating from her husband. Lodge's shifting between the continent and England during this period, together with his marriage to a known Catholic, leads biographers to assume that his intermittent exile and the denial of a licence to practise from the College of Physicians resulted from his Catholicism and possible participation in Counter-Reformation activities. The intervention of Sir Thomas Edmondes, ambassador to France, made it possible for Lodge to resume permanent English residence. In 1610 Lodge was admitted to the College of Physicians and the next year he swore an oath of allegiance and the privy council issued the order effectively protecting him from prosecution for recusancy. Although his name appears on a list of recusants in 1618, there is no evidence that Lodge's Catholicism caused him trouble after 1611. Indeed, the biographical assumption is that he established a viable medical practice in London in part because he attracted Catholic patients. 
Lodge continued to write and publish alongside his medical practice. His later literary reputation rests on two monumental translations, a folio volume of the works of the Jewish historian Josephus, and a folio volume of the prose works of Seneca. First published in 1602, 'The Famous and Memorable Workes of Josephus' was reprinted at least nine times in the seventeenth century. Late sixteenth-century interest in Josephus's history of the Jews and its later redactions is well attested; a copy entry for a translation of Josephus was first made in the Stationers' register in 1591 and both Thomas Nashe's 'Christs Teares Over Jerusalem' (1593) and Thomas Deloney's 'Canaans Calamitie' (1598) use the fall of Jerusalem as a cautionary allegory for contemporary London. Lodge seeks, he says in his introduction to the reader, to make history available for study: 'it is the most exact and chiefest interest of historie to awaken mans idleness, and arme them against casualities, and the whole bent of example hath no other issue... For as life, so Historie (the image of life) is fraught with pleasure, and displeasure; and onely in the use of life, the wisdome of life consisteth. ('Works', 4.25, 27)' Whether Lodge was the intended translator in 1591 or entered upon the task after the transfer of copy in 1598 is not known. The translation of Seneca also responded to an already established interest and occupied many years. An initial entry for the copy is dated 1600 and in a letter to Sir Thomas Edmondes in 1610 Lodge writes as though the translation were almost completed. The first edition of 'The Workes both Morall and Naturall of Lucius Annaeus Seneca' appeared in 1614. Lodge prepared a revised edition, published in 1620, that was to become a standard translation until the twentieth century, and the basis of selection and redaction by others, beginning with Roger L'Estrange's 'Seneca's 'Morals'' (1679). 
While practising medicine and translating Josephus and Seneca, Lodge also published other smaller works. In 1601 he translated selections of Catholic devotional writings by Luis of Granada, 'The Flowers of Lodowick of Granada'. Two years later a quarto volume, 'A Treatise of the Plague', reflects Lodge's vocational reading, his immediate practice as a physician, and his interest in making knowledge available to readers. Another text of popularized medical knowledge, 'The poore mans talentt', circulated in manuscript, the original dedicated to and evidently prepared for the countess of Arundel as an aid to her 'charitie' ('Works', 4.3). Lodge's final published work, a translation of Simon Goulart's commentary on the poetry of Du Bartas, the French Huguenot poet, is contemporaneous with his revision of the Seneca translation. English poets had been interested in Du Bartas's poetry since the 1580s; Philip Sidney worked on a translation before his death in 1586 and Joshua Sylvester's translation of the complete works appeared in 1605. 'A Learned Summary upon the Famous Poeme of... Du Bartas' was first published in 1621 and went through four editions before 1640. 
The last years of Lodge's life might have been lived in financial comfort. In 1612 the last of his brothers died and Lodge inherited an estate of enough value that a portion was leased for $200 a year. But as both Charles Sisson and Alice Walker have shown, Lodge continued to be embroiled in lawsuits over financial matters involving both debts and obligations that he owed and claims that he made upon the land of others. In any case, Lodge continued to practise medicine. In 1625 the London aldermen named Lodge as a physician who might be employed in relation to the plague. Early in the autumn of 1625 Lodge died, presumably of the plague. He died intestate; the administration of his estate was granted to his wife on 12 October 1625. 
Although Lodge was occasionally recognized by his contemporaries, his name occurs less frequently than might be expected from the range of his work and the length of his life. Some of the mentions, moreover, are not easily understandable in relation to what is taken to be Lodge's 'oeuvre'. Francis Meres's naming Lodge as among 'the best for comedy' is one such example; Edmund Howe's listing him among the 'Latin poets' in his continuation of Stow's 'Annales' is another. 'The Returne from Parnassus' notes that Lodge has 'his oare in every paper boat' and 'turns over Galen every day' ('The Three Parnassus Plays', ed. J. B. Leishman, 1949, 239). Lodge's dedications and direct or indirect autobiographical statements suggest personal friendships, some of long standing, but no permanent intellectual circle. The aristocratic Howard, Carey, and Strange families, the poets Spenser, Daniel, and Drayton, the professional writers Robert Greene and Barnabe Riche, the stationers Edward White and John Busbie, the professional secretaries and scribes Ralph Crane and Peter Bale may well have known each other, but they do not form any coherent social grouping. 
Lodge's later reputation, the long life of 'Rosalynde' and his translations of Josephus and Seneca notwithstanding, is eclipsed by that of his contemporaries, especially Shakespeare whose use of 'Rosalynde' kept Lodge's name current even as critical comparisons inevitably slighted Lodge. In the 'Dictionary of National Biography' Sidney Lee wrote that Lodge should be remembered primarily as a lyric poet. Edmund Gosse's edition, 'The Complete Works of Thomas Lodge' (not including any of the translations), had been printed only ten years before Lee wrote. While Lodge's poetry still features in anthologies of Elizabethan verse, critical attention has turned toward the fictions in the century since Lee's comment and Gosse's edition. The convergence of literary and historical investigations at the end of the twentieth century suggests that Lodge merits continued and renewed attention for some of the very reasons that may have inhibited earlier recognition: the length of his active life as a writer, the range of his writing activity, his Catholic affinity or affiliation, as well as for the undisputed literary accomplishment of his best work. 


@@@@@


doc= 16924


Lodge, William (1649-1689), etcher and landscape draughtsman, born on 4 July 1649 at Leeds, the son of William Lodge and his wife, Elizabeth Sykes, came from families of merchants in the cloth trade; his mother's grandfather, Richard Sykes, was one of the first aldermen of Leeds when it was incorporated as a borough in 1629. He attended a school in Leeds before being admitted in 1666 to Jesus College, Cambridge, and in 1668 to Lincoln's Inn in London, but on inheriting an income of $300 a year had no further need to earn a living. He had taken up painting, drawing, and etching as an amateur at Cambridge. 
In 1669-70 Lodge accompanied Thomas Belasyse, Lord Fauconberg, the new ambassador to Venice, and remained in Italy for two years, during which time he visited Rome and Provence. After his return he published in 1679 a translation of Giacomo Barri's 'Viaggio pittoresco d'Italia' under the title 'The Painter's Voyage of Italy', which he illustrated with his own etchings of artists' portraits. In the mid-1670s he met members of the circle of 'virtuosi' in York, and one of these acquaintances, Mr Bolter of York, later gave George Vertue an account of his life. Vertue was given another account by Ralph Thoresby of Leeds, whose wife was a relation of Lodge's (Thoresby always referred to Lodge as 'cousin' in his diary, and Lodge's name frequently appears in his correspondence). These narratives remain the chief sources of information about Lodge's life. 
Lodge was a close friend of the engraver Francis Place, with whom he made a sketching tour in Wales in 1678 at the height of the Popish Plot fever, when both men were arrested as Jesuit spies. He made copious drawings on many tours, some of which survive in Leeds Public Library, York City Art Gallery, and the British Museum. Most are made with a fine pen, and give the appearance of being studies for etchings. According to Vertue, Lodge also painted portraits in oils, but none is now traceable. Lodge's etchings have not been investigated since the list of fifteen that Thoresby gave Vertue. Among them are a pair of views of York, dated 1678; a 'Book of Divers Prospects done after the Life', containing small oblong Italian landscapes; and some miscellaneous views in London and near York. Some of these were published by his fellow Yorkshireman Pierce Tempest. Lodge also etched various plates of shells to illustrate papers by Martin Lister published in the Royal Society's 'Philosophical Transactions'. Unlike Place and other members of the York circle, he seems never to have made a mezzotint. Lodge died, unmarried, on 27 August 1689, and Vertue records a curious anecdote that he was buried in Harewood church, against his expressed wishes, but as had been foretold in a dream he had had. 


@@@@@


doc= 16925


Lodvill, Philip (d. 1767), religious writer, was born in Oxfordshire into an established family. He was the author of the first authoritative account in English of the doctrines and practices of the Orthodox church, which was published as 'The Orthodox Confession of the Catholic and Apostolic Eastern Church' in 1762. It was a translation of a confession written in the seventeenth century by Pyotr Mogila, metropolitan of Kiev, and approved by a synod of Orthodox bishops. Lodvill was a regular attendant at the Russian Orthodox church at 32 Welbeck Street in London and received the prayer oil from the hands of Father Andrey Samborsky, who became confessor to Catherine the Great of Russia. Lodvill states in his brief preface that he intended his translation to spread understanding of his faith and to encourage others to join the Orthodox church. 
Lodvill was married, probably to a Greek woman, and one of his daughters married the British consul at Salonika, Peter Paradise; their son was John Paradise (1743-1795). Lodvill died on 14 March 1767 and was buried on 22 March in Bow church, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 16926


William Loe (d. 1679), may have followed him in acting as a preacher to the Merchant Adventurers, issuing from Trinity College, Cambridge (from where he graduated in 1626 and of which he was a fellow), on 30 October 1627 'The Merchants Manuell' (1628), dedicated to the governor and members of the company. Loe records that the young William, having proceeded MA in 1629 and BD in 1636, was in Paris about 1638, where he was involved in discussions with leading Jesuits; he became vicar of Kirkby Masham, Yorkshire, in 1639. 


@@@@@


doc= 16927


Loe, William (d. 1645), Church of England clergyman, may have been born in Kent. He graduated BA from St Alban Hall, Oxford, on 5 November 1597 and proceeded MA on 14 June 1600, at which time, Anthony Wood records, he 'was much in esteem for Latin, Greek and human learning'. On 8 June 1618 Loe graduated BD from Merton College, and he was awarded his DD on 8 July. In 1598 he was presented to the vicarage of Churcham, Gloucestershire, and in 1600 was appointed master of the college school in Gloucester. It may be that about this time Loe married, but nothing is known of his wife. 
On 3 September 1602 Loe was presented by the queen to a prebend of Gloucester in succession to Samuel Proctor; he was installed on 30 September 1602. It was as the holder of this dignity that he preached 'The Joy of Jerusalem', a sermon at Paul's Cross on 18 June 1609. On 26 November 1611 he was presented to the rectory of Stoke Severn, Worcestershire, and in 1614 published four sermons preached in Gloucester Cathedral. However, this smooth progress did not continue for long. In 1617 William Laud, newly appointed dean of Gloucester, ordered the removal of the communion table in the cathedral to the high altar; there was strong opposition, and a protest or 'libel' was issued against Laud in which Loe appears to have been implicated. Perhaps it was this which helped earn the enmity of an unnamed powerful public man, later complained of. Yet Loe's reputation still stood high. Appointed chaplain to James I, he delivered a series of seven sermons at St Michael Cornhill and in the published version dedicated to the king was bold enough to suggest the need for moderate reform of 'the apparent errors and abuses crept into the church' (W. Loe, 'The Mysterie of Mankind', 1619, preface). 
In 1618 Loe was appointed pastor of the English company of Merchant Adventurers at Hamburg, though his departure was delayed for almost a year. Yet the procedure was, on his own account, given in 'The Merchant Reall', a sermon published at Hamburg in 1620: 'both civil and honest. First by free election of your own fellowship. Secondly by approbation of the state whence I came. Thirdly by recommendation of his sacred majesty under his own hand, who pleased to grace me his unworthy servant with his royal letters, and of the most reverend archbishop of Canterbury... Fourthly with attestation from the famous university of Oxford, under their seal, and from the cathedral church.' Armed with such impressive credentials, Loe did not hesitate to give advice on matters of a political nature. He warned his audience to ensure the orthodoxy of their apprentices: 'Their hearts are alienated, so are their actions, their intendments, their purposes. Unite them once in religion, they are yours absolute, present or absent; sleeping or waking, by sea or land'; most unusually, he did not disown the label puritan but sought to distinguish between 'puritans in action... to whom all things are pure, altogether busy in honest action' and 'puritans in faction', that is, 'all papists, anabaptists, brownists, separatists, and all singularists whatsoever' (Loe, 'Merchant Reall', 1-2). 
Loe remained in Hamburg almost a year, until at least 24 January 1620, when 'Songs of Sion, Set for the Joy of God's Deere Ones' was signed 'from my study within the English house at Hamborough'. His eldest son, 
Shortly after his own return to England, Loe senior issued his 'Vox Clamantis: a Still Voice to the Three Thrice Honourable Estates of Parliament', entered in the Stationers' register on 12 March 1621. In his epistle dedicated to George Villiers, duke of Buckingham, the author claimed that this work had 'lain suppressed some years, by means of a certain great one', recalling the 'aspersions of faction and sedition... which it pleased that great one mentioned to cast upon me at that time in an honourable assembly'. Loe also hinted darkly that this opponent would have had him put him to death: 'if some reverend fathers of the church, the blessed beau-peers of divinity, had not stayed that enraged fury against me: but not long after, the hand of almighty God surprised that greatness, clipped it, restrained it, that it might doe no more harm, and so it remains to this day.' Loe survived and prospered -- he was again a chaplain to the king by 9 October 1622, when he preached at Theobalds 'The Kings Shoe' (1623) -- but he continued to take risks. In January 1623, in 'The Kings Sword' -- a sermon before James and Prince Charles, newly returned from his abortive expedition to Spain -- Loe was careful to deny presuming to advise the king, but did actually urge him to the defence of the true religion by the sword, counselling military support for the Palatinate. 
It was perhaps about this time that Loe was instituted to the vicarage of Putney, where he caused to have the entries from earlier registers of the parish copied into a new register, according to his statement on its flyleaf dated 17 January 1624 and signed 'William Leo, DD' (Bannerman, iii). He is also known to have been vicar of Wandsworth in 1631: a story is told of him that in a 'parish near London' -- perhaps Wandsworth -- at morning service, in the absence of a colleague named Adams, he preached on the text 'Adam, where art thou?' to which the missing cleric responded in the afternoon with an exposition of the words 'Lo, here am I!' (Chester, 140). In 1632 he published 'The Incomparable Jewell', a marriage sermon celebrating the virtuous wife. Loe is last heard of in connection with the death in April 1645 of the controversial figure Daniel Featley, whom he attended in his last sickness, and at whose funeral on 21 April he gave the oration, published later that year. Loe himself also died that year and was buried in Westminster Abbey on 21 September 1645. 


@@@@@


doc= 16928


Loewe, Louis (1809-1888), linguist, was born of Jewish parents at Zulz, Prussian Silesia. After attending successively Rosenburg Academy and the colleges of Leszno, Nikolsburg (Mikulov), and Bratislava, studying theology, oriental languages, and the sciences, he matriculated at the University of Berlin, where he took the degree of PhD. His knowledge of languages and numismatics was already considerable, and on a visit to Hamburg he was entrusted with arranging the oriental coins in the Sprewitz collection. On arrival in London, he obtained introductions to the duke of Sussex and Admiral Sir Sydney Smith, through whom he became known to many leading scholars and patrons of learning in England. Pursuing his researches Loewe subsequently visited Oxford, Cambridge, and Paris. In 1836 he undertook, under the auspices of the duke of Sussex and Admiral Sir Sidney Smith, a three-year tour in the East for the purpose of extending his knowledge of such languages as Arabic, Coptic, Nubian, Turkish, and Circassian. Near Safed he was ill-treated and robbed by some Druses, and had to continue his journey through Palestine dressed as a Bedouin. In 1839 the duke of Sussex appointed him his lecturer on oriental languages. 
On his return from his travels in 1839 Loewe went to study in the Vatican Library. At this time Sir Moses Montefiore passed through Rome on his second journey to the Holy Land, and Loewe, who had been Montefiore's guest at Ramsgate in 1835, readily accepted his invitation to accompany him to Palestine as his secretary. This close relationship with Sir Moses ceased only at the latter's death, and some regarded Loewe as 'the power behind the throne' (Morais, 208). In the memorable mission to Damascus and Constantinople in 1840, and on the thirteen succeeding journeys, extending from 1839 to 1874, Loewe accompanied Montefiore, to whom his linguistic acquirements and shrewd sense proved invaluable. In 1840 he addressed a large mixed congregation in the synagogue at Galata in four languages. His services to the missions and philanthropic schemes of Montefiore were frequently acknowledged by the Jewish board of deputies. On 25 March 1841 he was presented by Montefiore to Queen Victoria. He married in 1844. 
In 1846 Loewe delivered two lectures on the Samaritans at Sussex Hall, Leadenhall Street, and in the same year he preached in the great synagogue at Vilna, on the occasion of Montefiore's mission to Russia. He was appointed first principal of Jews' College, Finsbury Square, in 1856, but soon resigned the office. He became examiner for oriental languages to the Royal College of Preceptors in 1858, and in the same year opened a Jewish boarding-school at Brighton. His advertisement in the 'Jewish Chronicle' offered Hindustani and fencing, and the assurance that 'the pupils are permitted to write to their Parents or Guardians once a week, and their letters are NOT examined' ('The Jewish Chronicle, 1841-1941', 39). He was naturalized on 12 July 1862. When in 1868 Montefiore founded the Judith Theological College at Ramsgate, he chose Loewe as principal and director, and Loewe filled that office for twenty years. 
Sir Moses Montefiore by his will named Loewe one of his executors and entrusted him with all his diaries and other private papers to enable him to write a biography of Lady Montefiore. This became a biography of Sir Moses also, and an oblique record of Loewe's own work and travels. It was completed in June 1888, and published as 'Diaries of Sir Moses and Lady Montefiore', edited by Dr L. Loewe, 2 vols. (1890). 
In 1841 Loewe prepared an English translation of J. B. Levinsohn's 'Efes Dammim' (1839), a series of conversations at Jerusalem between a Greek patriarch and a chief rabbi regarding the revival of the blood accusation in Soslow, Poland. In 1842 Loewe translated the first two conversations in 'Matteh Dan' by Chacham David Nieto, as 'The Rod of Judgment'. He also published 'Observations on a unique Cufic gold coin, issued by Mustali, tenth caliph of the Fatimite dynasty' (1849) and 'A Dictionary of the Circassian Language' (1854), originally printed in the 'Transactions of the Philological Society'. 
Loewe was a member of the Royal Asiatic and Numismatic societies, and of the Asiatic Society of Paris. He was a quiet, laborious scholar, with an aversion to public life and, except to those who knew him well, could seem cold and unsympathetic. Early in 1888 he moved to London where he died on 5 November 1888 at 53 Warwick Road, Maida Vale, leaving his wife, Emma, three sons and four daughters. He was buried at Willesden. 


@@@@@


doc= 16929


Loewenthal, Johann Jacob (1810-1876), chess player, son of a Hungarian merchant, was born at Budapest in July 1810. He was educated at the 'Gymnasium' of his native town, and received his first chess lessons from Szen, the noted Hungarian player, then a clerk in the archives at Pest. In 1842-5 he helped Szen and Grimm win a correspondence match with the celebrated Cercle des Echecs of Paris. He also travelled to Vienna and Berlin to play von Heydebrandt and study under Lasa, Anderssen, and other masters. Though a non-combatant in the revolutions of 1849, Loewenthal was an ardent follower of Kossuth, and held a civil appointment under his administration; thus he was expelled from Austro-Hungary in 1849, and sought refuge in the United States of America. For some time he ran a club in Cincinnati; he also played the twelve-year-old Paul Morphy, who beat him twice, with one draw. 
In 1851 Loewenthal visited Britain to take part in a chess tournament; being unsuccessful, he was reluctant to return to America. Howard Staunton procured him the secretaryship of the St George's chess club (1852-5). He also became chess editor of the 'Illustrated News of the World' and of 'The Era' (1854-67). He welcomed Morphy to London in 1858, accepted with a good grace defeat (by nine games to three with three draws) in a match with him, and published in 1860 'Morphy's Games of Chess, with Analytical and Critical Notes'. 
Matches were never Loewenthal's forte: 'he was, indeed, the most uneven player of his time... Staunton complained most irascibly of his 'glaring oversights' and 'stupendous blunders' -- and they were no less exasperating because he seemed to blunder against everyone except Staunton himself' (Cole and Diggle, 308); but 'it is not too much to say that his theoretical knowledge of the game was unrivalled' ('ILN', 119). None the less, he won the tournament of 1857 at Manchester -- beating Horwitz and Anderssen -- and that of 1858 at Birmingham, beating Staunton. In 1853, unfortunately, being something of a protege of Staunton, he was persuaded into a match, effectively as Staunton's representative, against the latter's rival Harrwitz. Sneered at by the 'British Chess Review' as 'the wandering Jew' and harassed by Harrwitz's partisans with organ-grinders and cigar-smokers, the series' thirty-three games finally proved too much, and Loewenthal lost by ten games to eleven. Staunton was distinctly cooler to him thereafter. 
Loewenthal was appointed manager of the great London chess congress of 1862, in which the first prize was taken by Anderssen, and in which he tied with Joseph Blackburne for eighth place after abandoning his last games. Thereafter, he concentrated on the administrative and literary side of chess. He edited the 'Chess Player's Magazine' throughout its life from 1863 to 1867, and was, from 1865 to 1869, manager of the British Chess Association, of which Lord Lyttelton was president. After the secretaryship of the St George's (a post perhaps dependent on Staunton's continued patronage), he was from 1857 to 1864 president of the St James's chess club and from 1872 president of the City of London. Loewenthal became a naturalized British subject in 1866. The following year, a German speaker found: 'so anxious was he both in outward appearance and manner to be taken for an Englishman that he would rather converse in broken French... than have recourse to German, which of course he spoke fluently' (Hoffer, 754). Loewenthal was a friend and frequent opponent at chess of W. G. Ward, under whose influence he joined the Roman Catholic church. By 1874 he needed the support of a subscription fund of $500. He retired to the Sussex coast because of illness and died, unmarried, at Burlington House, St Leonards, Sussex, on 20 July 1876. The residue of the subscription funded a Loewenthal memorial cup for the county chess championship. 


@@@@@


doc= 16930


Lofft, Capel (1751-1824), radical editor and writer, was born on 14 November 1751 in London, the only son of Christopher Lofft, a former private secretary to Sarah, duchess of Marlborough, and his wife, Anne Capell, who was the sister of the Shakespearian scholar Edward Capell. He was educated at Eton College from 1759 to 1769, when he matriculated from Peterhouse, Cambridge. He did not take a degree and in 1770 was admitted to Lincoln's Inn, whence he was called to the bar in 1775. At Peterhouse, the college of John Jebb and John Disney, he encountered a spirit of theological heterodoxy which influenced him for the rest of his life. He did not acquire a large legal practice, but in 1776 edited a compilation of reports of cases in king's bench, including several decisions of Lord Mansfield which were not recorded elsewhere. Lofft's report of Mansfield's crucial decision in the case of James Somerset -- that the laws of England did not recognize slavery -- allowed the nascent anti-slavery movement to derive a considerable political advantage. Thereafter Lofft was associated with movements for constitutional, legal, and religious reform. He was a strong critic of the British government's attempt to re-assert control over the North American colonies by force. 
In 1778 Lofft married, as his first wife, Anne (died 1801), daughter of the architect Henry Emlyn; they had three children, of whom the second, Robert Emlyn Lofft (died 1847), became an officer in the Bengal army. In 1781 Lofft inherited from his uncle Edward Capell substantial estates at Troston and Stanton in Suffolk, and for many years Troston Hall was his principal residence. He was now able to live independently of any profession; he became a prominent figure in Suffolk society, serving as a magistrate, and devoted his energy to writing and campaigns for reform. He was a founder member of the Society for Constitutional Information in 1780, organized a reform petition from Bury St Edmunds in 1783, and wrote many articles in favour of reform for the 'Bury Journal'. James Boswell, who met Lofft in 1784 in company which included Dr Johnson, described him as 'a most zealous Whig', with 'a mind... full of learning and knowledge' (Boswell, 'Life', 4.258). Lofft indeed became something of a polymath, with a serious interest in English literature, history, classics, foreign languages, botany, and astronomy. He represented the best of the amateur tradition in learning, exemplified by the financially independent country gentleman. 
Although brought up in the Church of England, by the 1780s Lofft had come to embrace Unitarian doctrines. In a letter to Joseph Parker in 1790 he described himself 'not as a Member of the Establishment but as a Dissenter so far removed from it as to be out of the Protection of the 'Act of Toleration'' ('Letters and remains of Capel Lofft'). He gave strong support to the campaign for the repeal of the 'Test and Corporation Acts' in 1787-90, contributing a 'History of the Corporation and Test Acts' (1790), which included a valuable list of the minority of MPs who had voted for repeal on 8 May 1789. He remained convinced of the need for complete civil equality for protestant dissenters, but, as he told his fellow reformer Christopher Wyvill in 1809: 'I must acknowledge I scarcely can expect religious Freedom to come but as a consequence of a Reform in the Election & Duration of Parliament' (N. Yorks. CRO, Wyvill of Constable Burton MSS, ZFW 7/2/210/13). 
During the 1790s Lofft vehemently opposed the ministry of the younger Pitt, especially in its war and taxation policies. He moved towards the more radical wing of the reform movement, arguing for the Society for Constitutional Information's programme of universal male suffrage and urging Wyvill himself to adopt a more radical approach. He used his influence in Suffolk in this cause, addressing several public meetings, and in 1800 his name was removed from the list of magistrates when he publicly opposed the imposition of the death penalty upon a young girl ('The New Suffolk Garland', 52-4). A few years later he joined the Society for the Diffusion of Knowledge upon the Punishment of Death, which campaigned against capital punishment. 
Anne Lofft died in 1801. On 10 March 1802 at St Benedict's, Cambridge, Lofft married, as his second wife, Sarah Watson (1780-1855), daughter of Joseph Finch of Cambridge. She was an author and poet in her own right. They had a son and two daughters; the son, Capell Lofft (1806-1873), became a miscellaneous writer of some note. Lofft himself maintained a high literary output, which included editions of Milton's 'Paradise Lost' (1792) and of Virgil's 'Georgics' (1803), together with a pamphlet entitled 'On the Revival of the Cause of Reform in the Representation of the Commons in Parliament' (1809) and a collection of Shakespearian aphorisms (1812). He was the patron of the poet Robert Bloomfield, to whose 'Farmer's Boy' he contributed a preface (1798). During the Regency period he maintained his radical political opinions; his closest associates were literary figures -- S. T. Coleridge, W. Hazlitt, H. Crabb Robinson -- who were also critics of the regime. Like Hazlitt, Lofft was a warm admirer of Napoleon Bonaparte. While remaining committed to strictly constitutional methods of proceeding, he refused to be deflected by a fear of popular pressure. As he told Wyvill in 1809: 'No violence, even of Mr Cobbett, shall make me other than a Friend to right Principles whencesoever they come' (N. Yorks. CRO, Wyvill of Constable Burton MSS, ZFW 7/2/208/48). In 1818 he embarked on a continental tour before settling at Turin four years later. Early in 1824 he moved to nearby Moncalieri, where he died on 26 May of the same year. He was buried in the protestant church of St Germain, Piedmont, and was survived by his wife, who died on 11 July 1855. 
In its obituary the 'Gentleman's Magazine' offered a description of Lofft's appearance: 'His figure was small, upright, and boyish; his dress -- without fit, fashion or neatness; his speaking -- small-voiced, long sentenced, and involved; his manner -- persevering, but without command' ('GM', 94/2, 1824, 184). His rather dishevelled person is captured, probably accurately, in S. Knight's cartoon 'A View Near Bury-Suffolk'. He was a perfect example of a Cambridge-educated whig, brought up in a tradition of Anglican latitudinarianism and subsequently a Unitarian. He expressed a vigorously libertarian mentality, while not challenging the fundamental property relationships of the society within which he occupied an eminent position. According to Wyvill, he 'knew how to temper the ardour of his zeal with candour, moderation, and the most conciliatory prudence' (Wyvill, 'Political Papers', 5.88 n.). His energy was distributed over too many areas of interest for him to become an outstanding expert upon any particular subject, but he none the less established a secure niche within the second rank of literary and political figures of his age. 


@@@@@


doc= 16931


Lofft, Capell (1806-1873), classical scholar, poet, and writer, fourth son of Capel Lofft (1751-1824), and only son with his second wife, Sarah Watson, daughter of John Finch, was born on 9 March 1806 at Troston Hall, Suffolk. In 1814 he was placed on the foundation of Eton College, and from there proceeded in 1824 to King's College, Cambridge, where he became a fellow in 1827. Having obtained the Craven university scholarship -- the highest classical distinction open in those days to King's men -- in 1827, he graduated BA in 1829, MA in 1832. He was called to the bar of the Middle Temple in 1834, but never attained, if he sought, professional eminence. In October 1837 he vacated his fellowship by his marriage to Mary, daughter of William Anderson of Newnham House, Cambridge. They had two daughters, the elder of whom (wife of the Revd T. H. Irwin) was drowned, together with her only child, in a boating accident on Lake Geneva -- a calamity to which Lofft alludes in his preface to the second edition of 'Ernest' (xxv). 
In 1837 Lofft published anonymously his first literary undertaking, a mental autobiography with a didactic purpose, entitled 'Self-formation, or, The history of an individual mind, intended as a guide for the intellect through difficulties to success, by a fellow of a college'. Harriet Martineau said that every parent of boys ought to read the book. Lofft's object is 'to show, as the result of his own proper and personal experience, that self-instruction is the one great end of rational education', and 'to point out how habits of thoughtfulness are to be formed'. He extols religion as the very best way to foster intellectual and moral advancement, attributing the development of his own sense of religion to an excursion in Devon with the 'Bible' as his only companion, and his subsequent perusal of William Law's 'Serious Call to a Devout and Holy Life'. After his marriage Lofft resided for a short time in London, but a roving life was more to his taste, and he spent most of his time on the continent, where the strong liberal principles which he inherited from his father and visions of social perfectibility led him into the society of some of the chief radical figures of the time. His next publication, likewise anonymous, was an epic poem in twelve books, 'Ernest', dedicated to the memory of Milton, and printed for the author in 1839. It was soon withdrawn from circulation. The poem embodies a German tradition of Ernest, a parallel to the Welsh one of Arthur, both of whom are to return and reign and fulfil other patriot prophecies. It represents the growth, struggles, and triumph of Chartism. H. H. Milman, when noticing the poem in the 'Quarterly Review' (December 1839), expressed the highest admiration of the genius of the unknown author, but condemned the work as wildly inconsistent and lawless in its style and object. A second edition was published in 1868 with the title 'Ernest, the Rule of Right'. In the preface the author complained of the unreadiness of the English people to support the Chartist movement. 
Lofft was in America during the civil war, and while living in Minnesota prepared an edition of the 'Self-Communion' of Marcus Antoninus, with critical notes to the Greek text. The title ran ''Markou... Ta es heauton Antoninou' sive ad seipsum commentarii morales. Recensuit, denuo ordinavit, expurgavit, restituit, notis illustravit... C. L. Porcher, N. Eboraci U.S., A.D.' 1861. A. liberatae reip. l.. Despite its eccentricity, some of Lofft's emendations have been accepted by more recent editors. In 1868 Lofft published in London 'New Testament: suggestions for reformation of Greek text from the self-conferred papal dictatorship and blind obstructiveness of mediaeval monkish copyists, on principles of logical criticism, by R. E. Storer' (that is, Restorer). 
In his old age Lofft abandoned the radicalism of his youth and purchased two considerable estates, one in Sussex, and the other, called Millmead, in Amelia county, Virginia, USA. He died at Millmead on 1 October 1873. 


@@@@@


doc= 16932


Forster, (Emma Judith) Mary (1853-1885), watercolour painter, was born at 20 Marlborough Buildings, Bath, on 6 December 1853, the daughter of Thomas Barton Watkin Forster (1822-1887) and his wife, Emma Stewart Galbraith (died 1882). Until her marriage she lived at Holt Manor, near Bradford-on-Avon, Wiltshire, the seat of her father, an amateur landscape painter. Father and daughter painted in Wales and France as well as locally, and Mary Forster also exhibited scenes of Yorkshire, Norfolk, and Hampshire. She may have visited Switzerland with her father and probably knew Scotland, her mother being a Galbraith from Macrihanish, Argyll. From the age of twenty Mary Forster exhibited in the annual general exhibitions at the Dudley Gallery, London; she also showed at the Royal Academy in 1876, 1878, and 1880. In early 1884 she was elected an associate of the Royal Society of Painters in Water Colours, but her art, in J. L. Roget's words, was: 'too delicate and refined to attract the attention which it deserved during the two years only in which her landscapes were accorded a place in the gallery. But they afforded fair ground for anticipation that had she lived longer they would have become a much more important feature in the annual gatherings. (Roget, 2.426)' On 3 June 1884, at Bradford-on-Avon, Mary Forster married Samuel Hill Smith Lofthouse ('b'. 1841), a barrister, who had himself exhibited a winter landscape at the Society of British Artists in 1874. For her final exhibits she used her married name. She died in childbirth at their home, Elmbank, Lower Halliford, Walton-on-Thames, Surrey, on 2 May 1885, during the summer exhibition of the Royal Watercolour Society, at which her 'Pembroke Castle' was attracting very favourable attention. A collection of twenty-six frames of her studies and sketches was hung in the society's winter show that year as a memorial. 


@@@@@


doc= 16933


Lofting, John (c.1659-1742), merchant and manufacturer of engines, was a native of the Netherlands, one of at least two brothers. He later recorded that he 'lived seven years at Amsterdam with one of the masters of the fire engines there, and is thoroughly acquainted with the methods practised in those parts in quenching of fires' ('DNB'). He came to England, obtaining grants of free denization in July 1686 and August 1688. At the time of his marriage, at St Nicholas Cole Abbey, London, on 3 May 1689, Lofting was described as a merchant, aged about thirty, and resident in the parish of St Thomas Apostle, London. His wife was Hester Bass of St Michael Queenhithe, London, aged nineteen, sister of Jeremiah Basse, future governor of New Jersey. In June 1689 Lofting enrolled in the Company of Free Shipwrights, paying quarterage until January 1699, thereby becoming a citizen of London. 
In October 1689 Lofting and Nicholas de Wael petitioned for a patent for the sole making and selling of 'an engine for quenching fire, the like never seen before in this kingdom' ('CSP dom.', '1689-90', 283). A patent was granted to Lofting (no. 263) and a joint-stock company set up to exploit it. Lofting's fire engine was probably the first in England to use a wired suction hose to throw water as high as 400 feet, and could 'force the Water in a continued Stream into Alleys, Yards, Back houses, Stair-Cases; and other obscure places, where other Engines are useless' (Houghton, letter of 5 Jan 1694). The engines were employed at several royal palaces, and their use at a number of London fires was praised by Christopher Wren. In 1694 Lofting was involved in disputes with a rival, George Oldner, over advice to London aldermen on fire precautions. John Houghton advocated using Lofting's fire engines for drainage or the watering of agricultural land, and Lofting also marketed an engine for 'Starting of Beer and other Liquors' ('LondG', 14-17 March 1691). After 1696 nothing is known of Lofting's engines, production may have ceased, but his advice on fire engines was sought at Marlow in 1730. 
In April 1693 Lofting was granted a patent (no. 319) for making and selling an engine to replace hand punching in the manufacture of brass thimbles. He began producing thimbles and sewing rings shortly afterwards, the first important manufacturer in England. John Houghton's detailed description of the horse-powered thimble works at Islington shows that Lofting had imported skilled workmen from the continent as well as the technology. Shortly before July 1697, Lofting moved from Islington to a water mill at Marlow in Buckinghamshire in order to double production to over 2 million thimbles a year. 
Throughout the 1690s Lofting continued as a merchant. He imported iron wire for his engines, dealt in wheat, exported upholstery ware and pewter to the Baltic and America, petitioned parliament about the import of French goods, traded with his brother in Amsterdam, and in 1696 was accused of setting up a lottery for illegal currency speculation. In 1698 Lofting and Jeremiah Basse shipped goods to Perth Amboy, East New Jersey, in the 'Hester', a sloop owned by Basse. It discharged without calling at or paying New York customs dues, and the governor of New York seized the ship and sold it. Lofting and Basse appealed to parliament and took legal action, eventually receiving damages and costs of $1890, but not before Lofting was declared bankrupt in March 1700. 
About 1696 Lofting, in partnership with Gaspar Frederick Henning, a German immigrant, obtained a 31-year lease to Marlow corn mills. They continued grinding corn, but set up an oil mill and a thimble manufactory as well. Lofting took up residence at Marlow soon afterwards, and this business became the basis of his revived fortunes after the bankruptcy, receiving praise from Daniel Defoe in 1721. From 1714 Lofting had a new partner, a corn factor called Merrett, but from 1724 he operated alone. A London business address was maintained, at Broken Wharf in Thames Street. Making his will in 1733 Lofting described himself as a gentleman whose living now mainly arose from the good management of his mills, but a codicil in 1737 noted that 'my estate has been lessened by losses of Rent and other accidents' (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/719 sig. 193). 
On 23 July 1709 Hester was buried at Marlow. On 16 December 1710 Lofting married Mary Carter of Eton at St Mary Magdalen, Old Fish Street, London. Mary died in October 1721 and Lofting never remarried. The first marriage produced at least one daughter and six sons, the second one daughter and two sons; but when Lofting died on 15 June 1742 only the six sons from the first marriage survived. The mills, the house he lived in, and the Three Tuns New inn in Marlow were left to his son Benjamin, who was to make payments to his brothers. Benjamin and his brother John continued the business, but do not seem to have renewed the lease to the mills in 1753. Samuel pursued a naval career until 1745, when he was dismissed, perhaps for suffering himself to be beaten by a marine, and William acquired wealth through a legal career and established a trust, Lofting's Charity, for the benefit of the poor of Marlow. 


@@@@@


doc= 16934


Loftus, Adam (1533/4-1605), Church of Ireland archbishop of Dublin, was born at Swineside in the parish of Coverham, Yorkshire, the second son of Edward Loftus. His father was bailiff to the abbot of Coverham; Robert Loftus (died 1606), father of Adam Loftus, first Viscount Loftus of Ely (1568-1643), was his brother. His education at Cambridge University may have been at Trinity College, and he probably was appointed to the rectory of Outwell St Clement, Norfolk, in Edward VI's reign. He chose, however, to make his career in Ireland. 
Loftus first went to Ireland as chaplain to Thomas Radcliffe, third earl of Sussex, who was reappointed lord lieutenant in May 1560. Sussex's instructions ordered him to establish the reformation by putting into effect the 'Acts of Supremacy and Uniformity' of 1560. Loftus played a key role in formulating and implementing the policy of enforcement, an extremely complex task in a country where the power of the Irish privy council was politically and geographically limited. In this he had the backing of two influential patrons in England, both with special responsibility for Irish affairs, Sir William Cecil and Francis Walsingham. As a result, Loftus survived the dispatch and recall of all the Elizabethan governors, occasionally even deputizing for them, and successfully maintaining a working relationship with all but one, Sir John Perrot. He was nominated Church of Ireland archbishop of Armagh on 30 October 1562 and consecrated on 2 March 1563. He worked closely with Sussex during his lieutenancy (25 June 1560 to 25 May 1564) and with Sir Henry Sidney during his lord deputyship (20 January 1566 to 1 April 1571 and 18 September 1575 to 14 September 1578), the latter hailing him as a great religious reformer on his translation to the archbishopric of Dublin on 9 August 1567. Later governors relied on Loftus's detailed knowledge of Irish affairs and his political judgement. He served as one of the lord justices on three occasions: from 31 August 1582 to 21 June 1584, with Sir Henry Wallop; from 27 November 1597 to 15 April 1599, with Robert Gardiner; and from 25 September 1599 to 26 February 1600, with Sir George Carey. 
Loftus was appointed chaplain to Alexander Craik, bishop of Kildare, by April 1561. Presented to the rectory of Painstown in co. Meath, he found that the distance from Dublin, where he was obliged to preach, made it impossible to fulfil reforming tasks in his living. Sussex's design to implement the reform programme envisaged a leading role for Loftus after his appointment as archbishop of Armagh. With the submission of Shane O'Neill (6 January 1562), the archbishop might act as a political watchdog there (like lord presidents of the queen's council in the north). To give the impression of continuity, Elizabeth I issued a 'conge d'elire', although this was unnecessary after the 'Acts of Supremacy and Uniformity'. This stratagem to win over the Armagh chapter failed, as the dean, Terence Daniel, explained to the government on 2 September, because the chapter consisted mostly of Shane's horsemen. Loftus received permission to take the temporalities of the see from 30 October until his consecration. On 2 March 1563, in accordance with a royal mandate of 20 January, he was consecrated by Hugh Curwen, archbishop of Dublin. Dating his archiepiscopal title from 1562 insinuated a line of episcopal succession unbroken by the Reformation. The queen simultaneously appointed Loftus to the Irish privy council. He was in England for twelve months from August 1566 because of ill health due to the damp weather in Ireland, and was admitted DD at Cambridge University on 25 November. 
Loftus could not act as a reformer in Armagh, because of the lack of control by the Dublin government over the area. Residing whenever possible in his official residence, Termonfeckin, near Drogheda, he complained that his temporalities were worth only $20 per annum. During a visit to England he was granted (on 6 January 1565) the deanery of St Patrick's 'in commendam', to improve his income until other suitable provision could be made. Loftus duly resigned the deanery to the new lord chancellor Robert Weston, and was then finally chosen to become archbishop of Dublin. The appointment had been hotly contested. 
Throughout his career in Ireland, Loftus appears to have hankered after positions in England, in order either to cure his gout or to work more effectively. This was sometimes a device to remind the government of his indispensability. To abandon Ireland would have been impossible, considering his increasing commitments there. 
Starting his work with no local connections, Loftus realized quickly that he needed his own supporters. The secret of his success as a political survivor lay in his wide circle of influential friends. He married Jane (died 1595), eldest daughter of Adam Purdon of Lurgan Race, co. Louth, and they had twenty children, twelve surviving into adulthood. Through his own and his wife's families Loftus gained trustworthy associates among the gentry and Dublin patricians. His wife's relatives expected much from his episcopal patronage. In times of crisis, he cited his family commitments when asking the government for financial assistance. Irish clans periodically attacked Tallagh, his seat on the edge of the Wicklow mountains. A nephew and some of his men were killed at the gates of his castle in spring 1573. In 1580, during the rebellion of James Eustace, third Viscount Baltinglass, Loftus lived 'in a kind of imprisonment in his own house' (TNA: PRO, SP 63/84/1). In 1600 he reported that his daughters, married to the sons of servitors in King's county, now wasted by the O'Connors, had sought refuge in his house with their families and were utterly destitute. One of his sons, fighting in the queen's service, was still unpaid at the time. In 1589-90 times were better, however, and he had sufficient funds to build Rathfarnham Castle on the estate purchased from David Barry, third Viscount Barry. 
Loftus's policy of promoting family interests made him vulnerable to accusations of covetousness, nepotism, and even neglect of his duties. Neither archdiocese yielded substantial or reliable financial rewards. He tried to make up for this by recovering church property alienated by his predecessor but apparently 'never gained a groat by any lease' (TNA: PRO, SP 63/72/52). He often asked for remission of debts and reminded the authorities that moneys were due to him. For example, as keeper of the great seal, he applied on 20 April 1580 for the 10's'. a day to which he was entitled, because his 180 acres were not enough to make the necessary provision towards the education of his 'thirteen poor children' (ibid.). There is no doubt that most of his earnings came from his secular posts. 
Loftus based his drive for reformation on his preaching, for which he was renowned. Reformation of religion meant 'extirpation of superstition' and ignorance, from which obedience and discipline were assumed to follow. He tried to recruit new preachers from England. Craik, after several unsuccessful attempts, warned the government that the livings were too small. Sussex too was aware that the problem lay in the inadequate remuneration of properly trained new clergy. In 1567 Sidney identified the government policy of giving the richest benefices to laymen as the greatest hindrance to the Reformation. The Reformation legislation of 1560 facilitated the more systematic use of church property to reward government officials in Ireland; bishoprics were treated as crown property. The benefices available to the preaching clergy were even worse than those in northern England. In addition, unsympathetic patrons hampered reform. These unfavourable conditions made the failure of the Reformation virtually inevitable. 
As a religious reformer Loftus had obvious puritan leanings. During the vestiarian controversy (1565-6) he recorded his disapproval of the harsh treatment of London congregations and Cambridge men, arguing that the compromise promoted by the Church of England was the work of the devil. Loftus implored Cecil to ensure that the good and learned preachers who rejected 'the popish rags' should not be suspended. He was convinced that the restoration of 'the true and sincere ministry' required the removal of 'all the monuments, tokens and leavings of papistry; for as long as any of them remain, there remains also occasion of relapses unto the abolished superstition of Antichrist' (TNA: PRO, SP 63/14/22). That Loftus went unpunished for his stance seems to have been dictated by the government's political opportunism. Armagh was strategically important, especially in 1565, when Loftus acted as mediator between protestant Scottish nobles and the English government. His puritanism was ideally suited to gain credence with the Scottish nobility who justified their rebellion against Mary, queen of Scots, by the Calvinist theory of resistance. Loftus's attitude ensured that the rebellion was treated as religious and not political in origin. He relied on his family connections to gather information and apply pressure, using his brother-in-law John Douglas as his messenger. 
Loftus's puritanism also prompted his recommendation of Thomas Cartwright and Christopher Goodman for preferment in Ireland. His advocacy of Cartwright in 1570 and again in 1577 shows that he valued the preacher. Goodman, like John Knox, elaborated the Calvinist theory of resistance in his 'How superior powers oght to be obeyd of their subjects' (Geneva, 1558). Despite this radicalism, Sidney supported Loftus in his efforts to secure the service of Goodman. Loftus was consistent in his support for the established church, though, clearing himself of allegations of separatism in 1567 by arguing that its structure was sacrosanct. What was established by law must be followed, except when dealing with adiaphora such as vestments. Although corresponding with leading puritans, he declared himself ignorant of the term 'puritan'. An innovation such as moving the communion table out of the chancel and into the middle of St Patrick's Cathedral at Easter 1576 was not considered too radical, because the building was full of people and space was needed, and because this was done frequently in northern England. Loftus denounced his critics as papists and enemies of God in league with the pope. The articles of faith to be read by the Irish clergy were shorter and less precise than the ones used in England, allowing for a broader, more conciliatory interpretation of uniformity. 
Ecclesiastical commissions were the preferred practical means of reform. When Loftus was nominated to the archbishopric of Armagh he was also commissioned (albeit to little effect) to hear ecclesiastical causes on 1 October 1565. Other local commissions followed. In the next few years he co-operated most effectively with Hugh Brady, bishop of Meath. Forming the central plank of the Reformation policy during these years, they dominated ecclesiastical commissions. Brady, an Irishman, urged caution. Relying on a network of traditionally loyal local families, he did not wish to 'correct their heresies' too vigorously. The instructions wisely allowed for personal judgement, and Loftus was content with outward conformity and consequent attendance at church services in which the new religion could be inculcated by sermons. 
On 20 October 1563 the government appointed two Englishmen, Sir Nicholas Arnold and Sir Thomas Wroth, to assess progress, deal with irregularities in the payment of soldiers, and implement the religious legislation. Their devastating report associated 'blind ignorance' and 'superstition' with social disorder, but observed that people feared to offend. In autumn 1564 the more permanent high commission for ecclesiastical causes was established, recognizing Loftus's growing reputation. Against Brady's advice, in 1565 Loftus's main concern was the new commission's limited competence, since he wished to proceed against the refusal of nobility and gentry to attend divine service. When the commission was renewed in July 1568, the appointment of Robert Weston, the lord chancellor, was crucial to its success. That Weston provided the essential lay support and legal expertise emerged in November 1573, when Loftus complained that since the lord chancellor's death he was 'very slackly assisted' (TNA: PRO, SP 63/42/76). 
In May 1577 the commission as a whole was renewed and the previous commissions revoked, but outstanding fines could be recovered. The instructions show a determination to assist the bishops with a very specific delineation of offences, revealing the failure of previous attempts to impose uniformity. They were concerned with heretical opinions, seditious books, conspiracies, scandalous words against the queen, absence from divine service, the correction of 'all heresies, schisms and ecclesiastical offences by censures, ecclesiastical deprivation, masterless men, quarrellers, vagrants and suspect persons, and all assaults and frays', measures to protect clerical marriage, adulteries, fornications, and other ecclesiastical crimes ('Irish Fiants', Elizabeth, 3047). The commissioners had the power to summon witnesses and impose fines and imprisonment. 
From 18 March 1577 to March 1579 Loftus devoted much energy to fighting an ecclesiastical device which the bishops resented as infringement of their rights: a commission of faculties, issued to the lawyers George Acworth and Robert Garvey to grant licences, dispensations, and faculties arising from a Henrician statute. The stated intention was to remove 'the inconvenience of having to apply to the archbishop of Canterbury' ('Irish Fiants', Elizabeth, 2996). These commissioners had power to check titles, prove wills, and exercise ecclesiastical censure and coercion, and their activities proved lucrative. The real intention behind the commission, though, was the regulation of religious reform to the advantage of the queen and her secular officials. The consequent struggle between the bishops and the commission was acrimonious, but ultimately decided in favour of Loftus. In spring 1579 Garvey and he were appointed to a new commission for faculties; and since the ecclesiastical commission became active again, both commissions were firmly under Loftus's direction. Garvey was one of Loftus's trusted supporters and ran the commission of faculties until his death in April 1580, when he was replaced by Ambrose Forthe. Any plan to suspend the ecclesiastical commission was opposed, even by the lord deputy, Sir William Fitzwilliam, since this would cause Catholics 'to swell too high against his children' (TNA: PRO, SP 63/145/49). The ecclesiastical commission concentrated on urban reformation. The bishops began visitations too. Loftus hailed the advances made in Dublin as a true preaching reformation. 
The ecclesiastical authorities were especially concerned with the new generation of Roman Catholic bishops sent to Ireland by the pope. Dublin officials took measures to prevent Roman Catholic bishops from establishing themselves in Ireland, especially in the light of fear that they were preparing the way for foreign invasions. In this activity they were largely successful. On 8 October 1583 Dermot O'Hurley, Roman Catholic archbishop of Cashel, was presented to the lord justices, not the ecclesiastical commission. His interrogation under torture and execution under martial law in 1584, while associated with the lord justices, Loftus and Wallop, proceeded from Walsingham's orders, sanctioned by the queen and privy council. In September 1590 Loftus admitted to Cecil (now Baron Burghley) that there was indeed a fairly recent 'general disposition to popery', leading to disloyalty 'under pretence of religion', but before Perrot's second year as lord deputy there were only twelve 'recusant gentlemen of account'. He added the revealing observation that, restrained by the ecclesiastical commission, they showed at least outward obedience and came to sermons and received communion (TNA: PRO, SP 63/154/37). Towards the end of Elizabeth's reign, there was much self-congratulation over the course of the Reformation in Ireland. On 3 February 1603 the Irish privy council assessed 'Reformation by commission' positively: impressive preaching, matched by a public lecture every week in the two cathedrals, made Dublin as good as any English city. Loftus was the driving force behind this. 
Since ignorance was seen as the origin of all disorder in Ireland, the government sought to support the Reformation by founding a university there. This issue had become more urgent because continental Roman Catholic seminaries sent able priests to Ireland. The privy council, however, had never before considered financing an Irish university to train protestant clergy. The far-reaching instructions to Perrot of 21 June 1584 included the authorization to consider a possible rededication of the revenues of St Patrick's to endow a university in Dublin. Curwen in the 1560s had vigorously opposed such a plan. In June 1565 Brady urged recalling Curwen to England and making provision for Loftus so that he could resign the deanery and then a university could be erected. He had stated the Tudor conviction about civility in its extended form: since ignorance bred murder, robbery, and adultery 'with vices infinite', a university was necessary to save the country (Shirley, 72). Loftus shared these sentiments, but as archbishop he needed no prompting to defend the integrity of St Patrick's. He agreed that a local university, the key to the reformation of religion, was long overdue, but the transformation of St Patrick's would mean that there would be no benefices for the preaching clergy. Loftus alleged that Perrot merely sought to gratify his ambition by creating 'Perrot's College'. The ensuing quarrel was resolved by the queen's order forbidding the dissolution, after Loftus had threatened to resign his archbishopric. It is unlikely that his threat tipped the balance, but his experience of Irish affairs could not be dispensed with. 
Loftus's own university scheme mobilized private interest. He persuaded the corporation of Dublin to make a grant of the priory of All Hallows and its park as the first practical step to the foundation of Trinity College, Dublin. His speeches to this end are the only remaining evidence of his style of preaching. When the proposal was sanctioned by Elizabeth, Loftus himself also subscribed $100 towards the foundation. The charter of the college (3 March 1592) made him the first provost. On surrendering the office on 7 June 1594, to Walter Travers, a scholar of a strong puritan bias, he warned him to conform to 'the doctrine and discipline of this church... established by law... Both papists and schismatics are (tho' in different degrees of enmity) equally our implacable enemies' (BL, Lansdowne MS 846, fols. 205'r'-207'r'). His vision of the Reformation had shifted significantly from including puritanism within the parameters of uniformity to excluding puritans (schismatics) just as much as counter-reformation Catholics (papists) from the college. 
Loftus's wife died in July 1595. He himself died at his palace of St Sepulchre in Dublin on 5 April 1605, at the age of seventy-one. He was buried in the choir of St Patrick's. His appearance and stature seem to be best captured in the anonymous portrait showing him as lord chancellor and first provost of Trinity College. He had stated his religious convictions in his last will, a rare account of faith unusual even among committed protestants at the time. He specifically renounced intercessions of saints and angels, and wished to rely only on the merits of Christ: 'which faith, since I was called to be Bishop and Minister of God's Holy Word, I have always both publicly preached and privately acknowledged, and I desire that this my Faith and Profession be made known to posterities hereafter as long as my memory be had of myself in this world.' Even today Loftus's intentions are much easier to assess than his actions and his impact. He made many enemies, and their vocal criticism has often dominated the verdicts of later historians. 


@@@@@


doc= 16935


Loftus, Adam, first Viscount Loftus of Ely (1568-1643), lord chancellor of Ireland, was the second son of Robert Loftus (died 1606) of Coverham in Yorkshire; his mother is unknown. His uncle, Archbishop Adam Loftus of Dublin, also held the Irish chancellorship from 1578 until his death in 1605. 
Loftus matriculated from Jesus College, Cambridge, in 1586, graduating BA in the same year and proceeding MA in 1589. Three years later he appears as a member of Thavies Inn, subsequently entering Lincoln's Inn. Archbishop Loftus arranged preferments for his nephew in Ireland. In 1594 he appointed him archdeacon of Glendalough and Loftus retained the benefice until his death, despite never being 'presbyteri canonici', Archbishop Laud's disapproval, and an adverse judicial ruling in 1638. Three years later, in 1597, he married Sarah (died 1650), widow of Richard Meredyth, bishop of Leighlin, and daughter of one Bathoe. They had four sons and two daughters. The same year he was made judge of the marshal court, in peaceful times a sinecure but not so when Loftus secured the post nor later, in 1608, during the repression of O'Doherty's rebellion. In 1598 he became a master in chancery. While his uncle was alive Loftus deputized on occasion for him in chancery and in the court of the prerogative as well as acting as his vicar-general. When he was created LLD, as has been claimed, is obscure. 
Further advancement followed: a knighthood (1604), membership of the Irish privy council (1608), constable of Maryborough Castle (1611), and judge of the new Irish admiralty court (1612). This last appointment involved Loftus in questions of patronage and jurisdiction. He was thus soon to spend $200 in litigation to wrest the appointment of water bailiff back from the city of Dublin. Very much later, in 1637, he was to object to incursions into his admiralty jurisdiction by the common law courts, the corporate towns, and the manor courts. From 1613 to 1615 he sat in the Irish House of Commons as a member for King's county. The main prize, the lord chancellorship, fell into his hands in 1619. Early that year, the then chancellor, Archbishop Thomas Jones, Archbishop Loftus's successor, died. There were two contestants for the vacancy -- Sir Francis Aungier, the master of the rolls, and Loftus. Offered $1000 by Loftus, the duke of Buckingham, then, as ever, in need of ready cash, made the self-evident choice: formal appointment by James I, on 13 May 1619, followed swiftly. More honours ensued. In May 1622 James raised Loftus to the peerage as Viscount Loftus of Ely: the viscountcy was intended, as the fulsome language of the accompanying patent had it, to 'descend upon his posteritie for his sake that thereby his vertues may be recorded for future ages, soe longe as there shall remaine an heire male of his howse' ('Ninth Report', HMC, 2.303). The chancellor, meanwhile, at this point was associated with key investigations into the condition of church and state in Ireland -- of which the king's directions for the courts of 1622 were one outcome -- and into the Ulster plantation. In 1622, in the absence of a lord deputy, Loftus served alongside Viscount Powerscourt as lord justice. Further periods as lord justice followed -- in 1629-33 alongside Richard Boyle, the earl of Cork, and in 1636 alongside Sir Christopher Wandesford. 
Proud, overbearing, and jealous of his position -- traits hardly in short supply in the king's servants of the period -- Loftus was to prove a tiresome colleague for those with whom he was teamed in the administration. Quarrels were frequent and a source of annoyance in England to Buckingham, who had, after all, secured him the chancellorship, and, following the latter's assassination, even to Charles I. In 1625 Loftus complained to the privy council at the level of his remuneration, alleging that an undertaking given on his appointment as judge marshal that he would receive 6's'. 8died per diem had not been honoured: 'I have only $300 p.a. How farr short this poore some is of a competent maintenance for so great and chargible a place, and what disproportion there must needs be between my receipts and disbursments, and what contempt and other inconveniences the pooreness of this fee may bringe, I know your Lordshipps will in your greate wisdome redely apprehend. ('Ninth Report', HMC, 2.294)' A king's letter wrought a modest amelioration, promising Loftus a moiety of all fines charged on writs issuing from the Irish chancery. How hard-pressed at this period Loftus actually was is impossible to determine. It may be significant that when, in October 1639, William Weston accused Loftus of having taken bribes, this was ascribed to the years 1620 to 1623 when Weston said he gave Lady Loftus, among other things, 'one suit of hangings of the value of $160, one dozen of silver plates with his lordship's arms thereupon [and] 32 ells [of] Polonie rich taffetie' ('CSP Ire.', '1633-47', 225). 
Meanwhile, a major row was brewing with Henry Cary, Viscount Falkland, appointed lord deputy in 1622. Loftus had declined to sign fiants for grants of a tannery and a distillery; he had also refused to accept Falkland's nominations of judges to serve on the assize circuits and of JPs. In a letter to Falkland, Loftus stood his ground: 'If the sole command of the seal be in his Lordship's [Falkland's] power, vain and needless is the place of a Chancellor, and profane and impious were his oath taken at his entrance, if his conscience should be subject to the will and command of any other person. ('CSP Ire.', '1615-25', 533)' Falkland was not convinced, and replied dubbing Loftus's suggestion of a reference to the judges 'a specious subterfuge to color a disobedience' (ibid., 540). Falkland took steps to guard his position and, if possible, obtain the removal of the lord chancellor. Allegations reached London that Loftus had orchestrated opposition to Falkland over the financial negotiations of 1627 and, potentially more damning, allegations, too, of miscarriages of justice in the Irish chancery. A detailed list of such supposed miscarriages, meticulously, if anonymously, prepared, survives in the state papers. Loftus was called to London in June 1627 to justify his conduct. The result, announced before Loftus's return in August 1628, was his total vindication. The irony of this in light of Charles I's verdict on Loftus in not totally dissimilar circumstances a decade later cannot have been lost on contemporaries. A consequential instruction of the king's the following year must have been a particularly bitter pill for Falkland to swallow. It was, wrote Charles, 'just and fit that all those that have preferred any scandalous and false informations or charges against our Chancellor, for his carriage in the execution of his office, be proceeded against in our High Court of Castle Chamber' (Morrin, 3.464). 
Between the recall of Falkland in the autumn of 1629 and the arrival of Viscount Thomas Wentworth, the future earl of Strafford, in the summer of 1633, the post of chief governor was shared by Loftus and Cork as lords justices. It was a strange alliance, stranger still that the king had endorsed it. Cork had earlier complained of the 'affronts and storms' he had encountered in legal proceedings before Loftus (Ball, 1.327), as a consequence of which Charles had rebuked his lord chancellor for failing to ensure that Cork received impartial justice; and a factor in Loftus's quarrel with Falkland had been the latter's nomination of a kinsman of Cork's to ride an assize circuit where lawsuits involving Cork were pending. So far as most items of official business were concerned the two preserved a united front. In the first months of office they thus both signed the decree ordering the suppression of religious houses throughout the kingdom, and in September 1632 they jointly ordered the destruction of buildings at St Patrick's Purgatory on Lough Derg in co. Donegal, in Queen Henrietta Maria's book an act of sacrilege over which she was later to protest to Wentworth. They were in unison, too, over the revival of recusancy fines. But the animosity between the two men -- its precise origin is unclear -- went deep, and could flare up on the least provocation. Gifts from Cork to Loftus of goshawks, falcons, and wine (not, so far as is known, reciprocated) and attempts by the king to secure the formal reconciliation of the two men -- ordering handshakes before witnesses -- achieved nothing. The capacity of both Loftus and Cork to use intemperate language to each other helped keep the relationship poisonous. Such an altercation occurred as the two accompanied Wentworth to Christ Church Cathedral on the day Wentworth was sworn in. And in 1635, at a meeting of the Irish council where the continuance of a lawsuit against Cork following a plaintiff's death was being debated, Cork attacked Loftus for expressing an opinion hostile to his own, whereupon Loftus, moved to anger, responded that he cared 'not a rush' for Boyle (Grosart, 1st ser., 4.109-10). At this uproar erupted. 
Wentworth's installation as lord deputy signalled a complete change in the fortunes of the two erstwhile lords justices, and for the worse. Of the two Cork became the first casualty: in 1636 he was forced to purchase at a huge price immunity from a prospective castle chamber prosecution connected to his unscrupulous land dealings in Munster. If Loftus had already been targeted Wentworth for the moment at least played a waiting game. There were even conspicuous displays of friendship and support. In 1634 he wrote to the lords of the admiralty in London backing Loftus's claims to patronage in the Irish admiralty: 'I have a high opinion of his loyalty, and do not think the Chancellorship (not worth above $400 a year) is as well paid as it should be' ('CSP Ire.', '1633-47', 72). 
A brutal exchange of letters between Loftus and Wentworth over the choice of barrister to replace Serjeant Catlyn on the Leinster circuit after Catlyn's sudden death in April 1637 marked a deterioration of the relationship. But already there had been set in train a sequence of events that was to lead to Loftus's downfall and disgrace. Accused in February 1637 by Sir John Gifford, the half-brother of his daughter-in-law, Elinor, of failure to honour a promise to provide a settlement on the marriage of his eldest son, Sir Robert Loftus, and Elinor back in 1621, the lord chancellor was eventually, on 1 February 1638, found at fault by the council board presided over by Wentworth and ordered to make the necessary financial arrangements. Sir Robert and Elinor had lived with the lord chancellor in his house and at his expense until shortly before Gifford voiced his complaint. Elinor's sister's husband was none other than Sir George Wentworth, the lord deputy's younger brother. When Elinor died in May 1639 the lord deputy penned an extraordinary tribute. 'With her', he wrote, 'are gone the greatest part of my affections to the country, and all that is left of them shall be thankfully, and religiously paid to her excellent memory' (letter to Lord Conway, 'Ninth Report', HMC, 2.298). In such circumstances, but not least because there was found but a single witness to the promise Loftus was supposed to have given in 1621, suspicion necessarily attaches to Gifford's bona fides and, indeed, to Wentworth's role in the entire affair. 
Yet for Loftus much worse was to come. Found contumacious in April 1638 for failing to comply with the decree of 1 February and for insults to Wentworth he was superseded from office and sent as a prisoner to Dublin Castle. And there he lingered until a bout of ill health secured a temporary respite in May 1639 and final release the ensuing July or August, having in the end complied with the decree of February 1638, apologized abjectly for his contempts, and in substantial measure beggared himself. The ferocity of the reported exchanges between Wentworth and Loftus during the latter's trial makes it hard to accept that they could ever have been on friendly terms. Loftus refused to kneel to receive his sentence on 20 April 1638. 'The Great Seal', he protested, 'ought not to creep on knees and elbows to any subordinate person in the world' ('Various Collections', 3. 171). The next day, with Loftus still refusing to surrender the seal, Wentworth is reputed to have remarked that he 'did once believe he should never have been able truly to have said that he was sorry his Lordship was lodged so near him' (ibid.). Loftus appealed against his sentence to the king, but Charles dismissed this, and in December 1639 Sir Richard Bolton was named lord chancellor in his stead. Wentworth took no risks over the king's handling of the appeal. In the intervening months a great deal of new material was assembled touching on Loftus's conduct as a judge -- material that included Weston's story of the acceptance of bribes -- all of which helped to traduce the lord chancellor's character still further. Some items in the dossier, for example, Loftus's supposed violations of articles 18 and 21 of the king's directions for the courts of 1622 (which, ironically, Loftus as a lord justice that year had promulgated), however, do possess the ring of truth. 
Loftus lost considerable property, in excess of $10,000 in value, as a result of the Irish rising of October 1641. Soon afterwards he removed to Yorkshire, where he died at Middleham in the North Riding early in 1643. He was buried later that year at Coverham church. His widow died seven years later. Sir Robert Loftus, his eldest son, predeceased him. Alice, his younger daughter, married the second Viscount Moore of Drogheda. During her father's incarceration she had vainly petitioned the king on his behalf, earning from Wentworth the scarcely flattering description of Loftus's 'unclean mouth'd daughter' (letter to Sir John Wintour, 10 Dec 1638, 'Ninth Report', HMC, 2.297). 
In the articles of impeachment drawn up against Wentworth in 1641, his conduct in 'Gifford v. Loftus' received specific mention. The decree of February 1638 was itself set aside by the English House of Lords in May 1642: the decision ordered the conveyance back to the former chancellor of the lands taken from him. Reverberations from the great cause lasted down to 1678. The successor to the viscountcy in 1643, Loftus's second son, Sir Edward, faced an uphill struggle to obtain enforcement of the Lords' ruling of 1642. Pitted against him, in a series of fascinating, if tortuous, English and Irish lawsuits (easily followed through 'Ninth Report', HMC, and 'Various Collections', vol. 3) which happened to necessitate, on separate occasions, the interventions of Oliver Cromwell and Charles II -- was Sir Robert and Elinor's daughter Anne, and, after the latter's death in 1659, Dacre Barrett, her son and heir. 


@@@@@


doc= 16936


Loftus, Dudley (1618-1695), orientalist and jurist, was born at Rathfarnham Castle, co. Dublin, the third son of Sir Adam Loftus ('b'. 1590/91, died in or after 1641), later lord justice and chancellor of Ireland, and his wife, Jane, daughter of Walter Vaughan of Golden Grove, King's county. He graduated BA from Trinity College, Dublin, in 1638 and then proceeded to Oxford, graduating MA from University College on 20 October 1640. 
On his return to Ireland at the outbreak of the Irish rising of 1641 Loftus was entrusted with the defence of Rathfarnham Castle and ably protected both the castle and the city of Dublin. He then embarked on a political career and served in the Irish parliament as MP for Naas between 1642 and 1648, as MP for Kildare and Wicklow in the English parliament in 1659, and in the Irish parliament as MP for Bannow in 1661 and for Fethard, co. Wexford, from 1692 to 1695. Loftus prospered throughout the Cromwellian period, evidently presiding in Trinity College, Dublin, as professor of civil law, and no doubt through this position took part in a review of the University of Dublin in order to assess the need for a second college. He received a number of high-ranking legal appointments beginning in 1651 when he was made deputy judge advocate-general and commissioner of the revenue. Three years later he was appointed judge of the admiralty and in 1655 was made a master in chancery, ingrosser of the great roll of the clerk of the pipe, and chief ingrosser for life. 
Edmund Borlase depicts Loftus as playing a key role in initiating the Convention of 1660 and although the issue remains in dispute, he certainly chaired a number of committees, among them the committee on religion. His innately conservative approach is evident in his support for 'ancients' rather then 'moderns', apparent in both his decision to produce an edition of an Aristotelian text and his later conflict with the Dublin Philosophical Society. No doubt it was this conservatism which allowed him to easily fit into the new Restoration regime, which not only renewed his position as master in chancery but also gave him new legal honours; in 1660 he was appointed vicar-general of Ireland and judge of the chancery. However, Loftus's impetuous nature led to his imprisonment in 1673, following his vocal denunciation of new rules concerning governmental control of the corporation, which he, as judge of the prerogative court, considered to be illegal. Yet by the time of the war of 1689-91 he was content to remain in his Exchange Street house in Dublin 'quietly at work upon his Syriac studies' (Stokes, 45). 
Loftus's legal career is well reflected in both his manuscript collections and printed works (written not only under his own name but also that of Philo-Britannicus), such as 'The Case of Ware and Shirley' (1669) and ''Digamias adikia', or, The First Marriage of Katherine Fitzgerald' (1677). However, his fame is chiefly due to his linguistic ability and oriental studies, said to have been encouraged by James Ussher, archbishop of Armagh, who proved extremely influential in his intellectual development. By the age of twenty Loftus reputedly knew as many languages. A catalogue of 1697 which lists 128 manuscript works written by him demonstrates his interests in Arabic, Persian, Hebrew, Armenian, Syriac, and Ethiopian (several works were destroyed but the remainder are now scattered between the British Library, Bodleian Library, and Trinity College Dublin Library, and Marsh's Library, Dublin). His printed works continued these trends, his oriental studies being most evident in works such as his translation of the life of Abul Faraj from Arabic into Latin, and his famous translation of the Ethiopian version of the 'New Testament' (1657) for Walton's influential polyglot 'Bible' of the same year. Other works include his contribution to Edmund Castell's combined 'Dictionary of Eastern Languages' (1667); 'Anaphora' (1693); 'An History of the Twofold Invention of the Cross' (1686); 'Logica seu introductio' (1657); 'Oratio funebris... Johannis Archepiscopi Armachani,... XVI die Julii 1663' (1663); 'L'oratione del' eccellentissimo Signore Giacobo duca d'Ormondia' (1664); and 'The Proceedings Observed in Order to, and in the Consecration of the Twelve Bishops' (1661). 
Loftus was married twice. His first wife was Frances (died 1691), the daughter and heir of Patrick Nangle, son of Thomas, styled baron of Navan. They had two sons, Dudley and Adam, and five daughters, Mary, Jane, Letitia, Frances, and Catherine, all of whom either died young or unmarried with the sole exception of Letitia, who married a Mr Bladen. Loftus's second marriage, to Lady Catherine Mervyn on 16 April 1693, caused some comment given his advanced age and in his brother-in-law Ware's view exemplified his improvident and foolish nature. Loftus died in Dublin two years later in June 1695 and was buried in St Patrick's Cathedral, Dublin, in the same month. 


@@@@@


doc= 16937


Loftus, William Kennett (c.1821-1858), archaeologist and traveller, was born at Rye, Sussex, the son of William Kennett Loftus (died 'c'.1860), a lieutenant in the Durham light infantry, and his first wife. He was the grandson of a well-known coach proprietor of the same name in Newcastle upon Tyne. He was educated successively at Newcastle grammar school, at a school at Twickenham, and at Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge, where, however, he took no degree. He acted for some time as secretary to the Newcastle Natural History Society, and his interest in geology attracted the attention of Professor Sedgwick and afterwards of Sir Henry De la Beche. Sedgwick proposed him as a fellow of the Geological Society, and De la Beche recommended him to Lord Palmerston for the post of geologist on the staff of Sir William Fenwick Williams on the Turco-Persian frontier commission. On this work Loftus was engaged from 1849 to 1852. 
While the other members of the commission travelled to Muhammarah (the scene of the original border dispute) by boat, Loftus and his friend Henry Adrian Churchill (1828-1886), together with a detachment of troops, rode across the desert and marshes of Chaldaea from the Euphrates to the lower Tigris. On this journey Loftus observed the ruins of many sites which were later identified as biblical cities, including al-Muquayyar (Ur), Warka (Uruch or Erech), and Sankara (Ellasar). Williams was impressed by their reports and allowed Loftus to return to Warka to excavate for three weeks. He subsequently sent back finds, including some glazed 'slipper' coffins from the Parthian cemetery, and a report to the British Museum. 
In 1853 Loftus returned to Warka to dig for three months under the auspices of the newly created Assyria Excavation Fund and gained an understanding of the size and complexity of the site. He discovered more coffins and important cuneiform tablets, and partly excavated some proto-Sumerian walls and the great Parthian temple. From Warka he moved to Sankara which Sir Henry Rawlinson, the learned political agent at Baghdad to whom Loftus sent any inscribed material which he discovered, identified as Larsa, the Ellasar of the 'Bible'. Other important finds were made at Tell Sifr. In 1855 Loftus returned to England with material including over eighty tablets and a variety of vases and metal objects which were sent to the British Museum. He was then appointed to the geological survey of India, but his health broke down from sunstroke, following on repeated attacks of fever while in Assyria, and he was ordered to Rangoon to recuperate. Owing partly to the interruption of the survey by the mutiny, he embarked for England on the 'Tyburnia' in November 1858, and died on board on 27 November within a week of starting, from the effects of an abscess of the liver, leaving a widow, Charlotte. 
Loftus has been described by H. V. F. Winstone as 'the most underestimated of nineteenth century explorers and excavators. His work was thorough and his interpretation of finds scholarly'. In 1852 he issued a volume of lithographs of cuneiform inscriptions, without a title, and in 1857 he published 'Travels and Researches in Chaldaea and Susiana'. This book caused a new burst of enthusiasm in America, France, and Britain for properly financed and organized excavations in the lower regions of Mesopotamia; it was reprinted in 1971. He also contributed papers to the 'Quarterly Journal of the Geological Society' in 1851, 1854, and 1855, and to the 'Journal of the Royal Geographical Society' in 1856 and 1857. Plants collected by him were sent to the herbaria at Kew and at the British Museum, and some antiquities were presented by him to the Newcastle Museum. 


@@@@@


doc= 16938


Logan, George (1678-1755), Church of Scotland minister and religious controversialist, was probably born in Glasgow, the son of George (or James) Logan, a merchant and burgess in the city, and his wife, Elizabeth, daughter of John Cunningham, minister of Old Cumnock. The family is thought to have originated in Ayrshire. Logan entered the Greek class at Glasgow University in 1693, and received the MA in 1696. Preparing for the ministry, he went on to study divinity and is listed as a student of that subject at Glasgow on 18 January 1697. 
Logan was licensed to preach by the presbytery of Glasgow on 4 March 1703, and then became chaplain to John, earl of Lauderdale. On 6 February 1707 he was called to the parish of Lauder in Berwickshire, and was ordained on 8 May 1707. He married his first wife, Anne Home (died before 1744), on 5 April 1711; the marriage produced a son and a daughter. On 16 October 1718 he was presented by the duke of Roxburghe to the parish of Sprouston in Roxburghshire, where he was admitted on 22 January 1719. He was transferred to the parish of Dunbar in Haddingtonshire on 24 January 1722, having again been presented by the duke of Roxburghe. While there he published his first work, the 'Essay upon Gospel and Legal Preaching', in 1723. 
On 31 August 1732 Logan was called to Trinity parish in Edinburgh, and was admitted on 14 December. On 8 May 1740 he was elected moderator of the general assembly which deposed Ebenezer Erskine and other dissident ministers who had vehemently opposed the use of patronage in selecting parish ministers, thus officially confirming the first major secession of the eighteenth-century Church of Scotland. The hotly debated patronage issue provoked Logan's first controversial publications. In 1732 he published 'A Modest and Humble Inquiry', followed by 'Continuation' in the following year. In 1733 he again wrote on church matters in 'An Overture for a Right Constitution of the General Assembly' (1736). In the following year he supported the government's interpretation of events surrounding the Porteous riots in Edinburgh in 'The lawfulness and necessity of ministers their reading the act of parliament for bringing to justice the murderers of Captain John Porteous'. 
Some time after 1 January 1744 Logan married his second wife, Lilias Weir. As a confirmed whig and presbyterian Logan was naturally opposed to Jacobitism and strongly urged that Edinburgh be placed in a state of defence during the rising of 1745. When this was not done, and Edinburgh was occupied by Jacobite forces, Logan left the city, and his home on Castlehill was used by the Jacobite army as a guardhouse. After they left Logan inserted a satirical advertisement in the newspapers for the recovery of possessions which had been stolen by the recent occupants of his house. 
Logan is best known for his contributions to the controversy between whigs and Jacobites over whether Scotland's monarchy was indefeasibly hereditary. Logan presented the whig presbyterian case for a limited monarchy that was not strictly hereditary, against the views of Thomas Ruddiman and other Jacobites. Already in 1717 Logan and other whigs, including the patriotic historian James Anderson, had formed a group of 'associated critics' to engage in whig / Jacobite controversy. Their object was to defend the reputation of the sixteenth-century Scottish historian George Buchanan, whose political and historical views were the cornerstone of Scottish whig-presbyterian ideology, and who had been attacked by Ruddiman in his edition of Buchanan's complete works. Their intention was to produce their own edition of Buchanan, refuting the slanders of Ruddiman. Although eighty pages of notes on Ruddiman's strictures were compiled the project was never completed. None the less, Logan spent the 1740s in lively literary combat with Ruddiman. In 1746 he argued in 'A Treatise on Government' that the Scottish monarchy was not rigidly hereditary. Ruddiman's counter-arguments were answered by 'A Second Treatise' (1747) and 'The Finishing Stroke, or, Mr Ruddiman Self-Condemned' (1748). The battle continued in 1749 with Logan's 'Second Letter... to Mr Thomas Ruddiman' and 'The doctrine of the jure-divino-ship of hereditary indefeasible monarchy enquired into and exploded, in a letter to Mr Thomas Ruddiman'. The historical issues dealt with in these works were all central to the controversy, including the relative hereditary claims of Bruce and Balliol to the Scottish crown, and the legitimacy of Robert III and the contemporary Stuart pretender. Logan also defended the seventeenth-century presbyterian idol, Alexander Henderson, against slanders by the episcopalian Ruddiman, in a work published in 1749. He died in Edinburgh on 13 October 1755. His wife appears to have outlived him, but died before 17 December 1770. 


@@@@@


doc= 16939


Logan, James (1674-1751), colonial official and scholar, was born on 20 October 1674 in Lurgan, co. Armagh, to Patrick Logan and Isabel Hume. Patrick Logan was a minister and an MA of Edinburgh University, who after becoming a Quaker had attempted to make a living as a schoolmaster. James knew Latin, Greek, and Hebrew when he was apprenticed at the age of thirteen to Edward Webb, a linen draper in Dublin, but he remained there only six months. During the conflicts in Ireland following the revolution of 1688 the Logan family fled to Scotland, and Patrick soon became master of the Friar Meeting-House Quaker school in Bristol. When the family returned to Ireland in 1693, James, aged nineteen, became a schoolmaster. While teaching he also perfected his Latin and Greek, learned French, Italian, and some Spanish, and, by studying William Leybourn's 'Cursus mathematicus', achieved knowledge of mathematics and astronomy, and built a library of more than 700 volumes. Discontented with being a schoolmaster, he sought to migrate to Jamaica and, when his mother objected, sold his library and became a linen merchant in Bristol. In 1699 William Penn hired him as secretary to accompany him on his second trip to Pennsylvania. 
Logan lived with Penn and his family at the Slate Roof House in Philadelphia until the proprietor moved to his estate at Pennsbury. Penn put Logan in charge of organizing land policy, a necessary task since proceeds from quitrents and sales would help pay the proprietor's debts. With the aid of a new law regularizing land sales, Logan brought order to land policy but he found collecting money a frustrating task. Logan continued as the Penns' business agent for nearly thirty years, a role that was bound to bring conflicts with the settlers. Logan helped Penn negotiate the charter of privileges, though he later criticized that document for giving the assembly too much power and the council too little. Logan's ideal of government was of a balance of monarchy, aristocracy, and democracy, and he feared that Pennsylvania had too much democracy. He did not bother to hide his contempt for the 'mob', and his rather supercilious manner did not endear him to the people. 
Before returning to England, Penn named Logan clerk of the council, secretary of the province, and one of three commissioners of property. Logan would serve on the council from 1702 to 1747. His new responsibilities brought him only $100 per year, so he began trading on his own account. Unable to make direct remittances from land sales to Penn in England, Logan began to invest such moneys in Pennsylvania commodities which could be sold elsewhere. By 1706 Logan had raised about $8000 in Pennsylvania money for Penn, but the debts of the proprietor to the Ford family amounted to $30,000. 
As Penn's primary agent in the colony, Logan became involved in political disputes with royal officials when Quaker lawyer David Lloyd questioned the Admiralty courts. Royal officials sought to make Pennsylvania a royal colony by proving the incompetence of proprietary government. Logan became the primary opponent of Lloyd, who emerged as a leader in the assembly's quest for power over land titles and fines at the expense of the proprietor. Logan also had to counter the politically disastrous policies of the new governor, John Evans, who issued a false alarm of a French attack in 1706 and sought to tax Philadelphia shipping to pay for a fort in Delaware. Other disputes centred on the rights of the assembly to set its own schedule for meeting and adjourning, and on whether the governor or assembly had the power to establish courts. The assembly attempted to impeach Logan, and thereby weaken Penn. The first trial failed when Governor Evans refused to preside as judge because the council was not equivalent to the House of Lords. When the new governor, Charles Gookin, argued that Logan's membership on the council made him immune, the impeachment ended, and in 1709 Logan sailed for England. 
Logan's first two courtships failed because of his lack of property. In Philadelphia he had wooed Ann, the daughter of merchant Edward Shippen. Ann was also courted by Thomas Story, a wealthy Quaker minister and lawyer. Ann preferred Logan but her family preferred Story, and she married him. The disappointment was made public when the Philadelphia monthly meeting in 1703 arbitrated a resulting dispute between Logan and Story. In England Logan engaged the affections of Judith Crowley, but her family objected to his lack of wealth, and she, like Shippen, refused to disobey them. Determined now to gain wealth, Logan began buying at cheap prices the rights to unoccupied lands of Quakers who had not come to Pennsylvania. Logan ultimately married Sarah Read (died 1754), a pious but not well-educated Quaker, on 9 December 1714. Their four children resembled their mother in piety, but did not share their father's intellectual acumen. 
On his return to Pennsylvania in 1711 Logan engaged in the fur trade, using tactics described by Frederick Tolles as 'hard, venturesome, unscrupulous if necessary', as he got fur traders into debt and supplied them with rum for the Native Americans -- even though the colony's laws and the Quaker meeting forbade selling alcohol to the American Indians (Tolles, 90). By 1715 he was sending $1000 in furs per year to England. He called the wagons for transporting the furs from his trading post on Conestoga Creek 'Conestoga wagons', and this continued to be the way Americans named the hooped, canvas-covered wagons used for westward migration. 
Logan observed his first negotiations with the Native Americans at the gatherings at Pennsbury in 1701. When the War of the Spanish Succession broke out in America, Logan sought to create a common British Indian policy to wean American Indians away from the French, and saw keeping the loyalty of the Five Nations of the Iroquois as a key element in British imperial strategy. He also faced problems with settler encroachment on Indian lands. Anticipating changes that would not take place for three decades, in 1731 Logan composed a memorial to the British government asking for a unified command so that the colonists could effectively deal with the Indians and the French. 
After Penn's stroke in 1711 and death in 1718, Logan continued to serve the Penn family loyally. He did extensive research on the disputed border between Pennsylvania, Delaware, and Maryland, finding maps to demonstrate what the crown thought was the border in 1681. When the Pennsylvania governor, William Keith (1717-26), ignored the council's advice before approving laws, and attempted to survey land and claim a copper mine for himself, Logan opposed him. Another issue was paper money, which Keith favoured but Isaac Norris opposed. Logan supported a modest circulation with sound backing, but feared depreciation if too much were issued. He approved of the assembly's issuing $15,000. In 1723 he returned to London to consult Hannah Penn, but before leaving he used his position as judge to lecture the people on the benefits of a mixed government. Logan returned with new instructions from Penn's widow, which Keith ignored. Instead Keith, aided by David Lloyd, commenced a pamphlet war with Logan and supporters of the proprietors. Keith and Lloyd won elections until Patrick Gordon arrived as new governor in 1726. When Keith tried to use the assembly as a new power base, an alliance of Logan, Norris, and even Lloyd defeated him. Keith's leaving Pennsylvania and David Lloyd's death in 1731 quieted political passions. 
Logan, now tired of supporting the proprietors, tried to persuade the sons of William Penn to come to Pennsylvania to look after their own interests, and Thomas Penn came to the colony in 1732. In January 1728 a fall broke a bone that did not heal properly, leaving Logan disabled. He became chief justice of the Pennsylvania supreme court (1731-9) and, after Governor Gordon's death in 1736, became the executive of the colony by virtue of his position as president of the council. 
Although Logan excelled at negotiating with American Indians, their confidence that he would treat them with the same care for justice as William Penn seems, in retrospect, misplaced. He co-operated with Thomas Penn in what was later known as the 'walking purchase', whereby the Lennai Lenape Indians lost a substantial amount of land by what many historians label a dubious interpretation of a previous purchase made by William Penn. Logan called upon the more powerful Five Nations, who claimed a kind of suzerainty over the region, to support his interpretation of the treaty and coerce the dwindling Lennai Lenape into accepting it. His last negotiation with the Indians, which occurred in 1742 when a delegation for the Five Nations visited Stenton, led in 1744 to a treaty at Lancaster, Pennsylvania, by which they pledged to support the British. 
Logan, contrary to Quaker beliefs, was not a strict pacifist, at least not since his first journey to Pennsylvania. He believed there was little difference between a magistrate's use of force and a defensive war. Because he thought Quaker principles were incompatible with government, he had advised William Penn to sell the right to government. Seeing a coming imperial war with France, in 1741 at the Philadelphia yearly meeting (an annual gathering of Friends from Pennsylvania, Delaware, and West New Jersey) Logan sent a treatise justifying war and seeking to persuade Quakers to withdraw from government. Quakers' successful pursuit of wealth, he argued, made Pennsylvania a tempting target. The treatise had no immediate effect, but set a series of principles that would be considered in later wars. 
Logan never lost his passion for learning and book collecting, being interested in astronomy, biology, optics, and numismatics as well as Greek and Latin classics. He collected a library of over 3000 volumes, which he bequeathed to the city of Philadelphia. He taught himself fluxions (calculus) by reading Newton's 'Principia mathematica'. Logan conducted scientific experiments on the sexuality of plants, and his results were published by the Royal Society and praised by Linnaeus. Robert Brown later named a genus after Logan, 'Logania', which in turn was employed to form the family name Loganiaceae. He had discussions with and opened his library to young scientists, including John Bartram, Thomas Godfrey, and Benjamin Franklin. Logan defended Godfrey's claim to having invented the quadrant against John Hadley, and introduced Bartram's work to Linnaeus. Logan also carried on a learned correspondence on many subjects with such diverse scholars as Peter Collinson, Cadwallader Colden, and William Jones. Like many scientists of his time, Logan believed that reason could discover a cosmic order and that science helped religion by describing the works of God. Logan died on 31 October 1751 at his home, Stenton, Germantown, Pennsylvania, and was buried in the Friends' burial-ground, Arch Street, Philadelphia. 


@@@@@


doc= 16940


Logan, James (1797-1872), writer on Scottish Gaelic culture, was born in Aberdeen on 13 March 1797, the son of a merchant there. He was educated at the local grammar school and afterwards at Marischal College. A fractured skull sustained while attending a highland games prevented him from following his intended career in law. From about 1821 it appears that he lived mainly in London, working as a writer and journalist, notably as a contributor to the 'Gentleman's Magazine'. He served briefly as secretary of the Highland Society of London, and worked as a transcriber of the British Museum catalogue from 1838 to 1840. His failure to hold any formal post for long was owed apparently to his 'impatience of restraint' ('DNB'), and he returned to freelance work, being supported during his later years by highland friends in London. At different times he is supposed to have enjoyed the patronage of Prince Albert and the fourth earl of Aberdeen. After suffering financial losses from bad investments, he sought assistance from the Royal Literary Fund and was nominated to a place among the poor brothers at the Charterhouse, London. Rusticated from the Charterhouse in 1864 for 'being habitually intoxicated', he was expelled for drunkenness in 1869 (Cross, 80). 
In the mid-1820s Logan made extensive walking tours of the highlands and islands, which led to his most significant work, 'The Scottish Gael', which first appeared in 1831 (2 vols.). The book, which was dedicated to William IV, encompassed a wide range of topics, from archaeology to early nineteenth-century Gaelic literature, and included chapters on war, arms, dress, hunting, food, poetry and music, and religion. Many of its archaeological and historical conclusions are no longer acceptable, and he relies overmuch on the Ossianica of James Macpherson, but the work contains a lot of valuable commentary on highland mores and traditional lore, and here he shows a fairly good knowledge of Gaelic. 'The Scottish Gael' was reissued with a memoir of the author and notes by Alexander Stewart in 1876. 
Following the enthusiastic reception of his 1831 book Logan was asked by John Mackenzie to write an introduction to his 'Beauties of Gaelic Poetry' (1841), in which he summarized and occasionally expanded upon points made in his earlier work. He supplied the text for 'The Clans of the Scottish Highlands' (2 vols., 1845-7), which consisted of original, if somewhat stereotyped, sketches of highland chiefs by R. R. McIan, and a 'Description and historical memoranda of character, mode of life, etc. etc.' by Logan. This work won contemporary praise for the verisimilitude of the tartans. 
Logan died at 66 Whitfield Street, St Pancras, London, on 29 March 1872. Undoubtedly many of his conclusions need to be modified or challenged in the light of more modern Celtic scholarship, but his positive contribution to a more sympathetic and informed attitude to Gaelic history and culture deserves to be recognized. 


@@@@@


doc= 16941


Logan, James Richardson (1819-1869), lawyer and newspaper proprietor, was born at Hutton Hall, Berrywell, Berwickshire, on 10 April 1819, the son of a gentleman farmer, Thomas Logan, and his wife, Elizabeth. A clever 'extra scholar' at Duns Academy, he trained with an Edinburgh barrister, and after a short spell planting indigo in Bengal moved to Penang in 1839, where he was admitted as an advocate in December 1841. His elder brother Abraham followed him to Penang and was admitted to the bar in April 1842, but soon moved to Singapore, where James joined him in partnership the following year. The brothers were to work closely together for nearly thirty years and were buried in the same grave. Abraham became editor-proprietor of Singapore's premier newspaper, the 'Singapore Free Press', secretary to the chamber of commerce, member of numerous public committees, and a champion of constitutional reform. In 1853 the more studious and reserved James returned to practise law in Penang, where he was made a justice of the peace and was much in demand as a lucid petition writer, an effective leader of deputations, and as a legal spokesman for the European and Chinese communities in opposing irksome official restrictions. In 1855 the brothers bought the 'Pinang Gazette', with James as editor, and their newspapers became particularly influential in the absence of representative institutions. In powerful editorials James argued Penang's case, criticizing dictatorial East India Company and government of India officials, championing free trade, and urging strong policies to protect commerce in the Malay states and Sumatra. 
James Logan died in Penang at the home of his son Daniel, the solicitor-general, on 20 October 1869. His funeral that same day was attended by the entire European community and leading Asians; he was buried in the protestant cemetery, Penang, and a monument was erected in front of the supreme court by open subscription lamenting his untimely death as a public calamity: 'Unselfish to a degree he spared neither time nor money to promote Penang's welfare'. 
But Logan's most lasting memorial was his 'Journal of the Indian Archipelago and Eastern Asia', always known popularly as Logan's journal. A fellow of the Geological Society of London, a member of the Asiatic Society of Bengal, and corresponding member of the Ethnological Society (of London) and the Batavian Society of Arts and Sciences, Logan contributed articles to prestigious journals of learned societies in London, Edinburgh, Calcutta, and Batavia. His own journal, the first attempt to promote a scientific periodical in the Straits Settlements at a time when most of the Malay peninsula was unexplored by Europeans, was unique in being conceived, edited, and financed single-handedly. Logan drew on the considerable expertise of officials, clergy, naval and military officers, lawyers, doctors, surveyors, businessmen, and planters of diverse nationalities, including one prominent Chinese merchant, while he himself contributed articles on a wealth of subjects: geology, exploration, piracy, Malay customs, aboriginal peoples, ethnology, and comparative philology. An indefatigable, ever inquisitive traveller, Logan braved hardship and often danger, which undermined his health. Sometimes he returned a living skeleton, fever-racked with malaria, which eventually killed him. Twelve volumes of Logan's journal were published between 1847 and 1859, until waning public enthusiasm and financial strain impelled Logan to abandon the journal and concentrate on public causes and the 'Pinang Gazette'. 
But Logan's enterprise inspired the formation in 1878 of the straits (later Malaysian) branch of the Royal Asiatic Society, with Daniel Logan as first vice-president, and the new society obtained a government grant to buy Logan's library. In his inaugural address, the president pledged to continue Logan's work, while avoiding the mistake of trying to carry the burden alone. While most of his geological and linguistic research was superseded or updated, Logan's journal remained of lasting interest to historians and anthropologists and the entire series was reprinted in 1970. 


@@@@@


doc= 16942


Logan, John (1747/8-1788), Church of Scotland minister and writer, was born in late 1747 or early 1748 in Soutra, in the eastern Edinburghshire parish of Fala. The second son of George Logan, a farmer, and Janet Waterston of Stowe, he was sent to the grammar school in Musselburgh; it was probably there that he made the acquaintance of the local minister, Alexander Carlyle, who would remain a lifelong confidant. Some time during his youth the family moved to Gosford Mains, along the northern coast of Haddingtonshire. Although his parents frequented the congregation of the Revd John Brown of Haddington, the foremost minister of the Burgher branch of Presbyterian seceders, Logan gradually shifted his allegiance to the moderate party in the Church of Scotland. From November 1762 he was a student of arts, and subsequently divinity, at the University of Edinburgh, where his classmates included Thomas Robertson, later minister at Dalmeny and an intimate friend to the end, and Michael Bruce, whose 'Poems on Several Occasions' Logan would publish in Edinburgh in 1770, three years after Bruce's untimely death. At the university Logan came under the influence of Adam Ferguson and Hugh Blair, both moderates in the Carlyle circle. On Blair's recommendation he travelled in the summer of 1768 to Caithness, in the far north of Scotland, to serve as tutor to fourteen-year-old John Sinclair, later Sir John Sinclair of Ulbster, the famous agricultural improver, who remained a friend and patron for life. Logan received his licence to preach from the presbytery of Haddington on 27 September 1770, and the following year was called to the second charge at South Leith, near Edinburgh, although a dispute over a competing presentation provoked a heavy-handed satirical drama entitled 'The Planters of the Vineyard' (1771) and delayed his ordination until 2 April 1773. He possessed a versatile intellect and in his early years at South Leith was supposedly an attentive pastor. Appointed in 1775 to a church committee charged with revising paraphrases and hymns for use in public worship, he was the largest contributor to the volume that the committee produced in 1781. Logan held strong whig views in politics, and in the general assembly of 1782 he broke with the moderates by delivering a powerful speech in support of an unsuccessful motion to congratulate the king on the recent change of ministries, from North to Rockingham. 
During the 1779-80 college session, and again the following year, Logan delivered at St Mary's Chapel, Edinburgh, lectures on universal history which were, according to the recollection of Adam Smith, 'approved and even admired by some of the best and most impartial judges' ('Correspondence of Adam Smith', 290). Logan hoped the lectures would establish his credentials for the chair of civil history at Edinburgh; when he heard that Principal William Robertson was supporting Alexander Fraser Tytler, who was appointed to the chair on 16 February 1780, he grew hostile to the principal, whom he subsequently called 'that impudent fellow Robertson' (letter to Carlyle, 12 April 1786, Logan MSS, Edinburgh University). On 10 November 1781, as he prepared to give his course of history lectures for a third time, Logan published, for the benefit of his hearers, 'Elements of the Philosophy of History: Part First', an extended outline of his views on the scientific nature of history and the progress of the ancient Greeks and Romans. He intended to add lectures on modern European history (the projected second part of his course), but the third lecture series was abruptly cancelled and the entire enterprise abandoned. In 1787, however, his brief 'Dissertation on the Governments, Manners, and Spirit, of Asia' appeared in London, with a prefatory advertisement by William Creech (signed W. C.), a co-publisher of both works, identifying it as one of the lectures Logan delivered in Edinburgh in 1780, which Creech had taken down in shorthand on account of 'the high approbation which they met with, from a learned and respectable audience'. Like the 'Elements', the 'Dissertation' is highly Eurocentric and dismissive of Asian culture, which it considers conducive only to despotism. 
Meanwhile Logan's personal life was unravelling. Always prone to depression, he had also developed a serious drinking problem and had impregnated a servant girl, one Catharine Rogers, who gave birth to a son in 1781 (Donald Grant to Carlyle, 4 Dec 1788, Logan MSS). In March 1781 he went to London to escape the wrath of his parishioners and to arrange for the publication of a volume of poetry. Letters to Carlyle on 18 May and 22 June reveal him to be in a state of suicidal despair as he tries to explain away his alcoholism. Under these circumstances Logan must have received some satisfaction from the success of his 'Poems', published by Thomas Cadell in July 1781 and reissued in a second edition the following spring, but that work touched off an intense controversy centring on charges of plagiarism, particularly in regard to the celebrated 'Ode to the Cuckoo' which Logan placed at the head of his book. 'Cuckoo' had also appeared in the 1770 volume of 'Poems on Several Occasions' by Michael Bruce, whose family and friends were adamant that it was his. In the course of an unsuccessful attempt to block the sale of a reprint edition of Bruce's 'Poems' in 1782, Logan, or his lawyers, claimed that he was the real author of 'Cuckoo' and a number of other poems in the 1770 volume, and this point was later supported by Thomas Robertson and Henry Mackenzie, among others. Several pamphlets and articles supporting Logan's authorship of 'Cuckoo' also appeared during the 1870s, when the controversy was at its height, but since then the weight of scholarly evidence and opinion has favoured Bruce. 
On 2 October 1781 Logan became a member of the Society of Antiquaries of Scotland, and on 12 June 1782 he donated to that society a copy of his 'Poems'. The next year he completed a play, 'Runnamede', adapted from Voltaire's 'Tancrede', which Robert Anderson called 'the greatest effort of his genius' (Anderson, 1033), but which Henry Mackenzie considered flawed (though he penned an unused epilogue to it), and which Adam Smith did not admire 'in the least' ('Correspondence of Adam Smith', 257, 290). It was banned from the stage at Covent Garden because the government considered its speeches on behalf of liberty too inflammatory. Although published in 1783 in London, and the next year performed in Edinburgh, the play proved to be another disappointment to Logan, who donated a copy of the London edition to the Society of Antiquaries of Scotland on 27 January 1784. 
Authorship of a stage play added to Logan's list of offences in the eyes of pious parishioners, as did the news that he had impregnated a second woman in the parish. Logan found it prudent to leave Scotland in October 1785 for a short-lived career of hack journalism in London, where Old Slaughter's Coffee House was 'his common resort of an evening' (Thompson, 153). Using Hugh Blair as an intermediary he arranged to demit his parish on 27 December 1786 in exchange for an annuity of $40 ('Extracts', 91). In London he worked with Gilbert Stuart on the 'English Review' and wrote 'A Review of the Principal Charges Against Mr. Hastings' (1788), a pamphlet so strident in its defence of Warren Hastings that the publisher, John Stockdale, was tried for libel (though acquitted). It is believed that Logan revised his Edinburgh lectures on ancient history from the Egyptians to the Greeks for publication in London in 1788 (second volume, 1791), by the Uxbridge schoolmaster William Rutherford, as 'A View of Antient History', which would be, Logan slyly assured Adam Smith on 20 August 1787, 'the very best [book] on the Subject' ('Correspondence of Adam Smith', 307). In a letter to John Douglas, then bishop of Carlisle, on 9 November 1787, Carlyle recommended Logan for service in the Church of England, but the bishop, having heard stories of his conduct, made it clear in his reply of 25 November that this could not be. Meanwhile Logan's health was deteriorating. On 4 December 1788 the Revd Donald Grant, who would be one of the two executors of his estate, reported to Carlyle from London that Logan was in the last stage of a consumption, and on 6 January 1789 he wrote again to say that 'Your poor friend is now freed from all his trouble. He died on Sunday 28th Decr., & was decently & genteely buried under my direction on Friday 2d. Janry' (Logan MSS). He was just forty years old, and unmarried. 
In his will Logan optimistically left $600 for his friends and his two illegitimate children against the sale of his manuscripts, which are listed in a published letter from Thomas Robertson, the second of his executors (Anderson, 1029). In April 1790 a volume of his 'Sermons', including the programme for an entire Lord's supper celebration, was published in Edinburgh by Bell and Bradfute. A second edition was called for before the end of the year, and the following spring a second volume appeared, containing religious lectures as well as sermons; the two-volume set continued to be among the more popular works of its kind in early nineteenth-century Scotland. Both volumes of Logan's 'Sermons' identify the author as a fellow of the Royal Society of Edinburgh on the title-page, since he had become a fellow at its inception in 1783, and he appears as a non-resident fellow in the first volume of the society's 'Transactions' (1788). On 14 May 1791 Donald Grant sent Logan's other manuscripts to Bell and Bradfute for evaluation, and on 26 November 1793 Thomas Robertson accepted an offer from that firm, giving the estate two-thirds of the profits in exchange for publication rights. The plan was for Blair (who had edited the 'Sermons') and Mackenzie to locate what Blair called 'sparks of the Loganic Genius' (Drescher, 1.166) and produce two large volumes of 'Miscellanies in Prose and Verse', followed by 'Lectures on Roman history'. In 1795 Robert Anderson announced that Robertson was planning to publish 'a full and candid representation of [Logan] and his writing' in an edition of his 'miscellaneous works' (Anderson, 1027). But none of these publications ever appeared, and it is not known what became of Logan's manuscripts after Mackenzie obtained them following Robertson's death in 1799. Mackenzie's final judgement of the unpublished poetry, plays, and periodical essays was that only the essays 'seem to possess enough general merit to entitle them to publication' (Drescher, 2.196). However, sales of Logan's 'Sermons', along with early nineteenth-century editions of his 'Poems, and 'Runnamede'' (first published in 1805 with a biography that is believed to be by Logan's friend, the Revd Robert Douglas of Galashiels), brought the estate enough money to enable Grant to pay out all the legacies specified in Logan's will, including $200 to each of his children when they came of age. 


@@@@@


doc= 16943


Logan, Robert, of Restalrig (1555-1606), landowner and conspirator, was the only son of Sir Robert Logan ('c'.1533-1561), sixth laird of Restalrig, and his wife, Agnes Gray ('c'.1540-1585), daughter of Patrick Gray, fourth Lord Gray. He was descended from a family of Ayrshire origin which had acquired the barony of Restalrig, just outside Edinburgh, through marriage in the late fourteenth century. Logan's father died when he was only six years old, and after 1565 his mother married Alexander, fifth Lord Home. Logan and his mother and stepfather were among the Marian defenders of Edinburgh Castle when the fortress surrendered to the regent Morton in 1573, but the young laird and his mother were set free. Following the death of Lord Home in 1575 his mother was married a third time, to Thomas Lyon, master of Glamis. Logan himself married Elizabeth MacGill ('c'.1560-1622), daughter of David MacGill, later king's advocate, shortly before he was served heir to his Midlothian, Berwickshire, and Ayrshire estates in 1576. The marriage was short-lived, for by 1578 Elizabeth had returned to her father's household. The couple probably divorced some time in that year, for in spring 1579 she married Sir Thomas Kennedy of Culzean. 
Logan supported the Ruthven raid in 1582 and after the new government had fallen in 1584 he was ordered to surrender his seaward seat, Fast Castle. In May 1586 he sat on the assize which acquitted Archibald Douglas of involvement in Darnley's murder. He was married again in October, to Marion Ker, of whom little is known except that she gave birth to his heir Robert as well as other children. In 1587 Logan accompanied the embassy of his cousin Patrick, master of Gray, to London to intercede for Queen Mary's life. When Gray fell from favour on their return, Logan was among those who stood surety that he would pass into exile. His taste for intrigue also drew Logan into association with Francis Stewart, first earl of Bothwell, and he was outlawed for conspiring with the earl in February 1593. 
Fast Castle became a frequent point of arrival for foreign mail packets and persons illicitly entering Scotland. In December 1593 Logan stole gold and silver plate, valued at 3000 merks, from William Nesbit of Newton, and the following April two of his men assaulted and robbed James Gray, an Edinburgh burgess travelling on the road to Berwick, of $950. In July 1594 Logan contracted John Napier of Merchiston to use his arts to uncover treasure supposed to be secreted within Fast Castle. Napier was promised a third share and safe conduct back to Edinburgh. It is improbable that anything was found, but the episode evidently did not endear Napier to Logan, for when leasing property in 1596 he forbade his tenant to sublet to anyone of Logan's surname. 
In the summer of 1600 Logan may have been drawn into the Gowrie conspiracy, though possible evidence of his culpability was not to emerge until after his death. Logan considered a venture with Peregrine Bertie, thirteenth Lord Willoughby of Eresby, to sail to the West Indies in 1601, but Willoughby's death in June arrested this scheme. Logan had meanwhile begun to dispose of his estates, for reasons which remain unclear, selling Fast Castle to Archibald Douglas of Pittendreich in November 1602, the barony of Restalrig to Lord Balmerino in 1604, and finally his Berwickshire lands to the earl of Dunbar. However, he had limited success in realizing the money from these sales and in 1605 travelled unsuccessfully to London to force the issue. Weakened by fever he died in Edinburgh's Canongate in July 1606. Two years after his death, his one time legal agent George Sprot, an Eyemouth notary, let slip while drinking that he had knowledge of the Gowrie conspiracy. Under arrest he confessed to possessing letters penned by Logan to the earl of Gowrie and others suggesting a plot to abduct the king to Fast Castle. Although Sprot admitted under torture that he had forged these letters, when the earl of Dunbar intervened in the interrogation he reverted to his original confession implicating Logan, while still maintaining the letters were themselves forgeries. Sprot was hanged for his part in the conspiracy in August, and the following June Logan's corpse was dug up and produced in court in the treason trial which forfeited his son. This outcome was of considerable benefit to Dunbar, who owed 15,000 merks to Logan's heir. 
Willoughby perhaps best summarized Logan's character when he judged him 'a vain, loose man, a great favourer of thieves reputed, yet a man of good clan, as they here term it, and a good fellow' (Bain, 2.1034). 


@@@@@


doc= 16944


Logan, Sir William Edmond (1798-1875), geologist in Canada, was born on 20 April 1798 in Montreal, the second son in the family of nine children of William Logan (1759-1841), a baker and owner of real estate, and his wife, Janet, 'nee' Edmond (died 1836). His grandfather was James Logan, a baker from Stirling who emigrated to Canada in 1784. Logan was educated at Alexander Skakel's school in Montreal and, from 1814 to 1816, at the Revd James Lippan's school in Edinburgh, where he was top of his class of 200. For one year he attended Edinburgh University, where he was registered in medicine, with classes in logic, mathematics, and chemistry; the last taught by Professor T. C. Hope, an opponent of James Hutton and Plutonism. In 1817 Logan moved to London, where he worked in accounting for his uncle. His evenings were spent studying geometry and languages, playing the flute, and painting, but he did not relish the evening social events which he attended with his uncle. 
In 1831 Logan's uncle acquired an interest in the Forest Copper Works near Swansea and Logan was appointed to manage the accounts. However, he soon realized that a continuous supply of coal was essential to the works, and that reserves could only be determined from a precisely surveyed geological map. He set out to survey the area, plotting his findings on the available existing maps. At one point he wrote to his brother in London noting that 'if a pound or two would make the theodolite better, I should be disposed to give it.' Nevertheless, when his map was displayed in Liverpool at the 1837 meeting of the British Association for the Advancement of Science, Henry De la Beche, director of the geological survey, adopted it as the official map; Logan's name remains on the modern maps of the area. As a result of his work, in 1837 he was elected to the Geological Society of London. 
Between February and April 1829 Logan travelled in Italy, possibly as a tourist. His diary contains notes about building stones, including granite, porphyry, travertine, and alabaster -- indicating his knowledge, and possibly the nature of his uncle's business. In 1834 a business trip of several months was made to Spain, including Cadiz and Barcelona, possibly to visit copper mines. On this trip he was reading Charles Lyell's 'Principles of Geology', published in 1830, and probably made a number of watercolour paintings. 
Although he continued map making in south Wales until 1841, Logan had been without permanent employment since the death of his uncle in 1838. In late 1841 he applied for the position of founding director of the geological survey of Canada. William Buckland, Adam Sedgwick, Roderick Murchison, and Henry De la Beche all supported his application and he was offered the appointment, with headquarters in Montreal, and accepted on 14 April 1842. Within seven years, with four employees and field guides drawn from among the local people, he determined the general geology of the area which bordered the St Lawrence River and ran northwards from the Great Lakes shores. His first objective was to find coal. In May 1843 he measured a 14,570 foot section of sediments with coal at Joggins, Nova Scotia, but at that time Nova Scotia was not part of Canada. Further surveys, in 1843 and 1844, of the Gaspe coastline and a transect of the interior failed to reveal any coal deposits. Alexander Murray, Logan's able mapper in the field, confirmed the absence of coal in Upper Canada. As a result, in subsequent years Logan's objective was mineral deposits. He personally mapped along the Ottawa River, and the area east of Montreal where copper showings were found. 
Using surveying instruments for field mapping proved impractical for Canada's vast area, much of it rugged wilderness. Logan perfected the 'pace and compass' method -- counting paces along a line established by prismatic compass -- which showed errors in the geographic maps made by earlier surveyors. While he was mapping the Gaspe coast local farmers and fishermen became concerned about this strange fellow walking in a seemingly erratic manner, mumbling to himself, cracking rocks with a large hammer, wrapping rock chips in paper, pencilling notes in a leather-bound book, and sleeping on the beach under a blanket hung over some sticks. On two occasions attempts were made to take him to an insane asylum, but his courteous manner, fluent French, and lucid explanations of the activity allayed fears. 
Logan published thirteen annual reports, issued from 1845 to 1857; four copies had to be provided for the government, which he personally wrote with ink and paper. His workday in the office, and in the field, began two hours before breakfast. He seldom if ever had any lunch, and the lamp in his office was seen burning until midnight and beyond. Some wondered if he ever slept. In 1854 the government conducted an official inquiry on the value of the geological survey and Logan called prominent geologists from the United States and Britain to testify. As a result, the government doubled the survey budget. However, when government funds still proved inadequate, Logan used his own money to keep the survey going, spending C$10,000 by 1864. His major summary report, 'Geology of Canada' (1863), contained 498 woodcuts, mostly of fossils and field sketches. A small atlas followed in 1865 -- it included a colour lithographed map covering parts of Newfoundland, Nova Scotia, northern United States, and Manitoba. In 1869 a 4 foot by 6 foot map was published, with individual copies hand coloured, possibly by Logan himself. It is not surprising that he suffered from eye strain. 
In 1851 substantial collections of Canadian rocks and minerals were displayed at the Great Exhibition in London, and Logan was elected to the Royal Society; after a similar exhibition in Paris in 1855, Emperor Napoleon III of France appointed him to the Legion d'honneur. He was knighted on 29 January 1856, the first native-born Canadian to be so honoured. On his return to Canada, Toronto citizens organized a banquet; the Royal Canadian Institute commissioned his oil portrait by George Berthon; and Montreal citizens held a soiree and commissioned a 'silver fountain'. In a letter to his brother, Logan implied that if the price of fame was speaking in public, he would gladly forgo the fame. Among his many other awards were the Wollaston medal of the Geological Society of London (1856); royal medal of the Royal Society (1867); the degrees of doctor of civil laws of Bishop's University, Lennoxville, Quebec (1855), and doctor of laws of McGill University, Montreal (1856); and induction into the Canadian Mining Hall of Fame, in January 1992. Logan endowed the chair of geology at McGill. 
Logan's chief contributions to geology included the first precise geological maps using surveying instruments, the realization that the underclay of coal beds with 'Stigmaria' roots is evidence for the 'in situ' origin of coal; and the establishment of the policies, philosophical objectives, and methodology of operation, of the geological survey of Canada, aims and methods which still prevailed in the late twentieth century. 
About 5 feet 8 inches in height, with a muscular build, Logan had great stamina. In the spring of 1827 he and two brothers, together with a friend, travelled about 350 miles in ten days, from their father's estate, Clarkstone (now called Avondale), near Polmont, Scotland, by walking, carriage, rowing boat, farm wagon, and steam boat. In one day, they walked from Ballachulish to Fort William and to the top of Ben Nevis. Walking the Canadian wilderness was made more difficult by dense bush, clouds of biting insects, rain, and snow. B. J. Harrington, Logan's biographer (1883), described him as 'strong in body, of active mind, industrious and doggedly persevering, painstaking, a lover of truth, generous, possessed of the keenest knowledge of human nature, sound in judgment, but always cautious about expressing an opinion' (Harrington). 
The Logan family were Presbyterians; William still attended church while living in London, but after his move to Wales in 1831 he worked seven days a week from before dawn to late evening, in office and field. In 1870 the Logan family donated a bell for the twin towered Presbyterian church in Polmont, in memory of their father. Logan retired as survey director on 30 November 1869 but continued fieldwork in the folded rocks east of Montreal where copper was being mined. He owned rental property in Montreal, probably inherited from his father and elder brother, James; some thought he might have been the richest man in Canada, and he was reputed to have left over $400,000 in cash, as well as extensive property. He died on 22 June 1875 at his sister's home, Castle Malgwyn, near Llechryd in Cardiganshire, where he had spent the winters since 1869; he was buried on 29 June at St Llawddog's Church, Cilgerran, Pembrokeshire. Logan was unmarried; mothers with daughters, perceiving Logan as an eligible bachelor, were told 'other rocks than 'rock the cradle' claim my whole attention' (Bell, 23). Canada honoured a native son by giving the name Mount Logan to its highest mountain (elevation nearly 20,000 feet), located in the south-west corner of the Yukon, and in 1998 the Canadian news magazine 'Macleans' named him among the most important figures in Canadian history. 


@@@@@


doc= 16945


Loggan, David (bap. 1634, d. 1692), artist and engraver, was born in Danzig, Poland, where he was baptized in the Calvinist church of St Peter and St Paul on 27 August 1634. He was the only son of John Loggan ('b'. 1608), a merchant, of a family of Scottish descent who had settled in Oxfordshire in the sixteenth century, and his wife, Margaret, the widow of John or Johann Klinge. Loggan is said to have learned engraving from Willem Hondius, who settled in Danzig in 1636, and, after Hondius's death in 1652, from the younger Crispijn de Passe ('c'.1597-1670) in Amsterdam. He apparently intended to continue his studies in France and Italy, but he settled in London between 1656, when some of his engravings were published in Amsterdam, and 1658, when he gained recognition through a pencil portrait of Oliver Cromwell, drawn shortly before the lord protector's death. He engraved a view of St Paul's Cathedral for Daniel King in 1658, and subsequently engraved a title-page to the 'Book of Common Prayer' (1662) and some plates for William Dugdale's 'Origines judiciales' (1666). In the early 1660s he became well known for his black lead (plumbago) portraits drawn on vellum from life, and he succeeded William Faithorne as the best-known exponent of this genre. The portraits, which include representations of Charles II and numerous Restoration courtiers and divines, are highly accomplished and full of character, and several of them were engraved. On 15 June 1663, when he was living in the parish of St Bride, Fleet Street, he married Anna ('c'.1644-1699), the daughter of John Jordan of the parish of St Andrew, Holborn, whose family owned property at Kencot, Oxfordshire. They had eight children, one of whom, John, became a fellow of Magdalen College, Oxford, and rector of Hanwell, Oxfordshire; another, Justinian, was a lieutenant in the Grenadier Guards. 
In 1665 Loggan and his wife left London because of the plague and settled at Nuffield, Oxfordshire. An engraved portrait of an Oxford innkeeper, 'Mother Louse' -- supposedly the last woman in England to wear a ruff -- brought him to the attention of the members of Oxford University, and he soon built up a flourishing local portrait practice. He is mentioned several times in the diaries of Anthony Wood, who appears to have introduced him to, among others, Elias Ashmole and John Aubrey, whose portraits he drew. By 1669 he had moved to Holywell Street, Oxford, where he had a 'rolling press' which he sold to Oxford University, and on 30 March 1669, probably through the influence of John Fell, he was appointed engraver to the university, with an annual salary of 20's'.; his first official commission was for a pair of plates of the newly built Sheldonian Theatre, where the university press was housed. In 1672 he was made a member of the university, and he was naturalized in 1675. A book of plates of academic dress ('Reverendis... doctoribus academiae Oxoniensis haec omnium ordinium [sic] habituumque academicorum exemplaria', 1674) has usually been ascribed to Loggan, though the plates are not signed; he and his assistants also engraved title-pages and plates for some of the university press's books. But the main legacy of his time in Oxford is his 'Oxonia illustrata' (1675), a set of bird's-eye views of all the colleges, academic halls, and university buildings, together with a map. It was intended to accompany Wood's 'The History and Antiquities of the University of Oxford' (1674), and was presented along with it by the university in the late seventeenth century to distinguished visitors to Oxford. Influenced by the work of Wenceslas Hollar, Loggan's meticulously detailed views were the first accurate representation of all the buildings and gardens of the university, and they have been an invaluable quarry for historians, antiquaries, and topographers ever since. In 1676 he engraved Christopher Wren's design for the new library at Trinity College, Cambridge, and in the same year he began work on 'Cantabrigia illustrata', a comparable volume of plates of all the Cambridge colleges and university buildings, for the production of which he was given a workshop and press at Trinity College; the book was published in 1690, when he was made engraver to the university. Some of his prints are preserved at Worcester College, Oxford. 
Loggan moved from Oxford to London in 1675 and settled in a house in Leicester Fields (now Leicester Square) in a row on the St Martin's Lane side, next to the Golden Head. Here he continued to draw and engrave portraits; he also let rooms in his house to 'persons of Quality who desir to have Lodgings' (Loggan to Sir Thomas Isham, 21 Oct 1675, 'Connoisseur', 152, 1963, 85) and acted as an agent for portraits by Sir Peter Lely and members of his circle and for books and furniture. His clients included Sir Thomas Isham of Lamport (Northamptonshire) and his younger brother and heir, Sir Justinian Isham, to whom he wrote in 1682 that he was 'so plaged with besunes [business] more than ever I have bin' (Loggan to Sir Justinian Isham, 12 Sept 1682, 'Connoisseur', 154, 1963, 88). His portrait practice suffered from the rise of mezzotint engraving in the late 1670s, but he produced some mezzotints of his own about 1683 and two maps in 1687. Vertue recorded, but cast doubt upon, a story that 'he hurt his sight so in delineating of King's College Chappel [Cambridge]... that he engraved but little afterwards' (Vertue, 'Note books', 1.98). 
In producing his plates of Oxford and Cambridge, Loggan was assisted by Robert White, who later became an accomplished portraitist in his own right, by Michael Burghers (1648-?1724), who succeeded him as engraver to Oxford University, and by another Dutchman, Everardus Kickius ('one Kickers'), who, according to Vertue, accompanied Loggan to Scotland, where they produced plates for 'Theatrum Scotiae'. Among other pupils and assistants were Abraham Blooteling (1640-1690), Gerard Valck (1652-1726), and Edward (le) Davis, who departed for France after Loggan's wife 'woud have him follow her in a Livery & other servile offices, which he refus'd to do' (Vertue, 'Note books', 2.29). 
Loggan died at his house in Leicester Fields in July 1692 and was buried on 1 August 1692 at St Martin-in-the-Fields. He left debts of $140, and, according to Vertue, 'little remaining substance... except for a few Copper graved plates' (Vertue, 'Note books', 6.182). They were sold to a printseller, Henry Overton, who republished the engravings of Oxford and Cambridge on which Loggan's later fame has largely rested. 


@@@@@


doc= 16946


Loggon, Samuel (bap. 1711, d. c.1778), Church of England clergyman and author, was baptized on 29 July 1711 at Cradley, Herefordshire, the son of William Loggon and his wife, Anna. He had at least four brothers and a sister. Loggon matriculated at Balliol College, Oxford, on 23 January 1730, graduated BA in 1733, and proceeded MA in 1736. He became curate of Eastrop and Sherborne St John, near Basingstoke. On 15 October 1740 he was elected usher of the free school of the Holy Ghost at Basingstoke by the corporation of Basingstoke, following a dispute over its patronage. 
In 1743 he became curate of Stratfield Turgis in Hampshire, and on 18 July 1743, through the petition of Lord Portsmouth to the lord chancellor, he was appointed master of the free school of the Holy Ghost by letters patent. This ancient foundation was at the time in a ruinous condition, and in 1743 Loggon had the estate surveyed, and suggested that some of the income of the mastership be allocated for its improvement. In 1744 he presented a petition on the subject to Lord Hardwicke, and as he alleged that the corporation had wrongfully encroached on land owned by the foundation, he treated the town council with insolence. On 7 October 1745 the town clerk was authorized to take proceedings against him for neglecting his duties as schoolmaster, but as the inhabitants generally sided with Loggon nothing was done. In fact in 1747 the Sir John Deane lectureship was added to his preferment as master. 
On 16 December 1746 Loggon was instituted to the rectory of Stratfield Turgis by George Pitt (afterwards Lord Rivers) of Stratfield Saye, a position he resigned in November 1748 on being presented, again by Mr Pitt, to the vicarage of Damerham in Wiltshire. He remained resident at Basingstoke and in periodic dispute with the corporation. He also appears to have undertaken duties as curate of the nearby parishes of Sherborne St John and Tunworth, providing both with 'double duty' each Sunday. He died unmarried at Basingstoke about 1778, and was buried, in accordance with his wishes, in a sawpit, in the churchyard of Stratfield Turgis. 
Loggon was eccentric in his habits, wore two shirts, and drank stale beer. He collected a large number of manuscripts, which he offered to the corporation of Basingstoke in return for a piece of plate; the corporation would not accept this condition, and the manuscripts passed to his nephew. His selected translation 'Colloquies of Corderius' (1759), which he had written for use at the school of the Holy Ghost, were extremely popular, running into twelve editions in his lifetime. 


@@@@@


doc= 16947


Logier, Johann Bernhard (1777-1846), music teacher and composer, descended from a family of French refugees, was born on 9 February 1777 at Kassel in Hesse. His father and grandfather were musicians, and the former gave him his early musical education. About 1790 he travelled to England, and for two years played the flute and piano daily for an aristocratic patron. He then joined a regimental band conducted by John Willman, the father of the clarinettist Thomas Willman, with which he went to Ireland. In 1796 he married Willman's daughter, and took to composing for and teaching military bands and the piano. On the disbanding of his regiment in 1807 he first became organist of Westport, co. Mayo, then moved to Dublin, where he conducted the orchestra at Johnson's theatre, ran a music shop, and was soon recognized as the city's leading music teacher. Among his piano pupils was his own daughter; and it was for her use that Logier initially designed the apparatus for guiding a pianist's hands that was to gain him celebrity. Known as the 'chiroplast', it was meant to ensure a correct wrist and hand position in the teacher's absence. (For a full description and illustration, see Rainbow, 193-4.) 
Finding the device successful, Logier decided to use it for group teaching -- making several pupils, twelve or more, play at the same time on as many pianos. The system led to much controversy. Musicians in general were opposed to it, but Spohr expressed himself in its favour ('Allgemeine Musikalische Zeitung', 1820), and Samuel Webbe adopted it in London. Several hostile pamphlets and articles led to Logier inviting the Philharmonic Society and leading musicians to attend an examination of Webbe's pupils in London on 17 November 1817. The results of this examination are detailed in 'An Authentic Account... by J. B. Logier' (1818), which was answered by 'An Exposure of the New System... Published by a Committee of Professors in London' (1818). Many pamphlets followed. 
In 1821 the Prussian government invited Logier to Berlin, where he established a chiroplast school with such good results that the king asked him to instruct twenty teachers to spread the system over the whole of Prussia. He remained for three years in Berlin, visiting England at intervals. By 1826 he had made enough money to retire. He settled near Dublin, where he died on 27 July 1846. 
Logier arranged much music for the piano, and composed sonatas and other pieces, including an ode for the jubilee of George III, performed in Dublin. Several works were written especially for his peculiar system, and he was the author of sundry theoretical treatises and a 'Complete Introduction to the Keyed Bugle', an instrument he was said to have invented. He was not without a taint of charlatanism, establishing in Dublin a 'chiroplast club', with a special badge. He remarked to Mazzinghi that he 'considered himself an instrument in the hands of Providence for changing the whole system of musical instruction'. These pretensions were extravagant, but what he did undoubtedly had a beneficial influence on piano teaching long after his system and invention were abandoned. 


@@@@@


doc= 16948


Loingsech mac Oenguso (d. 704), high-king of Ireland, was also king of Cenel Conaill. He succeeded Finsnechtae Fledach mac Dunchada (died 695) as high-king in 696 and reigned as such until his death. Loingsech was the first Cenel Conaill ruler to become king of Tara (high-king) in almost fifty years; the previous four kings to have attained to this position of overking of all the Ui Neill and their dependencies belonged to Sil nAeda Slaine, a branch of the southern Ui Neill in whose territory the iconic site of Tara lay. The annalistic sources contain only two entries on Loingsech. The first is a bare notice of the year of his accession. The second is unusually precise: it states that he died in the battle of Corann (in south Sligo) and that this occurred on the fourth of the ides of July (12 July), at the sixth hour, on a Saturday. 
Loingsech was fifth cousin to Adomnan, who had been abbot of Iona, and therefore head of the Columban 'paruchia', since 679. The fact that these Cenel Conaill cousins led the Ui Neill and the powerful Columban federation in the years 696-704 reinforced the prestige and power of both men. Throughout the seventh century, there was strong rivalry for ecclesiastical primacy between the various Irish 'paruchiae'. From the middle of the century onwards the church of Armagh, situated in the Ui Neill vassal territory of Airthir, offered a series of challenges to the Columban 'paruchia', by promoting the cult of Patrick and by centring the cult on Armagh itself. The Ui Neill's traditional allegiance, however, was to the founder saint of the Columban churches; and his successor, Adomnan, had brought this 'paruchia' to the peak of its power at the end of the seventh century. When the kingship of Tara returned to Cenel Conaill in the person of Loingsech, Adomnan was afforded his strongest chance of reasserting the primacy of the Columban federation. There is diplomatic evidence that Loingsech and Adomnan co-operated in at least one major enterprise: Loingsech's name appears first on the list of secular rulers who gave their support to the 'Lex Innocentium', a law promulgated by Adomnan in 697 'in' 'Hibernia' 'Britaniaque' ('in Ireland and Britain'), to which the church of Armagh gave its support. 
Adomnan aspired to establish a Christian high-kingship but while he promoted the Ui Neill as the supreme federation, the high-kingship did not become a hegemony enforced by military power until after the mid-ninth century. Nevertheless, Loingsech, and his grandfather, Domnall mac Aeda, are given the title 'rex' 'Hiberniae' ('king of Ireland') by the original hand of the annals of Ulster, the only two pre-ninth century kings so designated. As the annals before 'c'.740 are based on a chronicle compiled at Iona, the designation can be taken to reflect Adomnan's concept of Christian 'imperium'. 
However, it is possible that Loingsech, as king of Tara, was attempting to assert a claim to the high-kingship at the time of his death at the battle of Corann. In leading an army southwards into Connacht, his first aim probably was territorial expansion: Cenel Conaill's opportunity for eastward expansion had diminished as a result of Cenel nEogain aggrandizement. But Loingsech may also have hoped to deal a major blow to Connacht's ascendant dynasty, Ui Briuin Ai, and thereby gain the submission of the province: the accounts in the secondary hand of the annals of Ulster, in the interpolated annals, and in the narrative tale of the battle attribute the victory to Cellach mac Ragallaig, the Ui Briuin Ai king. 
Cenel Conaill rulers occupied the kingship of Tara only twice more after Loingsech's death. The first of these was Loingsech's immediate successor and first cousin, Congal mac Ferguso ('r'. 704-10). The second was Loingsech's son, Flaithbertach mac Loingsig, who began his rule in 728, was deposed in 734, and died in 765. It is therefore unlikely that Loingsech was over forty years of age at his own death. 


@@@@@


doc= 16949


Lok, Henry (d. in or after 1608), poet, was the third son of Henry Lok (died 1571), a London mercer, and his wife, Anne Locke, nee Vaughan (c.1530-1590x1607). Sir William Lok was his grandfather, the traveller Michael Lok his uncle, and the versifier of the psalms Michael Cosworth his cousin. Nothing is known about his early life or education, other than Wood's unsubstantiated assertions that he was born early in Elizabeth's reign, spent some time at Oxford, and then gained the support of an unnamed nobleman at court -- perhaps Henry Carey, Lord Hunsdon (Doelman, 5-6). Grosart was probably confused in stating that this Henry was the parent of one Zachary Lok who in 1598 described his father as a former Levant merchant of 'above 64 years of age' ('Poems by Henry Lok, gentleman', 2.20). 
Lok married Ann Moyle of Cornwall, with whom he had two sons, Henry ('b'. 1592) and Charles. Perhaps motivated by these family responsibilities, Lok became one of the most productive writers of devotional poetry of the 1590s: his 'Sundry Christian Passions' was published in 1593 and then reprinted in his volume entitled 'Ecclesiastes' in 1597. The latter contained an unparalleled sequence of sixty dedicatory sonnets addressed to a veritable who's who of late-Elizabethan literary patrons. The survival at Lambeth Palace Library of a copy with the dedicatory sonnets cancelled, except for the one to Archbishop Whitgift printed alone on a leaf facing the title-page, suggests that Lok sometimes presented personalized copies to chosen individuals. Lok also contributed a commendatory poem to James VI of Scotland's 'Poeticall Exercises at Vacant Houres' (1591), printed at Edinburgh but previously registered to Richard Field, the publisher of Lok's own two volumes. 
The success of this literary frenzy of patronage hunting seems to have been limited. While Lok claimed in January 1597 that the countess of Warwick had encouraged him to seek a pension from Sir Robert Cecil until some suitable office became available, no employment seems to have come his way (Doelman, 8). By early 1598 he was petitioning unsuccessfully for the collectorship of Devon; and on 8 June 1598 he even put himself forward for the position of keeper of the queen's bears and mastiffs. 'It is better to be a bear herd', Lok bitterly mused, 'than to be baited daily with great exclamations for small debts' ('CSP dom.', '1598-1601', 60). 
Eventually Cecil found some use for Lok in France and even acknowledged his service with the gift of a gelding. In 1599 Lok (who was skilled in cipher) was in Bayonne, assiduously collecting political information for Cecil. Unfortunately he also began to arouse the suspicions of the locals, who clearly did not believe his claim that he was merely an English traveller 'en route' for Spain with the entourage of the French ambassador. Back home in England by April 1600 and living in the Strand, his services seem to have been dispensed with by Cecil. Despite his previous poetic commendation of King James's poetry, Lok fared no better during the new reign. By March 1606 he was imprisoned as an insolvent debtor in the Westminster gatehouse. In May 1608 he was again incarcerated for debt and pleaded with Cecil to be transferred to the Clink at Southwark. Desperate appeals in October 1608 to Cecil appear to have gone unanswered, after which time nothing else is known about Lok's fate. Doelman states that Lok died 'in Venice in 1611' (p. 11), but, in an otherwise densely noted article, he gives no citation for this assertion. 
Lok is now best remembered for his two volumes of devotional verse, 'Sundry Christian Passions' (containing 200 sonnets), and 'Ecclesiastes', which reprinted the first collection and added another 100 sonnets, along with a separate grouping of twenty sonnets or 'Peculiar Prayers'. Including introductory and concluding poems, this 1597 edition contained 328 sonnets which were memorably derided in 'The Returne from Pernassus' (1606) as fit only 'to lie in some old nooks amongst old boots and shoes'. 
More recently, however, it has been proposed that Lok's devotional poetry should be viewed as a historically important contribution to the emergence of an early seventeenth-century tradition of British devotional writing, culminating in William Drummond's 'Urania' (1616) and John Donne's 'La corona' and 'Holy Sonnets' (Roche, 155). Lok presumably drew early inspiration from the pioneering devotional poetry of his mother, Anne Locke; and his own sonnets may have likewise influenced Barnabe Barnes's 'A Divine Century of Spirituall Sonnets' (1595) and Nicholas Breton's 'The Soules Harmony' (1602). Self-consciously learned and rich in biblical allegory, Lok's poems provide 'a kaleidoscopic sense of the 'Bible' impinging on the repentant soul'. Despite their unevenness in quality, the best of Lok's work may still be usefully regarded as mediating 'between the assertiveness of Donne and the humility of Herbert' (Roche, 158). Lok also included 'Sundry psalmes of David' in his 'Ecclesiastes' volume and contributed a commendatory verse to his cousin Michael Cosworth's own versification of the psalms (BL, Harley MS 6906). Lok was a showy metrical innovator and his 'Ecclesiastes' was prefaced by a pair of dedicatory poems to Queen Elizabeth which are 'two of the most elaborately numerological poems' to be found in Elizabethan poetry (Roche, 164). Despite his literary effusions, Lok remains a poignant example of how the pursuit of court patronage through poetic dedications sometimes led only to destitution and despair. 


@@@@@


doc= 16950


Lok, Michael (c.1532-1620x22), mercer, merchant adventurer, and traveller, was born in Cheapside, London, the youngest of five surviving sons of Sir William Lok (1480-1550) and his second wife, Catherine, 'nee' Cooke (died 1537), and the brother of Rose Throckmorton. By his own account Lok was taught in 'scoles of grammar' until he was thirteen, and was then apprenticed to his family's mercery business in Flanders. He remained there until about 1552, when he and his brothers, moved by their father's death and the Antwerp trade crisis of 1550-51, began to seek more distant, innovative markets for their wares. The Loks were devout converts to protestantism, and during Mary Tudor's reign Michael remained abroad, travelling to France, Scotland, Spain, Portugal, Venice, the Greek islands, and the Levant, acting as his brothers' factor and trading on his own behalf. During this time the sight of the wares of the New World and Far East made a powerful impression on him; it was from this period that Lok himself dated his abiding obsession with the expansion of English commercial activities through the discovery and exploitation of new markets (Cotton MS, Otho E VIII, fols. 41-3). He collected a significant library of travel literature, charts, and other cosmographical data, to a value of some $500, which he later put at the disposal of Richard Hakluyt the younger during the preparation of his 'Divers Voyages' (1582). 
Lok returned to England at the accession of Elizabeth I. In 1562 he was admitted to the Mercers' Company, and about this time married Joan (died 1571), daughter of Sir William Wilkinson, sheriff of London; they had eight surviving children. He continued to practise his mercery trade in London, and from 1571 to 1576 he was London agent of the Russia Company (Willan, 26-7). In 1574 he was approached by Martin Frobisher, with whom he may have had a prior acquaintance through his brothers' involvement in the Guinea voyage of 1554, in which Frobisher had sailed as a young man. Together they prepared a proposal to the privy council, to discover a sea route to 'Cathay' via the north-west. They secured a licence to attempt this from the Russia Company, whose charter privileges they were technically infringing, and secured investors from the city and court. For want of sufficient funds to dispatch a voyage during 1576, Lok was obliged to provide loans of over $800 from his own pocket. Two further voyages to Baffin Island followed, in which the queen herself invested, but the enterprise degenerated into a search for gold, incurring large losses (most spectacularly for Lok himself). Frobisher turned violently against Lok, whom he blamed for his own misfortunes, and led moves to impeach him for alleged financial irregularities. Effectively bankrupted, with his name on transactions entered into on behalf of his fellow adventurers, Lok was cynically abandoned to fight a series of creditors' suits. He went to debtors' prison upon at least eight occasions, and claimed to have seen the inside of every London gaol save the Fleet -- to which he was also committed subsequently. 
By this time Lok had fifteen children or stepchildren. He had married in 1576 or 1577 his second wife, Margery (died 'c'.1583), widow of Cesare Adelmare and mother of Julius Caesar Adelmare, later judge of the high court of admiralty. Lok emerged from prison for the final time in 1581 and spent most of the rest of his remarkably long life vainly attempting to recover some part of his former fortune and reputation. 
In 1587 Lok was in Ireland on unspecified business, though so penurious that he was obliged to send his son Benjamin back to England to raise money to bring him home to fight a suit against one of his rare debtors. In 1591 he took up a four-year tenure as the Aleppan consul of the Turkey Company, where he immediately alienated all the company's merchants by enforcing the letter of its regulations scrupulously. On the initiative of the company's governor, Sir John Spencer (a distant relative), he was dismissed without compensation. Lok fled to Venice and initiated a suit in the courts there for compensation, which effectively paralysed the company's trade in the Levant. Finally, on the privy council's urging, Lok accepted a compromise settlement of $300 in 1601. 
Lok retired from his business activities soon after returning to England on Christmas day 1602. He continued his studies, however. In 1612 he translated the last five decades of Peter Martyr's 'De orbe novo' for a new edition published by Thomas Adams as 'De Novo Orbe, or, The Historie of the West Indies'. For Samuel Purchas he made a translation from Spanish, the 'Mexican History in Pictures', and wrote a brief commentary, 'Note on the Strait of Sea Commonly called Fretum Anian, in the South Sea'. As late as 1615 Lok was being sued for a debt of $200 incurred during the north-west enterprise. Little is known of his life subsequent to this, but the inquisition post mortem on his estate was conducted only in 1623, and he died in Cheapside, 'at the sign of the lock' -- possibly his birthplace also -- between 1620 and 1622. Lok's eldest sons, Zachary, Benjamin, and Matthew, predeceased him, and their wills (particularly the debts they forgive) offer ample evidence of their father's continuing penury. Lok's reputation remained poor; he is regarded as the role model for the merchant Shylock by those who regard the earl of Oxford as the author of the 'Merchant of Venice' (Willan, 27). Hakluyt was more perceptive, regarding him as 'a man for his knowledge in divers languages & especially in Cosmographie, able to doe his country good, & worthie in my judgment for the manifold good partes in him, of good reputation & better fortune' (Hakluyt, 11). 


@@@@@


doc= 16951


Lok, Sir William (1480-1550), mercer and merchant adventurer, was the second son of Thomas Lok and grandson of John Lok, sheriff of London in 1461, both of whom were also members of the Mercers' Company. Although formally admitted to the company only in 1507, Lok was already supplying clothes of gold and silver to the king in that year. His daughter Rose Hickman later claimed that he became the mercer and agent of Henry VIII 'beyond the seas'. Lok's strong Lutheran convictions -- his first wife, Alice, was one of England's first converts to that doctrine -- made him a willing servant of the early architects of the English Reformation. During annual visits to the Low Countries to trade at the marts of Antwerp and Bergen op Zoom, Lok provided intelligence to Cromwell or the king, reporting rumours concerning political and diplomatic developments in Europe. In a prophetic letter of February 1535 he commented upon the growing reaction against the Anabaptists: 'They be gon owte of every parte of this countre towards that town [Leeth: Liege], and that distrowyd, they schall go to the town of Mynster as they do say here...' ('LP Henry VIII', 8.76). From further afield he passed on rumours that the Turks, fearful of Charles V's eastern ambitions, were attempting to form an alliance with any state who would join with them. In March 1527 Lok received official recognition in the form of an exclusive licence to import silks, jewels, and mercery wares for court revels. While in Dunkirk in December 1533 he tore down a papal bull excommunicating Henry VIII for his adulterous marriage to Anne Boleyn (who was herself supplied with French editions of the gospels, epistles, and 'Psalms' by Lok), an incident which earned Lok a pension of $100 annually, the position of gentleman of the privy chamber, and, upon at least one occasion, the honour of entertaining the king at his home. 
Lok's business activities were not confined solely to the importation of merceries; he was also involved in the export of beer, while in 1528 he sold 600 leather harnesses to the royal ordnance. In 1533 he was named in a letter to the king as someone known to have visited the island of Candia (Crete), which suggests that he was active in the wine or currant trade. In 1531 a ship jointly hired by Lok and John Gresham was detained at Lisbon 'en route' for London from Chios, another indication of interests in foreign consumables. In 1535 Lok was rated -- possibly for the king's subsidy -- at $1000. On 20 October 1545 he was elected alderman of Vitry ward, and on 3 March 1549 created sheriff of London and knighted by Edward VI. On 10 October that year Lok was a member of the procession escorting the duke of Somerset to the Tower. 
Lok was married four times: to Alice Spenser (died 1522); Catherine Cooke (died 14 Oct 1537); Eleanor Marsh (died 1546); and Elizabeth Meredith (died 1551). He fathered nineteen children, of whom twelve, five sons and seven daughters from his first two marriages, survived into adulthood. His children included Rose ['see 'Throckmorton, Rose], Michael Lok and Henry, father of the poet Henry Lok, all children of Catherine Cooke, and from his first marriage daughters Elizabeth (who married Nicholas Bullingham, later bishop of Lincoln and Worcester) and Jane, whose own three daughters all married members of the common council. 
Lok died at his home in Cheapside, 'at the sign of the Padlock' on 24 August 1550, and was buried in the Mercers' Chapel, St Thomas Acres, with his parents and first and fourth wives, his coat of arms being set into a window there. Like many of his contemporaries, in later life Lok had converted much of his capital into property; in his will he bequeathed numerous houses and shops in Bow, Spitalfields, and Cheapside (including his retailing shop, the Lok), some twelve farms with land in Merton Holts and Tottenham, and at least one inn, the Dogges Head in the Potte, in White Leg Entry, Cheapside. 


@@@@@


doc= 16952


Lombard, Daniel (1678-1746), Church of England clergyman and author, was born at Angers, France, on 10 April 1678, the eldest son of the Revd John Lombard (died 1721) and his wife, Francisca. Lombard's family travelled to London following the revocation of the edict of Nantes in 1685; his father, formerly a French protestant minister in Anjou, ministered in several French churches in London. Daniel Lombard was naturalized in England in January 1688. On 11 September of the following year he entered Merchant Taylors' School, London, and was then educated at St John's College, Oxford, where he matriculated on 7 July 1694; he was elected a scholar soon after. He graduated BA (17 May 1698); MA by diploma, being then abroad (16 March 1702); BD (26 April 1708); and DD (23 April 1714). Between 1697 and March 1718 Lombard was also a fellow at St John's College. 
Lombard, ordained deacon by Henry Compton, bishop of London, on 26 May 1700, and priest on 9 January 1701, was appointed chaplain at Hanover to Princess Sophia and the embassy. His first published sermon, addressed to the recently deceased Sophia, appeared in 1714. After the accession of George I, Lombard was made chaplain to the princess of Wales, and on 24 February 1718 he was instituted to the rectory of Lanteglos by Camelford, on the northern side of Bodmin Moor, Cornwall. He retained this living for the rest of his life, but was absent for much of this period. His other published works include a comparison of the lines of Francois Eudes de Mezeray and his father, Daniel, printed in Amsterdam in 1723. The 1745 Jacobite rising prompted Lombard to write his own 'Succinct History of Ancient and Modern Persecutions' (1747). He also contributed to his friend Francis Gregor's 1737 edition of Sir John Fortescue's 'De laudibus legum Angliae'. Lombard was known to his parishioners for his learning, his simple lifestyle, and his attachment to French customs. He died at Camelford, Cornwall, on 30 December 1746 and was buried at Lanteglos on 2 January 1747. 


@@@@@


doc= 16953


Lombard, Peter (c.1554-1625), Roman Catholic archbishop of Armagh, was born in Waterford town into an eminent and long-established merchant family. After receiving a good grounding in the classics at Peter White's school in Waterford, he went to the Spanish Netherlands and entered the University of Louvain to study philosophy. He graduated MA in 1572, coming first in his class, before studying theology, and eventually graduated DD in 1594. In the meantime, he was ordained a priest and began lecturing at Louvain, earning a brilliant reputation as a professor first of philosophy and then of theology. In 1594 he was appointed provost of Cambrai Cathedral, and he was also made canon of the collegiate college at Siclin in Tournai. 
By the late 1590s the Catholic church was increasingly divided over the issue of divine grace and the role of free will in salvation. The University of Louvain strongly opposed the new emphasis being placed by the Jesuits and their supporters on the importance of free will in securing salvation. In 1598 Lombard was chosen to participate on behalf of Louvain in the ongoing theological debates at Rome. He was also to defend the universities' privileges, which were being challenged by local Jesuits. On his arrival, Lombard quickly impressed Pope Clement VIII with his learning and ability; he spent the rest of his life at Rome, residing at the Palazzo Salviati and becoming theological counsellor to the Holy See. 
In 1599 Lombard began acting as an agent at Rome for Hugh O'Neill, earl of Tyrone, who was then leading an uprising against English rule in Ireland. By 1600 he had written his most famous work, 'De regno Hiberniae', which is strongly supportive of Tyrone. It begins by defending the Gaelic Irish from charges of barbarity and stresses Ireland's glorious past as a civilized Christian nation, particularly during the early middle ages. Moving to the present, Lombard argued the legitimacy of Tyrone's uprising, declaring that the English had forfeited their right to rule Ireland, based as it was on a papal grant, through their actions against the church. However, many Old English Catholics in Ireland regarded the Gaelic Irish Tyrone as a very imperfect champion of the Catholic cause and remembered how he had failed to support James Fitzmaurice's papal-sponsored crusade to Ireland in 1579. To address these charges, Lombard stressed Tyrone's personal piety and claimed that the earl had long foreseen that the English were bent on the destruction of the Catholic church, but had prudently refrained from taking up arms until he was fully prepared. 'De regno Hiberniae' was eventually published at Louvain in 1632. 
At Rome, Lombard won many influential figures over to Tyrone's cause including Robert Parsons, rector of the English college there, and the duke of Sessa, Spain's papal ambassador. On 18 April 1600 Lombard's lobbying paid off when Pope Clement granted a bull of indulgence to Tyrone's supporters in Ireland and appointed Tyrone captain-general of the Catholic armies in Ireland. However, as Tyrone came under increased military pressure from the English in 1600-01, he badly needed more overt support from Rome. At Tyrone's behest Lombard pressed for Clement to excommunicate those Catholics who opposed Tyrone and to appoint a Spanish nuncio to Ireland. The ultimate goal was for the pope to grant Ireland to Philip II of Spain, who would send his forces to conquer it. However, Clement was strongly anti-Spanish and was not prepared to countenance a further expansion of Spanish power. Moreover, he was also aware that many Catholics in Ireland opposed Tyrone's uprising. As a result he appointed an Italian nuncio and refused to excommunicate pro-government Catholics. However, not wanting to disappoint Tyrone completely, he did make Lombard archbishop of Armagh on 9 July 1601. Lombard had not been Tyrone's first choice for the position, but the earl would be satisfied that a supporter was now head of the Irish church, while the Old English would also be reassured by the promotion of one of their own. As it happened, Lombard was consecrated in Rome, but never went to his archdiocese. 
As events swung against Tyrone in Ireland, Lombard began to play a key role in the theological controversies raging at Rome. In 1602 he was appointed president of the special congregation, composed of cardinals and expert theologians, established to debate the issues of grace and salvation. As the congregation wound down its deliberations in 1607, he was authorized to draft the papal bull resolving the controversy. While the majority of the congregation wanted to condemn all forty-two of the propositions attributed to the Jesuit theologian Molina, Lombard's draft condemned only thirty. There is no doubting Lombard's opposition to the Molinists: throughout his career he was a vigorous critic of the Jesuits. His relative moderation on this matter simply reflected his anxiety to preserve the unity of the church. In the event, although Pope Paul V praised Lombard's draft highly, on 28 August 1607 the pontiff dissolved the congregation and ruled that each side should be allowed to follow its own teachings. 
During this period Lombard remained deeply engaged in Irish affairs. Following Tyrone's submission to the English early in 1603, Lombard quickly changed his attitude toward the crown, taking the pragmatic view that the Catholic church in Ireland had no option but to accommodate itself to a protestant government. This shift was apparent from the contents of his 'Episcopion doron', written in 1604. Dedicated to King James I of England, the book argues that the Catholic church is the one true church and appeals for an end to the persecution of Catholics in Ireland. The deep roots of Catholicism in Ireland are stressed: Catholicism is an intrinsic part of being Irish. The work includes an oblique criticism of Tyrone for exploiting religion to further his own ends. 
Thereafter, Lombard deviated from this conciliatory policy only in the immediate aftermath of the flight of Tyrone and Rory O'Donnell, earl of Tyrconnell, from Ireland in autumn 1607. Hoping that this development might precipitate a Spanish invasion of Ireland, Lombard wrote warmly to the earls and sought papal support for armed intervention in Ireland. However, by the time he received the two exiles outside Rome on 29 April 1608, it was clear that no military aid would be forthcoming from either Spain or the pope. Lombard reverted to his policy of appeasing the English in the hope of gaining better treatment for Catholics in Ireland, a decision which soon led to a rift with Tyrone. Indeed, prior to Tyrone's arrival in Rome, Lombard appears to have persuaded the pope not to appoint any of the earl's supporters to Irish bishoprics. 
Denied military aid and even permission to travel to Spain, Tyrone cut an increasingly wretched figure at Rome. Despite Lombard's advice, the pope felt obliged to comply with Tyrone's repeated requests on behalf of Florence Conry, who became archbishop of Tuam in 1609, and Eugene McMahon, who was translated to the archbishopric of Dublin in 1611. Lombard was furious at these appointments, believing that the Catholic church should be trying to distance itself from Tyrone. In a memorandum of 1612 he argued that these promotions had precipitated a hardening of the Dublin administration's attitude towards Catholicism, culminating in the execution that year of Conor O'Devany, bishop of Down and Conor. He added that bishops who owed their appointment to Tyrone would achieve little, as they would be subject to constant government harassment. By contrast, Lombard pointed to the success enjoyed by his own deputy David Roth, who had been sent to Ireland about 1610. Roth had opened up informal communications with Sir Arthur Chichester, lord deputy of Ireland, informing him of Lombard's opposition to Tyrone. As a result, Roth was given considerable leeway by the government, being able to resolve a serious dispute between the secular and regular clergy and to hold a provincial synod at Drogheda in 1614. 
The Vatican appears to have accepted Lombard's argument that future appointments to Irish bishoprics could not be associates of Tyrone. No further appointments were made until 1618, although ten were made between then and Lombard's death in 1625, and he appears to have had a major bearing on all or most of them. Indeed, in 1619, he was accused of trying to pack the Irish church with his own supporters. Although not averse to some self-aggrandizing, it must also be said that Lombard believed that the promotion of his own supporters was in the best interests of the church. When Tyrone attempted to canvass support for a Spanish invasion of Ireland in 1613-14, Lombard strongly opposed him, declaring that his religion commanded him to remain loyal to his rightful king. Lombard made sure through his nephew Robert that the English heard of this. However, if he was hoping for public appreciation of his efforts from King James, he was to be disappointed. On 21 April 1614, during the course of an address to a delegation of Catholic members of the Irish parliament at Whitehall, James roundly condemned Lombard as a traitor. However, the wily monarch's deeds did not match his words and, in practice, the Dublin government tacitly tolerated Roth's activities in Lombard's name. 
An opportunity soon presented itself for Lombard to prove that Catholicism was compatible with loyalty to a protestant king. In England, a group of imprisoned Catholic priests was presented with twelve test questions concerning their attitude towards the king. As theological adviser to the pope, Lombard was charged with drafting the appropriate responses for Catholics in such a situation. The resulting 1052-page manuscript, which was completed in 1616, is Lombard's response to James's criticisms of him. He stresses that James is the rightful king of England, Scotland, and Ireland, and that all Catholics have a duty to acknowledge him as such. Although a heretic, James is a lawful king because he was raised from birth as a protestant and could not have known any better. Lombard does say, however, that Catholics are entitled to disobey laws passed by the king that adversely affect the Catholic religion and that the pope has the power to depose legitimate monarchs who behave like tyrants. 
For the rest of his life Lombard was much in demand at Rome for his views on theological issues. On 24 February 1616 he gained an inauspicious place in history by heading the committee of eleven theologians which condemned Galileo's cosmology as heretical. The committee had debated the matter for only five days and showed little appreciation of the issues involved. A year later, Lombard advised the pope on how to approach proposals for a marriage alliance between England and Spain. He strongly endorsed the prospect of a marriage between a Catholic princess and a protestant prince, viewing it as a means of lessening the persecution of Catholics in England and Ireland. Recognizing that bargaining for formal toleration was unrealistic, he hoped that James could be persuaded to desist from enforcing the penal laws. 
Apparently, Lombard planned to travel to Ireland in 1620 and again in 1622, but never went. This may have been because he became involved in the long-running controversy over the methods used to convert the natives in Madura. In 1621 he was appointed head of the papal commission to examine whether Jesuit missionaries were justified in adapting Christianity to Brahman customs. The findings of the commission were substantially Lombard's work and had a major bearing on the papal bull issued on 31 January 1623 in favour of such methods. Lombard died shortly after September 1625 at Palombra, about 20 miles from Rome, and was buried in the parish church there. 


@@@@@


doc= 16954


Lombart, Pierre (1612/13-1682), engraver, was born and trained in France. At his death his age was given as sixty-nine, which places his birth in 1612 or 1613; Pierre-Jean Mariette, writing in the eighteenth century, says he was a Parisian. Nothing is known of his early career in France, though later writers variously thought that he was a pupil of Gerard Edelinck or Francois Poilly. A few signed plates may date from this period of his life. The first trace of him in London is in 1651, when he engraved the title-page to Jeremy Taylor's 'The Rule and Exercises of Holy Dying'. Signed and dated plates, often with the words 'a Londres' added, continue through the 1650s, but Lombart was certainly back in Paris in 1663, when he engraved a dated portrait of Antoine Grammont after Wallerant Vaillant. 
During the 1650s Lombart was the finest engraver working in England, and the principal competitor to William Faithorne. He made his name with two great portraits of Oliver Cromwell. The earlier, which can be dated between 1651 and 1653, shows him with a page and is after a painting by Robert Walker. The later, a full-length of Cromwell on horseback, followed in 1655. The portraits were dedicated by Lombart himself respectively to parliament and to the council of the Commonwealth. The 1655 print went through an unusual number of transformations through the years. G. S. Layard, who devoted a monograph to his researches into its history, identified seven states: the first shows Cromwell's head; in the second there is no head; in the third and fourth the head becomes that of Louis XIV; in the fifth it is Cromwell; in the sixth it is Charles I; and in the seventh it returns to Cromwell again. The plate survives in a private collection. 
The principal achievement of Lombart's London years was a series of twelve portraits after paintings by Anthony Van Dyck, usually known as 'The Countesses' because ten of them show ladies with the Latin title of comitissa. These bear a royal privilege, and so must have been made after the Restoration; however, they were published after Lombart's return to Paris, for each bears a French publication line as well. They are the prototype for the later series of full-length engravings after Van Dyck by Pieter Van Gunst and James McArdell, and perhaps inspired the set of 'Beauties' by Kneller now at Hampton Court. 
Lombart also worked extensively on the publications of John Ogilby, engraving most of the plates for his 1654 'Virgil' after Francis Clein. A few of the others were engraved by L. Richer, after whose designs Lombart engraved a set of 'The Liberal Arts'. Richer is recorded in John Evelyn's 'Diary' for 25 March 1653 as a 'rare graver in tallie douce... sent over by Card. Mazzarini to make collections of pictures' (Evelyn, 'Diary', 3.82), and it is possible that Lombart too travelled to London partly to profit from the dispersal of the royalist collections of paintings. After his return to Paris, Lombart was received into the Academie Royale de Peinture, but he never became a full member. He specialized in portraits, of which it seems that few, if any, can be dated later than the beginning of the 1670s. He died in Paris on 30 October 1682. His career still awaits a full study. 


@@@@@


doc= 16955


John Lombe (c.1693-1722), Sir Thomas's half-brother, born probably at Norwich, was probably apprenticed to Thomas, who subsequently encouraged him to visit Italy and make himself acquainted with the processes of silk throwing. He was referred to by Alderman Perry in his speech in the House of Commons when Sir Thomas Lombe's petition was being discussed as one 'whose head is extremely well turned for the mechanics'. He was further described in 1791 by William Hutton as 'a man of spirit, a good draughtsman and an excellent mechanic' (Hutton, 196). Hutton goes on to recount that John returned from Italy about 1717, bringing with him at least two Italians to assist him in starting the new factory. He adds that the silk throwers of Piedmont were so enraged at Lombe's success, and at the deception which had been practised upon them by the faithless Englishman, that they dispatched a woman to Derby to gain Lombe's confidence, and to administer a slow poison. In this she was successful, and her victim, after lingering for two or three years in great agony, died at his home, Silk Mill House, Derby, on 20 November 1722, and was according to Hutton buried with great pomp at All Saints' Church, Derby, on the 28th, when thousands of people attended the funeral. Hutton, who worked as a boy in the Old Silk Mill, related that Lombe's share of the mill passed 'into the hands of his brother, William' (actually his cousin), who, 'being of a melancholy turn, shot himself'. These events took place before Hutton was born (though he gleaned much from his grandfather) and his story must be received with some caution. It is likely that Lombe was actually buried in a mausoleum erected in a formal garden he had created on an island in the Derwent called the Little Bye-Flatt; the structure appears on Samuel Buck's 'East Prospect of Derby' (1728) but later disappeared, probably destroyed in a flood. Sir Thomas Lombe makes no allusion to his brother's death in his petition to parliament for the renewal of his patent. John Lombe's will was proved in London in July 1724. He was unmarried. 


@@@@@


doc= 16956


Lombe, Sir Thomas (1685-1739), merchant and inventor of silk-throwing machinery, eldest son of Henry Lombe, worsted weaver, of Norwich, was born at Norwich on 5 September 1685. The father died about 1695, leaving his sons Thomas and Henry under the care of his executors, while the surviving younger son John ['see below'] was to be brought up by his mother, Henry Lombe's second wife, formerly a Miss Wilmot. The family seems to have been long settled in Norfolk, and the name frequently occurs in local records. 
In the early part of the eighteenth century Lombe found his way to London, where he was apprenticed to Samuel Totton, mercer, and was admitted to the freedom of the Mercers' Company in 1707. In the same year he became a freeman of the City of London, and he eventually established himself as a merchant. In 1718 he obtained a patent (no. 422) for: 'a new invention of three sorts of engines never before made or used in Great Britaine, one to winde the finest raw silk, another to spin, and the other to twist the finest Italian raw silk into organzine in great perfection, which was never before done in this country.' A specification was duly enrolled, as required by the letters patent, but was lost, and reappeared only in 1867, when it was printed for the first time. Lombe says: 'I declare that by constant application and endeavours for severall years past, and employing a great many agents and workmen both here and in foreigne parts, I have at very great expense and hazards found out, discovered, and brought into this country the art of making the three capital engines.' These are mentioned in the title of his patent. The description of the machinery is deliberately obfuscated and is interspersed with numerous Italian technical terms, the use of which Lombe justifies by alleging that there were no English terms applicable. In fact, it is clear that the real purpose of this obfuscation was to prevent the successful adoption of his process once the patent had expired. 
Lombe employed his half-brother John, who, it is said, went to northern Italy, then the principal seat of the silk manufacture, and made himself thoroughly familiar with the various processes, sending back drawings made covertly on the spot, in bales of raw silk to be exported to England. These plans were realized on arrival, prototypes being erected in a room in Derby Moot Hall. Although long doubted, some evidence to support John's exploits has been found in archives at the University of Pisa. He probably worked for Glovere Urwin, silk exporters of Leghorn. This journey has been represented as a risky and daring enterprise, which may well constitute one of the first recorded instances of industrial espionage. The Piedmontese were said to have jealously guarded the secret of the manufacture, yet all the while a complete description of the Italian silk-throwing machinery, published as early as 1607 at Padua by V. Zonca in his 'Novo teatro di machine', was available in the collections of the Bodleian Library, Oxford. It contains engravings which show the construction of the machinery in great detail, and to an expert Zonca's book is to some extent more satisfactory than Lombe's specification. None the less, it is unlikely that anyone concerned with the possibility of throwing silk in Britain, least of all Lombe, was aware of its existence. Moreover, a number of persons had unsuccessfully petitioned in 1692 for leave to be incorporated into a company for the purpose of introducing the Italian machinery and starting a manufactory in this country. The Lombes, therefore, can be credited with having introduced into this country a new and important trade, the main elements of which were the basic machinery and the factory method of working, long-established in Italy. Significantly, the machines could be adapted to other types of yarn and were to be of inestimable value to the silk and ultimately the textile industry as a whole. 
In 1719 Thomas, John, and a cousin, William Lombe, in partnership began production at their mill, constructed from 1715, on an island in the River Derwent at Derby, adjacent to an unsuccessful silk mill built some fourteen years before by Thomas Cotchett, a local attorney. Eventually the mill became a prosperous concern, and Daniel Defoe records a visit to it in its first decade (Defoe, 3.38). The building, later known as the Old Silk Mill, was rebuilt after a fire in 1826. Subsequently the doubling shop collapsed in 1890 and the original building was extensively reconstructed after a fire which occurred on 5 December 1910, two years after silk throwing ceased. It was subsequently adapted to house the Derby Industrial Museum. 
Lombe's patent was granted for fourteen years, and naturally expired in 1732, but on 28 January of that year he petitioned parliament for an extension, alleging that he had been put to great expense in training workmen, and that the Sardinian authorities had prohibited the importation of raw silk, so that a supply had to be obtained elsewhere. However, it would appear, from a letter written in 1739 by his successor as proprietor at Derby, William Wilson, to Samuel Lloyd, once Lombe's agent in Italy, that silk supplies were curtailed only from 1733 (letter of 2 October 1739, W. Yorks. AS, DB 32/44). This reinforces the claim by William Hutton that Lombe 'forgot to inform [parliament] that he had already accumulated more than $80,000' (Hutton, 203). The petition was referred to a committee, and evidence was produced showing that the machinery had rendered the manufacturers of England independent of Italy for the supply of organzine, thus reducing the price. There was considerable opposition to the petition on the part of the cotton and worsted spinners, who were keen to use a modified form of Lombe's machinery for making yarn, but who had been prevented by threats of legal action for infringement. The facts are set out in 'The case of the manufacturers of woollen, linnen, mohair, and cotton yarn... with respect to... a bill for preserving and encouraging a new invention in England, by Sir Thomas Lombe' (n.d. [1732?]). The debate on the bill was thoroughly reported ('The Parliamentary History of England', 1732, 924) and is of great interest, being the first instance of an application to parliament to prolong a patent beyond the limit fixed by the 'Statute of Monopolies'. The bill was thrown out, but eventually an act was passed (5 Geo. II, c. 8) granting a reward of $14,000 to the inventor, one of the conditions being that Lombe should deposit models of his machinery in some public institution. Models were ultimately placed in the Tower (although this had clearly not happened as late as the 1750s). They later appear to have succumbed to the ravages of woodworm and the few surviving fragments later said to be in the Victoria and Albert Museum, London, were lost by 1974. Lombe's machinery was described and illustrated in Rees's 'Cyclopaedia' (art. 'Silk') and a one-third scale model of the machinery was deposited in the Silk Museum, Macclesfield, Cheshire. 
Lombe was an alderman of Bassishaw ward in the City of London, and was chosen sheriff in 1727. He was knighted on 8 July of the same year, when he attended at court to present a congratulatory address from the city to George II on his accession. He married Elizabeth Turner (died 1753), and they had two daughters, Hannah and Mary Turner. Lombe died on 3 January 1739 at his house in Old Jewry, London, leaving a fortune estimated at $120,000 ('GM', 9.47), which was bequeathed in equal portions to his widow and daughters. He desired his widow 'at the conclusion of the Darby concerns to reward the principal servants there as she shall think fit to the value of 500l. or 600l.' (will, TNA: PRO, PROB 11/694, sig. 14). His wife died on 18 November 1753, his daughters being married; Hannah in 1740 to Sir Robert Clifton, baronet, MP for East Retford, and Mary on 24 April 1749 to James Maitland, seventh earl of Lauderdale. 




@@@@@


doc= 16957


London, John (1485/6-1543), administrator, was a native of Hambleden, Buckinghamshire, the son of an Oxfordshire tenant farmer. In 1497, at the age of eleven, he was admitted a scholar of Winchester College, proceeding thence in 1503 as a scholar of New College, Oxford, where he was elected a full fellow in 1505. He graduated BCL in 1513, proceeded DCL in 1519, and was elected principal of Hinksey Hall in 1513. In 1526 he was elected warden of New College, a post he retained until 1542, while by 1533 he had been made a notary public by apostolic and imperial authority. Although he was not ordained priest until 1522, in April 1519 he became a canon of York Minster, holding the prebend of Bilton. He came to hold a number of other preferments, including a series of prebends in Lincoln Cathedral, and became a canon and prebendary at both Salisbury and Windsor in 1540. Appointed dean of Wallingford in 1536, and master of St John's Hospital there in 1541, on 1 September 1542 he was made dean of the new cathedral at Oxford, which was then in the former abbey of Osney. 
Although London played an active role in the persecution of Lutherans in Oxford, both at his own college and at King Henry VIII College, his reputation as a bloodthirsty persecutor of heretics owes much to the highly coloured account of his actions provided by John Foxe in the 'Acts and Monuments'. Certainly one member of New College, John Quinby, was in 1528 imprisoned in the steeple on London's orders, and died in captivity. When London's own nephew, Edward London, was heard to argue that papal supremacy had no legitimate foundation, his uncle summoned him and spent five hours trying to persuade him to disavow his opinions. Foxe claimed that London rejoiced in the arrest of Thomas Garrard (or Garrett) in 1540, and listed him among the 'pharisees troubled at Garrett's escape out of prison' ('Acts and Monuments', 5.424). London's reputation as a defender of Catholic orthodoxy places him low in Foxe's estimation: the martyrologist describes London as 'puffing, blustering, and blowing, like a hungry and greedy lion seeking his prey'. However, it is clear from correspondence between London and John Longland, bishop of Lincoln, that London was following the instructions of Cardinal Wolsey in his actions against Garrard in 1528, and that he preferred that the case should receive 'gentle and discreet treatment' (ibid., 5, appx). Despite Foxe's interpretation of London's interview with his nephew, it was London who was to find himself forced to justify his conservative opinions after Edward had reported them to the council in 1536. 
It is for his participation in the campaign for the dissolution of the monasteries in the 1530s that London is best remembered. He was responsible for the dissolution of houses in Oxford, Reading, Warwickshire, and Northamptonshire, and a number of letters between London, Cromwell, and Rich survive, many detailing the suppression of houses and the removal of images. David Knowles refers to him as a 'legendary figure' in the history of the period, while stopping short of Philip Hughes's description of London as 'one of the vilest men of all this vile time' (Hughes, 1.235). Although frequently regarded as a colleague of Layton, Legh, and ap Rice from the start of the process of visitation, London was not in fact active in the suppression of religious houses until 1538, and in many ways he was a strange choice as visitor: he had not been employed by the government prior to the dissolution, and played no role in the process of the official Henrician Reformation after this date. Earlier histories of the dissolution portray London as an enthusiastic destroyer and spoiler of the monasteries, removing everything of value and destroying what he could not remove. But more recently he has been viewed as a moderate and considerate agent of government, never making sweeping generalizations over the moral character of the monks, and making a deliberate effort to obtain financial security for those affected, for instance requesting favourable treatment for the abbess of Godstow. His own religious opinions were very much those of the conservative wing of the Henrician church; Knowles describes his motivation as an urge to reform rather than suppress, and there is little to suggest that he had any doctrinal interest in the obliteration of monasticism. 
Despite London's role in the dissolution, his relations with Thomas Cromwell were not always amicable. He has been criticized for his 'oleagenous subservience to his political masters, especially to Thomas Cromwell' (Buxton and Williams, 45), but there were good reasons for his repeated protestations of loyalty to the Henrician cause. In 1532 it was suggested that his conservatism was standing in the way of his commitment to the crown: London responded by assuring Cromwell that all rumours of his opposition to royal policy were false, and claiming that he had publicly consented to Henry VIII's divorce before the whole university. London invoked the assistance of Cromwell in the government of his college, protesting against the demands of his fellows, but his defence of papal authority at this time made his position less secure. In 1533 his position was under threat again after one Richard Jones, arrested and imprisoned in the Tower of London after involvement in alchemy and prophecy, promised that he would reveal things about London 'that would make him smoke and others too of his affinity' (Elton, 56). In July 1536 London felt compelled to write to Cromwell once again with a declaration of his loyalty to the crown, and denying rumours that he had spoken openly in favour of purgatory, pilgrimages, and the papal supremacy. 
London clearly feared that his position at New College was under threat: in a letter to Cromwell the latter's agent Thomas Bedyll outlined London's concerns and claimed that he was a dedicated servant of the crown. London enlisted the support of Bedyll again in 1537, protesting that Cromwell believed him to be a papist, and complaining again that he was troubled by the fellows of New College. The main causes of the clash with the fellows appear to have been his refusal to manumit bondsmen to college estates, and more particularly his hostility towards Lutheranism and the new learning. He had reported difficulties in maintaining discipline among the college membership, which included such conservatives as John and Nicholas Harpsfield alongside early evangelicals, John Man and John Philpot. His problems may indeed have been heightened by a clash between his obligation to enforce the will of the crown and his determination to suppress all heresy and innovation. London was clearly not the only conservative in New College, but his enemies were all too aware that any hint of opposition to the Henrician Reformation could be used against him. 
With the fall of Cromwell in 1540 London aligned himself more firmly with Stephen Gardiner and the conservative members of the Henrician court and church. Having become a canon of Windsor he played an active role in the persecution of heterodoxy there. John Foxe lists him among the persecutors of the group of Windsor evangelicals in the spring of 1543, and at the same time he also played an important role in the conspiracy against Thomas Cranmer and the evangelicals at court, which culminated in the so-called prebendaries' plot. It was London who brought Stephen Gardiner into the orbit of the plotters, thereby forging a powerful alliance of conservative interests based in Kent, Oxford, and Winchester. In March 1543 London brought evidence of heresy in Windsor before the privy council, apparently with the prior knowledge of Gardiner. London and his ally William Symonds alleged that Anthony Peerson and his circle were acting in violation of the 'Act of Six Articles' of 1539, which had set out official belief on a number of matters, most notably clerical marriage and the eucharist. Gardiner instructed London to return to Windsor to search for more concrete information, information that might be enough to tip the balance at court, and the mind of the king, in favour of the conservatives. London had an important part to play in the questioning of the suspects. The persecution of heresy in Windsor reached a peak in 1543, when it was believed that revealing the extent of heterodox belief there and in Kent would prove to be a decisive blow against the reformers, implicating Thomas Cranmer in the spread of evangelical beliefs in Kent and causing the king to turn against the archbishop. 
Peerson and two of his followers were burnt on 28 July, but in November the king chose to stand by Cranmer, and John London was one of the first casualties. This may have been no accident: there are suggestions that London admitted full responsibility for the events, and particularly the questioning of members of the privy council, in an effort to preserve Gardiner's position. Accused of committing perjury in an attempt to exonerate himself after the Windsor trials, he was convicted and sentenced to ride through Windsor, Reading, and Newbury facing the tail of his horse with a paper on his head, before being committed to the Fleet. He had died in prison before the end of the year. News of his death was welcomed by contemporary evangelical writers, including John Bale, who recorded the event in the 'Epistle Exhortatorye of an Englyshe Christiane' (1544; ESTC 1291; fol. 9'r'- 'v'). The nature of London's involvement in the affairs of church and state has done much to shape his posthumous reputation -- Catholic commentators and historians have condemned him for his involvement in the material destruction of the early Reformation, while protestant writers have criticized his continued conservatism and apparent allegiance to Rome. 


@@@@@


doc= 16958


London, William (fl. 1653-1660), bookseller, whose parentage, education, and private life are obscure, had a bookshop in Newcastle upon Tyne in the 1650s. His claim to fame derives mainly from 'A Catalogue of the most Vendible Books in England', which he published in 1657. In the preface London explained that he wanted to promote knowledge in the northern counties and had therefore compiled this catalogue which contained approximately 4500 titles and was arranged by subject category. The catalogue itself is preceded by 'An introduction to the use of books: in a short essay upon the value and benefits of learning and knowledge'. London claimed to be the first to list the books with their full titles, 'for a full title tels us the purport and intent of the books' contrary to the usual practice of listing short titles only which 'are great deluders and deceivers of mens expectations'. The title-page announces that besides the books in the catalogue maps, globes, paper, and wax may also be bought in his shop. The annual supplements promised are extant for 1658 (as part of the 1658 reissue of the catalogue) and for 1660 (also found as part of a 1660 reissue). The only other work known to be written by London is 'The Civil Wars of France' (1655) where the author professes to be 'a true Protestant, and friend to the Common-wealth of England'. This claim seems to be contradicted by his association with the printer Stephen Bulkley (Buckley) who had to move several times rather hurriedly due to his support for the royalist cause and who printed several anti-Quaker tracts which, according to the imprint, were sold in London's shop. The first of these is J. Gilpin's 'The Quakers Shaken' (1653). In the preface to his 'Catalogue' London said that he 'will not stop the Currant of a generall knowledg of Books, by leaving out all that are accounted Heterodox'. The 'Catalogue' was reissued twice with a cancel title-page and was possibly no great success, which may be the reason that the catalogue of Latin books London spoke of in his preface never materialized. 


@@@@@


doc= 16959


Long, Amelia, Lady Farnborough (1772-1837), watercolour painter, was born in Hill Street, Berkeley Square, London, on 29 January 1772, the elder daughter of the prominent art collector Sir Abraham Hume (1749-1838) and his wife, Amelia Egerton (1751-1809). She was educated in the classics. On 28 May 1793 she married Charles Long (1760-1838), a Treasury official who later became paymaster-general and in 1826 Baron Farnborough. He not only shared his wife's interests in the arts, but also took on the role of unofficial art adviser to the prince of Wales (later George IV). He drew and etched to a small extent and formed, no doubt with his wife's approval, a modest but significant art collection which included neo-classical sculpture, Dutch and Flemish paintings, and landscapes by Gainsborough, Claude, Rubens, Gaspard Dughet, and Sir George Beaumont. 
Early in their marriage, the Longs acquired property and land in Bromley, Kent, where they finally settled in 1801. Situated on a hill and built in the Italian style, Bromley Hill Place was transformed into 130 acres of spacious lawn, wooded grounds, winding waterways and rock garden, with rustic bridges and seats 'for rest and contemplation', a summer house, farm buildings, carefully sited marble vases, and sun dial (Long to George Cumberland, Egerton, 384). The house subsequently became a meeting place for artists and royalty, as well as the arena for Amelia Long's works as a horticulturist and watercolourist. 
In or shortly after 1796 Amelia Long took drawing lessons from the landscape painter Thomas Girtin, who reputedly 'told everything to his favourite pupil Lady Long' (Roget, 91). Early work shows her copying the masters of landscape painting, and employing the wide-angled topographical format and restricted tonal colour scheme characteristic of Girtin's work: a typical example is the 'View of St Paul's from Thames' (National Galleries of Scotland, Edinburgh). At the same time she was brought into contact with Dr Thomas Monro, the patron of aspiring watercolour painters and himself an amateur artist. Charles Long subscribed to the upkeep of J. R. Cozens, who was under Monro's care, and it may have been through the Monro Academy that Amelia Long was first introduced to Girtin. 
Amelia Long's relationship with the portrait painter Henry Edridge (1769-1821) was even closer. Another member of the Monro circle, he was an important influence on her studies of natural foliage and vegetation, which were mainly executed in pencil or chalk, sometimes with charcoal. His style is also apparent in a series of picturesque continental townscapes in soft ground etching, the result of three visits to France and Holland between 1815 and 1819 (British Museum, London). During her earliest visit, at the height of the Napoleonic war, Amelia Long also painted the British troops at St Cloud (Fairhaven collection, Anglesey. Surviving sketchbooks -- in the Victoria and Albert Museum in London and in Perth Museum and Art Gallery -- show that Long otherwise confined her travels to the south of England. The limited number of oil paintings which she appears to have executed are serene, somewhat Italianate landscapes: contemporaries commented on their Corotesque and Wilsonic qualities. Watercolour, however, remained her favourite medium and Bromley Hill Place the subject depicted more than any other, as is evidenced by her 'Views of Bromley Hill', twelve soft ground etchings, now held in the British Museum, London. As a mark of the respect which she commanded among fellow artists, she was made an honorary exhibitor at the Royal Academy from 1807 to 1822 and at the British Institution in 1825. Lady Farnborough died at Bromley Hill Place on 15 January 1837, and was buried at St Lawrence's Church, Wormley, Hertfordshire. She is now recognized as one of the talented group of amateur women watercolourists who made a vital contribution to early English watercolour painting. 


@@@@@


doc= 16960


Long, Ann (1681?-1711), celebrated beauty, was born, probably in 1681, at Draycot Cerne, Wiltshire, the daughter of James Long (died 'c'.1690) and his wife, Susan, 'nee' Strangways. She was the granddaughter of Sir James Long, second baronet (1617-1692), the royalist soldier and politician, and of another leading civil war politician, Giles Strangways (1615-1675). She was educated privately and never married. Most of what is known about her comes from Jonathan Swift, who admired her greatly, although their relationship never had the same intensity as those Swift had with Esther Johnson and Esther Vanhomrigh. 
Ann Long may have first emerged as a famous figure in London society as early as 1703. She became a toast of the Kit-Cat Club and her name was engraved on the club's drinking glasses by Thomas Wharton, earl of Wharton: '
Fill the glass; let Hautboys sound 

Whilst bright Longy's health goes round 

With eternal beauty blest 

Ever blooming, still the best; 

Drink your glass, and think the rest. 
('DNB')' Her closest associate was Catherine Barton (died 1739), niece of Sir Isaac Newton, who was rumoured to be the mistress of Charles Montagu, earl of Halifax, and later married the politician John Conduitt. She first met Swift in 1707 at the London home of her probable relatives the Vanhomrighs. In December 1707 or January 1708 Swift wrote 'A decree for concluding the treaty between Dr Swift and Mrs Long', published by Edmund Curll in 'Letters, Poems and Tales: Amorous, Satyrical, and Gallant' in 1718. Her position in society was financially sustained by debts contracted against an inheritance expected from her grandmother Dorothy, 'nee' Leach, Lady Long, but Lady Long did not die until 1710. In September of that year Ann Long dissolved her London household and, to hold off her creditors, fled to King's Lynn, Norfolk, where she lived near St Nicholas's Chapel and passed herself off as 'being of George Smyth's family of Nitly' ('Correspondence of Jonathan Swift', 1.274). Her grandmother's death did not improve her situation, as her brother Sir James Long, fifth baronet, withheld her legacy. 
Ann Long's imprudence with money did not damage Swift's regard for her. He even used her as a confidante in his slowly and tortuously developing passion for Esther Vanhomrigh, his Vanessa. On one occasion, wishing to drop a gentle hint to Vanessa about her behaviour but not wishing to do it openly in case she might be offended, he hit on the device of addressing a letter about her to Ann but sending it via Vanessa, conveniently forgetting to seal the enclosure; thus Vanessa gets to know what he thinks about her but cannot protest or remonstrate, since to do so she would have to confess that she had read his private letter. 
Ann Long's life must have become lonely after her exile to King's Lynn, although in her letters to Swift she enjoyed 'describing the rituals of provincial life and the mysterious figure that she cut there' (Nokes, 142). Only once did Swift turn against her, writing on 11 December 1710 that 'I had a letter from Mrs. Long, that has quite turned my stomach against her: no less than two nasty jests in it with dashes to suppose them. She is corrupted in that country town with vile conversation' (Swift, 'Journal to Stella', 1.118-19). 
In late 1711, by careful management of her $100 annuity and $60 rental from 'Newburg-house' (Swift, 'Journal to Stella', 2.446) in London, Ann Long had almost paid her debts and hoped to be able to leave King's Lynn. However, she was by this time suffering from asthma and from dropsy, and she died in King's Lynn on 22 December. The news reached Swift in London on 25 December, when he arrived at the Vanhomrighs' house for Christmas dinner: 'I never was more afflicted at any death... She had all sorts of amiable qualities, and no ill ones but the indiscretion of neglecting her own affairs' (ibid., 2.445-6). Swift suspected that Ann's brother intended to keep her death a secret to avoid the expense of a London funeral or public mourning. A notice of her death was placed by Swift in 'The Post-Boy' of 27 December. Swift also wrote to the minister of St Nicholas's Chapel, Thomas Pyle, revealing Ann's true identity and asking that she be buried in the church and that a memorial stone be placed there at Swift's expense. Swift's private commemoration of Ann Long, entered in his account book, was perhaps his most eloquent appreciation of her: 'She was the most beautifull Person of the Age, she lived in, of great Honr and Virtue, infinite Sweetness and Generosity of Temper and true good Sense' (ibid., 1.277n.). 


@@@@@


doc= 16961


Long, Lady Catharine (1797-1867), religious writer, was the youngest child of the seven daughters and four sons of Horatio Walpole, second earl of Orford (1757-1822), and his wife, Sophia, 'nee' Churchill (died 1797). Little is known of her early life, but on 25 July 1822 she married Henry Lawes Long of Hampton Lodge, Surrey. They had seven daughters and a son, and most of her writing appears to date from after her marriage. 
Long's novels were religious in focus, although this did not insure her against adverse criticism. Her 'Sir Roland Ashton: a Tale of the Times' (1844), a novel directed against the Tractarian movement, was described as 'feeble and second-rate' by an 'Athenaeum' reviewer who felt that fiction was not 'a good medium for religious instruction' ('Athenaeum', 24 Aug 1844, 771). She continued to work in this genre with some popularity, however, as she went on to write novels such as 'The First Lieutenant's Story' (1853), favourably reviewed by the 'London Daily News'. Both 'Roland Ashton' and this later novel were reprinted in Routledge's cheap series in the mid 1850s. 
Long also wrote pieces of music and poetry such as an 'Agnus Dei' for four or five voices in 1848, and 'He is not dead, he cannot die', an elegy set to music upon the death of Prince Albert. Her collection of inspirational praise and verse, 'The Midsummer Souvenir' (1846), contained original pieces, as well as selections from Felicia Hemans, Sarah Stickney Ellis, and other popular authors. 
Lady Catharine Long died suddenly from heart failure after being alarmed by a thunderstorm at Landthorne Hatch, Farnham, Surrey, on 20 August 1867. 


@@@@@


doc= 16962


Long, Charles, Baron Farnborough (1760-1838), politician and connoisseur of the arts, was born in the City of London in January 1760, the fourth son of Beeston Long, the head of a well-known firm of West Indies merchants in the City. A senior branch of the family, established at Hurts Hall in Suffolk, had owned an estate in Jamaica since the conquest of the island in 1665. His mother, Sarah, was the daughter of Abraham Crop, another wealthy City merchant. Long was educated at a private school in Greenwich and at Emmanuel College, Cambridge, where he matriculated in 1779, but is not known to have taken a degree. Simultaneously he was entered at the Inner Temple, where he had chambers in Tanfield Court. From 1786 to 1788 he made the grand tour, exploring Rome under the tutelage of James Byres, and laying the foundation of his art collection. 
Long's involvement in politics as a friend and ally of William Pitt, whom he had met at Cambridge, is attested as early as 1788, when he was canvassing for Lord Hood, the ministerial candidate in the Westminster election; and in January 1789 he himself entered parliament as member for Rye, a seat under Treasury control. He subsequently sat as member for Midhurst (1796-1802) and for Wendover (1802-6) -- boroughs whose parliamentary representatives were nominated by Pitt's friend Lord Carrington -- and for Haslemere (1806-26), where the Pittite earl of Lonsdale was sole patron. In 1791 he became junior secretary to the Treasury, in that capacity acting as parliamentary whip and teller and in 1796 undertaking much of the management of the general election on the government's behalf. In 1801 he insisted on following Pitt out of office, and was rewarded with a pension of $1500 per annum. At Pitt's behest he was prepared to advise Addington on Treasury matters and in 1802 was sworn of the privy council. In the following year he was the chief intermediary in negotiations between Pitt and Addington, which took place in his house at Bromley Hill in Kent. On Pitt's return to power in 1804 Long was made a lord of the Treasury (1804-6) and then chief secretary to the lord lieutenant of Ireland (1805-6). After Pitt's death in 1806 he took office in the Portland ministry as paymaster-general of the forces, a post which he retained until his retirement from politics in 1826. As a politician Long's ambitions were modest. 'Few persons', he told Lonsdale in 1809, 'have quitted an office with more reluctance than I retain mine.' He did not consider himself 'either disposed or fit for a cabinet office', and refused both the chancellorship of the exchequer and the secretaryship at war when they were offered to him by Perceval. He rarely spoke in the house except on matters arising from his ministerial responsibilities, and was a loyal and efficient political adjutant rather than an initiator of policy. He was the author of pamphlets on the French Revolution (1795) and the price of bread (1800), and in 1792 was instrumental, with Sir James Bland Burges, in the foundation of the 'Sun' newspaper as a tory organ. In 1820 Long was made a Knight of the Bath by George IV, and on his retirement from political life in 1826 he was created a peer with the title of Baron Farnborough (a village in Kent near his country residence). He was elected FRS in 1792, FSA in 1812, and was given an honorary LLD by his old university in 1833. 
Long's real passion was for the arts. His resources were too small to allow him to be a major patron or collector in his own right, but as a minister and MP he used his influence to further artistic causes such as the purchase of the Elgin marbles and the establishment of the National Gallery. In 1792 it was he who acted as intermediary between Pitt and Humphry Repton over the improvement of the former's grounds at Holwood, and when the Altieri Claudes were brought to England in 1799 it was in Long's house in Grosvenor Place that they were first exhibited to English connoisseurs. In subsequent years his name appears repeatedly in connection with the public patronage of the arts. In 1802 he was the chairman of the committee of taste appointed to supervise the erection of monuments to the heroes of the Napoleonic wars, whose responsibilities were in 1809 extended to the repair (with money voted by parliament) of Henry VII's chapel at Westminster. Whether it was the appropriate order for the facade of the privy council offices in Whitehall (1824) or the need for a fig-leaf on the heroic statue honouring the duke of Wellington that had been subscribed for by the ladies of Great Britain (1821), Long was sure to be consulted. Such was his reputation as an arbiter of taste that in 1834, when steps were being taken to establish an Institution of British Architects, it was in the form of an open 'Letter to Lord Farnborough' that the campaign was opened. He was an active trustee both of the British Museum and of the National Gallery (in whose establishment he played an important role) and as deputy director of the British Institution (or British Gallery) he was for many years a leading figure in its affairs. 
Long's advice on artistic matters was valued at the highest level. Both as prince regent and as king, George IV frequently consulted him over the commissioning of architecture, painting, and sculpture. In Mrs Arbuthnot's opinion Long was 'a complete courtier, [who] always acquiesces in any thing the King says & never dares contest a point with him', but the prince's secretary told Farington that in matters of art, 'The Prince Regent saw through Mr. Long's spectacles'. It was Long who negotiated royal commissions with artists such as Canova, Westmacott, and Lawrence, and who (for instance) told the last of the prince's wishes that he should go to Rome to paint the portrait of Pope Pius VII for the Waterloo Chamber at Windsor. When the king determined to reconstruct Windsor Castle, Long drew up a detailed brief which envisaged every important feature of the castle as subsequently remodelled by Wyatville, from the heightening of the keep to the formation of the Grand Corridor, and he also suggested the sunken garden below the east terrace, for which he made a sketch-plan in 1823. 
Long's own country villa at Bromley Hill in Kent, only a few miles from Pitt's at Holwood, was an elegant enlargement of an earlier house which he bought in 1801. Drawings made by Buckler at various dates between 1815 and 1835 (BL, Add. MS 36367, fols. 181-92) show a villa irregularly composed in the Italianate manner with neo-classical interiors. The extensive grounds were progressively improved to create a much-admired garden which by 1809 offered two picturesque walks, each a mile long, and a distant view of the dome of St Paul's Cathedral. Here Long entertained George IV, William IV, and Queen Adelaide, and here he died, childless, on 17 January 1838, leaving to the National Gallery paintings by Rubens, Vandyck, Canaletto, Teniers, Mola, Cuyp, and others. 
As a young man Long had a mistress called Sophia Tarleton who died in Paris in 1789 or 1790, claiming that he had secretly married her. On 28 May 1793 he married Amelia ['see 'Long, Amelia], daughter of Sir Abraham Hume of Wormleybury, Hertfordshire; she died in January 1837. Lord and Lady Farnborough were both buried at Wormley church, where they are commemorated by a monument by Westmacott. 


@@@@@


doc= 16963


Long, Charles Edward (1796-1861), genealogist and antiquary, born on 28 July 1796 at Benham Park, Berkshire, was the elder and only surviving son of Charles Beckford Long (died 1836) of Langley Hall in the same county and his wife, Frances Monro, daughter and heir of Lucius Tucker of Norfolk Street, Park Lane, London. Edward Long (1734-1813), the historian of Jamaica, was his grandfather. Long was educated at Harrow School (1810-14) and at Trinity College, Cambridge (1815-19), where he gained a declamation prize. In July 1818 he won the chancellor's gold medal for English verse on the subject of imperial and papal Rome. He graduated BA in 1819 and MA in 1822. Possessed of an ample fortune, Long devoted himself to historical and genealogical studies, which were greatly facilitated by the access to the College of Heralds granted him by his uncle by marriage Lord Henry Molyneux Howard, deputy earl marshal. 
Long always maintained a personal and scholarly interest in Harrow and materially assisted George Butler in his biographical notes to the lists of Harrow scholars (1849). In 1860 he wrote on the life of John Lyon (1514-1592), the founder of the school, for the 'Harrow Gazette'. Long also took a considerable interest in the history of Wiltshire: he was an earnest promoter of the archaeological society for that county, and contributed to its magazine. During many years he was a frequent correspondent of the 'Gentleman's Magazine', and the leading antiquarian periodicals of his day. 
In 1845 with the assistance of Sir Charles George Young, Garter king of arms, Long compiled a volume called 'Royal descents: a genealogical list of the several persons entitled to quarter the arms of the royal houses of England'. In 1859 he edited for the Camden Society, from the original manuscript in the British Museum, the 'Diary of the Marches of the Royal Army during the Great Civil War, Kept by Richard Symonds'. Long also made 'Genealogical collections of Jamaica families', which he presented to the British Museum (now Add. MS 27968). During 1857-9 he gave to the museum many valuable documents relating to Jamaica, and his letters to Joseph Hunter (1783-1861), extending from 1847 to 1859, are also preserved in the British Library. 
Of Long's other publications, two may be mentioned. First, his pamphlet of 1832 in which he defends the conduct of his uncle Robert Ballard Long (1771-1825) during the campaign of 1811; and, second, his volume 'Considerations on the Game Laws' (1824; 2nd edn, 1825) in which he offered a robust and thoughtful argument for regarding game as property, thereby allowing the sale of game to become a legal transaction. 
Long died unmarried on 25 September 1861 at the Lord Warden Hotel, Dover, on his return from a visit to Hamburg. He was buried at Seale churchyard in Surrey. 


@@@@@


doc= 16964


Long, Edward (1734-1813), planter and commentator on Jamaican affairs, was born on 23 August 1734 at Rosilion, St Blazey, Cornwall, the fourth son of Samuel Long (1700-1757) of Longville, Jamaica, Tredudwell, Cornwall, and Bloomsbury, London, and Mary ('bap'. 1701, died 1765), second daughter and coheir of Bartholomew Tate of Delapre, Northamptonshire. He was educated at Bury St Edmunds School, at Liskeard ('c'.1746-1752), and at home. He entered Gray's Inn, London, on 28 June 1753. On his father's death in early 1757, Long left his law studies and sailed to Jamaica, although he was called to the bar 'ex gratia', despite not having kept terms. The Longs had been connected with Jamaica since the 1660s. Long's great-grandfather Samuel had been speaker of the Jamaican assembly and was responsible for many of its procedures. His father, Samuel, born in Jamaica, was a member of the council and the owner of Lucky Valley sugar plantation, a rich property in Clarendon parish. Long took over the running of the plantation and became the private secretary of Lieutenant-Governor Sir Henry Moore, who had married his eldest sister, Catharina Maria. He was soon promoted to the position of judge of the vice-admiralty court in Jamaica. At St Catharine's Church, Jamaica, on 12 August 1758, he married Mary Ballard (1734/5-1797), second daughter and eventually heir of Thomas Beckford of Jamaica and widow of John Palmer. They had six children -- three sons (including the army officer Robert Ballard Long) and three daughters. Edward Long was elected a member of the Jamaican assembly for St Ann parish in 1761, 1765, and 1766. On 13 September 1768 he was elected speaker of the assembly, an office he held only until the house was dissolved on 22 September. In 1769 he left Jamaica because of ill health, and he lived the rest of his life in England. He retained his judicial office in Jamaica until about 1797 but never returned to the Caribbean. 
In moving to Britain, Long detached himself from the day-to-day business of running an estate and participating in Jamaican government, and allowed himself the time in which he could take a longer view of Jamaican affairs. For many years he was a member of the West India merchants' and planters' committee, and from his properties in Berkshire, Surrey, Hampshire, and Sussex, and the London house he leased at 46 Wimpole Street, Marylebone, from 1781, he wrote numerous articles for London newspapers as well as pamphlets on the sugar trade and the game laws, and after 1783 wrote regularly about imperial politics as an ally of the Foxite whigs. His most influential work, which cemented his reputation as the leading contemporary commentator on the eighteenth-century British Caribbean, was the three-volume 'History of Jamaica, or, General Survey of the Antient and Modern State of that Island', published in 1774. Based on private papers, public records, and his own experience of living in Jamaica, this is an invaluable vade-mecum to the social, economic, and political life of Britain's largest and wealthiest West Indian colony. The book combines encyclopaedic detail with polemics and propaganda; some sections are plagiarized from other writers. The meteorology, botany, zoology, medicine, history, and laws of Jamaica are all covered, but 'The History of Jamaica' is mainly consulted for its political arguments and its commentary on slavery. Long argued for better schools in Jamaica, for improved military defences, for a stronger militia, for more extensive white immigration, and for a solid church foundation. A staunch supporter of the elected Jamaican assembly, he criticized the governor's power to dismiss judges and suspend the assembly and council. He was a strong pro-slavery advocate who regarded enslaved Africans as subhuman, an inferior species. He thought that transporting enslaved Africans to the Caribbean instilled order and discipline into their lives. He associated slaves with apes in terms of lechery and feared the prospect of slave revolts. He considered the slave trade a profitable business for British interests and portrayed Jamaican slavery as a benevolent institution. He supported the rights of the plantocracy against the power of the imperial government and defended their cause when faced with humanitarian objections to slavery. He also argued, however, that plantation owners were inefficient managers. In his view this deficiency could be overcome when estate owners resided in Jamaica rather than returning as absentees to Britain. Long's work influenced Bryan Edwards's 'History, Civil and Commercial, of the British Colonies in the West Indies' (1793), another important contemporary work on the Caribbean. Section 2 of Edwards's book, on the origin of the maroons, was in fact taken from Long's 'History of Jamaica'. Long spent much time revising his 'magnum opus' for a second edition, but this was never completed. His grandson Charles Edward Long gave the British Museum the manuscript sheets of the revision along with much other material on Jamaica gathered by Edward Long. 
Long was a cultivated, studious man who wanted his family to be brought up in an intellectual atmosphere. He was an accomplished musician who played a Cremona violin and displayed an interest in science, corresponding with Dr Thomas Dancer, a botanist in Jamaica. Long's wife, Mary, died on 16 July 1797, aged sixty-two; Long himself survived until 13 March 1813, dying at Arundel Park, Sussex, the seat of his son-in-law, Henry Howard-Molyneux. He was buried on 20 March in the chancel of Slindon church, Sussex, where a memorial slab commemorates him. 


@@@@@


doc= 16965


Long, Edwin Longsden (1829-1891), painter, was born at Bath on 16 July 1829, the son of James Long, of a family resident in Kelston in Somerset. He was educated at Dr Charles William Viner's academy at 15 Edward Street, Bath; he then moved to London in 1846 to pursue a career as a painter and enrolled as a student at James Matthew Leigh's School of Art, then at 18 Maddox Street. He began his professional life as a portrait painter in Bath, making his debut at the Royal Academy in 1855 with three distinguished portraits. Other early portraits included likenesses of celebrated figures such as Lord Ellesmere (1856, National Portrait Gallery, London) and Charles Greville (exh. RA, 1856). On 19 March 1853 he married Margaret Jemima Aiton (1834-1907). 
In 1857 Long returned to London, where he was to settle the following year, and came under the influence of John Phillip with whom he visited Spain and was introduced to the work of the great Spanish masters Velazquez and Murillo, as well as to the country which was to dominate his painting for the next seventeen years. In this period his output was prolific, and he produced a large number of Spanish genre scenes. His Spanish work also includes his first history paintings such as 'The Suppliants' (1872, Royal Holloway and Bedford New College, University of London, Egham, Surrey) and 'The Moorish Proselytes' (1873, Russell-Cotes Art Gallery and Museum, Bournemouth) which were significant markers in establishing him as a serious artist. The rise in his reputation was dramatic and came with 'Babylonian Marriage Market' (1875, Royal Holloway and Bedford New College, Egham), which was exhibited at the Royal Academy exhibition of 1875. He had made an extensive visit to Egypt and Syria the year before, and the work had been some time in conception. The enthusiastic critical reception was unprecedented for Long and the work ensured his associateship to the Royal Academy in January 1876. 
Subsequently Long's work was characterized by highly detailed and researched depictions of the ancient world. Works such as 'An Egyptian Feast' (1877, Cartwright Hall Art Gallery, Bradford), 'The Gods and their Makers' (1878, Towneley Hall Art Gallery and Museum, Burnley), and 'Alethe' (1888, Russell-Cotes Art Gallery and Museum, Bournemouth) -- all shown at the Royal Academy -- illustrate his major achievement within this area. His works often contain a strong religious sentiment reflected in scenes which contrasted the early church with ancient religions, as well as more conventional biblical scenes. His successes, evident at the Royal Academy (he was elected a full academician on 13 July 1881), were also visible in the commercial galleries in Bond Street. Several were devoted exclusively to his work: Fairless and Beeforth set up a gallery of his work to follow up the success of their Dore Gallery and showed his ambitious 'Anno Domini, or, The Flight into Egypt' (1883, Russell-Cotes Art Gallery and Museum, Bournemouth). Thomas Agnew & Sons, meanwhile, commissioned many works from him, including a series of twenty paintings entitled 'Daughters of Our Empire' to coincide with Queen Victoria's golden jubilee year of 1887. 
Long's commercial success was reflected in his lifestyle: he commissioned two grand studio houses from the fashionable architect Richard Norman Shaw, built next to one another in Hampstead. He did not have the personality of a natural celebrity, being a small and quiet man with a gentle disposition. M. H. Spielmann in his article in 'The Graphic' of 1888 described him as 'reticent and retiring' (Spielmann, 612), while Julian Hawthorne in 'Shapes that Pass' (1928) remembered him as a 'thin, unobtrusive man, with a brown beard, gentle of speech' (Hawthorne, 251). Long died of pneumonia caused by influenza on 15 May 1891 at his home, Kelston, 42 Netherhall Gardens, Hampstead, London, and was buried at Hampstead cemetery on 22 May. He left three sons, a daughter, and a bitterly contested fortune of about $120,000. His widow, Margaret Long, set up the Edwin Long Gallery at 25 Old Bond Street in 1893 to revitalize interest in his work. The principal public collection of his works is now in the Russell-Cotes Art Gallery and Museum in Bournemouth. 


@@@@@


doc= 16966


Long, George (1780-1868), police magistrate, was the second son of Joseph Long of Shopwick, near Chichester, Sussex. He practised as an attorney in London and on 6 February 1806 he was admitted to Gray's Inn. He was called to the bar on 11 February 1811. He joined the home circuit and attended the Sussex sessions as a special pleader. In 1839 he was appointed a magistrate at Great Marlborough Street police court. From 1840 until 1842 he was recorder of Coventry. In 1841 he was transferred to Marylebone police court. He retired in 1859, by that time a bencher of his inn, and died on 26 June 1868 at his London home, 51 Queen Anne Street, Cavendish Square. He left a widow, Matilda Long. 
Long wrote several legal works, including one relating to the sale of personal property, and another on poor relief. He also wrote texts on moral and religious matters. 


@@@@@


doc= 16967


Long, George (1800-1879), classical scholar, was born at Poulton, Lancashire, on 4 November 1800, the eldest of four children of James Long, a West Indies merchant, and his wife, Isabel Brodbelt. Educated at Macclesfield grammar school, he wanted to enter the army, but on the death of his father it was decided that he should seek his fortune at Cambridge, where he entered Trinity College as a sizar in 1818. In 1821 he was bracketed Craven scholar with T. B. Macaulay and Henry Malden. He graduated BA in 1822 as thirtieth wrangler and senior chancellor's medallist; in 1823 he was members' prizeman, and gained a fellowship at Trinity over the heads of Macaulay and Malden. In 1824 he was chosen professor of ancient languages in the new University of Virginia where Thomas Jefferson (third president of the United States) was rector. Long was a frequent guest of Jefferson who called him 'the boy professor'. He developed a deep love for America, marrying there in 1827 Harriet 'nee' Gray (died 1841), widow of Lieutenant-Colonel Joseph Selden, judge of the supreme court of Arkansas. They had four sons and a daughter who died in infancy. 
In 1828, at the invitation of Lord Brougham, Long returned to England as professor of Greek in the newly founded University of London (afterwards University College, London). His 1830 lectures, published as 'Observations on the Study of the Latin and Greek Languages', are of interest as an early instance of the use of the comparative method in classical philology. Long held the Greek chair until August 1831 when he resigned in protest at the dismissal of Professor G. S. Pattison and became editor of the radical 'Quarterly Journal of Education' (10 vols., 1831-5), published by the Society for the Diffusion of Useful Knowledge (SDUK), of whose committee Long was an active member. He made the 'Quarterly Journal' a champion for the reform of secondary education, attacking the public schools and calling for new schools to meet the needs of the middle classes. He was later a supporter of the Central Society of Education. Long had a special interest in geography. In 1830 he was one of the founders of the Royal Geographical Society and was for many years a member of the council, serving as honorary secretary from 1846 to 1848. He wrote a paper on its teaching to 'The Schoolmaster' (1836), and contributed to volumes 3 and 12 of the Royal Geographical Society's 'Journal', and to William Smith's 'Dictionary of Greek and Roman Geography'. He edited for the SDUK 'The Geography of America and the West Indies' (1841) and wrote with G. R. Porter 'The Geography of Great Britain' (1850). His 'Atlas of Classical Geography' (1854) and smaller 'Grammar School Atlas of Classical Geography' became standard works. 
From 1833 to 1846 Long was engaged on the laborious task of editing for the SDUK the twenty-nine volumes of the 'Penny Cyclopaedia'. He was himself an extensive contributor and an unwearied editor, the regular issue of the monthly parts being never interrupted. He simultaneously contributed to the SDUK's 'Biographical Dictionary' (7 vols., 1842-4; the letter 'A' only). In 1842 Long became professor of Latin in University College, in succession to his great friend and former colleague at Virginia, Thomas Hewitt Key. He resigned the chair in 1846, and for a short time was lecturer on jurisprudence and civil law in the Middle Temple, having been called to the bar at the Inner Temple in 1837. He wrote all the articles on Roman law in William Smith's 'Dictionary of Greek and Roman Antiquities' (1842) and published in 1847 'Two Discourses on Roman Law'. In his knowledge of Roman law he stood alone among English scholars of his time, and he contributed greatly to the revival of its study in England. But that lay in the future. 
Exasperated by the indifference of his students, who were not then obliged to attend law lectures, and by the lack of encouragement which the Middle Temple authorities gave to his teaching, Long became a schoolmaster. From 1849 until midsummer 1871 he held the position of classical lecturer at Brighton College, a new school founded on progressive lines. There he found his metier, applying the principles he had advocated in the 'Quarterly Journal'. He used visual aids and insisted that a classical author be read as a modern one. An inspiring teacher, he was revered and held in affection by his pupils. He established for the infant school a formidable reputation in classical scholarship. Those years also produced his most important books. He edited various Latin texts, notably for the 'Grammar School Classics' series. In conjunction with Brighton's principal, Revd Arthur J. Macleane (died 1858), he established and edited the 'Bibliotheca Classica', contributing himself an edition of Cicero's 'Orations' (4 vols., 1851-8). He also published an admirable translation of Marcus Aurelius with the title 'Thoughts on the Emperor M. Aurelius Antonius' (1862) and began the publication of his reflective but vigorous 'Decline of the Roman Republic' (5 vols., 1864-74). In his 'Essays in Criticism' Matthew Arnold praised Long for treating Roman history 'not as a dead and dry matter of learning', but as having 'a side of modern applicability and living interest'. During the American Civil War Long staunchly supported the South and the 1869 edition of his 'Marcus Aurelius' commended Robert E. Lee. Later Long urged Lee 'to write his 'Commentaries' to stand beside those of Caesar'. 
In 1871 Long retired to Portfield, near Chichester, 'to tend my little garden and rose trees'. He lived a frugal life with his parrot George, his dog Caesar, and his housekeeper, Esther Lawrence, who was an executor of his will and is buried in his grave. In 1873 he was granted a civil-list pension of $100 a year for his services to learning. He once confessed that 'I live for my pen', but in old age complained ruefully that it 'never made me a living'; at one time his Cambridge medal was in pawn. Although he was said to have married three times, it is probable that he was only married twice; his second wife, of German extraction, ran off with one of his Brighton College pupils. Long died on 10 August 1879 at 2 Rhine Villas, Portfield, near Chichester, after six months' illness. He was buried at Portfield cemetery. A memorial tablet was erected at Brighton College, and a scholarship established there in his memory. 
As a teacher and writer Long exercised much influence on classical scholarship in England, which he wanted to save from 'dusty pedantry'. He was a man of extensive learning, gifted with a powerful memory and 'a clear judicial intellect'. He was even more remarkable for a rare simplicity, elevation, and integrity of life. 'No one', an obituarist remarked, 'ever lived the life recommended by Marcus Aurelius more completely' ('Spectator', 23 Aug 1879). 


@@@@@


doc= 16968


Long, Sir James, second baronet (bap. 1617, d. 1692), politician, was the only son of Sir Walter Long ('b'. in or before 1594, died 1637) of Draycot Cerne, Wiltshire, and his first wife, Lady Anne Ley (died 1627), second daughter of James Ley, first earl of Marlborough, and nephew of Sir Robert Long, later chancellor of the exchequer to Charles II. He was born at South Wraxall, Wiltshire, and baptized at Bradford-on-Avon on 12 January 1617. He may have travelled in France before being admitted to Lincoln's Inn in 1634. In the following year he was settled with jointure lands at his marriage to a daughter of Sir William Dodington, and at his father's death in 1637 he inherited the bulk of the Wiltshire estate, including Draycot House. His first wife had died by 1640, when he married Dorothy Leach (died 1710), a daughter of Sir Edward Leach of Shipley, Derbyshire, a master in chancery. 
In 1642 Long became a captain in Sir Thomas Glemham's royalist regiment of horse. By 1644 he had risen to the rank of colonel in Sir Francis Dodington's brigade, and in the same year was appointed sheriff of Wiltshire in the king's interest. Early in 1645 he escorted the prince of Wales to Bristol, and was leisurely returning eastwards when, on 12 March 1645, he was overtaken by a superior force of parliamentarians under Waller and Cromwell at Devizes. Retreating to Bath while hotly pursued by Waller, he was intercepted near Potterne by Cromwell, who suddenly appeared before him with an advance guard, and the high thickset hedges prevented his escape. Long was captured and of his 400 horse only some thirty succeeded in getting away. Clarendon ascribed the disaster to Long's 'great defect of courage and conduct' (Clarendon, 'Hist. rebellion', 4.12). He was soon exchanged, and in August 1645 captured Chippenham. On 4 May 1649 he was allowed to compound for his estates at the Goldsmiths' Hall, the assessment being fixed at $300. He thereupon paid his fine of $714 and sued out his pardon. Shortly afterwards, or so Aubrey relates, 'Oliver, Protector, hawking at Hounslow Heath, discoursing with him, fell in love with his company, and commanded him to weare his sword, and to meet him a hawkeeing, which made the strict cavaliers look on him with an evill eye' ('Brief Lives', 2.37). 
In 1673, by the death of his uncle Sir Robert Long, James succeeded to the baronetcy and estates in Yorkshire. He was admirably adapted for a country gentleman's life, if Aubrey is to be believed; he states that, in addition to his intellectual attainments -- recognized by his election as a fellow of the Royal Society in 1663 -- Long was a 'good swordsman, great memorie, great falconer and for horsemanship. For insects exceedingly curious and searching long since in naturall things'. He was also something of an antiquary: in a letter to Aubrey in 1688, preserved in the Bodleian Library, Long describes a number of Roman coins found at Heddington, Wiltshire. In the same year he wrote a short account of his family history, which is preserved in Wotton's 'Baronetage' (1771). Long often went hawking near Avebury, occasionally in the company of Aubrey, who once noted that 'our sport was very good... but the flight of the falcons was but a parenthesis to the colonell's facetious discourse, who was 'tam Marti, tam Mercurio', and the Muses did accompany him with his hawkes and spaniells' ('Wiltshire: the Topographical Collections', 315-16). Aubrey avers that Long wrote a great work, the 'History and causes of the civill war', as well as a tract entitled 'Examinations of witches at Malmesbury', but neither work appears to survive. His letters to Aubrey 'mention astrology, witchcraft and natural magic; he hoped to combine an account of these with conjectures concerning unicorns and a natural history of animals in a demonstration of God's wisdom in the creation' (Hunter, 135). In 1690 Edward Wells dedicated to Long his geographical table. 
Long represented Malmesbury in the three exclusion parliaments, 1679-81, and again from 1690 until his death. Considered 'moderately active' in the 1679 parliaments, he was, by 1681, 'clearly an opponent of exclusion' (Henning, 2.758). By 1688 he gave his opinion in favour of repeal of penal laws and James II's agents reported, and supported, his proposed election for Wiltshire in that year. After his election in 1690 he 'was regarded as 'doubtful' by the Government' (Henning, 2.758). He died in London, reportedly of an apoplexy, on the night of 22-23 January 1692. His body was carried to Draycot, where it was buried in the family vault on 3 February. 
By his second marriage Long had four daughters and one son, James, who died in his father's lifetime, leaving, by his first marriage to Susan, daughter of Colonel Giles Strangways of Melbury, Dorset, three sons -- Robert, Giles, and James -- who were successively baronets. James, Long's grandson, became fifth baronet in 1697, and was admitted to Balliol College, Oxford, on 1 February 1699. From 1705 he was MP successively for Chippenham, Wootton Bassett, and Wiltshire, until his death on 16 March 1729. His elder sister was Ann Long, friend of Jonathan Swift. 


@@@@@


doc= 16969


Long, James (1814-1887), missionary and Indian scholar, was born in Bandon, co. Cork, the eldest son of John Long, clerk and Methodist local preacher. While a pupil at Bandon grammar school he excelled in classics and developed an interest in languages. He also came under the influence of the evangelical revival of the time, and was converted at a Wesleyan Methodist meeting at the age of fourteen -- an experience which determined the direction of his future career. After volunteering for service with the Church Missionary Society (CMS) in 1838, he was sent to its training institution at Islington, London, where he impressed the principal, the Revd C. F. Childe, with his extensive knowledge of languages. He was ordained deacon in the Church of England in 1839 and priest in the following year, shortly before his departure for India in July 1840. He acted as superintendent of the CMS Anglo-vernacular school at Mizapore, Calcutta, for most of the period between 1840 and 1849. He married Emily Orme (died 1867) on 10 June 1848; they had no children. 
Although a friend and admirer of the Scottish missionary Dr Alexander Duff, Long became increasingly disillusioned with education through English as an instrument of evangelism and as a means of creating a class who would spread knowledge and enlightenment among the masses. While acting as pastor at Thakurpukur, a small village a few miles south of Calcutta, he experimented with methods of improving elementary vernacular education, illustrating his teaching by referring to familiar objects of everyday life and to local proverbs, metaphors, and similes. His innovative methods, emphasis on practical subjects, and introduction of a broad academic syllabus, including geography, history, and science, showed what might be done through the utilization and improvement of the traditional village system. Long's schools, acclaimed as model institutions, combined with his own arguments and lobbying of government officials, influenced the Bengal government's educational policy in the 1850s and 1860s, especially its attempts to develop the 'circle school system'. Increasingly convinced of the importance of conveying Christian 'truths' and Western scientific ideas and learning through the idiomatic language of ordinary people, Long was active on a large number of influential committees which were attempting to develop and disseminate a 'sound' vernacular literature. He was a member of the Calcutta School Book Society, the Vernacular Translation Committee, the Calcutta Auxiliary Bible Society, and the Calcutta Christian Tract and Book Society, for which he wrote an unusually sympathetic life of Muhammad founded exclusively on Arabic sources. In addition he greatly extended the work of collecting and publishing collections of Bengali proverbs and soon became the best-known authority on the subject. 
Long wrote on both historical and social issues. He believed that knowledge was the basis of real sympathy and that the study of society provided essential insights into the condition of the people and a meaningful basis for both Christian mission and social improvement. He was one of the founders of sociology in India. When Duff reorganized the Bethune Society in 1860 Long pioneered the branch dealing with sociology, and when Mary Carpenter visited Bengal in 1866 Long was largely instrumental in persuading her to found a branch of the Social Science Association in Calcutta -- an organization he continued to support until his retirement. 
Long, whose attacks in 1859 on European racism and claims to cultural superiority infuriated some of the Europeans in Calcutta, was further involved in controversy in the 1860s. In evidence before the indigo commission of 1860 he claimed, on the basis of vernacular publications, that few words could describe the state of feeling against the European planters in the indigo districts. In 1861 he received a copy of a vernacular play, 'Nil darpan, or, Mirror of Indigo', and brought it to the attention of government officials as, in his view, it reflected feelings which he feared would lead to further violence and bloodshed. The play attacked all involved in the indigo business and was extremely popular in indigo districts; it was written by Dinabhandu Mitra and purported to show the devastating effect of the indigo system on the life and livelihood of a peasant family. Seton-Karr, secretary to the Bengal government, asked Long to prepare a translation. When this was completed by Michael Datta (under Long's instructions) and after Long himself added a preface in which he declared that the effects of the indigo system were pointed out in language 'plain but true', Seton-Karr had the play and preface circulated under government frank. The planters, already shaken by the findings of the commission, were furious. Having failed to obtain the names of the government officials responsible for 'a foul and malicious libel' on the planters of Lower Bengal, they sought to discredit the government by indicting Long for libel in the supreme court of Calcutta in July 1861. After a trial which was characterized by the ineffectiveness of the counsel for the defence and the extreme partiality of Sir Mordaunt Wells, the presiding judge, whose violent language shocked even some of the planters, Long was found guilty and sentenced to a fine of 1000 rupees and a month's imprisonment. 
Kaliprosanna Sinha, a well-known Bengali writer and millionaire stepped forward immediately and paid the fine. Government officials, missionaries, and Bengalis of all religious persuasions visited Long in prison. Before the imprisonment and even outside Bengal he was regarded as 'one of the best friends of the peasantry', and addresses of sympathy and support came from associations and meetings in cities as far away as Allahabad, Madras, and Bombay. These events, which made Long a popular, India-wide hero, coincided with the beginnings of nationalist sentiment and gave him a degree of access into all levels of Indian society probably unprecedented for a European in the 1860s. 
Owing to ill health Long was forced to return to England in 1872. However, while in retirement he continued to campaign on Indian issues and was able to consolidate his links with Russia. His first visit to Russia had been in 1863 when, after the publicity surrounding his imprisonment, he was invited by liberal reformers within the administration to visit the country and report on the progress of serf emancipation. The report of his findings was published in a series of articles in the 'Anti-Slavery Reporter' in 1864. On later visits to Russia in 1872 and 1876 he made further enquiries into the condition of the peasantry, including the progress of education and spread of the Christian literature among them. While his writings on the similarities between India's and Russia's social systems reflect his interest in comparative sociology, his basic concern was, as hitherto, with the social and religious improvement of the masses. He dwelt on the improvement of collaboration between the Anglican and Orthodox churches and on the need for a greater understanding in England of Russia's civilizing and Christianizing mission in central Asia, a process which he argued was a major factor in the containment of Islam. 
In England, Long was a member of the Royal Asiatic Society and a fellow of the Royal Geographical Society. A short time before his death he assigned to the Church Missionary Society $2000 to provide popular lectures on the religions of the East. He died at his residence, 3 Adam Street, Adelphi, London, on 23 March 1887. 


@@@@@


doc= 16970


Long, John (1547/8-1589), Church of Ireland archbishop of Armagh, was born in London in 1547 or 1548. He was educated at Eton and contributed four Latin epigrams to the verses presented by Eton scholars to Queen Elizabeth at Windsor Castle in 1563. He was admitted as a scholar to King's College, Cambridge, on 13 August 1564. While there is no record of his having taken a degree when he left Cambridge three years later, Ware identified him as a doctor of divinity. He became the vicar of Stanwell, Middlesex. 
Elizabeth appointed Long archbishop of Armagh and primate of the Church of Ireland on the recommendation of her viceroy, Sir John Perrot, and the council of Ireland; he was consecrated on 13 July 1584. He became a member of the Irish privy council in the following year, also on Perrot's recommendation. Long was a rigorous protestant who reckoned that there were not forty Irish born Christians in all of Ireland. At first he advocated a sturdy policy of enforcing the Reformation in Ireland, prosecuting recusants and preventing Catholic priests from exercising their ministries, but was obliged to accept that that did not accord with the wishes of the crown. Thereafter he concentrated his energies on advancing the Reformation by teaching and persuasion, not with very significant success. In 1589 Barnaby Rich remarked that in Drogheda, the chief town in Armagh diocese and in close proximity to Long's residence, 'the Word of God has been for many years most plentifully preached but to such a froward and obstinate people that willfully resist the truth... [and] do as their [Catholic] fathers have done before them' ('Rich', fol. 10). 
Long died at Drogheda in January 1589 and was buried in the vault of Primate Octavian del Palatio in St Peter's Church, Drogheda. A month after his death, Lord Deputy Fitzwilliam commented in a letter to William Lyon, bishop of Cork, that the late archbishop 'loved good cheer but too well' ('DNB'). His widow, Anne, petitioned Perrot's successor for relief on account of the small estate left to her and her children, and the fact that many of her goods had been confiscated to pay some of the arrears of the tax of a twentieth owed by her late husband as archbishop of Armagh. Her petition was granted on 15 May 1589. 


@@@@@


doc= 16971


Long, John St John (1798-1834), quack and painter, was born at Newcastle West, co. Limerick, the second of three children of John Long and Anne St John. His father was a basket maker and handyman, and both parents were protestant. After demonstrating an ability in sketching, Long was sponsored in 1816 for two years by local residents in Doneraile, co. Cork, to undertake art classes at Dublin Academy, where he became a pupil of the still-life painter Daniel Richardson ('fl'. 1783-1830). After his return to Limerick, Long painted still lifes, landscapes, and portraits, and supported himself by giving drawing and painting lessons. He added St John to his name some time before 1822, the year he moved to London, where he assisted in the studios of Sir Thomas Lawrence, John Martin, and William Young Ottley. Long's own paintings, which were chiefly of biblical, allegorical, and historical subjects, were exhibited at the Society of British Artists, and at the British Institution in 1824-5. 
However, Long could not support himself by painting alone, and he turned instead to medicine. Although unqualified, he had gained some knowledge of anatomy from his art training. Initially he began practice in chiropody, but soon he effected his first 'cure' for consumption, in 1826. Long claimed that bodily impurities could be removed by his unique lotion, which was rubbed onto the back, shoulders, and chest, or, alternatively, inhaled. After his death, this lotion was found to consist of turpentine, acetic acid, and egg yolk. This counter-irritation cauterized the skin, and was designed to draw inflammations and lung ulcers to the surface. Once the impurities had been removed, the resulting blister was soothed with cabbage leaves. The corrosive liniment was claimed to cure consumption, rheumatism, gout, measles, smallpox, and even insanity. Long began this treatment in Howland Street, Fitzroy Square, in 1827, but soon after moved to 41 Harley Street. A tall, dark-complexioned, and handsome man, with a slender figure and impeccable manners, Long was particularly successful in gaining a large female clientele. Indeed between 1827 and 1834 he undoubtedly enjoyed the most lucrative and fashionable quack medical practice in London. 
In 1830, Long was indicted in two court cases involving consumptive female patients who had died after being 'rubbed' with Long's lotion. While Long was acquitted in one case, he was found guilty of the manslaughter of Miss Catherine Cashin at the Old Bailey on 23 October 1830 despite the favourable testimony of sixty-three of his patients. Long was discharged on payment of a fine of $250, which he flamboyantly paid on the spot. His practice did not suffer adversely from the publicity. The coroner in the second case was Thomas Wakley, editor of 'The Lancet'. Wakley described Long as the 'king of humbugs' (Wakley, 'John St John Long', 506) and his patients as the 'willing dupes and fools of a dishonest and tricking knave' (Wakley, 'Second trial', 726). The cases brought against Long provoked him to write two books setting forth his methods: 'Discoveries in the Science and Art of Healing' (1830) and 'A critical exposure of the ignorance and malpractice of certain medical practitioners, in their theory and treatment of diseases' (1831). 
Long, who did not marry, died on 2 July 1834, at Elm Grove, near Roehampton. His death was allegedly due to consumption, which he had steadfastly refused to treat by his own methods. This story is almost certainly apocryphal. Long had fallen from his horse in May 1834, and a later bad cough caused a ruptured blood vessel. His tomb was erected in Kensal Green cemetery, Middlesex, and was built in the style of a Greek temple, decorated with Aesculapian emblems. His epitaph noted that he had 'many enemies and few friends'. The secret of his lotion was later purchased from his executors, allegedly for $10,000, by Lewis C. Kinchela, an Irish medical practitioner -- to unknown success. Although a minor talent as a painter, Long exemplified how swiftly fame and fortune could be achieved by unqualified medical practitioners in early nineteenth-century London. 


@@@@@


doc= 16972


Long, Lislebone (bap. 1613, d. 1659), politician, was the eldest son of William Long (died 1645) of Stratton on the Fosse in Somerset, and his wife, Mary (died 1660), daughter of Thomas Loviband of Shorwell, Isle of Wight. Related to the Longs of Devizes and Trowbridge in Wiltshire, he was baptized at Beckington in Somerset in 1613 as Loveban, although he later changed his name to Lislebone. Educated at Magdalen Hall, Oxford, where he matriculated on 4 December 1629 and graduated BA on 1 February 1631, he was subsequently called to the bar at Lincoln's Inn in February 1640. Held by contemporaries in the highest esteem as 'a person of great integrity in the profession of law' (Manning, 377) he was described by Whitelocke as 'a very sober, discrete gentleman and a good lawyer' (Whitelocke, 4.341). He and his wife, Frances (died 1691), daughter of John Mynne of Epsom, had several children, including his heir, George (1644-1705). 
In local affairs Long identified both before and during the civil wars with his Wiltshire relatives, who were outspoken critics of the king. Apparently a presbyterian in religion, he became an elder in parliament's presbyterian national church and a member of the committee established to administer the solemn league and covenant in Somerset (1644), and was later appointed to the parliamentary committee charged with settling the form of church government in England (1648). He eventually became a member of parliament's county committee in Somerset after its revival in 1645, following the ending of royalist occupation. However, although the committee was increasingly dominated by Colonel John Pyne's radical war party faction, Long himself had by then emerged as a moderate in politics. 
Long's moderate stance was also demonstrated in parliament, following his election to the Long Parliament as a recruiter MP for Wells (1645-53). He strongly opposed Pride's Purge (6 December 1648), though he was not secluded, as shown when he acted as a teller on a critical vote on the day following the purge. After a period of hesitation, during which he made occasional appearances, he eventually absented himself from the Commons in protest (25 December). However, although he played no part in the trial and execution of the king he became a conformist by taking his dissent (22 February 1649) and resuming his seat in the Rump Parliament. Thereafter, like many other conformists, he played an active role in the work of committees, exercising a moderating influence on government policies. He allied closely with a group of conservative lawyers (including Bulstrode Whitelocke, Roger Hill, and Edmund Prideaux) most of whom opposed proposals for reform of the legal system. Together they were entrusted with drafting much of the Rump's legislation and organizing the work of its committees. 
Long also participated regularly in parliamentary debates. He served as MP for Wells in the first protectorate parliament (1654-5); for Somerset in the second protectorate parliament (1656-8); and again for Wells in Richard Cromwell's parliament (1659). He made intelligent contributions during sessions of the Cromwellian parliaments on points of law, precedent, and procedure, and spoke convincingly in the debates on James Nayler (5 December 1656), the 'Excise Bill' (8 January 1657) and the powers of the 'other house' (22 February 1658). He also submitted, as chairman of the committee charged with defining the powers of the lord protector, a paragraph to be inserted in 'The humble petition and advice' (22 May 1657). After being elected recorder of London (1 June 1655) he was knighted by Oliver Cromwell (15 December 1656) and appointed treasurer of Lincoln's Inn, a master of requests, and a commissioner of treasons (all in 1656). Much respected within his local community, he was appointed JP for Somerset 1654-9. 
On 9 March 1659 Challoner Chute, the speaker of Richard Cromwell's parliament, suddenly became indisposed as a result of being 'tired out with the long debates and late sitting' ('Diary of Thomas Burton', 4.92). Whereupon, after Sir Arthur Hesilrige had proposed that Long should take the chair during the speaker's illness, Sir Lislebone was duly elected 'by general consent of the House' ('JHC', 7.612). Although this was a tribute to the high regard in which he was held, his fame was sadly short-lived. One week later (16 March) Burton recorded in his diary that Long 'being very sick, could not attend' ('Diary of Thomas Burton', 4.419). He died later the same day and was buried at Stratton on the Fosse, leaving an estate which included a number of ecclesiastical and royalist lands purchased after confiscation by parliament. 


@@@@@


doc= 16973


Long, Sir Robert, first baronet (c.1602-1673), politician and exchequer official, came from an old Wiltshire family. His father, Sir Walter Long (1560-1610), married twice and left his principal estate to the son of his first marriage; but he was still able to settle property at Draycot Cerne on Long's eldest brother of the whole blood. Long was the eighth (but fourth surviving) son, being the youngest son of Sir Walter and his second wife, Katherine (died 1613), daughter of Sir John Thynne of Longleat. As a widow she married into a Shropshire family called Fox, and her eldest son and two of her six daughters settled in that county without much eclat. Long was admitted to Lincoln's Inn in 1619 and called to the bar eight years later. By then he was acting as secretary to his brother's father-in-law, the decrepit lord treasurer, the first earl of Marlborough, on whose interest he was elected for Devizes to the parliaments of 1626 and 1628-9. A totally inactive member and none too reliable an administrator, he devoted his energies to ingratiating himself with the newly arrived queen, Henrietta Maria, whose creature he became. After Marlborough's long-overdue resignation, Long entered the royal service, though for many years under the personal government of Charles I he had to be content with minor commissions and reversions. He was chiefly engaged as undertaker in a Lincolnshire drainage project, a work sufficiently important to excuse him from military service against the Scots in 1639. One of his reversions as receiver of recusant revenue south of the Trent fell in at this juncture, and the queen made him her surveyor-general. From her jointure he acquired an interest in the forest of Galtres, between York and Boroughbridge, and he became a gentleman of the chamber. He sat for Midhurst in the Short Parliament on the interest of the Roman Catholic Viscount Montagu, but he stood down at the autumn election. 
During the civil war Long joined the king at Oxford, where, as reversioner to the parliamentarian Sir Robert Pye, he was appointed writer of tallies in the exchequer. More significant to his career was his appointment as secretary to the young prince of Wales, whom he attended in the west country. Long was accused of precipitating the final royalist collapse here by providing parliament with intelligence about divisions among the commanders. He himself made his way to London, and thence to Paris, where he was welcomed by the queen and sent to rejoin the prince in Jersey, primarily to manage correspondence with royalist conspirators. Nevertheless on 19 November 1646 the parliamentary authorities received a petition from Long, offering to compound for his estates; but all the papers are missing from their records. When a part of the parliamentary fleet placed itself at the prince's disposal in 1648, Long went aboard to replenish the royalist coffers from a blockade of the Thames. Prizes were taken, but the results were disappointing, and Long, who was 'thought to love money too well' (Clarendon, 'Hist. rebellion', 4.415), was accused of lining his own pockets. 
The execution of Charles I left the Louvre faction, controlled by Henrietta Maria and her favourite Henry Jermyn, dominant in royalist counsels. They relied on Long to keep the prince steady and fast to the presbyterian alliance, and accordingly he warmly supported the move to Scotland. But Long was himself unacceptable to the Scots and had to return to the continent, while his property in England was included in the 'Act of Sale' of 16 July 1651. On the surrender of Jersey at the end of the year, the Commonwealth government came into possession of a trunkful of compromising letters. Long 'had not the good fortune to be generally well thought of' (Clarendon, 'Hist. rebellion', 4.323). His duties as secretary of state were transferred to Sir Edward Hyde, and Long left the court, though he still tried to make trouble for his supplanter by supporting an absurd allegation of a secret interview with Cromwell in London. 
At the Restoration, Long wrote from Rouen to beg Hyde's forgiveness, urging compassion on his 'destitute condition' ('Clarendon State Papers', 4.676), from which he was to emerge, after thirteen years of office, as owner of 'a very vast estate' (Christie, 'Letters to Williamson', 118). Giving his triumphant rival no further trouble, he regained his post as the queen's surveyor-general, acquiring from her Worcester Park in Surrey and Higham Ferrars Park in Northamptonshire, and ultimately became receiver-general of her revenues. It was on her interest that Long was elected for Boroughbridge in 1661, but in the first ten sessions of the Cavalier Parliament he was named to only forty-three committees, none of them of much political significance. When in 1662 he at last succeeded Pye as auditor of the lower exchequer, he was made a baronet. Much matured from the incompetent young secretary of 1626, Long now showed himself 'exceptional among 17th century Exchequer officials in having a conscientious devotion to the personal performance of his duties' (Roseveare, 30). Perhaps the mistrustful nature shown in his will left him incapable of delegating responsibility. Even more unexpectedly, while eschewing politics, he became a vocal supporter of the reforms introduced by the niggardly Sir George Downing, on whose behalf he had regularly to entertain officials from other departments, such as Samuel Pepys. This modest expense he was well able to afford while purchasing three Yorkshire manors and Athelhampton in Dorset, and spending $2500 on repairs to Worcester Park. With the collapse of Downing's 'payment in course' on the stop of the exchequer in 1672, Long could no longer avoid involvement in politics. He was restored to the privy council in July, and on 21 December attended a small meeting in Lord Arlington's lodgings to prepare for a stormy session in parliament. But he was not to face it after the recess of 29 March 1673. Weak of body with a long and lingering disease, Long was under the care of the Shropshire-born Dr Walter Needham. A lifelong bachelor, Long had secured a special remainder to his baronetcy for his nephew Sir James Long of Draycot Cerne. The other executor was Sir Richard Mason, a household official from a minor Shropshire family who had married James Long's daughter. But the bulk of the estate was entailed on his great-nephew James Long junior, who had made a much grander match with a daughter of a prominent Dorset churchman, Giles Strangways. A codicil added two months later, however, might be interpreted as evidence of a different spiritual allegiance, for he left $600, half of which consisted of a debt due from an English merchant in Rouen, 'for the good and benefitt of my Soule' (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/341/236), as privately communicated to Mason. Long died on 13 July 1673, and was buried on 28 July in Westminster Abbey according to the Anglican rite. 


@@@@@


doc= 16974


Long, Robert Ballard (1771-1825), army officer, one of the six children of Edward Long (1734-1813), judge and historian of Jamaica, and his wife, Mary Ballard (died 16 July 1797, aged sixty-two), widow of John Palmer, and daughter and heir of Thomas Beckford of Jamaica, was born in Chichester on 4 April 1771, the elder of twin sons. His brother was Charles Beckford Long (died 1836) of Langley Hall in Berkshire and his nephew Charles Edward Long (1796-1861). He was educated at Dr Thomson's school, Kensington, Harrow School (1780-89) under Dr Drury, and at the University of Gottingen, in Hanover, where he took a course of military instruction. On 4 May 1791 he was appointed cornet in the 1st King's dragoon guards, in which he became lieutenant in April and captain in November 1793. He served with the regiment in Flanders under the duke of York in 1793-4, and was deputy adjutant-general to General Sir George Don in the winter retreat to Germany in 1794-5. He returned home from Cuxhaven in January 1796, and after serving at Portsmouth as brigade major and aide-de-camp to General Sir William Pitt, whose friendship subsequently helped his career, he became a major in the York rangers (though he probably did not serve with them). He bought the lieutenant-colonelcy of the Hompesch mounted riflemen from the regiment's proprietor, Baron Hompesch, Long's father paying $2000 for this. Long became lieutenant-colonel of the regiment on 3 March 1798, and commanded it in Ireland against the 1798 uprising when it was employed under General John Moore in Wexford. In 1800 he was transferred to the York hussars, a fine foreign unit, which he commanded, chiefly at Weymouth, until it was disbanded in 1802 at the peace of Amiens. After studying at the senior department, Royal Military College, High Wycombe, Long was appointed lieutenant-colonel in the 16th light dragoons, and was transferred in December 1805 to the 15th light dragoons, of which Ernest, duke of Cumberland (later Ernest I of Hanover) was colonel. Cumberland repeatedly interfered, and relations between him and Long were hostile. Nevertheless Long remained lieutenant-colonel of the 15th for the rest of his life. Under Long's command the regiment was converted in 1806 to hussars, and its distinctive headdress was copied from the York hussars. Long was appointed brevet-colonel on the staff in Spain in 1808. He landed on 15 January 1809 at Corunna, the night before the battle, at which he was present, but held no command. He was adjutant-general to Lord Chatham on the disastrous 1809 Walcheren expedition. In 1810 he joined Wellington's army in Portugal, with the rank of brigadier-general, and commanded a brigade of cavalry under General William Carr Beresford in the actions of Campo Maior and Los Santos, and under Sir Rowland Hill in the operations of 1811-12. At Campo Maior, on 25 March 1811, he initially fought well; then he 'lost his head completely' (Fortescue, 'Brit. army', 8.133). Near Santa Marta on 15 May 1811 Long retreated, in the judgement of Beresford and his staff, with unjustified haste and showing insufficient resistance. Near Elvas on 23 June 1811, partly through Long's faulty dispositions, the British lost relatively heavily in casualties and captives; Wellington reprimanded Long. He commanded a brigade, composed of the 19th and 13th light dragoons, at the battle of Vitoria, 21 June 1813 (gold medal), and in Hill's operations in the Pyrenees and the investment of Pamplona. Wellington privately considered Long incompetent and, at Wellington's request, the commander-in-chief (Frederick, duke of York) in December 1812 recalled Long, against his wishes. Long returned, indignant, and declined an offer of a command in Scotland. 
After his return home Long, who had become major-general in 1811, and was made lieutenant-general in 1821, resided in various places before finally settling at Barnes Terrace, Surrey. He died at Berkeley Square, London, on 2 March 1825, and was interred in the family vault in the church at Seale, Surrey. 
Long had disagreements with Marshal Beresford when under his command in the Peninsula. After Long's death his nephew, Charles Edward Long, published in 1832 and 1833 two pamphlets, attempting to vindicate his uncle's conduct, especially at Campo Maior, from criticism in W. F. P. Napier's 'History of the Peninsular War' (6 vols., 1828-40), and in some letters of Lord Beresford (see 'Naval and Military Gazette', April and 31 Aug 1833). Long's Peninsular War correspondence, edited by T. H. McGuffie, was published in 'Peninsular Cavalry General (1811-13)' (1951). 


@@@@@


doc= 16975


Long, Roger (1680-1770), astronomer, was born on 2 February 1680 at Croxton Park, Norfolk, the son of Thomas Long, a gentleman. Following an early education at Norwich grammar school he was admitted as a sizar at Pembroke College, Cambridge, on 4 March 1697. He graduated BA in 1701, was elected fellow in 1703, and graduated MA in 1704. 
At the commencement of 1714 Long delivered a 'music speech' in Latin prose and English verse as a petition on behalf of Cambridge women who had previously been able to sit in that part of the university church known as the throne, but who had recently been forced to sit in the chancel, out of sight and unable to view the proceedings. The speech was well received and continued to be reprinted well into the nineteenth century, because in addressing the vice-chancellor, whom university wags usually styled 'Miss Greene', he assumed his native Norfolk dialect and, instead of saying 'Domine Procancellarie', 'did very archly pronounce the words thus, 'Domina Procancellaria', which occasioned a general smile in that grave Auditory' (Nichols, liv). 
Long was ordained deacon at Lincoln on 25 September 1716 and priest at Norwich on 23 December 1716. He was rector of Overton Waterville, Huntingdonshire, from 1716 to 1751, then of Bradwell-on-Sea, Essex. He had become DD in 1728, and was appointed vicar of Cherry Hinton, Cambridgeshire, in 1729, the same year he was elected a fellow of the Royal Society. On commencement Sunday June 1728 Long preached a sermon entitled 'The Blessedness of Believing'. He declared that 'vain therefore are all our attempts to conceive or explain, further than the Scripture will bear us out, the mysteries of faith: as well may we hope to measure the Heavens with a span, as with the short line of human reason to fathom the depths of them. (Long, 'Blessedness', 18)' His faith did not preclude his later astronomical work, some of which did involve measurement; at the beginning of his 'Astronomy in Five Books' he quoted an ancient source, noting that 'it is an observation of a philosopher that mathematical sciences have a tendency to purify the soul' (Long, 'Astronomy', 1.vii). 
Long was master of Pembroke College from 1733 to 1770 and vice-chancellor of the University of Cambridge in 1733-4. He was elected the first Lowndean professor of astronomy and geometry in 1750. A broadside was published, apparently in the 1760s and presumably written by Long, protesting the encumbrance of Lowndes's estate by the Admiralty, which prevented the university from benefiting fully from his bequest. 
Long's 'Astronomy, in Five Books' took some time to be completed: the first volume was published in 1742, part of the second in 1764, the remainder, posthumously, in 1784, having been prepared for publication by Richard Dunthorne (who served as butler and astronomer at Pembroke under Long) and the astronomer and mathematician William Wales. The astronomer royal, Nevil Maskelyne, offered his help as well. 
Long was very interested in teaching devices. In the first volume of his 'Astronomy' he described what he referred to as 'an astronomical apparatus', a hoop about 20 feet in diameter and 3 feet in breadth, which he had installed at Pembroke, 'whereon are delineated the constellations of the zodiac, with the ecliptic and such other circles as I thought proper' (Long, 'Astronomy', 1.x). He went on to describe in some detail his ideas for a similarly sized celestial sphere, which would rotate around a stage and which could be used to demonstrate astronomical phenomena to younger members of the university. Noting that he had little reason to expect encouragement in such an undertaking, he did eventually build such a sphere at Pembroke. Called the 'Uranium', the sphere was 18 feet in diameter and capable of seating thirty people; it was entered by climbing steps situated at the south pole. The inner surface was painted to represent the stars and constellations, there was a planetarium in the middle, and the entire sphere could be turned by a winch. The sum of $6 was set aside annually to pay for someone, generally an undergraduate, to look after the sphere, which stood until it was torn down some time after 1871. Photographs (in Pembroke College archives), as well as a sketch by William Stukeley (Bodl. Oxf., Gough maps 230, fol. 12), survive. Long's enthusiasm for teaching apparently extended to the very young; his commonplace book (in Pembroke College Library) contains 'An essay concerning teaching children to know their letters by a pack of cards', with various games described. 
Long was a member of the Gentlemen's Society at Spalding, Lincolnshire. Several amusing anecdotes were published, including the following, in the 'Gentleman's Magazine': 'That [Mr Bonfoy] and Dr Long walking together in Cambridge, in a dusky evening, and coming to a short post fixed in the pavement, which Mr B. in the midst of chat and inattention took to be a boy standing in his way, he said in a hurry, 'Get out of my way, boy.' That boy, Sir (said the Doctor very calmly and slily), is a post-boy, who turns out of his way for nobody. ('GM', 924)' Long died on 16 December 1770. His portrait, conveying a pleasant visage, hangs in Pembroke College, and suggests the sense of humour for which he was known. 


@@@@@


doc= 16976


Long, Samuel (1638-1683), planter and politician in the West Indies, was born in Wiltshire, the second son of Timothy Long (1610-1691) and his wife, Jane, the only daughter of Oliver Brunsell, the vicar of Wroughton. Nothing of his early life is known, except that on 20 October 1661 he married Elizabeth Streete. 
Long participated in the conquest of Jamaica, as a lieutenant in Colonel Edward D'Oyley's regiment, led by Admiral William Penn and General Robert Venables in 1655. He acted as secretary to the commissioners, which placed him at the centre of political affairs in the new colony and which may explain the considerable land grants he received after the war. As one of the largest landowners in the island, he subsequently played an instrumental role in limiting the prerogative powers of the royal governors and in championing the corporate rights of the elected assembly. He was elected as a member for Port Royal in the first meeting of an assembly, in which he served as clerk in 1664. He was later chosen speaker in four successive assemblies from 1672 to 1675. On the last occasion he was nominated by the members, not the governor, which henceforth became the established practice. He was sworn a member of the council and was appointed chief justice in 1674. He played a crucial role in ensuring the support of the council for the constitutional claims of the assembly against the governors. He said of his political stance that 'he asked nor desired nothing but his rights and privileges as an Englishman' ('CSP col.', 10, no. 1512) which included the right of the assembly to enjoy the same privileges in Jamaica as the House of Commons. He believed that the assembly alone should have the right to tax the colony, and he anticipated many claims later contended by the North Americans during the American War of Independence, saying 'that His Majesty's commission was no law to them, and that there might be that which was unlawful in such commissions' (ibid., '1677-80', no. 270). After the meeting of the first assembly in 1664 he was charged with treason primarily because of his success, with his ally and fellow planter William Beeston, in the passage of three acts which gave the legislature, not the governor, control of the revenue even before these powers were assumed by the House of Commons. The charges against him were dropped in recognition of the popularity of his stance. He was the first speaker to request the privileges of the house, possibly as early as 1672. He consolidated his earlier success with the alteration of the 'Revenue Act', in which the king's name was removed and the assembly won more control over the revenue, in 1675. He similarly orchestrated the reduction of the military powers of the governor in the 'Militia Act' of 1677. He foiled the 'new frame' of government in 1678 in which the imperial authorities attempted to recover the powers lost to the assembly and to undo his work. His opposition to the proposed changes caused his suspension from the council and his dismissal as chief justice. He was arrested with William Beeston and sent to England in 1680. He used the opportunity not only to gain his acquittal but to contrive a deal with the lords of trade in which the assembly passed a permanent 'Revenue Act' in return for the guarantee of existing laws giving control of the revenue to the assembly. He acted informally as the colony's agent in London and obtained permission for a permanent agent to represent Jamaica in Britain. He died in Jamaica on 28 June 1683 and was buried in the parish of St Katherine's. He had accumulated seven plantations, 11,183 acres in six parishes, and 288 slaves. He kept a particularly splendid residence in the capital at Spanish Town, far more elaborate than his plantation houses, which had a hall large enough for sixty chairs and seven tables. His career was synonymous with the rise of the sugar planters who dominated island politics. He and Beeston had created an assembly in Jamaica which surpassed the claims of peer institutions in North America even though the island did not rebel in 1776. 


@@@@@


doc= 16977


Long, Thomas (bap. 1621, d. 1707), Church of England clergyman, was the son of Richard Long of Exeter and was baptized at St Lawrence's Church there on 14 December 1621. Thomas matriculated servitor at Exeter College, Oxford, on 5 April 1639. He graduated BA in 1642, but left soon afterwards because of the turmoil in Oxford due to the civil war. He must have married by 1648 or 1649, when his eldest son Thomas was born, but we do not know the name of his wife (or wives). 
Long became vicar of Clyst St Lawrence, near Exeter, in 1652. In April 1684 Bishop Lamplugh of Exeter claimed in a letter to Archbishop Sancroft that Long was sequestered during the interregnum because of his loyalties and churchmanship: Long 'lay under a long Sequestration & yet held up against all interests, but the kings & the churchs, which he constantly asserted both by preaching & printing against the ringleaders of the Rebellion' ('Walker rev.', 118). However, whether Long actually was sequestered is questionable; John Walker, who knew Long well, and Long was indeed the 'ancient clergyman' who inspired him to write his account of the sufferings of the loyalist and Anglican clergy, fails to mention any such sequestration (ibid., v). A book published by Long in 1658 does not answer the question directly, but clearly shows his sense of persecution and alienation. He implied that the puritan authorities -- 'those who are named by the name of Christ' -- were committing 'iniquities' just as were the 'enemies of Jerusalem'. That these 'veterane Souldiers, and houshold-servants, who yet remain in his Tents, should conspire with his enemies to betray his fortresses, cast away their armes, and desert his cause, is of very sad consideration' (T. Long, 'An excercitation Concerning the Frequent Use of our Lords Prayer in the Publick Worship of God. And a View of what hath been Said by Dr. Owen Concerning that Subject', London, 1658, preface). In a letter of 1703 Long claimed that the number of ejected Anglican priests during the interregnum was much higher than Edmund Calamy's estimate -- perhaps as high as 10,000. All this, plus Long's later vitriolic attacks on dissent, suggest that, even if he was not sequestered, he certainly carried a grudge because of his treatment during the interregnum. 
Long was created BD by royal mandate at the Restoration and was created prebendary of Exeter Cathedral on 18 January 1661. He was a prolific writer, and in this period was best known for his bitter pamphlet wars against dissenters, particularly against the presbyterians. In 'Calvinus redivivus' (London, 1673) he argued that Calvin 'sets himself in the breach that is made, to prevent any farther separation, and to recall those that are departed to their former Communion' (Long, 'Calvinus', epistle). He went on to quote the reformer on his views of 'Anabaptists' and 'Libertines', and applied these comments to dissenters. This did not mean that Calvin would agree with Anglicans on all things: 'I know he differs in some things from us; but in many more from our Adversaries' (Long, 'Calvinus', 14). The interregnum -- and very likely his own experience during the interregnum -- was always in his mind when he wrote these tracts. In 'No Protestant but the Dissenters Plot' (London, 1682) he maintained that dissenters had persecuted Anglicans far more in the 1650s than vice versa during the Restoration. Dissenters, moreover, would go to any length to destroy the Church of England: 'By which we see, that the help of any Party, Anabaptists or Papists, are acceptable to the Dissenters, when there is any probability of afflicting or destroying the established Church' (Long, 'No Protestant', 11). He often lumped dissenting and papist plots together, and made an attempt at cataloguing their long, nefarious business in 'History of all the popish and fanatical plots and conspiracies against the established government... from the first year of Queen Elizabeth's reign to this present year 1684' (London, 1684). Long's greatest target among the presbyterians was Richard Baxter, against whom he wrote a great deal. Wood observed that he had 'undergone that very toilsome drudgrey of reading many or most of Mr. Richard Baxter's Books, and hath published Reflections and Animadversions on several of them' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 2.951). Baxter took umbrage at Long's 1678 book, 'Mr. Hales's Treatise of Schism Examined and Censured' (London, 1678), in which he accused nonconformists of being 'schismaticks'. Baxter replied to Long in a letter in which, with biting sarcasm, he said that he understood 'by your Book that you think that you are in the Right; which is the most that I have yet learned out of it, unless it be also that you think the Nonconformists be not yet hated and afflicted enough' (Keeble and Nuttall, 2.197-8). The attacks and recriminations between Long and Baxter continued until Baxter's death. In fact, Long was determined to have the last say, so after Baxter died he penned a 'Review of Mr. Richard Baxter's life, wherein many mistakes are rectified, some false relations detected, [and] some omissions supplyed' (London, 1697). When Edmund Calamy took over Baxter's 'Reliquiae' project, he inherited the battle with Long as well. Long sparred with him as he did with Baxter ('A Rebuke to Mr. Edmund Calamy, Author of the Abridgment of Mr. Baxter's Life', Exeter, 1704). 
Archbishop Sancroft offered Long the bishopric of Bristol in 1684, but he declined that poor diocese because of his age and the size of his family. Long also served as proctor for convocation in 1689, 1693, and 1694. Numerous sources report that he refused the oaths in 1689, but this is clearly not the case and seems to have arisen from confusion with his son, Thomas ['see below'], who also had a prebend at Exeter. Long was, it is true, a staunch advocate of passive obedience, but in 'Reflections upon a Late Book, Entituled 'The Case of Allegiance Consider'd'' (London, 1689), he argued that it was lawful to take the oaths of allegiance to William and Mary, who 'had a right Title to the Succession of the Crown of England'. James had clearly abdicated, since he 'deserted first the Government, and then the Land, and fled to an inveterate Enemy of our Religion and Nation,... and leaving us under a standing Army, wherein was a considerable party of Irish Papists, who... were likely to be very injurious to the English subjects. (Long, 'Reflections', 5-6)' Long maintained, however, that the best security that English subjects could give to the present government was to hold fast to the doctrines of non-resistance and passive obedience. 
Long had a reputation for erudition. He published sermons, works critical of heterodoxy ('Answer to a Socinian Treatise called 'The Naked Gospel'', London, 1691) and Lockean toleration ('The Letter for Toleration Decyphered', London, 1689), books against alteration of the liturgy of the Church of England ('Vox cleri, or, The sense of the clergy, concerning the making of alterations in the established liturgy', London, 1690), and a defence of Charles I's authorship of 'Eikon basilike'. 
Though he resigned his prebend in 1701, Long apparently remained at Clyst St Lawrence, though by the time he made his will, on 4 June 1706, he appears to have given up the living, as he merely described himself as a clerk of Exeter. The will, proved on 8 October 1708, lists eight children as survivors: Joseph, Nicholas, Thomas (who died not long after the will was made), John, Richard, Elizabeth, Dorothy, and Susanna. Long died on 7 December 1707 and was buried four days later in the parish where he had been baptized, St Lawrence, Exeter. 
Long's son, also 


@@@@@


doc= 16978


Thomas Long (1648/9-1707), Church of England clergyman, also attended Exeter College, Oxford, where he matriculated, aged fifteen, on 1 April 1664, but graduated from Corpus Christi College, Oxford, in February 1668 and proceeded MA in 1671. He was rector of Whimple, Devon, from 1676. After 1679 he served as chaplain to Anthony Sparrow, bishop of Norwich (and previously bishop of Exeter) whose daughter Bridget Sparrow (died 1712) he had married on 15 August 1676. He became a prebendary of Exeter in 1681. Long lost living and prebend in 1689 when he became a nonjuror. He died in Exeter in 1707, and was buried in St Lawrence's on 28 July, less than five months before his father, and five years before his widow. 


@@@@@


doc= 16979


Long, William (1817-1886), antiquary, born on 15 August 1817, was the second son of Walter Long (1788-1871) of Corhampton, Hampshire, and his wife, Lady Mary (died 1875), eldest daughter of William Carnegie, seventh earl of Northesk. He matriculated from Balliol College, Oxford, on 5 June 1835; he graduated BA in 1839 and proceeded MA in 1844. Long was a justice of the peace for Somerset and an FSA (from 1871) and he passed his life as a country gentleman and a local antiquary. His exhaustive articles on Avebury and Stonehenge, which appeared in the 'Wiltshire Archaeological and Natural History Magazine', were later expanded for publication in 1858 and 1876 respectively. 
Long married, on 13 April 1841, Elizabeth Hare (died 1874), only child of James Hare Joliffe; they had two sons and one daughter. He died at 2 Onslow Gardens, South Kensington, on 14 April 1886. 


@@@@@


doc= 16980


Longchamp, William de (d. 1197), administrator and bishop of Ely, probably born near Argenton, Normandy, was a son of Hugh de Longchamp, who was a servant of Henry II, farmer of the revenues of the honour of Conches, Normandy, at the time of his death (probably in 1187). Hugh held land in Herefordshire, including a knight's fee of Hugh de Lacy's honour, the marriage portion of his wife. Apparently, her father was a tenant of the Lacys. Although William de Longchamp's modest knightly background was typical of the 'new men' whom the Angevins were recruiting into their service, chroniclers' complaints against his low birth are unusually harsh, repeating the charge levelled by Hugh de Nonant, bishop of Coventry and Lichfield, that Longchamp was the grandson of a peasant, 'who being of servile condition in the district of Beauvais, had for his occupation to guide the plough and whip up the oxen; and who at length to gain his liberty fled to the Norman territory' ('Chronica... Hovedene', 3.142; 'Gir. Camb. opera', 4.418). He began his career as a clerk of Geoffrey Plantagenet, archdeacon of Rouen and later archbishop of York, then became chancellor of Richard, count of Poitou. When Richard acceded to the English throne in 1189 he named Longchamp royal chancellor, a title that he held until his death. He paid $3000 for the office, and an increase in fees charged for sealing chancery documents may have been intended to provide funds for paying this fine. At the Council of Pipewell (15 September 1189) Richard I elevated four long-time royal servants to bishoprics; among them was Longchamp, who became bishop of Ely, being consecrated on 31 December 1189. 
The king's first scheme for government of England during his absence on crusade broke down almost at once with the death in December 1189 of one of the two co-justiciars he had named, William de Mandeville, earl of Essex. Richard I then substituted William de Longchamp to serve alongside Hugh du Puiset, bishop of Durham. A second regency scheme was adopted at a council held at Nonancourt, Normandy, in mid-March 1190. The king named Longchamp chief justiciar of England, with Hugh du Puiset's authority confined to the lands north of the Humber. This, plus the fact of Longchamp's custody of the king's seal as chancellor, made his paramount authority clear. 
By late spring 1190 Longchamp had left the king's entourage on the continent and returned to England to take control of the government. His custody of important castles reinforced his authority, and on 5 June Pope Clement III named him papal legate for England, adding to his power and prestige. As legate he presided over ecclesiastical councils at Gloucester on 1 August and at Westminster on 13 October 1190. Richard's new commission to Longchamp, dated 6 June 1190, failed to define the role of Hugh du Puiset, justiciar for the north; and Longchamp chose to bar him from any role in the central government, excluding him from the exchequer and requiring him to surrender castles in his custody. Longchamp acted vigorously as justiciar and chancellor in 1190. He took firm steps to restore order and do justice at York, following the massacre of the Jewish community there. He also organized a general eyre in the summer of 1190; and himself headed the panel of justices sitting at Westminster from Easter term 1190 to Easter term 1191. Again in 1190 Longchamp launched an expedition against Rhys ap Gruffudd, the most powerful prince in south Wales. And he made a concerted effort to raise as much money as possible for the king -- for example, setting up a special exchequer to collect the enormous debts owed to Aaron, the Jewish moneylender of Lincoln. Longchamp left his mark on the English chancery. He is probably responsible for the precise dating clauses of Richard I's charters, and for substitution of the 'plural of majesty' for the first person singular -- innovations doubtless reflecting the chancellor's familiarity with the papal chancery's practice. 
Despite Longchamp's ability as an administrator, as a low-born foreigner he lacked the respect of the English baronage. He caused resentment by his financial exactions and the extravagance of his entourage as he moved about the country. His imperious manner and his ignorance of English customs soon aroused their incipient xenophobia, and brought mocking descriptions of his personal appearance and scurrilous attacks on his private life, including accusations of homosexuality. An accusation about his public activity, probably unjust, was that he ignored his associate justiciars; they were actually playing an important part in the administration, as barons of the exchequer, royal justices, and sheriffs. Yet he did seek to insinuate his own men into the government; by autumn 1191 a dozen counties had new sheriffs selected by the chancellor, and among them were two of his brothers. But Longchamp's chief problem in governing the kingdom was the powerful position of the king's brother, John, count of Mortain, whose position, not only as a great magnate but as a likely inheritor of the English crown, presented insurmountable difficulties for the chancellor. John knew how to exploit baronial opposition to Longchamp's authoritarian rule. One source of friction was the succession to the archbishopric of Canterbury, vacant in November 1190. Longchamp had some ambition of securing election for himself, but John wanted a say in the election. A more significant source of conflict was custody of royal castles. Longchamp was determined to keep royal control over key castles within John's domains, and in 1191 he began preparing for combat, importing mercenary soldiers from overseas. Richard I did not deal with complaints against his justiciar until the late spring of 1191, when he sent Walter de Countances, archbishop of Rouen, to England with two letters that directed the chancellor and others to take counsel with him, and implied that the archbishop should have an authority equal to the chancellor's own. Such orders were certain to undermine Longchamp's position, which was likely to be weakened further by the prospect of losing his position as papal legate; for Clement III died on 20 March 1191, and his commissions died with him. By midsummer, however, the new pope, Celestine III, had confirmed him in that office. 
Meanwhile Gerard de Camville, who had purchased the shrievalty of Lincolnshire and custody of Lincoln Castle from Richard I, had renounced the chancellor's authority and done homage to John. Longchamp then laid siege to Lincoln Castle, whereupon John occupied Tickhill and Nottingham castles, and commanded Longchamp to lift his siege of Lincoln, saying, 'It is not fitting to take their custodies away from law-worthy men of the realm... and hand them over to foreigners and unknown men' ('Chronicon Richardi Divisensis', 30-31). Walter de Coutances stepped forward at the end of April to act as mediator, and although both John and the chancellor appeared at the council at the head of large armed forces, the two opponents agreed to name arbitrators to settle the issue. Agreement was reached at a council at Winchester on 28 July 1191. There it was agreed that Gerard de Camville could keep his custody of Lincoln Castle and that John would surrender the castles he had taken. Also John obtained Longchamp's promise of support for his succession if the king died. 
Another crisis soon followed, and led to Longchamp's fall from power and his exile from England. Fearful of the implications for his own authority if the king's half-brother, the bastard Geoffrey Plantagenet, archbishop of York, should return to England to take up possession of his see, Longchamp ordered the sheriff of Sussex to prevent Geoffrey from landing at any port under his jurisdiction. The resulting scandal, when Geoffrey's goods were seized by the constable of Dover Castle, and the archbishop himself was forcibly dragged from the church of St Martin's Priory in Dover, where he had taken refuge, gave John an opportunity to discredit Longchamp, and he convened a great council at Marlborough, accusing him of breaking the peace sworn at Winchester. The council summoned Longchamp to come before it at Loddon Bridge, between Reading and Windsor, on 5 October; and after some hesitation the chancellor duly appeared. Walter de Coutances finally revealed the contents of the two royal letters that he had brought from Sicily, and complained that Longchamp had never sought his counsel. The chancellor left the council to return to London, having heard a rumour that Count John was preparing to seize the city by force. He asked the citizens to bar the gates to the count, but they refused to obey and denounced him as a traitor. He then took refuge in the Tower of London, but surrendered after three days. John and the magnates followed him to London, where they reconvened, hearing accusations from Geoffrey of York and from Hugh de Nonant. On 10 October Longchamp came before the council, maintaining that Archbishop Geoffrey had been seized without his knowledge or consent and declaring his readiness to account to the last farthing for his spending of the king's money. When he refused to lay down the duties assigned him by the monarch, the council stripped him of his offices, and required him to hand over hostages for the return of all castles held by his dependants. The great council declared John supreme governor of the kingdom, and granted him custody of all royal castles. 
Longchamp surrendered the Tower and Windsor Castle, and went to Dover in preparation for sailing to the continent. He was forbidden to leave England, however, and his efforts to escape in disguise made him a laughing-stock. He was variously described as having been caught fleeing in a monk's habit and in women's clothing, while a letter of Hugh de Nonant vividly depicts the fallen chancellor on Dover beach, dressed as a whore, being assaulted by a fisherman who had understandably assumed that he was encountering a prostitute. Eventually Longchamp sailed to Flanders on 29 October; he continued to Paris and then to Normandy. When he placed his diocese of Ely under an interdict and excommunicated his former colleagues at the exchequer, the archbishop of Rouen responded by seizing his episcopal estates and denouncing him throughout Normandy as an excommunicate. In 1192 Eleanor of Aquitaine persuaded the chancellor to withdraw the excommunication of his associate justiciars, and the archbishop to revoke his excommunication of Longchamp and restore his Ely estates to him. Having sent an agent to Palestine to inform Richard I of his fate, Longchamp returned to England in the spring of 1192, in an attempt to resume his duties as papal legate and to bribe John into supporting his restoration to his offices. John informed the bishops and barons meeting in a great council that the chancellor had promised him $700; they then offered him a larger sum of 2000 marks, and Longchamp had to leave the kingdom. In February 1194 a council at Westminster wrote to the pope protesting against Longchamp's continued legation, and some time after that he lost his commission. 
Richard I's capture on the journey from the Holy Land took Longchamp to England once more in the spring of 1193 on the king's order, to attend a council at St Albans where the raising of Richard's ransom was to be discussed. He brought with him a copy of the treaty between the king and the German emperor, and royal commands for a number of the king's English subjects to return with him to Germany as hostages to the emperor. The barons received him badly, and were unwilling to entrust their sons to him. The king's captivity led to other diplomatic missions by Longchamp. He was with Richard at Worms in late June 1193, when the emperor reopened the question of the amount of ransom to be paid. He left for an embassy to Mantes on 9 July to conclude a peace settlement between the English and French kings. Richard's release led to Longchamp's resumption of duties as chancellor, and also to royal favours. He received custody of the honour of Eye, and after a modest gift of 10 marks, was appointed sheriff of Essex and Hertfordshire, a post he held until 1196. Longchamp continued to serve on diplomatic missions; he negotiated the truce of Tillieres with Philip Augustus (23 July 1194) and returned to the emperor's court in July and November 1195. He died at Poitiers at the end of January 1197 (probably on the 28th, but perhaps on the 31st), on his way to Rome for negotiations about Richard's quarrel with the archbishop of Rouen over the king's construction of Chateau Gaillard on land of his see, and was buried at the abbey of Le Pin. 
William de Longchamp had a number of brothers who followed him to England to seek their fortunes. Stephen, who became a steward in the royal household and accompanied Richard I on crusade, and Osbert and Henry, both of whom acted as sheriffs in the 1190s, followed William into the service of the crown. Robert, a monk, became successively prior of Ely and of St Mary's, York. A nephew and niece made profitable marriages, while his sister Richeut married Matthew de Clere, whom Longchamp appointed constable of Dover Castle. Another sister, Melisend, is also known to have come to England. A man of considerable education and culture, Longchamp was one of a number of Anglo-Norman canonists active in the late twelfth century, composing a treatise 'Practica legum et decretorum'. His friends included such prominent writers as Nigel of Canterbury, who addressed to him a work warning against the courtier's life, 'Contra curiales et officiales clericos', and Peter of Blois, who wrote to Hugh de Nonant to complain of his treatment of the fallen chancellor. Richard Barre, a member of his household, dedicated to him a compendium of passages from the 'Old' and 'New' testaments arranged by topics. Described at the height of his power as 'Caesar and more than Caesar' ('Gir. Camb. opera', 4.399), Longchamp suffered resentment and humiliation as a result of the very ability that raised him to greatness. He was probably also the first Norman to be regarded as a 'foreigner' by members of the aristocracy in post-conquest England. 


@@@@@


doc= 16981


Longden, Sir Henry Errington (1819-1890), army officer, son of Thomas Hayter Longden, was born in January 1819. He was educated at Eton College and at the Royal Military College, Sandhurst. He was appointed to an ensigncy without purchase in the 10th regiment on 16 September 1836. His subsequent commissions -- all the regimental ones in the 10th regiment -- were lieutenant (1840), captain (1843), brevet major (1849), major (1850), brevet lieutenant-colonel (1856), lieutenant-colonel (1858), and colonel (1859). 
After taking a certificate of proficiency in higher mathematics and military drawing at the senior department, Royal Military College, in May 1842, Longden served with his regiment in India, and was present in the First Anglo-Sikh War of 1845-6, including the battle of Sobraon, and in the Second Anglo-Sikh War of 1848-9, including the two sieges of Multan, where he commanded the regiment at the attack on the heights on 27 December 1848, and was acting field engineer at the fall of the city. He was also at the capture of Chiniot and the victory at Gujrat, and was promoted brevet major. He served in the Indian mutiny and in September 1857, before Sir Colin Campbell advanced from Allahabad, he dispatched Longden from Benares with a small field force, to assist the Nepali troops in driving the rebels from the Azamgarh and Jaunpur districts. Longden commanded a party of picked marksmen, covering Brigadier Franks's force in the advance to Lucknow, and was attached to the Gurkhas during the siege and capture of the city; he was mentioned in dispatches. He was with Lord Mark Kerr at the first relief of Azamgarh on 6 April 1858, and was chief of the staff of Brigadier Edward Lugard's force at the second relief of Azamgarh, and the operations in the Jagdispur jungles. Longden afterwards retired on half pay, and was adjutant-general in India in 1866-9. He was promoted major-general in 1872 and lieutenant-general in 1877, and retired with the honorary rank of general in 1880. 
Longden was a KCB and CSI, and colonel in succession of the Hampshire regiment and the Lincolnshire regiment (late 10th regiment). He died in Bournemouth on 29 January 1890, from a chill caught at the funeral of his old friend Lord Napier of Magdala. 


@@@@@


doc= 16982


Longden, Sir James Robert (1827-1891), colonial governor, was the youngest son of John R. Longden, a proctor, of Doctors' Commons, London. In 1844, two years after the establishment of a civil government, he was appointed government clerk in the Falkland Islands, and became acting colonial secretary the year after. In 1861 he was appointed president of the Virgin Islands, in 1865 governor of Dominica, in 1867 governor of British Honduras, in 1870 governor of Trinidad, in 1874 governor of British Guiana, and in 1876 governor of Ceylon, which post he held until his retirement in 1883. In 1864 he married Alice Emily, the daughter of James Berridge of the island of St Kitts, West Indies. 
Longden was made CMG in 1871, KCMG in 1876, and GCMG in 1883. After his retirement he resided at Longhope, near Watford, Hertfordshire, and took a very active part in county affairs. He was a JP and alderman for the county under the 'Local Government Act'. He died at Longhope on 4 October 1891 and his funeral took place at Woking crematorium on 9 October. His wife survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 16983


Longespee, William (I), third earl of Salisbury (b. in or before 1167, d. 1226), magnate, was the natural son of Henry II and Ida de Tosny, probably the daughter of Roger (III) de Tosny, a powerful Anglo-Norman lord, and his wife, also Ida. Nothing further is known of the younger Ida's relationship with King Henry, but around Christmas 1181 she married Roger (II) Bigod, second earl of Norfolk. William's parentage on both sides seems to have been widely known, indeed he proclaimed it himself. His adoption of the coat of arms of his paternal grandfather, Geoffrey Plantagenet, namely azure, six leoncels rampant or, emphasized his descent from the counts of Anjou. And two of his charters in the cartulary of Bradenstoke Priory, Wiltshire, refer explicitly to 'Countess Ida, my mother' (London, nos. 481, 646). Moreover the list of prisoners taken by the French at Bouvines in 1214 included -- as well as Earl William himself -- 'Ralph Bigod, brother [half-brother] of the earl of Salisbury' (Molinier, 392); the younger son of Earl Roger Bigod, Ralph evidently had, and was known to have had, the same mother as Earl William, under whose command he was fighting. Nothing is known for certain of the date or circumstances of William's birth. His contemporary epithet Longespee, or Lungespee, may have been a conscious invocation of his namesake William Longsword, the second duke of Normandy ('r'. 928-42), during whose time his mother's family was later believed to have begun its rise to prominence, or of the second King William, called Longespee as well as Rufus. 
Little is known of Longespee's upbringing or early career, although in a letter of 1220 to Hubert de Burgh he reminded the justiciar that they had been brought up together. He received Appleby, Lincolnshire, from Henry II in 1188, which suggests that by then he had attained his majority. In 1196 his half-brother Richard I gave him in marriage Ela (or Isabel), countess of Salisbury (b. in or after 1190, d. 1261), the infant daughter and heir of William Fitzpatrick, earl of Salisbury. William and Ela had four sons: William (II) Longespee, Richard, a canon of Salisbury, Stephen (died 1260), a soldier and administrator made seneschal of Gascony in 1253 and lord justice of Ireland in 1259, and Nicholas Longespee (d. 1297), bishop of Salisbury from 1291 to 1297. Of four daughters, Isabel married William de Vescy, Petronilla died unmarried, Ela married first Thomas, earl of Warwick (died 1242), then Philip Basset, and Ida married first Walter Fitzrobert and second William de Beauchamp ['see under 'Beauchamp, de, family]. 
Salisbury was in close attendance on Richard in Normandy from 1196 to 1198, when he attested charters at Chateau Gaillard and doubtless gained military experience in the campaigns against Philip Augustus. He was with the king shortly before Richard routed Philip outside Gisors on 28 September 1198, although his presence in the engagement is not recorded. He took part in John's coronation on 27 May 1199, and thereafter was frequently with the king, with whom he seems to have enjoyed most cordial relations. The rolls reveal the two gaming together, and Salisbury received a steady stream of royal favours, from gifts of wine to an annual pension, against which he was frequently lent money by the king. His earldom, however, conferred more status than wealth, for although the barony commanded fifty-six fees and he was custodian of Salisbury Castle, an important royal fortress on which the Angevins expended large sums, he held no castle of his own. Although the king resisted his claim as earl to hold the shrievalty of Wiltshire by hereditary right, he was appointed to this office three times: 1199-1202, 1203-1207, and 1213-1226. In his capacity as sheriff, it was Salisbury's men who besieged the outlaw knight Fulk Fitzwarine in Stanley Abbey in 1202, but Salisbury himself was among those who procured John's pardon for Fitzwarine and his men the following year. Salisbury held a variety of other offices, being custodian of the castle and honour of Eye in February 1205, keeper of Dover Castle, most notably in 1212-13, when French invasion threatened, and sheriff of Cambridgeshire and Huntingdonshire from May 1212 to 1216. In 1208, when John moved to anticipate the interdict, Salisbury took custody of the lands of clergy in the diocese of Ely who refused to celebrate mass, and in August 1212 became supervisor of the keeper of the archbishopric of Canterbury. The same year, possibly in order to secure Salisbury's support in a time of increasing political disaffection, John supported his claim to the barony of Trowbridge, which he received in 1213 when the king disseized Henry de Bohun. 
Salisbury's diplomatic abilities are reflected in a series of important missions entrusted to him. Early in 1202 he negotiated a treaty between John and Sancho VII, king of Navarre. In 1204, together with the earl marshal, he escorted Llywelyn to the king at Worcester, was among those sent to treat with the king of Scots in November 1205, and accompanied William the Lion to meet John at York in November 1206. In March 1209 he headed an embassy to the princes of Germany on behalf of John's nephew Otto, who was subsequently crowned emperor, and in May 1212 he went on a mission to Ferrand, count of Flanders. 
Salisbury's most prominent role, however, was as a military commander of considerable ability on both land and sea. In August 1202, together with William (I) Marshal and the earl of Surrey, he shadowed Philip Augustus's army as it withdrew in close order from the siege of Arques on learning of John's victory at Mirebeau. The lightly armed earls, however, only narrowly escaped capture by a counter-attack led by William des Barres. In 1203, he received back the important castle of Pontorson on the Breton border, which he had earlier exchanged for lands in England, and this, together with his being keeper of the castle of Avranches, suggests a marcher command against Breton attack. With the fall of Normandy he was given command of Gascony in May 1204, and in September made constable of Dover and warden of the Cinque Ports, which offices he retained until May 1206. In June 1205 he sailed to reinforce the garrison of La Rochelle, with the only part of the great force collected by John to see active service. In 1208 he was appointed keeper of the March of Wales, and he accompanied John on the Irish expedition of 1210. In May 1213, together with the counts of Holland and Boulogne, Salisbury led a powerful expeditionary force to aid Count Ferrand against Philip Augustus, the earl himself having been given a magnificent ship by King John. On 30 May the allied force attacked a large French fleet moored off Damme, a little north-east of Bruges, burning many ships but sending a great number back to England laden with arms and provisions. Although Salisbury and the forces which disembarked to raid inland were driven off on 1 June by the arrival of Philip's larger army, the naval victory was significant, and forced the French king to abandon his planned invasion of England. According to the 'Histoire de Guillaume le Marechal' Salisbury, with William Marshal and the count of Boulogne, had been instrumental in advising this pre-emptive strike. Earlier that May he was one of the earls who swore that John would observe the papal terms concerning satisfaction to the bishops, and witnessed his declaration of homage to the papal see. 
Later in 1213 Salisbury returned to Flanders with troops and a credit of over 20,000 marks. In 1214, as marshal of the king of England, he led the allied forces that recovered almost all of Flanders for Ferrand. At the fateful battle of Bouvines on 27 July 1214 he commanded the right wing of the allied army with Renaud de Dammartin, count of Boulogne. He fought bravely, but was clubbed from his horse by Philippe, the militant bishop of Beauvais, and taken captive. The 'Histoire de Guillaume le Marechal' explicitly absolves him from blame for the failure at Bouvines, stating indeed that the battle was fought against his advice, and that the emperor Otto would have been taken or slain without Salisbury's aid. His release was still being negotiated in February 1215, but he was eventually exchanged for Robert, son of the count of Dreux. Back in England by May he was among those appointed to examine the state of royal castles, but his attempt to prevent London falling to the barons was unsuccessful. Dispatched with a force of Flemish mercenaries against insurgents in Devon, Salisbury succeeded in forcing the rebels to abandon Exeter. 
It is uncertain whether Salisbury was present at Runnymede for the initial negotiations on 15 June, but he was named among those on whose advice 'Magna Carta' had been granted, which suggests he was with John by 19 June. Salisbury received extensive grants from the royal demesne in August in compensation for the honour of Trowbridge, restored to Henry de Bohun by the baronial committee of twenty-five as one of the king's unjust disseisins. 
In October 1215 John ordered Salisbury to relieve Oxford and Northampton with a small field force drawn from the garrisons of ten royal castles, but it seems that Falkes de Breaute led the expedition. Following the fall of Rochester Castle in December Salisbury was one of the commanders left to contain the rebels in London while John led his forces north. With Falkes de Breaute and Savaric de Mauleon he conducted a punitive 'chevauchee' through the predominantly rebel counties of Essex, Hertfordshire, Middlesex, Cambridgeshire, and Huntingdonshire. During the ravaging of the Isle of Ely in the early weeks of 1216, however, it was Salisbury who protected the womenfolk from the worst excesses of Walter Buc's Brabancon mercenaries. He rejoined the king and aided him in the siege of Colchester, pledging on John's behalf to observe the surrender terms agreed with the French and baronial garrison, terms which the king subsequently violated. 
After Louis's landing on 21 May 1216 Salisbury adhered to John until rapid French gains in the southern counties led the earl to submit to Louis at Winchester in late June. Little credence, however, need be given to the rumour recorded by William the Breton that Salisbury's defection was caused by John's seduction of Countess Ela while Salisbury had been a prisoner in France. Rather, he was prompted by the widely held belief that John's cause was now lost; nevertheless the king was still able to order his lands to be seized by 30 August. Following the death of John (19 October), Salisbury remained in Louis's camp and, according to Wendover, he attempted to persuade Hubert de Burgh to surrender Dover to the French. On 5 March 1217, however, during Louis's absence in France, Salisbury re-entered the king's faith and was absolved from excommunication. He brought with him William Marshal the younger, who was a close friend and ally, and around one hundred lesser men from Wiltshire and the south-west. A considerable blow to Louis, his return had been influenced by the worsening military position of the French, the fact that Henry de Bohun, his rival for the castle and honour of Trowbridge, was one of Louis's leading English supporters, and the regent's promise to him of Sherborne Castle and the counties of Somerset and Devon, simply in return for his 'homage and service'. 
Having witnessed the surrender of Knepp Castle near Shoreham, Salisbury and the younger Marshal laid siege to Winchester, taking the fortified episcopal palace of Wolvesey. On the arrival of the regent they were sent to Southampton, which they took, installing a constable before returning to share in the rich booty which had accrued from the surrender of Winchester (before 14 March). At the battle of Lincoln (20 May 1217) Salisbury commanded the third squadron of the royalist forces, and with the younger William Marshal led the charge through the west gate of the city against the French and English besieging the castle from the south and east. According to the 'Histoire de Guillaume le Marechal' the Marshal saved Salisbury from the lance of Robert of Ropsley by felling this assailant, and together they proceeded to engage the count of Perche in front of the cathedral. After the royalist victory Salisbury was rewarded with custody of the city and county of Lincoln 'by common council' of the king's supporters, although Ranulf (III) of Chester received the earldom. Later, in 1218, he and the regent partitioned the English manors of the count of Perche who had been killed in the battle; Salisbury gained those of Aldbourne and Wanborough in Wiltshire and adopted the latter as his chief seat in the shire. Salisbury took part with Hubert de Burgh in the naval victory off Sandwich on 24 August, in which the English intercepted a French fleet bringing vital reinforcements to Louis. He was closely involved in the resulting peace negotiations which culminated in the treaty of Lambeth, 12 September, and Louis's departure from the kingdom. 
From 1217 until his death in 1226 Salisbury enjoyed a position of considerable power, his career epitomizing both the centrifugal and the centripetal forces which so characterized the minority of Henry III. Within his areas of influence he sought to exercise effective local autonomy without the interferences of central government. Between March 1217 and 1219 he tried to make effective the grants of the lordship of Somerset and Dorset and, later, of Alnwick, extorted from the regency, but failed against the power of John's sheriffs. He made repeated efforts to secure Lincoln Castle from the redoubtable Nicola de la Haie, the hereditary castellan, claiming both custody of the castle and wardship of the rich Haie barony in Lincolnshire, since his eldest son, still a minor, was betrothed to Idonea, daughter and heir of Richard de Camville (died 1217). In May 1220, on the death of Robert of Berkeley, Salisbury seized Berkeley Castle and Robert's lands and chattels in a pre-emptive bid for wardship of his heir, 'against justice, the custom of the kingdom and the law of the land', as the earl of Pembroke complained to the justiciar, Hubert de Burgh (Shirley, no. clv, p. 179). 
Salisbury nevertheless professed himself strongly committed to government by the king's council, stating forcefully in 1220 that the only legitimate orders were those sanctioned by 'the magnates of England who are held to be and are of the chief council of the king, with other chief men' (Carpenter, 204). He supported the king and the justiciar Hubert de Burgh at crucial moments in the restoration of royal authority. In 1221 he opposed both the count of Aumale and Peter de Mauley. At Christmas 1221, and again at Northampton in December 1223, when the country came to the verge of civil war, he stood with the justiciar against the powerful dissident faction of the earl of Chester, Falkes de Breaute, Engelard de Cigogne, Brian de Lisle, and other castellans reluctant to yield up their shrievalties and castles. In this Salisbury represented, in his own words, 'we native-born men of England' against those 'aliens' who were felt to be fomenting war within the kingdom (Shirley, no. cxcvi, p. 221). In June 1222, on Henry's second act of resumption of royal demesnes, he yielded a number of royal manors, and in February 1223 he surrendered Salisbury Castle, only to receive it back directly, with the custody of the castles of Shrewsbury and Bridgnorth, and the shrievalties of Shropshire and Staffordshire. 
Salisbury retained his role as a leading military commander until his death. In mid-1223 Salisbury was joint leader with William Marshal of a force of 140 knights, sent by Hubert de Burgh against Llywelyn, which established control over Kidwelly and Ceredigion. In 1225 he accompanied Richard of Cornwall, then only sixteen, as the effective leader of the successful expedition to Gascony, which reasserted English control in the province and secured it from the invasion of Louis VIII. Before La Reole fell on 13 November, however, Salisbury had fallen sick and embarked on a difficult three-months voyage home. Driven ashore on the Ile de Re, held for Louis by Savaric de Mauleon, he took shelter in the abbey of Notre Dame de Re. He was warned to escape, according to Matthew Paris, by two of Savaric's men, to whom he gave $20, and set sail again. He landed in Cornwall at Christmas, and in January was received with great rejoicing in Salisbury Cathedral. Paris relates an implausible tale of an attempted poisoning of the earl by Hubert de Burgh. The story is undoubtedly false, for the two men were close and the earl's death at Salisbury Castle on 7 March 1226 was almost certainly the result of the illness contracted in Gascony. He was buried in the lady chapel of Salisbury Cathedral, whose foundation stones he and his countess had laid on 28 April 1220, with the assistance of the legate Pandulf. Later moved to the easternmost bay of the south arcade of the nave, his tomb, carved 'c'.1240 by craftsmen of the Wells school, was one of the finest military effigies of its period. On an arcaded oak tomb chest enriched with mosaic inlay on gesso, the originally richly coloured effigy of local Doulting stone depicted Salisbury in gilded mail armour with armorial surcoat and shield. 
Despite his prominence Salisbury's character remains enigmatic. His support for John during his excommunication led Wendover to number him among the king's evil counsellors, while the annals of Dunstable believed it was Salisbury who, on John's orders, arrested Geoffrey of Norwich who later died in captivity as a result of his harsh treatment. The opprobrium of monastic chroniclers, however, was short-lived. Wendover approvingly noted his especial veneration of the Virgin, before whose altar he had kept a light burning since the day of his knighthood, and who it was claimed had appeared to Salisbury during his shipwreck in 1225. The same chronicler accords him a pious end, when, stripped and with a halter round his neck, he knelt before Richard Poor, bishop of Salisbury, declaring himself a traitor to God and refusing to rise until he had confessed and received the sacrament. His salvation was betokened by the fact that the candles in his funeral procession from the castle to the cathedral remained alight despite a raging storm. 'When William, the flower of earls resigned his princely breath', ran the epitaph added by Matthew Paris, 'his long sword was content to find a shorter sheath' (Paris, 3.105). 
Certainly Salisbury and his wife seem to have been more than conventionally devout. His will largely comprises benefactions to religious houses. He endowed the Augustinian house of Bradenstoke, Wiltshire, founded by Ela's great-grandfather, Walter of Salisbury, and was commemorated at the hospital of St Nicholas, Salisbury. In 1222 he gave the manor of Hatherop, Gloucestershire, for a Carthusian foundation, adding further endowments in his will, although at the monks' request his widow afterwards moved them to her manor of Henton (or Hinton), Somerset, where the monastery of Locus Dei was dedicated in 1232. The same year Ela began an Augustinian nunnery at Lacock, where she herself took the veil in 1238 and became abbess in 1239. 
Longespee was a political figure of the first rank, symbolizing not only the important role played by royal bastards, but the multifaceted competence in administration, diplomacy, and war which characterized leading figures in the Angevin regime. He has been labelled among the 'conspicuous trimmers' (Carpenter, xviii) during the period of crisis in 1216-17, but the 'Histoire de Guillaume le Marechal', written in the 1220s, and possibly after Salisbury's death, passes over his temporary defection to Louis in silence. Rather he is portrayed with no little justification as a loyal, courageous, and skilful commander, 'whose mother was largesse and whose banner was prowess' (Meyer, ll. 12125-8), the former compliment perhaps being a tactful inversion of his illegitimacy. 


@@@@@


doc= 16984


Longespee, Sir William (II) (c.1209-1250), magnate, was the eldest son and heir of Ela, countess of Salisbury (b. in or after 1190, d. 1261), in whom the earldom was vested, and William (I) Longespee (b. in or before 1167, d. 1226). He had three brothers, of whom the youngest was Nicholas Longspree, later bishop of Salisbury, and four sisters. His marriage to Idonea, heir of Richard de Camville and Eustacia, daughter of Gilbert Basset, was arranged in April 1216; they married between 1226 and 1230. 
A minor at his father's death, Longespee was knighted by his cousin Henry III at Gloucester at Whitsuntide 1233, but he must have attained his majority before that since Henry had intended to knight him at Easter 1230. Moreover, in March 1230 Countess Ela was instructed to surrender to William all the lands she held of inheritance as the wife of William (I) Longespee, along with other properties granted to her son by Henry in 1228-9; and in November 1230 William paid homage for the lands claimed by his wife, Idonea, as of hereditary right. Earlier that year, he had accompanied Henry III on his ill-fated expedition to Brittany. This was his first taste of military action, and for the rest of his short life he was to be closely associated with his royal cousin, largely in a military capacity. In the autumn of 1233, during the rebellion of Richard Marshal, earl of Pembroke, he was at Henry's side in the operations against the Welsh and other supporters of the earl. In 1234 he was engaged in the pursuit and arrest of Peter des Rivaux. After returning from his first crusade (discussed below), he played a leading role in Henry III's expedition to Gascony in 1242-3. The number of royal charters he attested there, and the fact that he generally heads the list of lay witnesses, indicates his high standing in the king's regard and counsels. He fought at the battle of Saintes (July 1242), and was appointed captain of a number of subsequent operations, including the raid into Perigord in late 1242 and the siege of Garro in 1243. Back in England, Longespee went in royal service to Wales in June 1245, in response to the Welsh rising of 1244-5 under Dafydd ap Llywelyn. 
Longespee did well from his career in royal service, as the favours showered upon him in these years indicate, but the earldom of Salisbury was denied him. He clearly expected to receive the comital title, for a number of his 'acta' (1231-7) contain explicit statements of his hopes. In 1237-8 he claimed by hereditary right custody of Salisbury Castle and the 'comitatus' of Wiltshire, of which Patrick, earl of Salisbury, had been seised in Henry II's reign. Judgment against Longespee may have been given before his departure on crusade in 1240; if so, he did not give up, for he was pestering the king during 1242 when both were in Gascony. On 16 October 1242 Henry promised that on his return to England he would judge concerning the county of Wiltshire and Salisbury Castle. If judgment went against Longespee he and his heirs would receive 40 marks per annum from the revenues of the county; if he were successful, the king would be quit of that sum and of the 60 marks per annum granted to Longespee until judgment were made. Since judgment indeed went against him, for reasons that remain somewhat puzzling, it is not surprising that Longespee does not appear so high in Henry's counsels after their return to England in 1243; he was much less frequently at court in the following years. Relations were certainly not embittered, however, for Henry continued to dispense patronage and favours to him, and, according to Matthew Paris, he was not unduly aggrieved. He apparently accepted, however reluctantly, the crown's arguments regarding the comital title, and he possessed, of course, the lands attached to the earldom, concentrated largely in Wiltshire and Dorset. Lesser holdings, including those brought to him through acquisition and marriage, were located in Berkshire, Oxfordshire, Buckinghamshire, Surrey, Hampshire, Gloucestershire, Northamptonshire, and, more importantly, Lincolnshire and Somerset. 
Longespee was a man of some piety. He patronized the Franciscans of Salisbury and Oxford, and the Dominicans of Wilton, besides making notable grants to monastic houses of his family's connection, especially Lacock Abbey and Bradenstoke Priory. He also twice went on pilgrimage overseas: in 1232 to an unknown shrine, and in 1245 to Santiago de Compostela. This behaviour, combined with his active military career, helps to explain his particular association with crusading. He went on crusade twice, something that marks him out from most of his contemporaries and suggests a genuine crusading enthusiast. He first took the cross in June 1236 at Winchester, along with Richard, earl of Cornwall, and other associates. They left Dover in June 1240, travelled across France for embarkation at Marseilles, and landed at Acre in October. This crusade was marked by its lack of action in the field, and it can be assumed that Longespee performed no memorable deeds, especially since no later source in his praise makes anything of his first crusading venture. After witnessing a charter drawn up at Acre on 2 May 1241 he almost certainly sailed home on 3 May, when Earl Richard left the Holy Land. He arrived back in England in early March 1242. Within weeks he was off again, to attend Henry III in Gascony. 
Longespee took the cross once more in May 1247, encouraged, apparently, by the example of Louis IX and the French. Much is known of his preparations for this crusade. One of his first acts against his crusade passage was a journey to Lyons to petition the pope for financial subsidy. After an audience with Innocent IV he was duly promised moneys from the redemption of English crusading vows on 6 June, but he experienced difficulties in securing the cash and further papal mandates were required in 1248 and 1249 to ensure payment of the 2000 marks eventually assigned to him. Money was raised in other ways, including the lease of four of his manors for four years from Michaelmas 1248 and the grant of a charter to his burgesses of Poole in return for 70 marks. His royal patron and cousin came to his assistance with further grants of money. He also took measures to settle disputes over property and to ensure the security of his interests and family during his absence. These included the drawing up of a will, duly confirmed by the king, the securing of a royal judicial protection, the appointment of executors and attorneys, and the concluding of a number of quitclaims and final concords. In 1249, for the good of his soul, he secured a grant from his mother, now abbess of Lacock, that he would be received into all spiritual benefits and prayers of the house in perpetuity, and it was probably around this time that he requested his body be buried at Lacock. With his mother's blessing he left England in 1249, an essoin on his behalf, taken at Wilton on 18 April, indicating that he had already left, though other evidence makes a date in late June or early July more likely. He joined the army of Louis IX at Damietta in Egypt, with around 200 English knights under his command, at some point in late 1249, certainly before the general advance up the Nile that began on 20 November. If Matthew Paris (uncorroborated) is to be believed, he had previously attended Louis. But following an ugly clash with certain French nobles, Robert, count of Artois, at their head, over the spoils from successful raids he had mounted out of Damietta, Longespee withdrew to Acre, having failed to secure justice from Louis in the matter. He returned to Damietta, according to Paris, only on Louis's prompting. 
It is upon the circumstances and manner of his death on crusade that Longespee's later, posthumous, fame rested. Following further reinforcement from France in October 1249, which may well have included Longespee and his knights, the strategic decision was taken to advance on Cairo. The army travelled slowly up the right bank of the Damietta branch of the Nile, until it was halted, unable to cross, on the north bank of the al-Bahr al-Saghir, opposite Mansourah where the bulk of the Egyptian forces were located. Eventually a local revealed the existence of an unguarded ford downstream, and on 8 February 1250 the vanguard, comprising the best cavalry and including the English under Longespee, crossed the ford at dawn led by Robert of Artois. Louis had instructed Robert to secure a bridgehead and advance no further, so that the main body of the army could cross safely. But Robert, rashly disobeying orders, insisted upon further attack, first into the Egyptian camp at Jadila and then into the town of Mansourah itself, though the vanguard was now isolated with no prospect of support. In the narrow streets of Mansourah, unable to manoeuvre, they were largely destroyed. As contemporaries, Muslim and Christian, appreciated, this proved to be the turning point of the entire crusade, so it is not surprising that the incident attracted much comment in Western sources, especially English and French ones, and that the attempt should be made to find a scapegoat for the crusade's failure. 
Longespee was but one of those who died at Mansourah, but within twenty-five years he was emerging in English sources as a heroic figure, an ideal, exemplary crusader who fought to the death while the cowardly French, led by Robert of Artois, sought to flee the field, his arrogance and greed having doomed all of them. A legend rapidly developed: Longespee was transformed into an English 'national' crusading hero, and his fame continued for a century and more. That the nature of his supposed last stand, and the deaths of his loyal English crusading companions, met with favour in English chivalric circles is amply proved by the Anglo-Norman poem in his and their honour, composed 'c'.1275-1300, and then copied. Matthew Paris, plainly, was exposed to earlier, oral analogues in the 1250s, and the diffusion of his works contributed to the making of Longespee's legend in other social circles as well. 
Despite his wishes it seems that Longespee's bodily remains came to be buried in the cathedral at Acre, not at Lacock, and that his family and descendants made no attempt to translate them. The fine knightly effigy in the nave of Salisbury Cathedral is said, traditionally, to be of him, and produced on his mother's order, but the grounds for this are no more than romantic. He and his wife, Idonea, left one son, William (III) Longespee, and one daughter, Ela, who married James Audley. 


@@@@@


doc= 16985


Longfield, Mountifort (1802-1884), jurist and economist, was born at Church Hill, Desertserges, near Bandon, co. Cork, the second son of the Revd Mountifort Longfield, vicar of Desertserges, and his wife, Grace, daughter of William Lysaght of Fort William and Mount North, near Mallow in co. Cork. He had two brothers and three sisters. After first being educated by Thomas Dix Hincks, probably at Fermoy Academy, Longfield entered Trinity College, Dublin, in 1818 and graduated as moderator and gold medallist in natural science in 1823. He was elected a fellow of the college in 1825, but as jurist, for at that time the college regulations required all fellows to be in holy orders, except five, of whom one was elected as 'medicus', the other four as jurists. Called to the Irish bar in 1828, Longfield proceeded to the degree of MA in the same year and to LLD in 1831. In that year he lectured in the law school of Trinity College as deputy for the professor of feudal and English law, Philip Crampton. In 1832 a new professorship of political economy was established in Trinity College; Longfield applied for it and was appointed, on the results of an examination set by Richard Whately, archbishop of Dublin, who funded the chair. This appointment was tenable for five years only, and in 1834 Longfield, who had drawn attention to himself by his zeal and ability as a teacher of law when serving as deputy for Crampton, was appointed to succeed him in the regius professorship of feudal and English law, resigning his fellowship in order to do so. He held this office for the rest of his life, although from 1871 he employed a deputy to carry out its duties. 
Longfield had already earned a high reputation as a real property lawyer when he became a QC in 1842. When the 'Incumbered Estates Act' became law in 1849 he was selected to be one of the three commissioners by whom it was administered. With the extension of the act to unincumbered estates in 1858, the commission was replaced by the landed estates court, of which Longfield then became a judge. He continued to sit in this court until 1867, when he retired and was sworn of the Irish privy council. 
In his later years Longfield maintained an interest in economic and social questions. In 1847 he became one of the founder members of the Dublin Statistical Society (later renamed the Statistical and Social Inquiry Society of Ireland) and in 1863 succeeded Whately as its second president. He was also active in the National Association for the Promotion of Social Science and gave the opening address as president of its social economy section at its Dublin meeting in 1861. Longfield was appointed a commissioner of Irish national education in 1853, and also gave much voluntary service to the Church of Ireland, acting as an assessor to its general synod on several occasions after its disestablishment in 1869; at that period he was also instrumental in developing new methods for financing the church. His experience in the landed estates court led Longfield to recognize the need to strengthen the legal rights of tenants to compensation for improvements. In an essay published by the Cobden Club in 1870 he outlined what came to be known as the 'Longfield scheme of parliamentary tenant-right', which attracted wide interest and support, but which Gladstone felt unable to incorporate into his first 'Irish Land Bill'. 
In 1845 Longfield married Elizabeth Penelope, daughter of Andrew Armstrong, of Kilsharvan, co. Meath; there were no children of the marriage, and she died in 1882. Longfield died at his home, 47 Fitzwilliam Square, Dublin, on 21 November 1884, and was probably buried in the city's Mount Jerome cemetery. Although he had virtually retired from public life a decade earlier, at his death he was still known and highly regarded as a learned and impartial judge, a man of vigorous and independent mind, with more liberal views on social and economic issues than might have been expected in his day from a long-established expert in real property law. 
Longfield's former position as the first incumbent of the first chair of political economy to be founded in Ireland received little or no mention in his obituaries -- not surprisingly, for he had left the chair almost half a century earlier; it was a forgotten interlude in a long and distinguished legal career. Almost twenty years later, in 1903, the American economist E. R. A. Seligman published two articles in the 'Economic Journal', 'On some neglected British economists', which drew attention, among others, to the work of Longfield as evidenced in the three volumes which he published during his tenure of the Whately chair: 'Lectures on Political Economy', 'Four Lectures on Poor Laws', and 'Three Lectures on Commerce and one on Absenteeism' (1834-5). Since then it has come to be recognized by economists throughout the world that in these lectures Longfield produced work of outstanding originality, and his posthumous reputation in economics eclipsed that which he had in his own lifetime as a jurist. In 1833 when Longfield gave his first lectures on political economy, which (as his appointment required) he afterwards published, the theories of value and distribution developed by David Ricardo and propagated by James Mill dominated the subject. Having shown that he understood these theories better than many contemporary interpreters, Longfield rejected them and presented his own analysis in five lectures. His explanation of value emphasized market prices rather than natural values, stressing utility as of at least equal importance with labour costs in determining value. His theory of distribution was perhaps his most original contribution: in it he put forward a theory of profits as determined by the marginal productivity of physical capital and of wages as determined, not by subsistence, but by the specific productivity of each labourer. 
Unlike Ricardo, Longfield took an optimistic view of the long-term prospects for economic development, and predicted that the effects of increased population would be offset by technical progress in agriculture and that increased capital accumulation, while lowering profits, would improve the productivity of labour and allow real wages to rise, with consequent economic and social benefits. While his two other published courses of lectures dealt primarily with current Irish economic problems, in his 'Lectures on Commerce' he again showed his originality as an economic theorist, specifically treating the case of trade in more than two commodities and explaining the causes of international specialization in terms of variations in factor endowments. He thus foreshadowed developments in this field which were not generally known and accepted until almost a century later. Longfield's ideas in political economy had considerable influence on his successors in the Whately chair -- indeed he really founded a distinctive 'Trinity College Dublin school of value theory' -- but until Seligman wrote they remained completely unknown to economists outside Ireland, and this state of affairs Longfield himself appears never to have sought to alter. 


@@@@@


doc= 16986


Longland, John (1473-1547), bishop of Lincoln, was born at Henley-on-Thames, Oxfordshire, the son of Thomas Longland (died 1529) and Isabel Staveley, who had a shop in Henley. By the time of his mother's death in 1530, the family was clearly a prosperous one. 
John Longland went to school in Henley, and his parents were said to have promoted his education: 'I was entrusted by my parents to a school of good and sound learning' (Longland, 'Quinque sermones', 4, fol. 88'v'). He may have gone from Henley to Eton College, a foundation of which he was very fond, and in which he was eventually to be buried. From Eton he went by 1491 to Oxford, where he became a scholar and fellow (and bursar) of Magdalen College, and was for a year (1506/7) principal of Magdalen Hall. By 1509 he was BTh, and DTh by 1511. 
Longland was from the first a scholar, and by the time of his death had accumulated a very large library. He received his first preferments in 1505, but they were not of a particularly significant kind until he became dean of Salisbury in December 1514 and a canon and prebendary of St Stephen's Chapel, Westminster, in 1517 and of St George's Chapel, Windsor, in 1519. He was singled out for advancement by the quality of his preaching, which was admired by such serious churchmen as Thomas More, Richard Kidderminster, and William Warham. Warham wrote to Longland commending a published volume of his sermons, for his 'fervent zeal for reformation to be made as well of heretical doctrines as of misbehaviours in manners', and he assured him that his sermons would give Longland a 'perpetual memory' (Lincoln Archives Office, register 26, fols. 206-206'v'). Longland was also in correspondence with Juan Luis Vives and with Erasmus on matters of church reform. So influential a preacher gained the notice of Henry VIII, perhaps partially because Thomas Wolsey had been at Magdalen with Longland. He was, therefore, a strong candidate for preferment, and on 20 March 1521 Longland was provided to the see of Lincoln; he was consecrated on 5 May and the temporalities were restored on 26 June. Almost immediately afterwards he became the king's almoner, and by 1524 the royal confessor. 
Wolsey's hand may be seen in these marks of favour. Wolsey often used Longland to help him with his most cherished projects. It was Longland who in 1525 preached at the laying of the foundation stone of Cardinal College, who was Wolsey's agent in acquiring 'singing men' for the college, and on whom Wolsey relied for his projected reformation of the statutes of the University of Oxford; and it was to Wolsey that Longland wrote some of his most personal letters. For Longland, unlike Wolsey, the combination of these posts meant that, like other bishops before him, he was always torn between his obligations to his diocese and those of the court. He had been present at the Field of Cloth of Gold in June 1520 and he was required to preach at court for most major festivals and in Lent. In 1525 he told Wolsey that he was at court for Trinity Sunday (11 June) and for Corpus Christi eve and day (14 and 15 June). On the eve 'the king his grace was shriven and on the morrow was shriven and houselled' (Ellis, 3/1, 251-4). As though this were not enough, plague was raging and the bishop could not even find safe refuge at his favourite manor of Buckden, in Huntingdonshire. 
His duties to his diocese Longland saw mainly in terms of dealing with the larger institutions within it, the monasteries and the cathedral church. He was installed in this latter in September 1522, and two years later began a personal visitation of it. He wrote new rules for the poor clerks, whose truancy had become legendary. In his requirements for them, some written in his own hand, he ordered them not to keep hawks, dogs, and ferrets, but a single dog for them all, and not to play cards or dice, or to hunt, or 'use any other unlawful or unhonest games or play'. Fines were imposed for slander, drawing a knife, and for assault which 'God forbid... draw blood of any of his fellows' (Lincoln Archives Office, dean and chapter MSS, A.2.10[8]). There were other penalties for leaving gates open or using doors as privies. All to no avail, since a mere two years later the fines levied were finding their way back to the clerks themselves, whose games now included playing with loaded dice. 
Longland also found that the religious houses of his diocese fell short of his exacting standards. Before he came to the see of Lincoln, he had preached to the monks of Westminster and had roundly condemned the laxity of the religious: 'Woe unto them who do not devote themselves to prayer and reading... but they give themselves over to gourmandising and self-indulgence. When they have filled their bellies, they belch, they sit idle, they laugh and pass most of the time in relaxation and idle vanities. The pure will see God and rejoice in the sight; the impure will neither rejoice nor see... Our true predecessors, both monks and secular clergy, led a holy and hard life, we a much easier and softer one, we who have stained her pristine beauty and devotion with worldly desires. (Longland, 'Tres conciones', 1, fols. 7'v', 9-10)' In visiting some of the most severely disordered monasteries of his diocese, Longland showed that his view of them was not merely idealistic. He was apt to embellish his injunctions with quotations in his own hand from the rule of St Benedict. He confined his visitations to the most intransigent of the monastic orders in his diocese, and the houses he visited clearly shocked him. At the Augustinian priory of Dorchester he took the unusual step, in June 1529, of appointing a new prior. A year later, he found that his nominee did not read his injunctions to the community, and that he was dallying with a local lady. At Great Missenden, to which he made injunctions in 1531, he was forced to admit that the monks were uneducated, and he told them that 'ye be ignorant and have small understanding of Latin [so] we have drawn our said injunctions in our vulgar English tongue' (Lincoln Archives Office, register 26, fol. 212). Where monks and nuns could not feign ignorance of his wishes, they went behind his back to court, pretending that he was the cause of the undoing of a place. No amount of energy expended either by him or by his deputies appeared to make any difference. It is hardly surprising that when the monasteries were dissolved, Longland made no move to defend them. 
Longland could not evade the enormous challenges that heresy posed to a diocese which certainly had a Lollard community in Buckinghamshire. Moreover, the diocese included the University of Oxford, where Luther's views, in whole or in part, were much debated. In Luther, Longland recognized a formidable adversary: 'You, Luther, already turn everything upside down and confound everything... You revile the holy sacraments from which we derive every remedy and help against all the diseases of the soul. You want everything to be in common, you want the human race to be a wanderer on the earth as it was in the beginning, without a leader, without a ruler... without authority... without virtue, without grace. (Bodl. Oxf., MS Arch.A.d.11, fol. 44)' Within a week of his consecration, Longland was present at Paul's Cross for the condemnation of Luther, the public burning of his books, and a penetrating sermon against Luther preached by John Fisher in 1521. He followed this by ordering a search for Luther's books in Oxford and by a further examination of those Buckinghamshire Lollards, drawn mainly from Amersham, who came under suspicion of heresy as a result of having been required to abjure their opinions before his predecessors. Four of them were condemned to the stake and many more were imprisoned in monasteries as a form of penance. But by 1526 Longland's activities in Oxford went well beyond that. Booksellers were to be searched and scholars' rooms scoured for the works of Luther. But vigilant as he might be, the bishop's commissary in Oxford realized that Lutherans like Thomas Garrett had made contact with scholars who were 'given to Greek, Hebrew and the polite Latin tongue' ('Acts and Monuments', 5, appendix 1). He could not stop the distribution of books. Like Bishop Nicholas West of Ely, between 1527 and 1532 Longland took the unusual measure of asking any priest suspected of heretical views for an oath of orthodoxy before he was admitted to a benefice. He also alerted the archdeacon of Lincoln to the danger that the Lincolnshire coast presented for the import of heretical books. 
At the height of Longland's campaign against Lutheranism came another threat: it was that of the king's marriage. Wolsey's biographer, George Cavendish, thought that the king first raised doubts about the validity of his marriage with Longland, but others were of the opinion that the cardinal prompted Longland to raise the question. Certainly Longland was at the centre of the affair and at all times seems to have taken the king's side. He was the obvious person to solicit the views of the University of Oxford on the marriage, and though he encountered much hostility, he was selected by the king to be chancellor of the university in 1532. He accompanied Henry and Anne Boleyn to France in 1532 and was a strong candidate for the archbishopric of Canterbury on the death of William Warham in August 1532. Longland's favoured position was, however, weakened by the disgrace of his friend Thomas Wolsey, and still more by Wolsey's replacement at court, Thomas Cromwell. Longland's correspondence with Cromwell reveals the bishop's meticulous attention to detail, but clearly no love was lost between the two, and there are no references to the personal problems that he shared so readily with Wolsey. 
If Longland had no doubts about the Boleyn marriage, he had some problems with its sequel. He was not, like John Fisher and Thomas More, in total opposition to the royal supremacy over the church, nor was he against the succession passing to the issue of Anne Boleyn. The challenge, however, to ecclesiastical jurisdiction posed by the threat to the clergy of 'praemunire' and eventually of the delegation of the supremacy to Thomas Cromwell as vicegerent, was a different matter. In 1534 the Spanish ambassador reported 'the Bishop of Lincoln... has said several times since Christmas that he would rather be the poorest man in the world than ever have been the King's councillor and confessor' ('LP Henry VIII', 7, no. 14). That was but the beginning. Longland could and did argue with Cromwell about the extent of the invasion of his jurisdiction by archbishop or vicegerent or anyone else. He sent carefully worded letters and a well-chosen gift in order to safeguard the rights of future bishops of Lincoln, but it was not until 1538 that he actually made public his views on the supremacy of the bishop of Rome. 
Preaching before the king at Greenwich on Good Friday 1538, Longland said that there is only one great bishop and: 'he did penetrate the heavens whose name is Jesus the Son of God... The bishop of Rome therefore ought... to be abashed, ashamed and to abhor his own pride. For... he outrageously doth offend God and blasphemeth him in that he presumeth to take this high name ['summus maximus' and 'universalis pontifex'] from our bishop Christ... He is the mighty Bishop. We are not so. ('A Sermonde Made before King [Henry VIII]')' It was, however, one thing to accept a royal supremacy under Christ, but Longland was discriminating in his attitude to the various reforms of the church that resulted from it. Not surprisingly, he does not appear to have objected to the dissolution of the monasteries, and he seems to have remained consistently in favour of a vernacular scripture. In a sermon reminiscent of Erasmus, he said: 'We rejoice much that we have it in our own vulgar speech, that we hear it, that we read it, that we have it in our bosoms, and hanging at our girdles, and it is daily preached among us. But what shall this profit if we live not thereafter? If we live not well and Christianly? (ibid.)' 

For Longland, to live as a Christian was not necessarily to adopt the views of Cromwell, Cranmer, or Martin Luther, and he took very good care to control preaching in his diocese and to limit it to the uncontentious exposition of scripture. A printed copy of the agreed declaration about the royal supremacy was sent to all his clergy in 1535, and in the following year preaching on opinions which had no authority from king or bishop was forbidden. By 1540 he was keeping records of preachers and having an eye to what they preached. He was equally careful to control any spread of heresy, either through books smuggled into the University of Oxford, or through the network of Lollard communities. He wrote to his archdeacons to make sure that anybody transgressing his orders about preaching was to be reported to him at once. 
But there were some changes that Longland disliked but could not stop. He clearly objected to the plunder of church treasure and the attempt by the crown to extend its control of the church by influencing bishops and deans and chapters of cathedrals in their grants of lands and advowsons. As early as 1534 he insisted that his dean and chapter should not allow any such grants to be made unless his explicit approval had been obtained. In his leasing of episcopal lands, he attempted after 1540 to concentrate them in a few hands, and these were mainly those of his family and most trusted servants. The charge of nepotism can obviously be made against him, but it was not nepotism in its usual derogatory sense, simply to benefit the family: he was attempting to keep the wealth of the church in conservative hands -- a purpose that is very marked in his will. In his later years he invested his money in building a chantry in Lincoln Cathedral, thereby placing his faith in the idea of intercession for the dead and its institutionalization which disappeared from England even as he lay dying. His last years were spent mainly at Wooburn, Buckinghamshire, and he began to visit some of his archdeaconries, notably that of Buckingham, in person. He recognized that the defence of the church in the 1540s lay in the hands of the secular clergy, whose welfare he had delegated to others in the early part of his episcopate. 
Longland died at Wooburn on 7 May 1547. He asked that his body be buried at Eton College, and that his heart be taken to his cathedral church and buried before 'the most blessed sacrament at the high altar' (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/31, fol. 305'v'). All parishes through which his body passed between his house at Wooburn and Eton were to receive 6's'. 8died for the maintenance of their churches. His will reveals the scholar and theologian that he had been. To a Dr Roydon, he left his smaller astrolabe and a clock, with a small book about making dials. To many different people, he left a large quantity of books. From his library at Buckden '[books of] the greatest and best sort' were to go to Lincoln Cathedral, but the smaller ones were to be distributed among the rectors and vicars of the county. Additionally he left books to be chained in the libraries of Eton College and, at Oxford, in those of the colleges of Magdalen, Lincoln, Oriel, and Brasenose. He left to his nephew Edward Longland a commentary on the 'Bible' and three of his best books of sermons from his study at Buckden. He was a wealthy man, and his servants and relatives received from him horses and harnesses, large quantities of bedding, and a considerable amount of silver. He pardoned the debts of those who owed him less than 40 shillings, and was extremely generous to another nephew, Thomas Longland, who was apparently setting up house and needed his linen and household utensils. To the dean and chapter of Lincoln he left a considerable number of copes and for his successors to the bishopric, his red silk gloves and episcopal sandals, together with books needed for giving orders and consecrating bishops. He also left to them a book of blessings for the use of future bishops of Lincoln, but with the prudent condition that it might not be taken away from the cathedral. The furnishings for his own chantry chapel were provided for, and a psalter was to be chained there. 
Longland seemed at his death to be aware of his own humble origins as well as of his evangelical duty to care for the old and poor. He provided for an almshouse at Henley for five men and five women, and his own devotional rigour was in part demanded of them. They had, among other devotions, to be able, twice daily, to say (five times, in honour of the five wounds of Christ) the 'Our Father' and the 'Ave', together with the creed. Most importantly of all, they were not to hold 'any erroneous opinions' under pain of dismissal (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/31, fol. 306'v'). 
Longland may seem to have been a time-server who had the power to influence Henry VIII and did not use it. But as the royal confessor he had access to information which perforce is now lost. Henry VIII trusted his integrity, and that is most evident in his protection of Longland against another royal servant, Thomas Cromwell. Cromwell might bully Longland but did not oust him. Longland could not avoid the diminution of his diocese with the formation of the dioceses of Oxford and Peterborough, with all the loss of status and wealth that this implied. The Lincolnshire rebels in 1536 derided him and murdered his vicar-general, even though they were as doctrinally conservative as he was. His sermons reveal a rigorous attitude to his faith and a stern and somewhat joyless attitude to the gospel. His own death saved him from changes in royal policy of which he would not have approved. He remained throughout his life aware, almost too aware, that he would account for all his actions 'at that great day of examination' ('A Sermonde Made be for the Kynges Hyghenes'). 


@@@@@


doc= 16987


Longley, Charles Thomas (1794-1868), archbishop of Canterbury, was born at Boley Hill, Rochester, Kent, on 28 July 1794. He was the fifth son of John Longley, recorder of Rochester and a magistrate of the Thames police court, and his wife, Elizabeth, daughter of Thomas Bond, a London timber merchant. He was the last but one of seventeen children born to the couple, several of whom died in infancy. He was educated at Cheam School before his election as a king's scholar at Westminster School in 1808 and as a Westminster student of Christ Church, Oxford, in 1812. He graduated BA in 1815 with a first in classics; he proceeded MA in 1818, and BD and DD in 1829. He held several offices at Christ Church, where he was tutor and censor between 1825 and 1828, and was a university proctor in 1827, leaving the first proctor's handbook for his successors. He was genuinely popular throughout the university. He was ordained deacon in 1818 and priest in 1819, and served as curate to Thomas Vowler Short, incumbent of Cowley (and later bishop of St Asaph). He became vicar of the parish in November 1823, and in August 1827 rector of West Tytherley in Hampshire, which involved resigning his Christ Church studentship. He was much in demand as a tutor for the sons of the aristocracy and gentry. Bishop C. R. Sumner appointed him rural dean. In March 1829, after Vowler Short had canvassed his name among the governors, Longley was invited to become headmaster of Harrow. The roll increased and Longley enlarged the syllabus, but his regime's lack of discipline was notorious. He was also believed to have become very wealthy through capitation fees. 
On 15 December 1831 Longley married Caroline Sophia, eldest child of Henry Brooke Parnell, first Baron Congleton. Parnell was paymaster-general in Melbourne's administration and he suggested Longley's name for a bishopric to the prime minister. Longley was appointed bishop of the newly created see of Ripon in October 1836. Despite the method of recommendation for appointment, Melbourne agreed that Longley need not be constrained to vote with the government on matters of Irish church policy. Longley actually voted against the government on other issues besides the Irish church, to Melbourne's pain and displeasure. 
Longley threw great energy into engendering diocesan spirit in what was the first new diocese in England since the Reformation. Initially he had the practical problem of finding a suitable episcopal residence. He was given permission by the ecclesiastical commissioners to look for a suitable site for a new palace. Eventually land at Bramley Grange Farm, close to Ripon, was purchased from the lessee, and the archbishop of York, its ultimate landlord, passed the property to the see of Ripon. The minster in Ripon became the new diocese's cathedral church. The diocese included the countryside of the North Riding as well as the growing industrial towns of Barnsley, Bradford, Dewsbury, Halifax, Huddersfield, Leeds, and Wakefield. There was a glut of school and church building during his twenty-year episcopate, W. F. Hook's legendary efforts in Leeds being merely the most prominent. Stephenson ('Victorian Archbishops', 23) calculates an increase in churches from 307 to 432, in vicarages from 170 to 301, and in curates from 76 to 146. 
The controversy over the church of St Saviour's, Leeds, remains the most famous issue of his episcopate. In 1839 Hook, vicar of Leeds, had tried to persuade both J. H. Newman and E. B. Pusey of the need for more churches in Leeds and of the opportunity that this would give to the Oxford men for widening their influence. Pusey's wife had recently died and he conceived the church as both a memorial to her and a testimony to his church principles. Pusey's church would serve a very deprived part of the city, where brothels were numerous and which was later to suffer appallingly from cholera. Pusey was an anonymous donor. Both Longley and Hook soon became concerned about Pusey's ideas. In particular Pusey insisted on an inscription exhorting prayer for the builder of the church -- himself. Longley and Hook both protested that when he died such an inscription would encourage prayers for the dead, which they found unacceptable. 
The foundation-stone of the church was laid in 1842 and the next three years until its consecration were filled with disagreements. Longley refused to dedicate the church to the holy cross, as Pusey wished; he objected to a stone altar and there were many other minor disputes. It was agreed to dedicate the new church to St Saviour. Although Longley did consecrate the church in October 1845, unhappiness about its practices and its clergy continued throughout Longley's time at Ripon. Naturally these altercations gave Longley a poor reputation among advanced Tractarians and even led to him being wrongly described as low-church by the intemperate W. H. B. Proby. Longley, like Hook and many fellow bishops, was a staunch high-churchman, whose support for the Tractarians diminished as they became ever more 'Romish'. 
Longley opposed the 'Oxford University Bill' of 1854 which, among other things, reduced the proportion of clerical fellows in each college and reconstituted the central government of the university. In 1854 Longley was named as one of two churchmen who would join the executive commissioners empowered to revise the statutes of the university and colleges of Oxford. He was later one of the five referees who produced a new constitution for Christ Church, Oxford, in 1867. 
On Palmerston's nomination Longley was translated to the see of Durham on 13 October 1856. He had previously declined a move to Lincoln. Here he began again the work of church building. His wife died in October 1858 at Auckland Castle. After four years he succeeded Thomas Musgrave as archbishop of York on 1 June 1860. In the brief time that he was at York the Northern convocation was revived (1861). Archbishop Musgrave had refused to let the convocation transact active business. One of its first acts was to condemn 'Essays and Reviews', to Longley's satisfaction. 
Longley stayed only two years at York before Palmerston nominated him to his fourth see. He succeeded J. B. Sumner at Canterbury on 20 October 1862. Doctrinal disputes figured large. Longley and William Thomson, the archbishop of York, were dissenting members of the judicial committee of the privy council which overturned the verdict of heresy in the court of arches against the authors of 'Essays and Reviews'. The law lords on the committee and Bishop A. C. Tait of London had exonerated them. The two archbishops issued pastoral letters which explained that the committee had only judged extracts of the book. Longley was also firmly convinced of the unsoundness of Bishop J. W. Colenso's writings, and thought him properly deposed from his Natal bishopric by Bishop Gray of Cape Town, his metropolitan. At the same time Longley dissuaded W. J. Butler, vicar of Wantage, from agreeing to election in Colenso's place. 
By far the most important event of Longley's primacy was the first Lambeth conference, which met in London on 24-27 September 1867. The furore over Colenso was but one of the pressures that necessitated a meeting of Anglican bishops. J. B. Sumner had resisted calls for a meeting of bishops as he had resisted the revival of the Canterbury convocation. Longley, by contrast, had welcomed visits by American and Scottish bishops while still at Ripon. On 24 September seventy-eight British, colonial, and foreign bishops inaugurated the Lambeth or Pan-Anglican synod. Longley insisted that the meeting was a conference not a synod: no declaration of faith was to be made nor were canons to be enacted. 
Even the description of the faith held by Anglicans was a subject of haggling. Reference to the first four ecumenical councils was finally included. Initially the case of Colenso was not scheduled for discussion, but pressure from the colonial bishops overturned this. A large majority of the bishops were united in condemnation of Colenso, although Longley forestalled a proposition to do so formally by appointing a committee to consider the matter. Nevertheless Samuel Wilberforce had a statement of support for Colenso's deposition signed by fifty-six bishops. The whole issue of appeal from the colonies to a spiritual tribunal in England was discussed. There were many who were suspicious of the whole proceeding, including William Thomson, the archbishop of York, who stayed away along with most bishops from the northern province, fearing that the 'Thirty-Nine Articles' would be compromised. Dean A. P. Stanley refused the use of Westminster Abbey for the closing service because he was afraid that the bishops would censure Colenso. 
Longley had to contend with the constant pressure of Lord Ebury, who wished to amend the form of clerical subscription. Ebury believed that many were deterred from ordination because they could not assent to every word in the prayer book and the articles. Eventually a royal commission on subscription (1864-5), of which Longley was inevitably a member, was conceded and minor changes were enacted. Henceforth clergy gave assent that the prayer book and articles were 'agreeable' to the word of God. Ebury's attempts to change the burial service were quashed. 
Longley was also faced with the increase of ritualism during his primacy. Ebury's continuing attempts to reform the liturgy were included in the remit of the commission on ritual which was set up in 1867 and of which he was part. The first report, in August, condemned eucharistic vestments. 
Although the bishops still had great influence over internal church affairs, the state got its own way more and more. In 1868 compulsory church rates were abolished and disestablishment of the Irish part of the United Church of England and Ireland, which Longley had opposed in parliament and at public meetings, became imminent. A fatigued Longley developed bronchitis after a holiday intended for recuperation and died at Addington Park, Croydon, on 27 October 1868. He was buried in the churchyard there. Longley had three sons and four daughters; his eldest son, Sir Henry Longley (1833-1899), became chief charity commissioner. Longley's personal charm and striking good looks (he was C. L. Dodgson's most photographed male subject), and his intellect and energy, served him very well throughout his life. His fame, though inflated by virtue of being primate when the Lambeth conference was first called together under his chairmanship, is not undeserved. 


@@@@@


doc= 16988


Thomas Longman (1699-1755), the first in the line of publishers, was born at Bristol in 1699, the son of Ezekiel Longman's second marriage, and he was nine years old when his father died. No evidence survives about why in 1716 his guardians sent him to London to be apprenticed to a Lombard Street bookseller, John Osborn (died 1734), at the sign of the Oxford Arms. In 1724, one year after his articles expired, Thomas (remembered in the firm as Thomas I), using an inheritance from his Bristol relatives, acquired for $2282 9's'. 6died a publishing house at the sign of The Ship. It had been in existence since 1640, owned by different families, the last of them that of William Taylor, remembered as publisher of Daniel Defoe's 'Robinson Crusoe' (1719). John Osborn was an executor. Taylor had moved premises to Paternoster Row, occupying a property later numbered 39, in 1711 and had also acquired the Black Swan, an adjacent property, at the corner of Paternoster Row and Ave Maria Lane. 
Thomas, who did not immediately acquire all the Taylor copyrights -- 'Robinson Crusoe' was not one of them -- always called himself a bookseller and not a publisher (the term was not then used in its current sense), and he never printed any of the books that bore his imprint, usually an imprint shared with others. From 1725, moreover, he was joined as a partner by John Osborn's son, also called John, who died without issue in 1733 six months before his father. There was one even closer family connection with the Osborns. Thomas married the elder Osborn's daughter, Mary (died 1762), on 27 January 1731, in St Paul's Cathedral. They too had no children. 
Almost at once Thomas had added to the shares in the titles of books he acquired from Taylor at a time when such shares were bought and sold at convivial but exclusive sales. He paid particular attention to science titles, beginning with an edition of the works of the chemist Robert Boyle, prepared by Peter Shaw, his doctor, who helped Mary through a serious illness in 1735. Seven years earlier he had been one of a consortium which published the influential 'Cyclopaedia of Arts and Sciences' compiled by Ephraim Chambers, whom he is said to have treated with 'the liberality of a prince and the tenderness of a father' (H. Curwen, 'A History of Booksellers', 1873, 82). His best-remembered enterprise, however, is that of being one of a later consortium which produced Samuel Johnson's 'Dictionary of the English Language' in 1755. Thomas died on 18 June that year, nine years to the day from when the agreement with Johnson was signed. 
It was Mary who on Thomas's death became the senior partner in what was by then a thriving business, alongside Thomas's nephew 


@@@@@


doc= 16989


Thomas Longman (1730-1797), who was keenly interested in the theatre and married Elizabeth Harris, the sister of a proprietor and manager of Covent Garden. Without him the Longman business, thriving though it was, might have come to an end very near its beginning; and it was fortunate for its survival and further growth that he had no fewer than twelve children. His eldest son, 


@@@@@


doc= 16990


Thomas Longman (1804-1879), married Florence Pratt-Barlow, Emma's niece. Six years later 


@@@@@


doc= 16991


Longman family (per. 1724-1972), publishers, had their origins at Winford near Bristol. The family tree has been traced back to Thomas Longman, a Somerset yeoman, whose third son, also named Thomas, born 'c'.1612, was apprenticed to a Bristol 'sopemaker' in 1626, being made free in 1633. He married Ann, the daughter of Ezekiel Wallis, an alderman and one-time mayor of Bristol. There were three generations of Longman soapmakers before the advent of seven generations of Longman publishers. The local soap trade was in decline, however, after 1738. When Ezekiel Longman, sheriff, died in 1708, the London book trade, through which the Longmans made their way into history, was already flourishing, offering, if never without risk, expanding markets and rising profits. 

Thomas Longman (1699-1755), the first in the line of publishers, was born at Bristol in 1699, the son of Ezekiel Longman's second marriage, and he was nine years old when his father died. No evidence survives about why in 1716 his guardians sent him to London to be apprenticed to a Lombard Street bookseller, John Osborn (died 1734), at the sign of the Oxford Arms. In 1724, one year after his articles expired, Thomas (remembered in the firm as Thomas I), using an inheritance from his Bristol relatives, acquired for $2282 9's'. 6died a publishing house at the sign of The Ship. It had been in existence since 1640, owned by different families, the last of them that of William Taylor, remembered as publisher of Daniel Defoe's 'Robinson Crusoe' (1719). John Osborn was an executor. Taylor had moved premises to Paternoster Row, occupying a property later numbered 39, in 1711 and had also acquired the Black Swan, an adjacent property, at the corner of Paternoster Row and Ave Maria Lane. 
Thomas, who did not immediately acquire all the Taylor copyrights -- 'Robinson Crusoe' was not one of them -- always called himself a bookseller and not a publisher (the term was not then used in its current sense), and he never printed any of the books that bore his imprint, usually an imprint shared with others. From 1725, moreover, he was joined as a partner by John Osborn's son, also called John, who died without issue in 1733 six months before his father. There was one even closer family connection with the Osborns. Thomas married the elder Osborn's daughter, Mary (died 1762), on 27 January 1731, in St Paul's Cathedral. They too had no children. 
Almost at once Thomas had added to the shares in the titles of books he acquired from Taylor at a time when such shares were bought and sold at convivial but exclusive sales. He paid particular attention to science titles, beginning with an edition of the works of the chemist Robert Boyle, prepared by Peter Shaw, his doctor, who helped Mary through a serious illness in 1735. Seven years earlier he had been one of a consortium which published the influential 'Cyclopaedia of Arts and Sciences' compiled by Ephraim Chambers, whom he is said to have treated with 'the liberality of a prince and the tenderness of a father' (H. Curwen, 'A History of Booksellers', 1873, 82). His best-remembered enterprise, however, is that of being one of a later consortium which produced Samuel Johnson's 'Dictionary of the English Language' in 1755. Thomas died on 18 June that year, nine years to the day from when the agreement with Johnson was signed. 
It was Mary who on Thomas's death became the senior partner in what was by then a thriving business, alongside Thomas's nephew Thomas Longman (1730-1797), who was keenly interested in the theatre and married Elizabeth Harris, the sister of a proprietor and manager of Covent Garden. Without him the Longman business, thriving though it was, might have come to an end very near its beginning; and it was fortunate for its survival and further growth that he had no fewer than twelve children. His eldest son, Thomas Norton Longman (1771-1842), was an outstanding figure in the Longman line of publishers. The second son, George (1776-1822), provided further dynastic connection, highly valuable in trading terms. With the fortune bequeathed to him by his father, he went into business with the enterprising paper maker John Dickinson, and was the first Longman to become a member of parliament. 
The connections continued and became more intricate. In 1843 William Longman (1813-1877) married Emma Pratt-Barlow, daughter of a rich railway director, whose brother had married John Dickinson's daughter, and in 1874 Thomas Norton Longman (1849-1930), eldest son of Thomas Longman (1804-1879), married Florence Pratt-Barlow, Emma's niece. Six years later Charles James Longman (1852-1934) married Harriet Ann, the daughter of Sir John Evans, who was a treasurer of the Royal Society and president of the Society of Antiquaries as well as a paper maker. 
There was another connection, this time with printing. Mary (1801-1870), one of the daughters of Thomas Norton Longman (1771-1842), married Andrew Spottiswoode, later printer to Queen Victoria, a member of the famous printing house founded by his grandfather William Strahan, main printer for the early Longmans. 
The name Norton had come into the Longman family in 1736 following the purchase by Thomas Longman (1699-1755) and Samuel Buckley from the Norton family, its patentees, of the royal grant and privilege of printing William Lily's 'Latin Grammar' dating back to the sixteenth century. The last Thomas Norton Longman was always known in the business as Mr Norton. 
Such family connections and convergences have often been noted, as they were in 1854 by a publisher very different from the Longmans, Charles Knight; and in 1924, the 'Publishers' Circular', a valuable periodical launched in 1837 by a group of publishers including William Longman, numbered Longman names, as Knight had done, like sovereigns. Five were called Thomas, and it was only because there were by then too many Longmans in the business that the last Thomas Norton Longman dropped the numbering. 
Yet there remained a strong sense of family hierarchy. In 1924, at the time of the much celebrated bicentenary of the house, Harold Cox -- the last editor of the 'Edinburgh Review', the quarterly which Longmans had owned throughout most of its history -- suggested as a firm believer in the 'principle of heredity' that 'the example of the firm of Longmans' was of more than family interest. Through six generations (and there was to be a seventh) a single family had 'successfully administered an important and constantly expanding business', preserving 'the traditions on which the original success of the firm was based', but developing them 'to meet new needs or to seize new opportunities' (Cox and Chandler, 48). 
Even more eloquently, Sir George Otto Trevelyan, the nephew of Macaulay, paid tribute at the time of the bicentenary to the house with which his own family had been and remained in such close dynastic connection. It was not, he said, 'a creature of the State, nor of the Church, nor of the Universities, nor of any corporate body'. Nor was it 'the creation of the money-making impulse'. The house stood both for 'self-help and the effort of the individual' and for 'family tradition, for ideals of public usefulness and assistance to the cause of literature and science, handed on from generation to generation' (Cox and Chandler, 56). In the Trevelyan family that cause was perpetuated by Sir George's son G. M. Trevelyan, who had already written several books for Longman by 1924, including his 'British History in the Nineteenth Century', published two years before. His 'English Social History' (1944) was as much of a Longman bestseller as Macaulay's five-volume 'History of England' (1849-61). The cheque for $20,000 paid to Macaulay by Longman on account in 1855 has been carefully preserved. 
Dynastic links were present inside the Longman business at almost every level as well as between the Longmans and other families. Thus the Greens, father and son, Bevis (1793-1869) and William Ellerby (1836-1918), spanned almost a century of the business, and from 1889 to 1926 the imprint used by the Longmans was 'Longmans Green'. Not until 1959 did it become 'Longmans'. The success of the family, as the Longmans themselves appreciated, always depended on the taking in of 'outsiders', the first of them Owen Rees (1770-1837), a Welsh dissenter from a very different background from the Longmans, who was made a partner in 1797 before the death of Thomas Longman on 5 February 1797. There were many non-Longman partners in the nineteenth century, their names recorded in the successive imprints of the house. The longest list of names, six of them -- Longman, Hurst, Rees, Orme, Brown, and Green -- was on the imprint between 1823 and 1825. 
In briefly describing the house of Longman & Co. in 1859, the year of the retirement of Thomas Brown and the death of Cosmo Orme, 'The Times' (6 September) claimed that 'perhaps nothing more has tended to raise the House to its present position than the plan adopted by the principals of introducing fresh blood from time to time'. It noted also, however, that 'like some of our other well-known institutions, its origin is lost in obscurity'. The family itself made every effort to find out, and this remark could not have been made ten years later. 
In 1842, before the mid-Victorian boom years in the history of publishing, an obituary notice of Thomas Norton Longman in the 'Annual Register', in which the Longmans had had a share since 1805, described him as the head of a house 'which has for more than a century been distinguished as the Leviathan of publishing and bookselling'. The description was to become more familiar between 1851 and 1870, when the mid-Victorian publishing business was dominated by a few great leviathans, as they were called at the time, with the house of Longman heading or near the head of them. 
The basis of the house's strength was capital. Thomas Norton Longman had left nearly $200,000 in 1842, when he died accidentally after falling from his horse on his way back from Paternoster Row to his house in Hampstead; and Bevis Green, who died in 1869, left about the same sum. Nevertheless, success depended not only on capital but on the display of publishing skills. A new phase in the history of the family began in 1842, when for the first time two sons, Thomas and William, succeeded to the control of the firm. They were given good advice by the aged Sydney Smith, then a canon of St Paul's living not far from Paternoster Row. 'You and your brother', he told them, 'are arrived at years of great maturity and are quite capable of conducting your own business... I expect you [both] to live together upon the strictest terms of friendship and to be ready to make mutual concessions' (Wallis, 19-20). They followed his advice, whether they needed it or not, and from the start divided their responsibilities in a sensible manner. By virtue of his age Thomas Longman (1804-1879) was chairman, but William, who was born on 9 February 1813, was a more dynamic businessman, although, like earlier Longmans, he was singled out by contemporaries less for his dynamism than for his 'courtesy, geniality, kindliness and ready hospitality'. The latter quality had always been stressed by his father, who generously entertained his authors as well as published them. 
In 1873 it was said of William by Henry Curwen, author of an early history of the book trade, that he succeeded through a combination of enterprise and discretion, and the former quality was evident in 1863 when he arranged the acquisition of the business of J. W. Parker, not the first or last of Longman acquisitions, which greatly strengthened the Longman list of authors. John Stuart Mill was one of them, and his 'Subjection of Women' (1869) and his revealing 'Autobiography' (1873) were major Longman publications in a completely different genre from John Henry Newman's 'Apologia pro vita sua' (1854), a book published by Longman at Newman's own request. 
In the Parker list there were three historians very different from Macaulay and from each other -- J. A. Froude, who became a close friend of the Longman family, H. T. Buckle, and W. E. H. Lecky. Two other of Longman's highly successful mid-Victorian publications were P. M. Roget's 'Thesaurus' (1852), frequently re-edited, first in dynastic fashion by his son and grandson, and 'Gray's Anatomy' (1863), a far less original work, but one which was also to go through many new and distinctly different editions, including a lavish centenary edition in 1958. In this and other books the Longmans paid particular attention to illustrations. 
The mid-Victorian theological list was extremely varied, and while it included Newman, with very different religious views from those of the family, it also included the highly controversial works of J. W. Colenso, deposed for heresy -- and reinstated -- bishop of Natal: Colenso had written many successful mathematical textbooks at various levels for Longman, to whom he sold the copyright for $10,000. Education was already a Longman speciality, but the width of their publishing list is demonstrated by the presence in it of the novelist Anthony Trollope ('The Warden'); the traveller Richard Burton (Longmans did not publish his erotica); the sociologist, would-be psychologist, Herbert Spencer; the philologist Max Muller; the soldier Evelyn Baring, later Lord Cromer, whose 'Staff College Essays' appeared in 1870 when he was a lieutenant; the man of many parts Sir John Lubbock, later Lord Avebury, 'qua' anthropologist; and the widely read writer on cookery Eliza Acton. 
Longman was the second of the publishing leviathans to be described at length in a series of three anonymous articles in 'The Critic' in 1860, written by a well-known Victorian journalist, Francis Espinasse. (Murray was the first, Blackwood the third.) He traced the story of the dynasty back to Bristol and described its association under Thomas Norton Longman and Rees with an at least equally remarkable list of pre-Victorian authors, some of whom had already become leading names in English literature -- Samuel Taylor Coleridge, William Wordsworth, Robert Southey, and Sir Walter Scott. The second edition of the 'Lyrical Ballads' (1800), with its famous preface, had already joined Johnson's 'Dictionary' in a Longman hall of fame. And before Macaulay there had already been one other long-remembered record payment, that of $5000 presented to Tom Moore for his now largely forgotten Romantic poem 'Lalla Rookh' (1817), which went through six impressions in its first year. Espinasse ended his article with a reference to a new edition of Johnson's 'Dictionary'. Only the house of Longman had survived from the original consortium. 
A regular Longman publication that survived all rival publications was the 'Edinburgh Review', the whig quarterly through which Macaulay came to fame. Launched in 1802 in association with the Scottish firm of Archibald Constable, it remained in joint Constable-Longman hands after only a short break until it became Longmans' exclusive property in 1826 after the collapse of the Constable business. Edited by Francis Jeffrey, it had established substantial political importance before the advent of its Victorian editor Henry Reeve, a personal friend of the Longman family, who stayed in his chair for forty years from 1855. In unpublished memoirs the last Thomas Norton Longman could write in 1921, eight years before the review ceased to appear, that the family had been fortunate in all 'our editors, and all has been such smooth running that there is little or nothing to report'. 
This last Thomas Norton Longman, son of Thomas Longman (1804-1879), was one of a new generation of Longmans who took over at Paternoster Row following the death of the first William Longman on 13 August 1877. He had joined the business as a young man of twenty and had become a partner in 1873. Four years later William's son, Charles James Longman, with impeccable whig first names, became a partner too. A third Longman, George Henry (1852-1938), also entered the business and became a partner in 1879. He took little part in the literary side of the house, but had responsibility for foreign trade and, loosely, for financial affairs before the advent of professional accounting. A fourth Longman, Hubert Harry Longman (1856-1940), was not much involved in the business at Paternoster Row, but for a time was given charge of the Ship Binding Works at Great Saffron Hill, conveniently not far away. This was a subsidiary company, formed in 1887. Hubert Harry's main interest was in Liberal politics in Surrey, and he was the only Longman to be made a baronet -- in 1909. 
Effectively publishing control of the house of Longman was now in the hands of Thomas Norton Longman and Charles James Longman (1852-1934), the latter the junior but the more powerful of the two. Known as CJ, he was educated at Harrow School and at University College, Oxford; he was also known in the book trade as Black Longman on account of his square-cut black beard. He could be autocratic in his treatment of employees and even of authors. It was reputed that he lost the young Winston Churchill, whose first books were published by Longman, because Churchill lit a cigar in his presence. It was CJ, however, who was largely responsible for the negotiations leading up to the acquisition in 1890 of the house of Rivington (founded in 1711), which involved more complex issues than the acquisition of J. W. Parker in 1863. CJ was surprised to be approached by Francis Hansard Rivington about a take-over since Rivington had been in charge of the business for thirty-nine years. 
The Rivington deal strengthened the Longman theological list even more than the Parker deal had done, and Longmans were now the publishers of Newman the Anglo-Catholic as well as of Newman the Roman Catholic. They were placed in direct contact too with the high-church party in Oxford. Yet this was not the only new link forged during the period. CJ was a close friend of the novelist Rider Haggard, and it was through this and similar links that Longmans published Robert Louis Stevenson's 'Dr Jekyll and Mr Hyde' (1886). On very different fronts CJ fostered the increase in the number of school textbooks and the expansion of the overseas side of the business, two developments which converged with the development of English language teaching. A key appointment was that of J. W. Allen in 1884, who arrived at Paternoster Row with teaching experience with the Liverpool school board. His experience and acumen added to Longman family profits, but he did not become a partner until 1918 on the death of W. E. Green, who left him his shares. 
The head of the house of Longman, the last Thomas Norton Longman, claimed in typewritten memoirs that as 'Longman the 5th' he had the right to have the casting vote on all details relating to the form and price of any book: 'my very blood is printer's ink and my very bones are made of a mixture of type and paper'. In one of his very first business transactions, however, that with Disraeli, then Lord Beaconsfield, he yielded to the author in 1880 on many points in relation to the publishing of Disraeli's 'Endymion'. He confessed that he was surprised too by the immediate great success of 'The Voyage of the Sunbeam' (1877) written by Anna Brassey, daughter-in-law of the great contractor: it sold a quarter of a million copies in a popular edition and was translated into every European language. 
Like his cousin, Thomas Norton Longman later put much of his trust in the unremitting literary advice given to the house by Andrew Lang: Lang had been at Oxford with Frederick William Longman (1846-1908), who because of an accident became a lifelong invalid and could not take part in the business. Lang also wrote a regular column, 'At the sign of The Ship', for 'Longman's Magazine', founded in 1882, priced 6died, and edited by CJ, which lasted until 1905 without ever acquiring the reputation and prestige of the 'Cornhill' or 'Macmillan' magazines. 
Scientific and medical books fell within Thomas Norton's range of responsibilities, with CJ cultivating the history side of the business. In 1881 the 'English Historical Review' was launched, edited by a Longman author, Mandell Creighton, later bishop of London, to be followed in 1905 by a new twelve-volume series on the political history of England, the first of many later Longman series. One of these was to be the responsibility of Cyprian Blagden, formerly a public schoolmaster, an inspector of schools, who came to know more about the history of the Longman business than any member of the family. In his penetrating booklet 'Fire More than Water' (1959) he claimed that those Longmans who had controlled the business during the 107 years since 1842 had provided no new 'publishing answers'. They had provided the old answers 'over and over again under new conditions and with changing problems' (Blagden, 29). There was limited truth in the remark as far as the first seventy years were concerned, for by 1964 the house of Longman was making more of its longevity than of its enterprise, and at the end of the First World War Thomas Norton and CJ were still in charge at the top. Thomas Norton retired a year later; CJ, increasingly conservative, not until 1928: in his last years he refused to keep a telephone in his room. He died in 1934. 
It made very little difference to the daily business routines of the family when in 1889 Longmans Green became a family company, or, indeed, when in 1926 a limited liability company transformed the partners into directors. Each lunchtime they held a meeting to discuss business after a boy employee had taken round the relevant papers to each director's room, using the words 'Mr Green desires your presence' long after the last Green had died. No formal votes were taken at the meetings. 
Nevertheless, emphases were changing, with an increased concentration on education and on overseas expansion. School textbooks became increasingly profitable after the 'Education Acts' of 1870 and 1902, and so did textbooks in English and vernacular languages for overseas, some of them produced abroad. There had been an early Longman connection with America when Thomas Longman (1730-1797) was chairman, and in 1889 a branch of Longmans Green was opened in New York. By 1918 it had built up a substantial independent business, not only in textbooks. A branch in Toronto followed in 1922. In India branches had been opened in Bombay in 1895 and in Calcutta in 1906. Blagden headed the Indian operations from 1941 to 1948. 
Two new Longmans arrived in Paternoster Row in 1906 -- Robert Guy Longman (1882-1971), the younger son of George Henry Longman, and his cousin William Longman (1882-1967), the son of C. J. Longman, the first of them educated at Eton College and Trinity College, Cambridge, and the second at Harrow School and University College, Oxford. They both became partners three years later, once again specializing in their interests. Robert Guy was a highly intelligent and sensitive publisher with a lively interest in music and literary tastes of his own. It was he who encouraged novelists as different as Elizabeth Bowen, Stella Gibbons, and Mary Renault and the American author and playwright Thornton Wilder. He did not retire until 1948. William, always known in Paternoster Row as Mr Willie, concentrated on finance and accounts, inheriting a traditional and ritualized system, but, following the 'Companies Act' of 1914, one required to follow standard procedures of accounting. 
William was a shy man, who by the time when he retired in 1964 after thirty years as chairman was something of a recluse. Yet, like his father, he was involved in the higher politics of publishing. C. J. Longman had been first president of the newly formed Publishers' Association in 1896 and again from 1902 to 1914, and had given his full support to the net book agreement, regulating the retail prices of books, which had been initiated by Frederick Macmillan. William, who was president from 1929 to 1931, was described by a fellow publisher, Stanley Unwin, as the best president the association ever had. 
In their own publishing Robert Guy Longman and William Longman had to help steer their ship, still the Longman publishing logo, through the troubled seas of two wars and unprecedented depression. There was one family tragedy too. Eight weeks after the beginning of the First World War William's younger brother Frederick (1890-1914) was killed in action. During the depression the house of Longman had to turn for financial assistance to an outsider, Kenneth Boyd Potter, a member of a shipping family with its own rich and varied dynastic history, who became a director, bringing in necessary capital in 1926 and playing a bigger part than any of the Longmans when it became a public company in 1948. He was one of three directors who then disposed of some of their shares as part of a capital reorganization, William receiving $57,252 for his and Robert Guy $72,996. 
It would have been impossible to foresee this outcome on 29 December 1940 when at the height of the German air assault on Britain 39 Paternoster Row was totally destroyed along with neighbouring buildings. The fires that burnt there, started by incendiary bombs, were far more devastating than those of an earlier fire in 1861 which led the Longmans to have built on the site an imposing new building in Portland stone 'in the Renaissance style'. Literature, supported by the Arts and Science, was represented in the keystone of the main arch. It was with these two fires in mind -- and the great fire of London of 1666 -- that Blagden wrote 'Fire More than Water', noting that fires had their phoenixes, a lesson of 1940 as much as of 1861. 
In 1939 part of the Longman business had already been transferred to Wimbledon, and it was to suburban houses there that Robert Guy and William Longman now moved out, carrying on their business as far as possible as usual after a back list of nearly 6000 titles had been reduced to twelve. And there was further fire to come, for in April 1941 the old Ship Binding Works was put out of action. Even then the trials were not over, but in 1947 it was possible for the Longmans and their employees to return to London, this time to the West End not the City -- first to 6 and 7 Clifford Street, and next, in 1961, to 48 Grosvenor Street, not far away. These had been eighteenth-century domestic houses, built about the time when Thomas Longman started his business in 1724. 
There was no one single domestic residence passed on from one generation to another. The first Thomas Longman had lived and worked in Paternoster Row. So, too, had several of the later members of his family. Thomas Norton Longman (1771-1842) was the first to move out from the City to Mount Grove, Hampstead, in 1798: all his children were married in Hampstead parish church, and a bust in memory of him was placed there, donated by J. R. McCulloch, the political economist, and other friends. 
After his marriage in 1838 Thomas Longman (1804-1879) moved to a Nash house in Hanover Terrace, Regent's Park, moving again further out of London ten years later, but keeping a London house in Sussex Gardens, where the youngest of his five daughters was born. It was the daughters whom he commemorated in a stained glass window in the Grosvenor Chapel, South Audley Street, complete with ships and black swans. Thomas moved later to Hampshire, where in 1860 he built an imposing new house at Farnborough Hill, designed in deep rose brick by Henry Edward Kendall, and set in a substantial estate. It too incorporated a frieze of stone terracotta panels depicting in high relief ships in full sail and swans swimming on water surrounded by palm trees. It was not bequeathed to any of his children, however, and two years after his death in 1879 it was acquired by the exiled French Empress Eugenie, who lived there until her own death in 1920. 
Thomas Longman's brother, William, who produced an even larger family consisting of seven daughters and three sons, lived in Hyde Park Square in London before acquiring houses first in Chorleywood and later in Berkhamsted, so that the Longman family, while mostly retaining London houses, was now scattered geographically. It was not until 1908 that the last Thomas Norton Longman, Thomas Longman's eldest son, acquired a substantial country house, Shendish, near Apsley, Hertfordshire, which had been built by Charles Longman, the Dickinson partner, in 1853 and which was occupied after his death in 1873 by his son Arthur (1843-1908), also a partner in the Dickinson paper business. Thomas Norton Longman retired to Shendish in 1919 exactly fifty years after his first arrival at Paternoster Row. He was buried there in a churchyard which was built at the expense of the Longman, Dickinson, Pratt-Barlow, and Evans families. 
Charles James Longman, Thomas Norton Longman's nephew, had a country house in Hertfordshire, Upp Hall, Braughing, near Ware, coincidentally not far from Harlow, where the Longman business was to move in 1968. His elder son, William, recorded that CJ was the last member of the family to live in style. He had four children, three of whom were given public-school and university educations, and possessed a town house, complete with mews and a coachman, as well as his country estate, where he employed seven domestic servants, two gardeners, two labourers, and two gamekeepers. 
The gamekeepers were more than status symbols, for most of the Victorian Longmans, beginning with Thomas Longman (1804-1879), were keenly interested in sports, a few of them more than they were in the business. The first William, deeply involved as he was in business affairs and in his own historical researches, which led him to write several books mainly on medieval English history and the architecture of St Paul's, was a founder member of the Alpine Club and its president from 1871 to 1874. C. J. Longman was an association football blue at Oxford and champion of England at archery in 1883, and along with his partner, the last Thomas Norton Longman, produced many books on different sports in their 'Badminton Library', begun in 1885 with the duke of Beaufort as its editor. CJ himself contributed the volume on archery. The series was supplemented later by a monthly 'Badminton Magazine'. George Henry Longman captained the Eton cricket eleven and Cambridge University, played regularly for the Gentlemen against the Players, and sponsored a Longman cricket club for employees of the business. Arthur Longman (1843-1908), like his father a partner in Dickinson & Co., was master of the Old Berkeley hunt. 
The last of the Longmans, Mark Frederick Kerr Longman (1916-1972), was more interested in the arts than in sports, but he had a country house at Bishopstone, on the top of a hill near Salisbury, an eighteenth-century rectory with Victorian connections. It is reputed to have been the model for Anthony Trollope's Plumstead Episcopi in 'The Warden', which was published by Mark's great-grandfather in 1855. 
Mark was the son of Henry Kerr Longman, who never entered the Longman business, but who came to its rescue as a stockbroker when for the only time in its history it faced banking problems in 1932. Mark's three forenames all came from the female side of his inheritance. In 1874 George Henry Longman had married Mary Frances Kerr, the daughter of Lord Frederic Kerr, whose brother was called Mark, and since the last Thomas Norton Longman had no male heir -- he had four daughters -- and William Longman had no children, it was through Henry Kerr Longman that the two of the last generation of Longmans entered the publishing business. Of his five sons, John Cecil Longman (1912-1965), who never intended to become a publisher, was made a director on the same day as his younger brother Mark, and their cousin, Thomas Michael Longman (1917-1978), only son of Robert Guy Longman. Thomas Michael was the only member of the family to leave the house of Longman. In 1959, unhappy about the decision of his fellow directors not to allow him to extend the theological side of their business, he set up a publishing business of his own, taking with him as partners two of his house colleagues, G. C. Darton and John Todd. 
Mark Longman had joined the house straight from Cambridge in 1938, returning after war service in 1946. Described in the headline of his 'Times' obituary (6 December 1972) as an 'outstanding publisher', he had become head of what was now simply called Longmans in 1964. An effective chairman and a brilliant speaker, he was president of the Publishers' Association from 1969 to 1971, following in the footsteps of an earlier generation of Longmans. He was also an energetic president of the National Book League, believing strongly in the future of the book in an age of new electronic media. 
There were great hopes for the future of the Longman business when it moved out in 1967 to a new building in Harlow New Town. It was designed by Sir Frederick Gibberd and proudly named Longman House. The warehouses had moved out earlier in 1959. The business was still expanding on the educational side with non-Longmans, like John Chapple and John Newsom, who inspired the move to Harlow, playing a major part. The expansion overseas, particularly in Commonwealth countries, had been so substantial that in 1966 a Longman Group of companies was constituted, their locations ranging from Nigeria to Australia, the Caribbean to the Pacific, with Mark as its first chairman. Exports and overseas sales then accounted for three-quarters of the Longman total. They depended on enterprise on the periphery rather than at the centre, where there was a shortage of family capital. In 1968, therefore, Mark initiated and carried through friendly negotiations that resulted in the take-over of the Longman Group by the Financial and Provincial Publishing Company, owned by S. Pearson & Son, and two years later Pearson Longman Ltd was formed. The pedigrees of the Longman and Pearson families, the latter with its origins in Bradford in 1856, sharply contrasted, but the first chairman of Pearson Longman, Patrick Gibson, had been at Eton with Mark and was proud to link the two family names in the company's new title. 
In the same year Mark became vice-chairman of Penguin, and after the death of Sir Allen Lane, founder in 1936 of the famous paperback business, he played a major part in arranging a merger between Pearson Longman Ltd and Penguin. It was not to last, but both companies continued to operate within the Pearson Group, a large conglomerate, dealing in many other products besides books, including porcelain and wine, until Pearson Longman, which flourished in the 1980s under the leadership of Tim Rix, a non-Longman and a non-Pearson, ceased to exist in 1994. That decision was taken not at Harlow but by the Pearson Group in London. 
Mark's widow, Lady Elizabeth Lambart, daughter of the tenth earl of Cavan, who had seen Mark through a long and crippling illness, survived this last landmark event in the Longman story. She had worked briefly inside Longmans as a secretary, and she was proud of the part that Mark, her second cousin, had played not only within the business, but within publishing as a whole. He was also chairman of the Fine Art Society, and his portrait by Graham Sutherland is a worthy memorial. 


@@@@@


doc= 16992


Longman family (per. 1724-1972), publishers, had their origins at Winford near Bristol. The family tree has been traced back to Thomas Longman, a Somerset yeoman, whose third son, also named Thomas, born 'c'.1612, was apprenticed to a Bristol 'sopemaker' in 1626, being made free in 1633. He married Ann, the daughter of Ezekiel Wallis, an alderman and one-time mayor of Bristol. There were three generations of Longman soapmakers before the advent of seven generations of Longman publishers. The local soap trade was in decline, however, after 1738. When Ezekiel Longman, sheriff, died in 1708, the London book trade, through which the Longmans made their way into history, was already flourishing, offering, if never without risk, expanding markets and rising profits. 

Thomas Longman (1699-1755), the first in the line of publishers, was born at Bristol in 1699, the son of Ezekiel Longman's second marriage, and he was nine years old when his father died. No evidence survives about why in 1716 his guardians sent him to London to be apprenticed to a Lombard Street bookseller, John Osborn (died 1734), at the sign of the Oxford Arms. In 1724, one year after his articles expired, Thomas (remembered in the firm as Thomas I), using an inheritance from his Bristol relatives, acquired for $2282 9's'. 6died a publishing house at the sign of The Ship. It had been in existence since 1640, owned by different families, the last of them that of William Taylor, remembered as publisher of Daniel Defoe's 'Robinson Crusoe' (1719). John Osborn was an executor. Taylor had moved premises to Paternoster Row, occupying a property later numbered 39, in 1711 and had also acquired the Black Swan, an adjacent property, at the corner of Paternoster Row and Ave Maria Lane. 
Thomas, who did not immediately acquire all the Taylor copyrights -- 'Robinson Crusoe' was not one of them -- always called himself a bookseller and not a publisher (the term was not then used in its current sense), and he never printed any of the books that bore his imprint, usually an imprint shared with others. From 1725, moreover, he was joined as a partner by John Osborn's son, also called John, who died without issue in 1733 six months before his father. There was one even closer family connection with the Osborns. Thomas married the elder Osborn's daughter, Mary (died 1762), on 27 January 1731, in St Paul's Cathedral. They too had no children. 
Almost at once Thomas had added to the shares in the titles of books he acquired from Taylor at a time when such shares were bought and sold at convivial but exclusive sales. He paid particular attention to science titles, beginning with an edition of the works of the chemist Robert Boyle, prepared by Peter Shaw, his doctor, who helped Mary through a serious illness in 1735. Seven years earlier he had been one of a consortium which published the influential 'Cyclopaedia of Arts and Sciences' compiled by Ephraim Chambers, whom he is said to have treated with 'the liberality of a prince and the tenderness of a father' (H. Curwen, 'A History of Booksellers', 1873, 82). His best-remembered enterprise, however, is that of being one of a later consortium which produced Samuel Johnson's 'Dictionary of the English Language' in 1755. Thomas died on 18 June that year, nine years to the day from when the agreement with Johnson was signed. 
It was Mary who on Thomas's death became the senior partner in what was by then a thriving business, alongside Thomas's nephew Thomas Longman (1730-1797), who was keenly interested in the theatre and married Elizabeth Harris, the sister of a proprietor and manager of Covent Garden. Without him the Longman business, thriving though it was, might have come to an end very near its beginning; and it was fortunate for its survival and further growth that he had no fewer than twelve children. His eldest son, Thomas Norton Longman (1771-1842), was an outstanding figure in the Longman line of publishers. The second son, George (1776-1822), provided further dynastic connection, highly valuable in trading terms. With the fortune bequeathed to him by his father, he went into business with the enterprising paper maker John Dickinson, and was the first Longman to become a member of parliament. 
The connections continued and became more intricate. In 1843 William Longman (1813-1877) married Emma Pratt-Barlow, daughter of a rich railway director, whose brother had married John Dickinson's daughter, and in 1874 Thomas Norton Longman (1849-1930), eldest son of Thomas Longman (1804-1879), married Florence Pratt-Barlow, Emma's niece. Six years later Charles James Longman (1852-1934) married Harriet Ann, the daughter of Sir John Evans, who was a treasurer of the Royal Society and president of the Society of Antiquaries as well as a paper maker. 
There was another connection, this time with printing. Mary (1801-1870), one of the daughters of Thomas Norton Longman (1771-1842), married Andrew Spottiswoode, later printer to Queen Victoria, a member of the famous printing house founded by his grandfather William Strahan, main printer for the early Longmans. 
The name Norton had come into the Longman family in 1736 following the purchase by Thomas Longman (1699-1755) and Samuel Buckley from the Norton family, its patentees, of the royal grant and privilege of printing William Lily's 'Latin Grammar' dating back to the sixteenth century. The last Thomas Norton Longman was always known in the business as Mr Norton. 
Such family connections and convergences have often been noted, as they were in 1854 by a publisher very different from the Longmans, Charles Knight; and in 1924, the 'Publishers' Circular', a valuable periodical launched in 1837 by a group of publishers including William Longman, numbered Longman names, as Knight had done, like sovereigns. Five were called Thomas, and it was only because there were by then too many Longmans in the business that the last Thomas Norton Longman dropped the numbering. 
Yet there remained a strong sense of family hierarchy. In 1924, at the time of the much celebrated bicentenary of the house, Harold Cox -- the last editor of the 'Edinburgh Review', the quarterly which Longmans had owned throughout most of its history -- suggested as a firm believer in the 'principle of heredity' that 'the example of the firm of Longmans' was of more than family interest. Through six generations (and there was to be a seventh) a single family had 'successfully administered an important and constantly expanding business', preserving 'the traditions on which the original success of the firm was based', but developing them 'to meet new needs or to seize new opportunities' (Cox and Chandler, 48). 
Even more eloquently, Sir George Otto Trevelyan, the nephew of Macaulay, paid tribute at the time of the bicentenary to the house with which his own family had been and remained in such close dynastic connection. It was not, he said, 'a creature of the State, nor of the Church, nor of the Universities, nor of any corporate body'. Nor was it 'the creation of the money-making impulse'. The house stood both for 'self-help and the effort of the individual' and for 'family tradition, for ideals of public usefulness and assistance to the cause of literature and science, handed on from generation to generation' (Cox and Chandler, 56). In the Trevelyan family that cause was perpetuated by Sir George's son G. M. Trevelyan, who had already written several books for Longman by 1924, including his 'British History in the Nineteenth Century', published two years before. His 'English Social History' (1944) was as much of a Longman bestseller as Macaulay's five-volume 'History of England' (1849-61). The cheque for $20,000 paid to Macaulay by Longman on account in 1855 has been carefully preserved. 
Dynastic links were present inside the Longman business at almost every level as well as between the Longmans and other families. Thus the Greens, father and son, Bevis (1793-1869) and William Ellerby (1836-1918), spanned almost a century of the business, and from 1889 to 1926 the imprint used by the Longmans was 'Longmans Green'. Not until 1959 did it become 'Longmans'. The success of the family, as the Longmans themselves appreciated, always depended on the taking in of 'outsiders', the first of them Owen Rees (1770-1837), a Welsh dissenter from a very different background from the Longmans, who was made a partner in 1797 before the death of Thomas Longman on 5 February 1797. There were many non-Longman partners in the nineteenth century, their names recorded in the successive imprints of the house. The longest list of names, six of them -- Longman, Hurst, Rees, Orme, Brown, and Green -- was on the imprint between 1823 and 1825. 
In briefly describing the house of Longman & Co. in 1859, the year of the retirement of Thomas Brown and the death of Cosmo Orme, 'The Times' (6 September) claimed that 'perhaps nothing more has tended to raise the House to its present position than the plan adopted by the principals of introducing fresh blood from time to time'. It noted also, however, that 'like some of our other well-known institutions, its origin is lost in obscurity'. The family itself made every effort to find out, and this remark could not have been made ten years later. 
In 1842, before the mid-Victorian boom years in the history of publishing, an obituary notice of Thomas Norton Longman in the 'Annual Register', in which the Longmans had had a share since 1805, described him as the head of a house 'which has for more than a century been distinguished as the Leviathan of publishing and bookselling'. The description was to become more familiar between 1851 and 1870, when the mid-Victorian publishing business was dominated by a few great leviathans, as they were called at the time, with the house of Longman heading or near the head of them. 
The basis of the house's strength was capital. Thomas Norton Longman had left nearly $200,000 in 1842, when he died accidentally after falling from his horse on his way back from Paternoster Row to his house in Hampstead; and Bevis Green, who died in 1869, left about the same sum. Nevertheless, success depended not only on capital but on the display of publishing skills. A new phase in the history of the family began in 1842, when for the first time two sons, Thomas and William, succeeded to the control of the firm. They were given good advice by the aged Sydney Smith, then a canon of St Paul's living not far from Paternoster Row. 'You and your brother', he told them, 'are arrived at years of great maturity and are quite capable of conducting your own business... I expect you [both] to live together upon the strictest terms of friendship and to be ready to make mutual concessions' (Wallis, 19-20). They followed his advice, whether they needed it or not, and from the start divided their responsibilities in a sensible manner. By virtue of his age Thomas Longman (1804-1879) was chairman, but William, who was born on 9 February 1813, was a more dynamic businessman, although, like earlier Longmans, he was singled out by contemporaries less for his dynamism than for his 'courtesy, geniality, kindliness and ready hospitality'. The latter quality had always been stressed by his father, who generously entertained his authors as well as published them. 
In 1873 it was said of William by Henry Curwen, author of an early history of the book trade, that he succeeded through a combination of enterprise and discretion, and the former quality was evident in 1863 when he arranged the acquisition of the business of J. W. Parker, not the first or last of Longman acquisitions, which greatly strengthened the Longman list of authors. John Stuart Mill was one of them, and his 'Subjection of Women' (1869) and his revealing 'Autobiography' (1873) were major Longman publications in a completely different genre from John Henry Newman's 'Apologia pro vita sua' (1854), a book published by Longman at Newman's own request. 
In the Parker list there were three historians very different from Macaulay and from each other -- J. A. Froude, who became a close friend of the Longman family, H. T. Buckle, and W. E. H. Lecky. Two other of Longman's highly successful mid-Victorian publications were P. M. Roget's 'Thesaurus' (1852), frequently re-edited, first in dynastic fashion by his son and grandson, and 'Gray's Anatomy' (1863), a far less original work, but one which was also to go through many new and distinctly different editions, including a lavish centenary edition in 1958. In this and other books the Longmans paid particular attention to illustrations. 
The mid-Victorian theological list was extremely varied, and while it included Newman, with very different religious views from those of the family, it also included the highly controversial works of J. W. Colenso, deposed for heresy -- and reinstated -- bishop of Natal: Colenso had written many successful mathematical textbooks at various levels for Longman, to whom he sold the copyright for $10,000. Education was already a Longman speciality, but the width of their publishing list is demonstrated by the presence in it of the novelist Anthony Trollope ('The Warden'); the traveller Richard Burton (Longmans did not publish his erotica); the sociologist, would-be psychologist, Herbert Spencer; the philologist Max Muller; the soldier Evelyn Baring, later Lord Cromer, whose 'Staff College Essays' appeared in 1870 when he was a lieutenant; the man of many parts Sir John Lubbock, later Lord Avebury, 'qua' anthropologist; and the widely read writer on cookery Eliza Acton. 
Longman was the second of the publishing leviathans to be described at length in a series of three anonymous articles in 'The Critic' in 1860, written by a well-known Victorian journalist, Francis Espinasse. (Murray was the first, Blackwood the third.) He traced the story of the dynasty back to Bristol and described its association under Thomas Norton Longman and Rees with an at least equally remarkable list of pre-Victorian authors, some of whom had already become leading names in English literature -- Samuel Taylor Coleridge, William Wordsworth, Robert Southey, and Sir Walter Scott. The second edition of the 'Lyrical Ballads' (1800), with its famous preface, had already joined Johnson's 'Dictionary' in a Longman hall of fame. And before Macaulay there had already been one other long-remembered record payment, that of $5000 presented to Tom Moore for his now largely forgotten Romantic poem 'Lalla Rookh' (1817), which went through six impressions in its first year. Espinasse ended his article with a reference to a new edition of Johnson's 'Dictionary'. Only the house of Longman had survived from the original consortium. 
A regular Longman publication that survived all rival publications was the 'Edinburgh Review', the whig quarterly through which Macaulay came to fame. Launched in 1802 in association with the Scottish firm of Archibald Constable, it remained in joint Constable-Longman hands after only a short break until it became Longmans' exclusive property in 1826 after the collapse of the Constable business. Edited by Francis Jeffrey, it had established substantial political importance before the advent of its Victorian editor Henry Reeve, a personal friend of the Longman family, who stayed in his chair for forty years from 1855. In unpublished memoirs the last Thomas Norton Longman could write in 1921, eight years before the review ceased to appear, that the family had been fortunate in all 'our editors, and all has been such smooth running that there is little or nothing to report'. 
This last Thomas Norton Longman, son of Thomas Longman (1804-1879), was one of a new generation of Longmans who took over at Paternoster Row following the death of the first William Longman on 13 August 1877. He had joined the business as a young man of twenty and had become a partner in 1873. Four years later William's son, Charles James Longman, with impeccable whig first names, became a partner too. A third Longman, George Henry (1852-1938), also entered the business and became a partner in 1879. He took little part in the literary side of the house, but had responsibility for foreign trade and, loosely, for financial affairs before the advent of professional accounting. A fourth Longman, Hubert Harry Longman (1856-1940), was not much involved in the business at Paternoster Row, but for a time was given charge of the Ship Binding Works at Great Saffron Hill, conveniently not far away. This was a subsidiary company, formed in 1887. Hubert Harry's main interest was in Liberal politics in Surrey, and he was the only Longman to be made a baronet -- in 1909. 
Effectively publishing control of the house of Longman was now in the hands of Thomas Norton Longman and Charles James Longman (1852-1934), the latter the junior but the more powerful of the two. Known as CJ, he was educated at Harrow School and at University College, Oxford; he was also known in the book trade as Black Longman on account of his square-cut black beard. He could be autocratic in his treatment of employees and even of authors. It was reputed that he lost the young Winston Churchill, whose first books were published by Longman, because Churchill lit a cigar in his presence. It was CJ, however, who was largely responsible for the negotiations leading up to the acquisition in 1890 of the house of Rivington (founded in 1711), which involved more complex issues than the acquisition of J. W. Parker in 1863. CJ was surprised to be approached by Francis Hansard Rivington about a take-over since Rivington had been in charge of the business for thirty-nine years. 
The Rivington deal strengthened the Longman theological list even more than the Parker deal had done, and Longmans were now the publishers of Newman the Anglo-Catholic as well as of Newman the Roman Catholic. They were placed in direct contact too with the high-church party in Oxford. Yet this was not the only new link forged during the period. CJ was a close friend of the novelist Rider Haggard, and it was through this and similar links that Longmans published Robert Louis Stevenson's 'Dr Jekyll and Mr Hyde' (1886). On very different fronts CJ fostered the increase in the number of school textbooks and the expansion of the overseas side of the business, two developments which converged with the development of English language teaching. A key appointment was that of J. W. Allen in 1884, who arrived at Paternoster Row with teaching experience with the Liverpool school board. His experience and acumen added to Longman family profits, but he did not become a partner until 1918 on the death of W. E. Green, who left him his shares. 
The head of the house of Longman, the last Thomas Norton Longman, claimed in typewritten memoirs that as 'Longman the 5th' he had the right to have the casting vote on all details relating to the form and price of any book: 'my very blood is printer's ink and my very bones are made of a mixture of type and paper'. In one of his very first business transactions, however, that with Disraeli, then Lord Beaconsfield, he yielded to the author in 1880 on many points in relation to the publishing of Disraeli's 'Endymion'. He confessed that he was surprised too by the immediate great success of 'The Voyage of the Sunbeam' (1877) written by Anna Brassey, daughter-in-law of the great contractor: it sold a quarter of a million copies in a popular edition and was translated into every European language. 
Like his cousin, Thomas Norton Longman later put much of his trust in the unremitting literary advice given to the house by Andrew Lang: Lang had been at Oxford with Frederick William Longman (1846-1908), who because of an accident became a lifelong invalid and could not take part in the business. Lang also wrote a regular column, 'At the sign of The Ship', for 'Longman's Magazine', founded in 1882, priced 6died, and edited by CJ, which lasted until 1905 without ever acquiring the reputation and prestige of the 'Cornhill' or 'Macmillan' magazines. 
Scientific and medical books fell within Thomas Norton's range of responsibilities, with CJ cultivating the history side of the business. In 1881 the 'English Historical Review' was launched, edited by a Longman author, Mandell Creighton, later bishop of London, to be followed in 1905 by a new twelve-volume series on the political history of England, the first of many later Longman series. One of these was to be the responsibility of Cyprian Blagden, formerly a public schoolmaster, an inspector of schools, who came to know more about the history of the Longman business than any member of the family. In his penetrating booklet 'Fire More than Water' (1959) he claimed that those Longmans who had controlled the business during the 107 years since 1842 had provided no new 'publishing answers'. They had provided the old answers 'over and over again under new conditions and with changing problems' (Blagden, 29). There was limited truth in the remark as far as the first seventy years were concerned, for by 1964 the house of Longman was making more of its longevity than of its enterprise, and at the end of the First World War Thomas Norton and CJ were still in charge at the top. Thomas Norton retired a year later; CJ, increasingly conservative, not until 1928: in his last years he refused to keep a telephone in his room. He died in 1934. 
It made very little difference to the daily business routines of the family when in 1889 Longmans Green became a family company, or, indeed, when in 1926 a limited liability company transformed the partners into directors. Each lunchtime they held a meeting to discuss business after a boy employee had taken round the relevant papers to each director's room, using the words 'Mr Green desires your presence' long after the last Green had died. No formal votes were taken at the meetings. 
Nevertheless, emphases were changing, with an increased concentration on education and on overseas expansion. School textbooks became increasingly profitable after the 'Education Acts' of 1870 and 1902, and so did textbooks in English and vernacular languages for overseas, some of them produced abroad. There had been an early Longman connection with America when Thomas Longman (1730-1797) was chairman, and in 1889 a branch of Longmans Green was opened in New York. By 1918 it had built up a substantial independent business, not only in textbooks. A branch in Toronto followed in 1922. In India branches had been opened in Bombay in 1895 and in Calcutta in 1906. Blagden headed the Indian operations from 1941 to 1948. 
Two new Longmans arrived in Paternoster Row in 1906 -- Robert Guy Longman (1882-1971), the younger son of George Henry Longman, and his cousin William Longman (1882-1967), the son of C. J. Longman, the first of them educated at Eton College and Trinity College, Cambridge, and the second at Harrow School and University College, Oxford. They both became partners three years later, once again specializing in their interests. Robert Guy was a highly intelligent and sensitive publisher with a lively interest in music and literary tastes of his own. It was he who encouraged novelists as different as Elizabeth Bowen, Stella Gibbons, and Mary Renault and the American author and playwright Thornton Wilder. He did not retire until 1948. William, always known in Paternoster Row as Mr Willie, concentrated on finance and accounts, inheriting a traditional and ritualized system, but, following the 'Companies Act' of 1914, one required to follow standard procedures of accounting. 
William was a shy man, who by the time when he retired in 1964 after thirty years as chairman was something of a recluse. Yet, like his father, he was involved in the higher politics of publishing. C. J. Longman had been first president of the newly formed Publishers' Association in 1896 and again from 1902 to 1914, and had given his full support to the net book agreement, regulating the retail prices of books, which had been initiated by Frederick Macmillan. William, who was president from 1929 to 1931, was described by a fellow publisher, Stanley Unwin, as the best president the association ever had. 
In their own publishing Robert Guy Longman and William Longman had to help steer their ship, still the Longman publishing logo, through the troubled seas of two wars and unprecedented depression. There was one family tragedy too. Eight weeks after the beginning of the First World War William's younger brother Frederick (1890-1914) was killed in action. During the depression the house of Longman had to turn for financial assistance to an outsider, Kenneth Boyd Potter, a member of a shipping family with its own rich and varied dynastic history, who became a director, bringing in necessary capital in 1926 and playing a bigger part than any of the Longmans when it became a public company in 1948. He was one of three directors who then disposed of some of their shares as part of a capital reorganization, William receiving $57,252 for his and Robert Guy $72,996. 
It would have been impossible to foresee this outcome on 29 December 1940 when at the height of the German air assault on Britain 39 Paternoster Row was totally destroyed along with neighbouring buildings. The fires that burnt there, started by incendiary bombs, were far more devastating than those of an earlier fire in 1861 which led the Longmans to have built on the site an imposing new building in Portland stone 'in the Renaissance style'. Literature, supported by the Arts and Science, was represented in the keystone of the main arch. It was with these two fires in mind -- and the great fire of London of 1666 -- that Blagden wrote 'Fire More than Water', noting that fires had their phoenixes, a lesson of 1940 as much as of 1861. 
In 1939 part of the Longman business had already been transferred to Wimbledon, and it was to suburban houses there that Robert Guy and William Longman now moved out, carrying on their business as far as possible as usual after a back list of nearly 6000 titles had been reduced to twelve. And there was further fire to come, for in April 1941 the old Ship Binding Works was put out of action. Even then the trials were not over, but in 1947 it was possible for the Longmans and their employees to return to London, this time to the West End not the City -- first to 6 and 7 Clifford Street, and next, in 1961, to 48 Grosvenor Street, not far away. These had been eighteenth-century domestic houses, built about the time when Thomas Longman started his business in 1724. 
There was no one single domestic residence passed on from one generation to another. The first Thomas Longman had lived and worked in Paternoster Row. So, too, had several of the later members of his family. Thomas Norton Longman (1771-1842) was the first to move out from the City to Mount Grove, Hampstead, in 1798: all his children were married in Hampstead parish church, and a bust in memory of him was placed there, donated by J. R. McCulloch, the political economist, and other friends. 
After his marriage in 1838 Thomas Longman (1804-1879) moved to a Nash house in Hanover Terrace, Regent's Park, moving again further out of London ten years later, but keeping a London house in Sussex Gardens, where the youngest of his five daughters was born. It was the daughters whom he commemorated in a stained glass window in the Grosvenor Chapel, South Audley Street, complete with ships and black swans. Thomas moved later to Hampshire, where in 1860 he built an imposing new house at Farnborough Hill, designed in deep rose brick by Henry Edward Kendall, and set in a substantial estate. It too incorporated a frieze of stone terracotta panels depicting in high relief ships in full sail and swans swimming on water surrounded by palm trees. It was not bequeathed to any of his children, however, and two years after his death in 1879 it was acquired by the exiled French Empress Eugenie, who lived there until her own death in 1920. 
Thomas Longman's brother, William, who produced an even larger family consisting of seven daughters and three sons, lived in Hyde Park Square in London before acquiring houses first in Chorleywood and later in Berkhamsted, so that the Longman family, while mostly retaining London houses, was now scattered geographically. It was not until 1908 that the last Thomas Norton Longman, Thomas Longman's eldest son, acquired a substantial country house, Shendish, near Apsley, Hertfordshire, which had been built by Charles Longman, the Dickinson partner, in 1853 and which was occupied after his death in 1873 by his son Arthur (1843-1908), also a partner in the Dickinson paper business. Thomas Norton Longman retired to Shendish in 1919 exactly fifty years after his first arrival at Paternoster Row. He was buried there in a churchyard which was built at the expense of the Longman, Dickinson, Pratt-Barlow, and Evans families. 
Charles James Longman, Thomas Norton Longman's nephew, had a country house in Hertfordshire, Upp Hall, Braughing, near Ware, coincidentally not far from Harlow, where the Longman business was to move in 1968. His elder son, William, recorded that CJ was the last member of the family to live in style. He had four children, three of whom were given public-school and university educations, and possessed a town house, complete with mews and a coachman, as well as his country estate, where he employed seven domestic servants, two gardeners, two labourers, and two gamekeepers. 
The gamekeepers were more than status symbols, for most of the Victorian Longmans, beginning with Thomas Longman (1804-1879), were keenly interested in sports, a few of them more than they were in the business. The first William, deeply involved as he was in business affairs and in his own historical researches, which led him to write several books mainly on medieval English history and the architecture of St Paul's, was a founder member of the Alpine Club and its president from 1871 to 1874. C. J. Longman was an association football blue at Oxford and champion of England at archery in 1883, and along with his partner, the last Thomas Norton Longman, produced many books on different sports in their 'Badminton Library', begun in 1885 with the duke of Beaufort as its editor. CJ himself contributed the volume on archery. The series was supplemented later by a monthly 'Badminton Magazine'. George Henry Longman captained the Eton cricket eleven and Cambridge University, played regularly for the Gentlemen against the Players, and sponsored a Longman cricket club for employees of the business. Arthur Longman (1843-1908), like his father a partner in Dickinson & Co., was master of the Old Berkeley hunt. 
The last of the Longmans, Mark Frederick Kerr Longman (1916-1972), was more interested in the arts than in sports, but he had a country house at Bishopstone, on the top of a hill near Salisbury, an eighteenth-century rectory with Victorian connections. It is reputed to have been the model for Anthony Trollope's Plumstead Episcopi in 'The Warden', which was published by Mark's great-grandfather in 1855. 
Mark was the son of Henry Kerr Longman, who never entered the Longman business, but who came to its rescue as a stockbroker when for the only time in its history it faced banking problems in 1932. Mark's three forenames all came from the female side of his inheritance. In 1874 George Henry Longman had married Mary Frances Kerr, the daughter of Lord Frederic Kerr, whose brother was called Mark, and since the last Thomas Norton Longman had no male heir -- he had four daughters -- and William Longman had no children, it was through Henry Kerr Longman that the two of the last generation of Longmans entered the publishing business. Of his five sons, John Cecil Longman (1912-1965), who never intended to become a publisher, was made a director on the same day as his younger brother Mark, and their cousin, Thomas Michael Longman (1917-1978), only son of Robert Guy Longman. Thomas Michael was the only member of the family to leave the house of Longman. In 1959, unhappy about the decision of his fellow directors not to allow him to extend the theological side of their business, he set up a publishing business of his own, taking with him as partners two of his house colleagues, G. C. Darton and John Todd. 
Mark Longman had joined the house straight from Cambridge in 1938, returning after war service in 1946. Described in the headline of his 'Times' obituary (6 December 1972) as an 'outstanding publisher', he had become head of what was now simply called Longmans in 1964. An effective chairman and a brilliant speaker, he was president of the Publishers' Association from 1969 to 1971, following in the footsteps of an earlier generation of Longmans. He was also an energetic president of the National Book League, believing strongly in the future of the book in an age of new electronic media. 
There were great hopes for the future of the Longman business when it moved out in 1967 to a new building in Harlow New Town. It was designed by Sir Frederick Gibberd and proudly named Longman House. The warehouses had moved out earlier in 1959. The business was still expanding on the educational side with non-Longmans, like John Chapple and John Newsom, who inspired the move to Harlow, playing a major part. The expansion overseas, particularly in Commonwealth countries, had been so substantial that in 1966 a Longman Group of companies was constituted, their locations ranging from Nigeria to Australia, the Caribbean to the Pacific, with Mark as its first chairman. Exports and overseas sales then accounted for three-quarters of the Longman total. They depended on enterprise on the periphery rather than at the centre, where there was a shortage of family capital. In 1968, therefore, Mark initiated and carried through friendly negotiations that resulted in the take-over of the Longman Group by the Financial and Provincial Publishing Company, owned by S. Pearson & Son, and two years later Pearson Longman Ltd was formed. The pedigrees of the Longman and Pearson families, the latter with its origins in Bradford in 1856, sharply contrasted, but the first chairman of Pearson Longman, Patrick Gibson, had been at Eton with Mark and was proud to link the two family names in the company's new title. 
In the same year Mark became vice-chairman of Penguin, and after the death of Sir Allen Lane, founder in 1936 of the famous paperback business, he played a major part in arranging a merger between Pearson Longman Ltd and Penguin. It was not to last, but both companies continued to operate within the Pearson Group, a large conglomerate, dealing in many other products besides books, including porcelain and wine, until Pearson Longman, which flourished in the 1980s under the leadership of Tim Rix, a non-Longman and a non-Pearson, ceased to exist in 1994. That decision was taken not at Harlow but by the Pearson Group in London. 
Mark's widow, Lady Elizabeth Lambart, daughter of the tenth earl of Cavan, who had seen Mark through a long and crippling illness, survived this last landmark event in the Longman story. She had worked briefly inside Longmans as a secretary, and she was proud of the part that Mark, her second cousin, had played not only within the business, but within publishing as a whole. He was also chairman of the Fine Art Society, and his portrait by Graham Sutherland is a worthy memorial. 


@@@@@


doc= 16993


Longmate, Barak (1737/8-1793), genealogical editor and heraldic engraver, was the only son of Barak Longmate (died 1763/4), of the parish of St James's, Piccadilly, who was descended from a Lincolnshire family, and his first wife, Elizabeth Weston. His mother seems to have died soon after his birth, and certainly before 29 October 1741, when his father married Mary Yeomans. In 1752 he was bound apprentice to James Wigley, citizen and clothworker of London, for $10. On 2 July 1764, at Greenwich, he married Elizabeth Thompson (died 1781). 
Longmate seems to have begun heraldic engraving in private practice as early as 1760. By the 1770s he was contributing work to heraldic and genealogical publications, and by the end of the decade was also working on the editorial side. He was responsible for the fifth edition of Collins's 'Peerage', which came out in eight volumes in 1779, as well as for a supplementary volume in 1784; in the preface to the latter he announced a plan to publish an 'Extinct Peerage of England', but this was not accomplished. In 1788 he produced a small, two-volume work, 'The Pocket Peerage'; popularly known as 'Longmate's Peerage' this achieved some success, and he produced two further editions before his death. The small compass of these books did not allow much elaborate engraving but he continued to execute more distinguished work in other contexts, and regarded a large, separately produced plate, 'A genealogical history of the family of O'Sullivan More from Duach Donn, monarch of Ireland. Anno Mundi 3912', as his masterpiece. Hugh Clark, later editor of the successful 'Introduction to Heraldry', considered himself Longmate's pupil in heraldic engraving; how formal the relationship was is not clear. 
To assist his editorial work and his private engraving commissions Longmate collected genealogical and heraldic manuscripts, and also compiled many of his own. Among the latter was a great 'alphabet', or dictionary of arms, such as engravers relied on when selecting arms for clients who did not know, or claim to know, what their arms were. Though of dubious function this dictionary (later owned by Thomas Willement; BL, Add. MS 30373) is important because it cites its sources. Compiled between 1760 and 1793 it illuminates how the published armories of this and later periods -- such as those by Joseph Edmondson, William Berry, and John Burke -- came into being. Longmate also made detailed extracts from William Segar's 'Baronagium' (probably in connection with the projected 'Extinct Peerage'), noted church monuments in the counties around London, and copied and updated many of the heralds' visitations, several contemporary manuscripts of which he possessed. 
Longmate died at his house at 11 Noel Street, Soho, on 23 July 1793, leaving three sons and two daughters, and was buried four days later in the churchyard of St Marylebone. Part of his library was sold by Leigh and Sotheby, raising $235 9's'. 9died His eldest son, 


@@@@@


doc= 16994


Barak Longmate (1768-1836), succeeded him both in his business and as editor of 'The Pocket Peerage', of which he produced four further editions. By the time of the seventh, in 1813, the success of John Debrett's rival work was hampering sales, and no further editions followed. The younger Longmate was a friend and assistant of John Nichols and other antiquaries in his circle. His obituary in the 'Gentleman's Magazine' states that about 1801 he made church notes in many parishes of Gloucestershire with a view to continuing the work of Ralph Bigland on that county, but that the project was abandoned after the disastrous fire at Nichols's printing house in 1808. On 12 August 1793, at St Paul's, Covent Garden, he married Elizabeth, daughter of Jeremiah Locke, of the parish of St Martin-in-the-Fields; they had no children. Having lived for many years in Margaret Street, off Cavendish Square, Longmate retired in his sixties first to Camden Town and then to Edward Street, Hampstead Road, east of Regent's Park. There he died, after a long paralysis, on 25 February 1836, and was buried on 3 March at St Marylebone. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 16995


Longmuir, John (1803-1883), poet and lexicographer, was born on 13 November 1803 near Stonehaven, Kincardineshire, the son of John Longmuir and his wife, Christian Paterson. In 1814 his parents moved to Aberdeen, where he was educated at the grammar school, and at Marischal College. After graduating MA he completed divinity studies. In 1825 he published 'The College and other Poems', the title poem of which criticizes the academic system of the time. 
After leaving university Longmuir taught for some years in schools at Stonehaven and Forres. In July 1833 he was licensed to preach by the presbytery of Forres. On 2 January 1835 he married Lillias, daughter of Alexander Milne, a bookseller in Forres. He was appointed evening lecturer at Trinity Chapel, Aberdeen, in 1837, and in September 1840 was ordained minister to the city's Mariner's Church. At the Disruption of 1843 he went over with most of his congregation to the Free Church of Scotland. For some years he was lecturer on geology at King's College, Aberdeen. His first wife having died, he married, second, Dorothy Hawthorn Dixon in 1857. On retiring from lecturing in 1859 he was granted the degree of LLD. 
Longmuir published three further collections of verse, 'Bible Lays' (1838), 'Ocean Lays' (1854), and 'Lays for the Lambs' (1860). He produced a popular guidebook to Dunnottar Castle in 1835, and one to Speyside in 1860. He also published a volume on a local monolith, 'The Maiden Stone of Bennachie' (1869), 'A Run through the Land of Burns and the Covenanters' (1872), and an edition of Alexander Ross's 'Helenore' (1866). 
In addition to his other accomplishments Longmuir was a noted lexicographer. He edited a dictionary combining the work of Walker and Webster in 1864, and revised Walker's 'Rhyming Dictionary' in 1865. His revision of Jamieson's 'Scottish Dictionary' appeared in an abridged edition in 1867 and in four volumes between 1879 and 1912, and is probably his most important work. As a preacher Longmuir was noted for his conversational style, and several of his sermons were published. He was popular as a platform speaker, particularly in the cause of temperance. He died at 5 Dee Place, Aberdeen, on 7 May 1883, survived by his wife and at least one son, A. D. Longmuir. 


@@@@@


doc= 16996


Langstrother, Sir John (d. 1471), administrator and prior of the hospital of St John of Jerusalem in England, seemingly came of a well-to-do northern family, several members of which were buried in St John's Hospital, Clerkenwell. Preceptor of the order's estate at Dalby, Lincolnshire, by 1448, in 1449 Langstrother became preceptor of Balsall, Warwickshire, and receiver for the treasury of the hospital in England. For twenty years his administrative, financial, and negotiating skills commended him to the order's grand master in Rhodes, as well as to Richard Neville, earl of Warwick (died 1471), and English kings. By 1463 he was one of Edward IV's councillors; he was the preceptory's bailiff of Eagle, Lincolnshire, and steward of the grand master by 1469. Langstrother's prominence in the order and in the realm made him the unanimous choice of his brethren as prior of the hospital in England on 9 March 1469. The office of English prior was nationally important. Its holder was normally a royal councillor, and was also premier baron of England, so it is not surprising that he needed a royal licence before he could take up office or administer his order's estates. Edward IV distrusted Langstrother for his Neville associations, and tried to impose his young brother-in-law, Sir Richard Woodville, as prior in 1469. 
Following the defeat of Edward's supporters at Edgcote (26 July), Langstrother was appointed treasurer of England by Warwick, but once Edward regained his independence he was removed from the treasurership (25 October 1469). Edward refused to recognize him as prior until he swore fealty (18 November), which was regarded as a dangerous precedent by the hospital. In any case, Langstrother remained Warwick's confidant: after the Lincolnshire rising of March 1470, he kept secretly in contact with Clarence, and was put in the Tower of London when the duke and Warwick fled to France. The invasion of Clarence and Warwick in September 1470 brought him back to high office; he was with the force that released Henry VI from the Tower, and on 20 October was reappointed treasurer. Henry VI rewarded his loyalty by acknowledging the rights of his order and confirming his appointment as duly elected prior on 20 December. Langstrother helped to negotiate Warwick's treaty with France (16 February 1471), and on 24 February he and John Delves were granted the wardenship of the mint. Having been sent to France for the purpose, in April 1471 he escorted Queen Margaret and her son, Prince Edward, to England and accompanied them to Tewkesbury. At the battle (4 May) he shared command of the Lancastrian centre, and following their defeat sought sanctuary in Tewkesbury Abbey. Edward was induced to pardon him and other fugitives to the abbey, but they were subsequently taken out, and on 6 May Langstrother was tried and executed in Tewkesbury's market place. His body was allowed honourable burial, in the hospital of St John at Clerkenwell. 


@@@@@


doc= 16997


Longueville, William (1639-1721), lawyer, was the only son of Sir Thomas Longueville, knight, of Bradwell Abbey, Buckinghamshire, and his wife, Anne Ashcombe, second daughter and coheir of Sir William Ashcombe of Alvescot, Oxfordshire. He was entered as a student at the Inner Temple in November 1654; he then matriculated at Christ Church, Oxford, on 25 July 1655 and was created MA in special congregation on 28 September 1663. He was called to the bar at the Inner Temple in 1660, was called to the bench in 1677, and he became an autumn reader in 1682, a Lent reader in 1685, and treasurer in 1695. He was one of the six clerks in chancery from 1660 to 1678. These were six officers who received and filed bills, answers, replications, and other documents on the equity side of the court. He was a successful conveyancer, and by his practice was able to restore the fortunes of his family, which his father had ruined. He married Elizabeth (1647-1716), third daughter and coheir of Sir Thomas Peyton, second baronet, of Knowlton, Kent, and his second wife, Cecilia. They had two sons, Charles and William, who died in the East Indies, and two daughters, Catherine and Elizabeth. 
Longueville was a close friend of Sir Francis North, the lord keeper, and his brother Roger. The best account of him is given by Roger North in the 'Life' of his brother; there he is described as one of the lord keeper's most intimate friends, valued for his 'fluent, witty, litterate, copious and instructive' conversation and for his knowledge and love of the classics and poetry (North, 'Life of the Lord Keeper', 458). For a time Roger North, who had leased Sir Peter Lely's house in Covent Garden, London, lived near to Longueville, who occupied a house in Bow Street, Covent Garden, but the connection and friendship between the Norths and Longueville may have been closer. The Peytons of Knowlton, the family of Longueville's wife, Elizabeth, were a branch of the Peytons of Isleham; Thomas Peyton of Isleham married Elizabeth, daughter of Sir William Yelverton, of Rougham, Norfolk, the property that Roger North bought in 1690-91. As early as 1672 Francis North was given a mortgage over this property by Yelverton Peyton, and in the mid-1680s his sister Elizabeth Wiseman also held a mortgage over Rougham. 
Longueville was also a close friend of the poet Samuel Butler. Roger North describes him as 'the last patron and friend poor old Butler, the author of 'Hudibras' had, and in his effete old age he supported him, otherwise he might have bin literally starved'. Butler repaid him by making him his heir: 'that is gave him his remaines, but in loos papers, and indegested'. Longueville 'reduced them to method and order, where they lye out of reach of the tapstering printers' (ibid.). They are now in the British Library (Add. MS 32625). An edition with notes was published by Robert Thyer in 1759. 
William Longueville has been identified as the Mr Longueville who is referred to by George Farquhar in his preface to 'The Twin Rivals' (1703), of whom Farquhar says he 'must own [him]self obliged... for some lines in the part of Teague, and something of the lawyer; but above all, for his hint of the twins, upon which I formed my plot'. That this refers to the William Longueville discussed here was questioned by Charles Stonehill in a note to his edition of Farquhar's 'Works', who refers to 'a marginal note in the 'Biographia Britannica' (ed. 1793, vol. 5) [which] says that Longueville was 'as we are told, our author's countryman, and a fencing master, as was also his son, James...' It does seems unlikely that anyone but an Irishman could have given help in composing the lines of Teague. (1.398)' Letters from Longueville are preserved in the Hatton papers in the British Library (Add. MSS 29550-29586), some of which are printed in the Camden Society edition of the 'Correspondence of the Family of Hatton'. 
Longueville died on 21 March 1721 in London and was buried on 30 March in Edward the Confessor's chapel, Westminster Abbey. Apart from his property, which passed to his son, and mourning for his two daughters, he left $50 each to the school of St Clement Danes and 'to the poor of the said parish as my executor shall finde to be objects of pitty'. 


@@@@@


doc= 16998


Longworth, Maria Theresa (1833-1881), plaintiff in a case of disputed marriage and author, was born at Cheetwood, near Manchester, the youngest of six children of Thomas Longworth, silk manufacturer, and his wife, Ann, 'nee' Fox. Thomas Longworth's business, and at one time his residence also, was in a large house at the corner of Quay Street and Longworth Street, Manchester. Maria's mother died when she was very young, and she was educated at an Ursuline convent school in Boulogne, France, where she became a Roman Catholic. She spent two years in Italy completing her education. On her return to her father's house at Smedley near Manchester, disagreements with him on religious subjects arose, and she spent much of her time with a married sister in Boulogne, or on visits to friends. 
In the summer of 1852, while crossing the channel with some friends, Maria Longworth was introduced to William Charles Yelverton, afterwards fourth Viscount Avonmore, and a correspondence between them began. In 1855 she served as a nurse with the French Sisters of Charity during the Crimean War, and met Yelverton again at the Galata Hospital, when she accepted his proposal of marriage. Yelverton's relatives disapproved of the engagement and it was broken off for a time; but on 12 April 1857 the couple went through a private ceremony of marriage in Scotland, when Yelverton read aloud the Church of England marriage service at Maria Longworth's lodgings at 1 Vincent Street, Edinburgh. They were afterwards married by a priest at the Roman Catholic chapel at Rostrevor in Ireland, and then lived together in Ireland and Scotland. 
On 26 June 1858, while Maria was in Edinburgh, Yelverton formally married Emily Marianne Forbes, widow of Professor Edward Forbes. On 31 October 1859 Maria Longworth, claiming to be Yelverton's wife, sued him for restitution of conjugal rights in the London probate court, but the court decided that it had no jurisdiction over the marriage. In 1861 an action was brought in Dublin by Mr Thelwall, in whose house Maria Longworth had been living, to recover from Yelverton money Thelwall had supplied to her. This action lasted from 21 February to 4 March 1861, and the validity of both the Scottish and the Irish marriage was established in the Irish court. In July 1862 on appeal the Scottish court of session annulled the marriage, and the judgement was affirmed by a majority of the House of Lords on 28 July 1864, although Lord Brougham declared in Maria Longworth's favour. Her attempt to reopen the case at Edinburgh in March 1865 failed, and the House of Lords on 30 July 1867 supported the Scottish court. Finally her appeal to the court of session, on 29 October 1868, to set aside the judgment of the House of Lords was rejected. Much sympathy was shown to her in this long and unsuccessful struggle, and a subscription was raised on her behalf in Manchester. A novel based on the affair, 'Gentle Blood', was published by J. R. O'Flanagan in 1861. In 1867 'A Wife and not a Wife' by Cyrus Redding appeared, similarly inspired by Maria Longworth's case. 
Maria Longworth spent her later years in travel, and died of dropsy at Pietermaritzburg, Natal, on 13 September 1881. She was buried the next day in the Church of England cemetery in Pietermaritzburg. 
What money Maria Longworth had was spent in the litigation, and she largely supported herself by writing. Her chief works were 'Martyrs to Circumstance' (1861), 'The Yelverton Correspondence, with Introduction and Connecting Narrative' (1863), 'Zanita: a Tale of the Yo-Semite' (1872), and two books about travel. 


@@@@@


doc= 16999


Lonsdale, Henry (1816-1876), physician and biographer, was born in St Mary, Carlisle, on 25 February 1816, the son of Henry Lonsdale, a tradesman there, and his wife, Hannah. After attending a local school he was apprenticed in 1831 to Messrs Anderson and Hodgson, at that time the leading medical practitioners in Carlisle. In 1834 he went on to study medicine at Edinburgh, and after a very successful course was in his third year appointed assistant to Robert Knox (1791-1862), the anatomist, whose biographer he later became, and also to John Reid, the physiologist. Lonsdale studied during the summer of 1838 in Paris; he also went to London, and became a member of the Royal College of Surgeons and licentiate of the Society of Apothecaries. On his return to Edinburgh in 1838 he graduated MD; his thesis, 'An experimental inquiry into the nature of hydrocyanic acid', was printed in the 'Edinburgh Medical and Surgical Journal' in 1839. 
In the autumn of 1838 Lonsdale, who was suffering from overwork, took temporary charge of a country practice at Raughton Head, Cumberland, where he helped to found the Inglewood Agricultural Society, a monthly club and the first of its kind in the county. He also gave a course of popular lectures on science, and he became interested in the work of Susanna Blamire, 'the muse of Cumberland', whose poems he subsequently collected. In 1840 he returned to Edinburgh, and from May of that year he was a partner with his former principal, Robert Knox, giving a daily demonstration in anatomy in the classroom and managing the dissecting rooms. In 1841 he was appointed physician to the Royal Public Dispensary, where for the first time in Edinburgh he introduced the use of cod-liver oil. During an epidemic of relapsing fever in Edinburgh in 1843, he took charge of the largest district, and when the health of his three assistants broke down he did the work single-handed. 
Lonsdale was admitted fellow of the Royal College of Physicians of Edinburgh, in 1851, and at one of their monthly meetings he read the paper 'On the terminal loops of the nerves in the brain and spinal cord of man'. These loops, which he had discovered when examining an infant suffering from deformities, he exhibited under a powerful microscope. The history of the case was recorded in the 'Edinburgh Medical and Surgical Journal' in 1843 and attracted some attention. Lonsdale was soon afterwards appointed a senior president of the Royal Medical Society, to which he made a notable contribution on diphtheria, based chiefly on observations of the disease at Raughton Head. He was also for two sessions the senior president of the Hunterian Medical Society, and was at the same time senior president of the Anatomical and Physiological Society, which had been resuscitated by Knox and himself. 
In 1845 Lonsdale's increasing susceptibility to bronchitis induced him to relinquish his growing practice in Edinburgh and to return to Carlisle, where he settled in the autumn of 1845. In 1846 he was appointed physician to the Cumberland Infirmary, an office which he held for twenty-two years. Lonsdale attributed an epidemic of scurvy occurring in a district north of Carlisle to the lack of vegetables following the potato blight of 1846. His observations enabled him to dismiss the theories of Robert Christison, who had assigned the disease to a defective supply of milk, and to reassert the traditional explanation for scurvy. When in the winter of 1847-8 cholera seemed to be threatening western Europe, Lonsdale established a sanitary association in Carlisle. He contributed many articles promoting the 'Health of Towns Act' to the 'Journal of Public Health', a London periodical supported by the early sanitary reformers. His report on the health of Carlisle was quoted with commendation in the House of Commons by Lord Morpeth. A careful essay which Lonsdale wrote on the health of bakers also attracted notice and was reprinted in 'Chambers's London Journal'. 
In 1851 Lonsdale married Eliza Indiana, only daughter of John Smith Bond, of Rose Hill, near Carlisle, whose residence subsequently became his own. After his marriage Lonsdale occupied himself in reading, travelling in southern and eastern Europe, interesting himself in Italian art and archaeology, and collecting materials for the biographical studies that he undertook. The writing of biographies of a number of local notables and medical practitioners became his main work during the 1860s. After producing several individual works, he published in 1867 the first volume of his 'Worthies of Cumberland', a six-volume series of short biographies. In them he attempted to avoid political bias and aimed to pursue the 'brevity, conciseness of arrangement, and the use of terse and simple language' which he felt suited to the region's character (Lonsdale, 'Worthies', vol. 1, preface). The collection was well received by contemporaries. 
Lonsdale died at Rose Hill on 23 July 1876, and was buried on 27 July in Stanwix churchyard. He left three sons and three daughters. A man of genial and kindly temperament, Lonsdale was in politics a philosophical radical, and took a special interest in the cause of Italian unity. He helped to collect subscriptions for Garibaldi's expedition to Sicily in 1860, and was the friend of Mazzini and Kossuth, as well as of Garibaldi. 


@@@@@


doc= 17000


Lonsdale, James (1777-1839), portrait painter, was born at Lancaster on 16 May 1777 and baptized on 15 June at St John's, Lancaster, the son of Francis Lonsdale and his wife, Anne. It is believed that he attended a charity school in Lancaster. He worked as a pattern designer at Margerison and Glover's printworks, Catterall, near Garstang, Lancashire. About 1799 Lonsdale moved to London, where he briefly became a pupil of George Romney, who retired to Kendal late in 1799, and in October 1801 he entered the Royal Academy Schools. In that year he painted a copy of Van Dyck's Ghent masterpiece 'The Crucifixion', as the altarpiece for the Roman Catholic chapel of St Mary and St Michael, Garstang, where it still hangs. In 1806 he presented to Lancaster his 'Admiral Lord Nelson' (Lancaster town hall), for which he received the freedom of the city. With encouragement from Richard Threlfall, a local Lancaster architect, whose portrait by Lonsdale was exhibited at the Royal Academy in 1809, he soon received commissions from Archibald, ninth duke of Hamilton of Ashton Hall near Lancaster, of whom he exhibited one portrait in 1804 and another in 1819. Between 1802 and 1838 Lonsdale exhibited 138 paintings at the Royal Academy, eighty-seven with the Society of British Artists (which he had helped to found) in Suffolk Street, and seven with the British Institution. He was painter to the Sublime Society of Beefsteaks, a dining club limited to twenty-four members, more familiarly known as the Beefsteak Club, founded in 1735 by the theatre manager John Rich, which included Hogarth among its founding members. 
On 7 April 1807 Lonsdale married Jane Thornton (1776/7-1827), who came from Lancaster, in Edmonton, Middlesex. On the death of John Opie in 1807 Lonsdale bought that painter's house in Berners Street, Marylebone, where the couple lived thereafter. They had three sons, all baptized at St Marylebone, Middlesex: Richard Threlfall Lonsdale, who became a painter; James John Lonsdale, who became a circuit judge in the West Riding of Yorkshire (1855-67) and recorder of Folkestone (from 1847 to his death, 'c'.1886); and Edward Francis Lonsdale, who became a surgeon. It is thought that a descendant, Henry Lonsdale, wrote a life of James Lonsdale which was published in 1870, although no copy of this work appears to be extant. Jane Lonsdale died on 28 April 1827. 
Lonsdale's commissions included one in 1820 from the lord mayor of London for a portrait of Queen Caroline; on Henry Meyer's stipple engraving of that portrait Lonsdale is described as 'Principal Painter in Ordinary to the Queen', a description that Cross questions in his biography of Romney (Cross, 241). Another portrait of Queen Caroline painted by Lonsdale 'c'.1821 is in the National Portrait Gallery, London. Further aristocratic and royal commissions included 'HIH Archduke Maximilian' (exh. RA, 1819); the king of the Belgians; the tsar of Russia; 'Lord Hamilton' (exh. RA, 1822; Royal Collection), and portraits of the duke of Wellington (1815; Gov. Art Coll., HM embassy, Vienna) and the duke of Sussex (exh. RA, 1817; Trinity College, Cambridge). Famous sitters included the 'Right Honourable William Pitt' (1807; Lancaster town hall); the French tragic actor Francois-Joseph Talma as Hamlet (exh. RA, 1818); the sculptor Joseph Nollekens ('c'.1818; NPG); Henry Brougham, first Baron Brougham and Vaux (1821; NPG), and the scientists Sir William Congreve (exh. RA, 1812; NPG); John Dalton (exh. Society of British Artists, 1825; Manchester University), and Sir Humphry Davy (exh. RA, 1822). Also of interest are his 'King John Signing Magna Charta' painted for the duke of Norfolk and later executed in stained glass, and 'A Game at Chess' (exh. British Institution, 1837; Castle Museum and Art Gallery, Nottingham) which includes a self-portrait of Lonsdale and portraits of his three sons. 
Commentators note Lonsdale's bold, accurate portrayal of faces with 'little attempt at flattery' (Redgrave, 'Artists', 75). This may explain why his clientele was 'chiefly confined to male sitters' (Bryan, 'Painters', 3.244). Lonsdale died at his home in Berners Street on 17 January 1839. A memorial to him and his wife was placed in St Mary's Priory church, Lancaster. 


@@@@@


doc= 17001


James Gylby Lonsdale (1816-1892), classical scholar and Church of England clergyman, the bishop's eldest son, was born at the Clapham home of his grandfather, John Bolland, on 14 October 1816. He was educated at a Kensington school, then at Laleham School under the Revd J. Buckland (brother-in-law of Thomas Arnold), and from 1828 at Eton College, where in March 1834 he won the Newcastle scholarship. In 1833 he was elected open scholar of Balliol College, Oxford, graduating BA in 1837 with a first in classics and a second in mathematics, and proceeding MA in 1840. He became fellow of Balliol in 1838, counting among his friends Benjamin Jowett and A. P. Stanley, and was a tutor from 1841 to 1842. 


@@@@@


doc= 17002


Lonsdale, John (1788-1867), bishop of Lichfield, born on 17 January 1788 at Newmillerdam, near Wakefield, Yorkshire, was the eldest son of John Lonsdale (1737-1807), vicar of Darfield and perpetual curate of Chapelthorpe, and his wife, Elizabeth, 'nee' Steer (1750-1827). His education commenced under the Revd Robert Wilkinson at the grammar school in Heath, near Halifax, and continued at Eton College from 1799, where Joseph Goodall pronounced him the best Latin scholar he had ever had. In 1806 he went up to King's College, Cambridge, where he twice won the Browne medal for a Latin ode, and was said to have penned the best Latin since the Augustan age in winning a university scholarship in 1809. In the same year he became a fellow of King's, taking his BA in 1811. Lonsdale commenced at Lincoln's Inn in 1811, but returned to King's in 1814 as a tutor. In 1815 he was ordained deacon and then priest within a month, relinquishing his fellowship on his marriage (25 November 1815) to Sophia (died 16 Oct 1852), daughter of John Bolland MP, a London hop merchant. They had five children. 
Shortly after his ordination Lonsdale was appointed chaplain to Archbishop Manners-Sutton (remaining in post when Howley succeeded), and the master of the Temple, Dean Rennell, advanced him to an assistant preachership. In 1822 Lonsdale became Christian advocate at Cambridge, succeeding Rennell's son, Thomas, of whom Lonsdale published a memoir in 1824. He soon resigned, however, when the archbishop appointed him rector of Mersham, Kent. From 1827 the same patron advanced him in succession to a prebendal stall at Lincoln, the precentorship at Lichfield (1828), and a prebend at St Paul's (1831). In 1828 Lord Lyndhurst made him rector of St George's, Bloomsbury, where he remained until he removed to Regent's Park in 1834, holding no cure before becoming preacher of Lincoln's Inn (1836-43) and rector of Southfleet, near Gravesend (1836-42). Throughout these years Lonsdale was a prominent figure in London religious life, being an active member of the National Society, the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel, the Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge, and the Incorporated Church Building Society. He served on the provisional committee and then on the council of King's College, London; in 1830 he declined to become the first principal. In January 1839, however, he took the post, having assumed its responsibilities during the illness of Hugh James Rose the previous year. As principal he secured the position of the medical school, and after resigning in 1843 he remained a council member until his death. Lonsdale also maintained a lifelong interest in Eton. In 1840 he was elected provost, only to decline in favour of Francis Hodgson, the crown nominee, whom the fellows had refused since he did not possess a BD (which Lonsdale, himself a fellow in 1827-8, acquired in 1824). In January 1843 Blomfield appointed Lonsdale archdeacon of Middlesex, and in October Peel made him bishop of Lichfield, Howley having recommended him as possessing 'perfection of temper, and extraordinary fairness of mind'. 
Lonsdale was widely acknowledged as an outstanding bishop, distinguished by his unswerving attention to diocesan duty and his lack of partisanship. He rarely ventured onto the national stage in print or in person -- Howley judged him 'too thin-skinned' -- and the only major publication of his later career was 'The Four Gospels with Annotations' (1849) (prepared with W. H. Hale), which like his sermons concentrated on a clear exposition of fundamental doctrines. In 1847 he chaired the royal commission on Lord Lyndhurst's act prohibiting marriage with a deceased wife's sister, but despite condemning the act was not present to vote for its repeal. He was briefly chair of the Cambridge University commission in 1857. When he did speak out, Lonsdale was a voice of moderation, warning convocation against extreme resolutions against Bishop Colenso, and protesting against the decision of the council of King's College to ask F. D. Maurice to resign his professorship in 1853. 
Lonsdale consecrated 156 new churches in his diocese; he himself contributed $3,700 to this work. His personal wealth, drawn partly from profits obtained through improvements to an estate leased on Sunk Island at the mouth of the Humber, enabled him to become a net contributor to his see. Lonsdale also fostered the corporate life of the diocese, encouraging the meeting of ruridecanal chapters, lodging ordinands at the episcopal palace, and reserving his patronage exclusively for its clergy. At the time of his death he was contemplating summoning a diocesan conference. His most controversial innovation came when, despite considerable evangelical opposition, he supported the establishment of a diocesan theological college, opened in 1857. Lonsdale died suddenly from the rupture of a blood vessel on the brain on 19 October 1867 at Eccleshall Castle. He was buried at Eccleshall. 
Tall and thin but broad shouldered, Lonsdale was fond of shooting, fishing, and the theatre, regretting that public opinion frowned on this last enthusiasm in a clergyman. His theology was that of 'the 'old' high church school... but broadened by experience' (Denison, 240). He had little sympathy with ritualism, but in private preferred Tractarians to evangelicals, since they more generally conformed with his vision of a gentleman clergy. 


In June 1842 Lonsdale took holy orders. It was about this time that he developed a liver complaint which forced him to leave Oxford (though he retained his fellowship until his marriage in 1864), and which afflicted him throughout the remainder of his life. Lonsdale accepted the post of chaplain to Bishop Tomkinson of Gibraltar, returning in 1843. He undertook cures at Malvern and Bowness, where he remained from 1844 to 1849. He then taught at the Royal Institution School in Liverpool, and in 1851 became a tutor at the University of Durham, serving as censor of University College and junior proctor (1852-3). In 1853 he was appointed principal of Hatfield Hall, but resigned the following year as illness again took its toll. In 1854 he was encouraged to offer himself for election to the mastership at Balliol, but instead turned to parochial work as a curate at Duddon, Cheshire, and then at Holt, Worcestershire. After brief spells at Whitchurch grammar school and as assistant preacher at Lincoln's Inn, in 1863 Lonsdale was appointed professor of classical literature at King's College, London. In the following year he married Amelia Mary Peake. In 1870 he retired to the Balliol living of South Luffenham, Rutland, and in 1873 became rector of Huntspill, Somerset, where he remained until 1878. During these years, with his friend Samuel Lee, he produced his major publications -- prose translations of Virgil (1871) and of Horace (1873), the former going through twelve editions. After leaving Huntspill he moved to Mayfield, Sussex, and finally to Weybridge in 1885. He died of a chill at 6 Queen's Parade, Bath, on 25 April 1892, and was buried in Bath. 
The testimonials Lonsdale received for King's College in 1862 bear witness to the high regard in which he was held, both as a scholar and as a teacher whose 'presence and manner act like a spell in enlivening dullness' (H. Montagu Butler). In person he was melancholic and retiring, but with a winning, boyish sense of humour. Conservative in his politics, he was a high-churchman with little time for ritualism (although he fraternized with nuns at Mayfield), favouring a practical piety: as he observed in one of his sermons, 'Of theology we can have too much; of true religion we cannot' ('Sermons', 188). 


@@@@@


doc= 17003


Lonsdale, William (1794-1871), geologist, youngest son of William Lonsdale (1742-1813), a silk mercer from Skipton, Yorkshire, and his wife, Mary Wagstaffe (1745?-1832) of Higham Ferrers, Northamptonshire, was born on 8 September 1794, probably in Bath, where he spent his early years. In February 1810 he was commissioned, without purchase, as ensign in the 4th (King's Own) regiment of foot. He served at Salamanca in 1812 and Waterloo in 1815, but soon afterwards, as a retired lieutenant on half pay, he returned to Bath. 
By chance, Lonsdale became interested in Bath's geology, which William Smith (1769-1839) had there made so popular. He began by working out the sequence of the strata and collecting, examining, and identifying their associated minerals and fossils. His appointment as the first honorary curator of the Bath Literary and Philosophical Institution in 1825, and his personal donation of over 1000 geological specimens to its museum collections, testify to his growing reputation for preparing, labelling, and cataloguing accessions. Described by his early acquaintance Roderick Impey Murchison, as a 'tall, grave man with a huge hammer on his shoulder' (A. Geikie, 'Life of Sir Roderick I. Murchison', 1875, 1.128), Lonsdale the fossil-hunter daily advanced his geological studies during the 6 mile return walk from his mother's Batheaston home to his work in Bath. 
Lonsdale's 1827 report 'On the occurrence of galena in the Inferior Oolite' [near Frome] ('Philosophical Magazine', 2, 1827, 234-5) resulted from his enquiries into the forces governing deposition of ore in Carboniferous Limestone as compared with other strata. He believed that the age formerly assigned to these metallic veins was 'too remote' and with better knowledge of the unconformable superposition of rocks, similar finds could be expected in more recent secondary formations. He next earned high praise for his definitive geological colouring of areas of the midland counties on Ordnance Survey maps, and greater recognition, in February 1829, for his paper 'On the oolitic district of Bath' ('Transactions of the Geological Society of London', 3, 1835, 241-75). This was the first comprehensive analysis of the classic Bath area, within a 70 mile radius of the city. Lonsdale described the sequence of the strata from the Lias to the Lower Chalk and their associated fossils, and complemented six geologically coloured sections with descriptive tables of organic remains featuring only those specimens which he had personally collected and identified. 
Lonsdale was elected fellow of the Geological Society of London in June 1829 and, later that year, appointed as its curator, librarian, and indexer; in this capacity he found himself carrying out nearly all the work which had previously fallen on the honorary secretaries. In 1832 he was first awarded the society's Wollaston fund, to extend his investigation of the oolites to the southern boundaries of Warwickshire and Oxfordshire. He determined the Stonesfield Slate's position as in the lower part of the Great Oolite and defined the 'Cotteswold' hills escarpment as a prolongation and much expanded layer of the Inferior Oolite. In March 1840, Lonsdale's 'Notes on the age of the limestones of south Devonshire' ('Transactions of the Geological Society of London', 2nd ser., 5, 1840, 721-38) showed they had often been assigned to the transition series but that their similarity in character with the Old Red Sandstone had been noticed by various field workers. In December 1837, Lonsdale had proved that 'shells resembling or identical with mountain-limestone species... Silurian corals, the 'Calceola sandalina', and various distinct Testacea' were all present in these beds. This showed that the south Devonshire limestones were 'of an intermediate age between the Carboniferous and Silurian systems, and consequently of the age of the Old Red Sandstone' ('Transactions of the Geological Society of London', 2nd ser., 5, 1840, 727). Lonsdale thereby played a significant role in the introduction of the new Devonian system. 
Lonsdale's advice was constantly sought both for identifying fossils and editing manuscripts and his role as mentor is exemplified by his relationship with Charles Darwin, whom he greatly assisted in the study of corals. Six species from the Palaeozoic formation of Van Diemen's Land were described by Lonsdale in an appendix to Darwin's book on volcanic islands, published in 1844. Problems caused by persistent ill health, however, forced Lonsdale into early retirement from the geological society in 1842, but the gift of more than $600 from his friends at the society allowed him to continue his studies in the west country while looking for a healthy place to live. In 1844 he again received the Wollaston fund to aid his research, and in 1846 he was awarded the fund, and now the Wollaston medal, for his contributions to geological science in describing Silurian and Devonian corals and for his papers, 'Corals from the Tertiary formation of North America' and 'Corals from the Palaeozoic formations of Russia'. Finally rewarded with a fourth Wollaston fund in 1849, Lonsdale produced a memorandum respecting 'Choristopetalum impar' and 'Cyathophora? elegans' ('Quarterly Journal of the Geological Society of London', 7, 1851, 113-17), and a note on the genus 'Lithostrotion' ('Annals of Natural History', 8, 1851, 451-77), both papers reflecting his concentration on physical and taxonomic differentiation between genera and species. Lonsdale's unpublished 'magnum opus' featuring the Palaeozoic tabulate corals, ''Alveolites', 'Favosites', and 'Heliolites'', reveals the facility with which he had interpreted the languages of science in conjunction with his own work, either to endorse or to challenge orthodox opinion. As an evolutionist and pioneer of microscopy, every aspect of geological determination was important to him. He was aware of the effects which 'permanent alteration in the inhabiting medium' (Lonsdale MSS, Bath RO) might have on the form and size of a shell or coral, and he knew that every factor which might affect the development of animal life had to be taken into account before the distribution of species could be properly judged. Stratigraphy, Lonsdale believed, should be based on evidence derived not only from fossils, but also from order of superposition, mineral composition, and lithological structure. His own work on stratigraphy, taxonomy, and corals constituted an outstanding and invaluable gift to geological science. Lonsdale, who never married, died of tuberculosis on 10 November 1871, at his home, 12 City Road, Bristol, and was buried four days later at Arnos Vale cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 17004


Lookup, John (fl. 1739-1740), theologian, the details of whose upbringing and parentage are unknown, was a disciple of the philosopher John Hutchinson (1674-1737). In 1739 Lookup published 'The erroneous translations in the vulgar versions of the scriptures detected in several instances taken from the original, with a previous essay upon the doctrine of the Trinity', the 'Essay' having been written in deprecation of Edward Merchant Johnson's pamphlet, 'A Plain Account of the Trinity from Scripture and Reason' (1739). In the following year Lookup produced his translation, 'Berashith, or, The First Book of Moses, Call'd Genesis', which is inscribed to John Potter, archbishop of Canterbury. Lookup had previously shocked the archbishop by his 'incorrect sentiments' on the doctrine of the Trinity. His translation shows him to have possessed a creditable knowledge of Hebrew. 


@@@@@


doc= 17005


George Loosemore (bap. 1619, d. in or before 1682), composer and organist, was baptized on 12 September 1619 at Barnstaple. Having been a chorister at King's College, Cambridge, he was from 13 June 1635 organist at Jesus College. 


@@@@@


doc= 17006


Loosemore, Henry (1605x9-1670), composer and organist, was born probably at Barnstaple, Devon, son of Samuel Loosemore ('bap'. 1577, died 1642) and his wife, Gillian Maney ('bap'. 1584), and brother of John Loosemore (1613/14-1681), the Exeter organ builder, and George Loosemore ['see below']. Although his ancestors had lived at Bishop's Nympton since the early sixteenth century, Henry may have been a chorister in one of the Cambridge colleges and spent most of his adult life in the service of King's College. At Michaelmas 1627 he was listed for the first time as lay clerk and organist, and he continued to receive regular payments in respect of both posts for the rest of his life. 
In his long career at King's, Loosemore apparently served the college well. At Christmas 1627 he was paid for copying a new organ book (probably New York Public Library, MS Drexel 5469), and during the next three years he received further payments for augmenting the college's choral partbooks and for binding his organ book. Most of Loosemore's extant compositions are choral and were composed for liturgical use at King's, though six keyboard dances and two consort pieces by him also survive. Loosemore's sacred music includes two services, full anthems (one of which, 'O Lord, increase my / our faith', was long attributed to Orlando Gibbons), and verse anthems. Although the quality of his music is variable, his best work is very well crafted and bears comparison with that of his more famous contemporaries. 
On 17 February 1634 Loosemore married Elizabeth Brooke ('bap'. 1595, died 1660) at St Botolph's, Cambridge. In 1640 he took the Cambridge MusB degree. Between 1640 and 1652 Loosemore was paid for teaching the choristers at King's, though with the cessation of choral services by 1643 all his college posts probably became sinecures. Between 1652 and 1660 he is said to have acted as organist and music teacher to the family of Dudley, third Baron North, at Kirtling, Cambridgeshire, but he evidently resumed his full college duties at the Restoration. On 7 July 1670, having 'died suddenly in a privy house' (Shaw, 357), he was buried at St Botolph's, Cambridge. 
Loosemore's brother 
Most of Loosemore's music, which is both sacred and incomplete, survives in two autograph manuscripts at the British Library, London, and at Trinity College, Cambridge, where he became organist in 1660. He is known also to have composed fancies for viols, now lost, which were admired by Baron North, of Kirtling, whose family Loosemore served as organist and music teacher between 1660 and 1666, following in his brother Henry's footsteps. Loosemore possessed neither the technical fluency nor the creative talent of his brother, to whose best music his own is inferior. In October 1665 he was paid by Jesus College for copying choral music, and in the same year he obtained the Cambridge MusD degree. He was dead by 11 September 1682, and his widow, Honorah, died on 3 February 1692. 


@@@@@


doc= 17007


Loosemore, John (1613/14-1681), organ builder, was born probably at Bishop's Nympton, Devon, the son of Samuel Loosemore ('bap'. 1577, died 1642), organ builder, and his wife, Gillian Maney ('bap'. 1584). He was the brother of George Loosemore ['see under 'Loosemore, Henry] and Henry Loosemore, who were both organists and composers. He was baptized at Barnstaple on 25 August 1616. Nothing is known of his life until the period 1635-8, when he looked after the organ at Hartland church, Devon. At the Restoration he was at Exeter Cathedral, where for the rest of his life he was clerk of works and lived in the cathedral close. In November 1660 he was paid $5 by the chapter towards 'the making of a sett of pipes to' a temporary organ used in the cathedral until a new one was built. Another instrument, a small chamber organ for the choir school, survived until the twentieth century. 
In January 1663 Loosemore was sent at the expense of the chapter to Cornwall, where he selected tin for a new organ that he was to build in the cathedral. Later that year he went to examine Thomas Harris's organ in Salisbury Cathedral, 'the better to inform himself to make the new organ' at Exeter, and in 1664 he visited London 'about the church's business'. His new cathedral organ, completed about 1665, was one of the largest built in the years after the Restoration, and was Loosemore's most important work. Its specification was unadventurous and representative of several new cathedral instruments of the time in its continuation of the English organ building style before the civil war. In these organs there were few if any signs of the continental devices -- such as reed, mixture, and mutation ranks -- adopted by the Dallams, who had recently returned to Britain from Brittany. Despite the essential conservatism of the Exeter organ, its great double diapason with large pipes was a notable feature, though perhaps more for its ostentatiousness than for its musical value. Indeed, a contemporary visitor thought the organ's visual qualities outweighed its aural ones. Loosemore's organ case survives. His autograph note of 'what the organ cost' gives $847 7's'. 10died as the total sum, owing to 'not bying tinne in seson'. 
Among other organs built by Loosemore was one for Sir George Trevelyan of Nettlecombe Court, Somerset ('c'.1665); its reed stop suggests that Loosemore was not entirely immune to French influence, though he remained at heart a member of the old English school. He was also a maker of virginals, and, like other makers of his time, used boxwood for naturals in the keyboards. One of his virginals (1655) is in the Victoria and Albert Museum. Loosemore was married, and in 1674 his daughter, Joane, married John Shearme, who was also an organ builder and probably Loosemore's assistant. Loosemore died in Exeter on 18 April 1681, in his sixty-eighth year, and was buried in Exeter Cathedral on 20 April. His epitaph on a gravestone in the transept records that he was 'easily the chief among craftsmen of his kind' (translation from the Latin; Edmonds, 31). 


@@@@@


doc= 17008


Looten, Jan (c.1618-c.1680), landscape painter, was born in Amsterdam. He appears in a group portrait of a company of militia dated 1642, and was married in Amsterdam in September 1643, when he was about twenty-five years old. He moved to London early in the reign of Charles II. The Ogdens, writing about the English taste in landscape in the seventeenth century, rate him the 'most important landscape painter of the Northern tradition active in England' during the 1660s, and one of the few to use 'English scenery consciously in composing their ideal landscapes' (Ogden and Ogden, 116). He painted landscapes 'of a sublime or romantic description' ('DNB'), with dark woods and waterfalls, in the style of Roelant Roghman, Allart van Everdingen, Jacob van Ruisdael, or Meindert Hobbema. Looten also painted some views of the Alps in Switzerland, where he is said to have lived for several years. He generally used larger than average canvases, and the figures in his paintings were often the work of Jan Lingelbach. Jan Griffier was his pupil and, according to George Vertue, 'became a more pleasant Painter than his Master' (Vertue, 'Note books', 1.50). In 1669 Looten was living in St James's Market, where he was visited on 11 April by Samuel Pepys, who 'there saw no good pictures' but was introduced to another painter, Simon Verelst ('Diary', 514). Vertue states he 'died poor in Yorkshire' (Vertue, 'Note books', 1.77). That he was in Yorkshire and in straitened circumstances is suggested by a letter of 1678 from William Lodge in London to Henry Gyles in York saying 'as for those things of Mr Loton they are out of my way... tell honest Cowell as a secret that I would not have him putt so much confidence in his Landskip painter, by what I have heard of him here being in debt to severall he delt withall and so left em' (Hake, 64). He died in London or York about 1680. Administration of the effects of Johanes Looton was granted to one of his creditors in London in February 1691. 
Four landscapes attributed to Looten are in the Royal Collection; of the three originally in the collection of James II, 'Landscape with an Estuary' and 'A Wooded Landscape' were probably painted for him about 1675. Looten landscapes in national collections include those at Cheltenham Art Gallery, falsely signed and dated 'Hobbema pinx 1686'; Temple Newsam House, Leeds; and Beecroft Art Gallery, Southend-on-Sea. The 'River Landscape' in the National Gallery, thought to be by Looten, is now attributed to Joris van der Haagen. There are also earlier landscapes in Amsterdam (figures by Lingelbach), Nancy (1655), Copenhagen (two, 1656; figures by Lingelbach), Rotterdam (1658), Hamburg, Berlin (two), and elsewhere. Numerous Looten landscapes have passed through the auction houses over the years. 


@@@@@


doc= 17009


Lopes, Henry Charles, first Baron Ludlow (1828-1899), judge, was born at Devonport on 3 October 1828, the third son of Sir Ralph Lopes, second baronet (died 1854), of Maristow, Devon, and his wife, Susan Gibbs, the eldest daughter of Abraham Ludlow of Heywood House, Wiltshire. He was the great-nephew of Sir Manasseh Masseh Lopes, first baronet, who was imprisoned for political corruption and bribery. Sir Lopes Massey Lopes, third baronet (1818-1908), was his brother. He was educated first at Winchester College and then at Balliol College, Oxford, where he matriculated on 12 December 1845 and graduated BA in 1850. He joined Lincoln's Inn on 5 June 1849, but moved on 26 May 1852 to the Inner Temple, where he was called to the bar on 7 June 1852, and elected bencher on 31 May 1870 and treasurer in 1890. On 20 September 1854 he married Cordelia Lucy, daughter of E. Clarke, of Efford Manor, Devon; they had at least one son. 
Lopes practised first as a conveyancer and equity draftsman, later as a pleader on the western circuit and at Westminster. He was appointed recorder of Exeter in 1867 and became QC on 22 June 1869. He was returned unopposed as Conservative member for the rotten borough of Launceston on 9 April 1868 and in the general election of 1874 wrested Frome from the Liberals. In 1876 he was appointed justice of the High Court and knighted (28 November). He then sat in the Common Pleas and Queen's Bench divisions until advanced in 1885 to the Court of Appeal (1 December), when he became member of the privy council (12 December). He was made a peer on the queen's jubilee in 1897 (26 July), as Baron Ludlow of Heywood, Wiltshire, retiring shortly afterwards for health reasons. 
Ludlow died of influenza at his London house, 8 Cromwell Place, Kensington, on 25 December 1899, his wife having died before him, in 1891. His son, Henry Ludlow, succeeded as the second Baron Ludlow. Although not a great lawyer, Lopes was an able judge in 'nisi prius' and divorce cases, and an admirable chairman of quarter sessions. 


@@@@@


doc= 17010


Lopes, Sir Manasseh Masseh, first baronet (1755-1831), landowner and politician, was born Manasseh Lopes in Jamaica on 27 January 1755, only son of Mordecai Rodriguez Lopes (died 1796), plantation owner, and Rebecca, daughter of Manasseh Pereira of Jamaica. He came from a family of Sephardic Jews who had become very wealthy as sugar planters in Jamaica and he inherited a substantial fortune on the death of his father in 1796, who had settled in Clapham, Surrey. Lopes was believed to have spent $100,000 buying the Heywood estates at Maristow, Devon, in 1798 and he continued to buy land around Plymouth, so that by 1820 he was one of the largest landowners in Devon. He also invested heavily in the East India Company and gave $5000 to the loyalty loan of 1797. On 19 October 1795 he married Charlotte Yeates, daughter of John Yeates of Monmouthshire; they had one child, Esther, who died on 1 July 1819. In 1802 Lopes was baptized in the Church of England and the same year was returned to parliament for New Romney, Kent. He became a firm supporter of Pitt and for his loyalty received a baronetcy on 1 November 1805; he also obtained a royal licence to add Masseh to his name. He was not a candidate at the 1806 general election and his election as MP for Evesham, Worcester, in 1807 was declared void on the grounds that some of his votes had been illegal. In 1810 he purchased the borough of Westbury from Montagu Bertie, fifth earl of Abingdon, at a cost of some $75,000 with the intention of ensuring his electoral success, although he decided to contest Barnstaple in Devon at a by-election in January 1812. Defeated by the opposition candidate, William Busk, he succeeded at the general election later that year, as did the two government candidates at Westbury, but he found himself considerably out of pocket as a result. After failing to receive compensatory patronage from Lord Melbourne, he voiced his dismay to Lord Liverpool and claimed that he had been treated with 'total neglect and disregard' by those he had so faithfully supported (Fisher, 456). 
It is possible that Lopes's discontent, coupled with his political ambition, tempted him into using corrupt practices to win votes. With the assistance of a contingent of electors, his agent secured Lopes's return for Grampound in Cornwall by bribing forty voters with $35 apiece. This bribery became known only after a petition was lodged against Lopes following his 1818 election in Barnstaple, in which he was accused of making payments to voters. For his first offence he was brought to trial at Exeter assizes before Mr Justice Holroyd and a special jury on 18 March 1819 and he was convicted. He then stood trial for the allegations made at Barnstaple where it was found he had spent $3000 in bribes, and had bribed 63 of the 300 resident electors at $5 each. Although the house saw fit to unseat him, he was acquitted 'from defect of proof' at Devon assizes in August 1819 (Fisher, 457). On 13 November he was sentenced to two years' imprisonment and a fine of $10,000 by the court of king's bench. In the eyes of a number of MPs, such as Lord John Russell and even Lopes's counsel, James Scarlett, his sentence was seen as a necessary measure against electoral corruption. Brougham and the Holland House set, however, thought that he had been unfairly singled out for a crime of which many MPs were guilty. On his release from prison Lopes continued in public life and was returned in 1823 for his pocket borough of Westbury. Despite his unpopularity he successfully stood again in 1826, but later resigned his seat to provide for Peel on his rejection by Oxford University in 1829. Lopes, who served as a magistrate for Devon and Wiltshire, and from 1810 was recorder of Westbury, died at his seat, Maristow House, on 26 March 1831 and was buried at Bickleigh, Devon. He left a fortune of $800,000, principally in government and East India stock, but also in land. His nephew and heir, Ralph Franco, assumed the surname Lopes on succeeding to the baronetcy. 


@@@@@


doc= 17011


Lopez, Roderigo (c.1517-1594), physician and alleged conspirator, was born in Portugal, where his father, Antonio Lopes, was physician to Joao III. A New Christian, or son of a Jew baptized by force in 1497, he studied at the University of Coimbra, graduating BA on 7 February 1540 as Ruy Lopes, MA on 4 December 1541, and going on to enrol for the medical course on 23 December 1541. The university's degree registers for the period from 1537 to 1550 have not survived, but it is likely that he received his degree in medicine in 1544. Lopez settled in London in 1559, soon after Elizabeth I's accession. He was admitted as a fellow of the College of Physicians (the date is not recorded) and was the first appointee as physician to St Bartholomew's Hospital following its refoundation in 1547. He received $2 a year with a house and garden nearby in Little Britain. One of his colleagues at the hospital, William Clowes, noted in his work on gunshot wounds (1591) that Lopez showed himself to be both careful and very skilful, not only in his counsel in dieting, purging and bleeding, but also for the direction of Arceus's apozema. About 1563 he married Sarah ('b'. 1550), daughter of Dunstan Anes, citizen and grocer of London. She was English born of Portuguese Jewish parents. They conformed to the established church but secretly adhered to Judaism. Their eldest daughter, Ellyn or Elinor, was baptized on 9 January 1564 at St Bartholomew-the-Less, as were other children: Ambrose on 6 May 1565, Douglas on 13 May 1573, William on 24 October 1577, and Ann on 1 March 1579. Their son Anthony was sent to Winchester College. In the 1571 census of aliens in the parish of St Andrew's, Holborn, Lopez is described as 'Doctor Lopus, Portingale, howsholder, denizen came into this realm about xij yeares past to get his lyvinge by physycke; and Lewis Lopez, his brother, is a soiourner in his howse and a joyner' (Huguenot Society). Another brother, Diego Lopes Aleman, was a merchant in Antwerp and Venice. 
Lopez became physician to the earl of Leicester and after the death of Giulio Borgarucci he was appointed physician to the queen and her household in 1581. As such he received a life pension of $50 a year. In June 1584, by way of reward, he was granted a monopoly of the importation of sumach and aniseed for ten years. This was renewed again in January 1593. In 1588 he was granted land and tithes in Worcestershire belonging to the bishop of Worcester. Lopez lived at one time in Wood Street and later in Mountjoy's Inn, Fenchurch Street. 
In 1580 King Henrique of Portugal died and Philip II of Spain invaded and seized the country. The other claimant to the Portuguese throne, Dom Antonio, prior of Crato, took refuge in France and then in England with his followers. Lopez, who was among his keen supporters, helped to persuade the queen to recognize him as king of Portugal. However, Dom Antonio's cause did not prosper and after the failure of his counter armada attack on Lisbon, in 1589, his followers gradually defected and made their peace with Philip. 
In 1584 'Leicester's Commonwealth', an anonymous Roman Catholic tract attacking the earl of Leicester, mentioned Lopez among his instruments: 'Iulio the Italian and Lopes the Iewe, for Poysoning & for the arte of destroying children in women's bellies' ('Leicester's Commonwealth', 116). This was the first suggestion made that Lopez was a poisoner. A second such suggestion was made in 1586 by Antonio da Veiga, one of Dom Antonio's turncoat followers. In a letter to Don Bernardino de Mendoza, the Spanish ambassador to France, he claimed that in 1572 Don Gerau de Espes, the Spanish ambassador in London, had persuaded Lopez to sabotage Bartolomeo Bayon's voyage to the Spanish Indies by giving him a purge, which, however, Lopez did not do. Veiga claimed that he could persuade Lopez to poison Dom Antonio. The Spaniards did nothing about it. 
In 1590 Lopez himself approached Mendoza, through the intermediacy of Manuel de Andrada, who was a double agent, possibly on the initiative of the secretary of state, Sir Francis Walsingham, who had used Hector Nunes in 1586 to open negotiations with Spain. Lopez, who was Walsingham's physician, was an obvious alternative intermediary. Mendoza sent Andrada on to Spain, where he was interviewed by the Portuguese secretary of state, Dom Cristovao de Moura. Andrada proposed two things: first the opening of peace negotiations through Lopez, and second the immobilization of Dom Antonio by getting the English to agree either to his house arrest or else to his expulsion. The Spaniards were also interested in persuading Dom Antonio's son Manuel to defect. The correspondence between Dom Cristovao de Moura and Philip II in the Spanish state papers makes it quite clear that these were then their sole aims in opening negotiations with Lopez. They gave Andrada a jewelled ring worth $100 as a gift for Lopez's daughter. Walsingham died in 1591 and Lopez continued his correspondence with the Spanish officials without the knowledge or authority of the English government. 
Lopez also incurred the enmity of his former patient, the earl of Essex. In a conversation with Dom Antonio and with Philip II's former secretary, Antonio Perez, who lived at Essex House, Lopez told them of what diseases he had treated Essex, 'which did disparage his honour' (Goodman, 1.152-3). Perez reported this back to Essex, who was understandably furious. 
After Walsingham's death in 1591 Essex took the latter's principal cryptologist, Thomas Phelipes of the Customs House, into his service and he discovered a secret correspondence between Estevao Ferreira da Gama, one of Dom Antonio's erstwhile supporters, and the count of Fuentes, in the Spanish Netherlands. This was followed by the arrest of Lopez's courier, Gomez d'Avila, a Portuguese New Christian living in London, and of one Manuel Luis Tinoco, who was carrying letters from Spanish officials in the Netherlands to Ferreira da Gama. When they were interrogated they implicated Lopez. On 28 January 1594 Essex wrote to Anthony Bacon, 'I have discovered a most dangerous and desperate treason. The point of conspiracy was Her Maties death. The executioner should have been Dr Lopus. The manner by poison. This I have so followed that I will make it appeare as cleere as the noone day. (LPL, MS 653 fol. 312, vol. 7, no. 17)' Once Essex had committed his reputation to this thesis Lopez's fate was sealed. Matters were also made worse by a letter which Manuel Andrada had sent to Lord Burleigh in 1591, in which he wrote, 'The King of Spain had gotten three Portuguese to kill her Majesty and three more to kill the King of France' ('CSP for.', '1591-2'). Once a clandestine correspondence with Spain had been discovered this naturally left William Waad and Sir Robert Cecil keen to unmask Andrada's three unnamed Portuguese assassins. Tinoco was tortured and Ferreira da Gama threatened with torture until their confessions confirmed Essex's preconceptions. Ferreira da Gama was asked if Lopez would have been willing to poison the queen and confirmed that he would have been. Philip's main concern was to neutralize Dom Antonio and to eliminate Antonio Perez. Lopez had acted stupidly and dishonestly. Once his intrigues came to light, and these included passing information about the English court to Spain and a cryptic letter concerning his donation to a secret synagogue in Antwerp, the privy council, including William Waad and Robert Cecil, were ready to believe the worst. Lopez's claim that the sole purpose of his intrigue was 'to deceive the Spaniard and wipe him of his money' (Camden, 484) was not believed. Lopez, Manuel Luis Tinoco, and Estevao Ferreira da Gama were tried at Guildhall. The attorney-general, Sir Edward Coke, made great play with Lopez's secret Judaism. All three were convicted of high treason and hanged, drawn, and quartered at Tyburn on 7 June 1594. The government published an official account of the plot, stressing the criminal conduct of Philip of Spain in trying to murder the queen of England, whereas she never had and never would attempt to murder him. 
Many people, influenced by the flow of polemics after the event, were shocked at Lopez's alleged venality and ingratitude to the queen, who had been his benefactress. Christopher Marlowe's play 'The Tragedy of the Rich Jew of Malta' with its villainous Jewish character, Barabbas, was revived. William Shakespeare responded by writing and staging 'The Merchant of Venice' with its murderous Jewish character, Shylock, who hates all Christians. Their audiences would have been well aware of the story of Lopez's alleged plot. 
Some ten years later Count Gondomar wrote to Philip III about the affair, alleging that Lopez and Ferreira da Gama had been innocent and unjustly convicted. He wrote, 'the King our master had never conceived nor approved such measures... the Count of Fuentes neither received nor gave such an order, moreover it is understood that Dr Lopez never passed through his thoughts, because he was a friend of the Queen and a bad Christian. (Documentos ineditos, 196-8)' Sarah Lopez petitioned the queen to be allowed her late husband's estate. The queen kept King Philip's ring and most generously gave her back the rest, which was little enough. 


@@@@@


doc= 17012


Lord, Henry (b. 1563), clergyman and ethnographer, was born in Oxfordshire; his parents' names are unknown. He matriculated from Magdalen Hall, Oxford, on 15 April 1580, but seems to have left without a degree. In January 1624 the East India Company appointed him chaplain to the company factory at Surat in Gujarat for five years at a salary of $60 per annum, and advanced him two months' pay and $20 to buy books. Lord arrived with the rest of the English fleet in October 1624; by December 1625 he was threatening to return to England, but the president of the factory, Thomas Kerridge, forbade him to go. 
At Kerridge's urging Lord studied the religion of the Hindu Banias, 'out of their Manuscripts, and by renewed accesse, with the helpe of Interpreters, made my collections out of a booke of theirs called the SHASTER' (H. Lord, 'Display of Two Forraigne Sects', pt 1, sig. B2'r'), as well as the 'Zend-Avesta' of the Parsis. He gave accounts of these in his two-part work, 'A display of two forraigne sects in the East Indies vizt: the sect of the Banians the ancient natives of India and the sect of the Persees the ancient inhabitants of Persia' (1630), which he dedicated to Archbishop Laud and to the East India Company. The book offered an invaluable account of Hindu and Parsi cosmography for European readers, albeit framed by a condemnation of their 'vaine Superstitions, and composed Forgery' (Lord, 'Display', pt 1, 93) deployed 'to beget in good Christians, the greater detestation of these Heresies' (ibid., pt 2, 53). Pierre Briot translated the work into French in 1667, and it was reprinted repeatedly, for example in Awnsham Churchill and John Churchill's 'Collection of Voyages and Travels' (1732, 1744, 1752), in Bernard Picart's 'Ceremonies et coutumes religieuses de tous les peuples du monde' (1723-42), and in John Pinkerton's 'General Collection of the Best and most Interesting Voyages' (1808-14). The date and place of Lord's death are not known. 


@@@@@


doc= 17013


Lord, John Keast (1818-1872), naturalist and traveller, was probably born in Cornwall, the son of Edward Lord. He was taken to Tavistock, Devon, with his brother, William Barry Lord, and educated by an uncle named Luscombe, a man of some local position. About 1840 Lord was apprenticed to Edgecombe and Stannes, chemists, in Tavistock, and afterwards entered the Royal Veterinary College, London, on 4 November 1842. He received his diploma (MRCVS) on 29 May 1844 and established himself as a veterinary surgeon at Tavistock, but his convivial tastes led him astray, and he suddenly disappeared. He is said to have made a whaling voyage and been shipwrecked, and to have been for some years a trapper in Minnesota and the Hudson's Bay fur countries. On 19 June 1855 he was appointed to the British army in the East as a veterinary surgeon with local rank, and attached to the artillery of the Turkish contingent, with which he served in the Crimea. He received the rank of lieutenant on 4 January 1856. In August of that year he was acting as veterinary surgeon with local rank and senior lieutenant of the Osmanli horse artillery. 
When British Columbia was formed into a colony after the gold discoveries on the Fraser River in 1858, Lord was appointed (1 February 1858) naturalist to the British North American boundary commission sent out to run a boundary line along the forty-ninth parallel of north latitude, separating the new colony from United States territory. He was detached to San Francisco to buy mules, and to his skill and energy the success of the transport arrangements of the expedition was largely due. He lived for some time at Vancouver Island, but returned to England on 14 July 1862. The valuable collections he made of mammals, birds, fishes, insects, and other specimens are now in the Natural History Museum, London. Two new mammals, a muskrat which he called 'Fiber osoyooensis' and another animal, related to the hare and the rabbit, which he called 'Lagomys minimus', were described by him in the 'Proceedings of the Zoological Society' (1863, 95-8), where he argued that these should be classified as new species rather than simply varieties. In the same year, dressed in the garb of a trapper, he delivered lectures entitled 'The canoe, the rifle, and the axe' at the Egyptian Hall, Piccadilly, London, and there he became acquainted with the naturalist Francis Trevelyan Buckland. At Buckland's suggestion Lord became a contributor to 'The Field', and joined the staff of Buckland's journal, 'Land and Water', on its establishment on 1 January 1866. 
Subsequently Lord was employed by the viceroy in archaeological and scientific researches in Egypt. While there he made many observations on snakes and exposed the tricks of the snake charmers, who, seeing his dexterity in handling venomous snakes made him a 'sheikh' of their craft. He brought to London collections of remains from ancient mines and sent them back to Egypt after arranging them. Catalogues of collections of Lepidoptera and Hymenoptera formed by him in Egypt were published in London in 1871. Lord was appointed the first manager of the Brighton aquarium, which was opened on 10 August 1872, but four months later, on 9 December, he died aged fifty-four at his home, 17 Dorset Gardens, Brighton. His friend Buckland described him as a big, unostentatious, large-hearted man, a delightful companion, and a first-rate practical naturalist. 
Lord's most enduring work was perhaps 'The Naturalist in Vancouver Island and British Columbia' (2 vols., 1866), at the end of which are lists of his collections in north-west America. He also wrote, under the pseudonym of the Wanderer, 'At Home in the Wilderness' (1867, 2nd edn, 1876), and helped in an enlarged edition of Francis Galton's 'Art of Travel' (new edn, 1867). In addition he was a contributor to the 'Leisure Hour', 'Temple Bar', the 'Intellectual Observer', and other journals, and as the Wanderer contributed many papers on sea fisheries and other topics to 'Land and Water', which for a short time he edited as Buckland's substitute. 


@@@@@


doc= 17014


Lord, Percival Barton (1808-1840), diplomatic agent and surgeon, was born at Cork. He was the son of John Lord, chaplain to an institution founded by the Kingston family at Mitchelstown, co. Cork, for the relief of decayed gentlewomen. After being taught by his father he went to Trinity College, Dublin, where he graduated BA in 1829 and MB in 1832. From Dublin he went to Edinburgh, where he zealously studied anatomy and physiology and acted as resident superintendent of a hospital during an epidemic of cholera. Following completion of his course in Edinburgh he went to London, and there contributed some valuable medical reviews to the 'Athenaeum', notably two on consumption in the numbers for 15 and 22 March 1834, which were reprinted by medical journals on the continent and in America. 
On 23 November 1834 Lord was appointed assistant surgeon in the service of the East India Company, and proceeded to Bombay. On the voyage he studied Persian. He was appointed to the native cavalry in Gujarat, and afterwards accompanied, as surgeon, the embassy (the 'commercial mission') which was sent under Sir Alexander Burnes to Kabul. At Kabul he won the friendship of Dost Muhammad Khan and other Afghan chiefs, and his fame reached the ears of Murad Beg, the dreaded emir of Kunduz, who sent a mission to request his attendance on his brother, then threatened with blindness. Accordingly, late in November 1837, Lord penetrated into Tartary through the mountains of the Hindu Kush. He found the case of Murad Beg's brother hopeless, but he embodied valuable observations in a report to the government, which met with the highest approval. 
Lord was consequently, on 1 October 1838, named political assistant to William Hay Macnaghten, the envoy dispatched to Kabul, and was sent to Peshawar to collect and arm all the natives who were ready to fight on behalf of Shah Shuja, whom the English government had determined to place on the throne of Afghanistan instead of Dost Muhammad. At Peshawar he wrote to his mother that he was 'busied in casting cannon, forging muskets, raising troops, horse and foot, talking, persuading, threatening, bullying, and bribing'. Lord determined on a vigorous forward policy to extend the authority of Shah Shuja even beyond the Hindu Kush. Initially he had a series of successes, and a mixture of bluff and modest force gained step-by-step advances towards Turkestan. But Macnaghten and the Indian government were always ambivalent and, in a confused situation, drew back. The first phase of the forward movement ended, Lord being killed in a minor engagement at Purwan on 2 November 1840. One of the early players of 'the great game', Lord was 'an unfortunate choice, for while he did not lack intelligence, there was an errant impulsiveness about his judgement which... cost Britain dear' (Yapp, 353). 


@@@@@


doc= 17015


Lord, Thomas (fl. 1791-1796), ornithologist, was a protege of the painter the Revd Matthew William Peters RA (1742-1814), and under his 'inspection and patronage' published at London, in folio numbers, from 1791 until 1796, a work entitled 'Lord's Entire New System of Ornithology, or, Oecumenical History of British Birds'. This consisted of 114 plates painted and engraved by Lord himself, with a brief descriptive text revised by Dr Dupree, master of Berkhamsted grammar school. The figures were mostly life size, and the book is now very rare. In October 1796 Lord was living at 6 Lambeth Road, near the Obelisk in London. 


