@@@@@


doc= 17016


Lorimer, James (1818-1890), jurist, was born at Aberdalgie, Perthshire, on 4 November 1818, the son of James Lorimer (1779-1868), factor of the earl of Kinnoul, and Janet Webster (1776-1866). Initially educated at home, he briefly entered Perth grammar school, before matriculating with his only brother, Thomas W. Lorimer, in the University of Edinburgh in 1834. After a year of study, he was apprenticed to a merchant in Glasgow with the ultimate intention that he should pursue a career in India. Thomas was apprenticed to a writer in Perth. A breakdown in James's health in Glasgow resulted in his return to Aberdalgie to recuperate. In 1837 he resumed study in Edinburgh, completing the regular curriculum in 1840. The greatest influence on him was the class in moral philosophy of Sir William Hamilton, who combined a critical reading of Kantianism with the Scottish philosophy of common sense. 
Recurrence of the asthma that was to plague Lorimer all his life led to his going abroad to study in September 1840. He travelled first to Geneva where he remained until September 1841, attending classes in natural sciences at the Academy, before embarking on a tour of Italy and Germany. He next intended to study law in Berlin. After an interview with the great scholar F. C. von Savigny which left Lorimer embarrassed as he had not appreciated the importance of the professor to whom he had been given a letter of introduction, he spent the winter of 1841-2 learning German, and started classes in the spring, studying Roman law with G. F. Puchta, chemistry with E. Mitscherlich, and legal philosophy with Adolf Trendlenburg. Of the three Lorimer considered that the most influential on him were the lectures in chemistry. He spent the summer session of 1843 at the University of Bonn, attending F. C. Dahlmann's lectures on politics and history, and G. Kinkel's on art history. He returned home to Scotland in the autumn to matriculate as a law student in the University of Edinburgh. After two sessions, on 8 March 1845, he was admitted to the faculty of advocates. He intended his membership of the faculty to help him pursue an essentially literary career. He was active in the Speculative Society. The patronage of Lord Kinnoul secured him the sinecure post of lyon clerk in 1848: a deputy carried out the duties. 
With a weak voice and continuing poor health, Lorimer had only a slight practice at the bar, and, although he sometimes acted as sheriff substitute of Midlothian, he devoted his energies to a variety of other interests such as 'Chambers's Encyclopaedia'. From the late 1840s and early 1850s he started to write in the 'Quarterly Journal of Agriculture', the 'North British Review', and the 'Edinburgh Review'. Putting his legal knowledge to use he wrote a 'Handbook of the Law of Scotland'. Aimed at the general public, and first published in 1859, this reached a sixth edition in 1894. Lorimer's interest in constitutional reform led to 'Political Progress not Necessarily Democratic' in 1857 and 'Constitutionalism of the Future' in 1865. He favoured complex voting systems in which individuals would have votes linked to various qualifications. He corresponded on these issues with a number of individuals including J. S. Mill, whose work on representative government he discussed in the 'North British Review' (November 1861). By 1851 he felt sufficiently secure in his literary career to marry and on 22 December that year he married Hannah (1835-1916), daughter of John Riddel Stodart, writer to the signet, and Jemima Henrietta Brown. The couple had three sons and three daughters, the most noted of whom were the artist John Henry Lorimer RSA and the architect Robert Stodart Lorimer ARSA (1864-1929). One important fruit of Lorimer's literary labours was his election as a fellow of the Royal Society of Edinburgh in 1861. 
In the 1850s the agitation for reform of the Scottish universities that had existed since the royal commission in the 1820s culminated in the 'Universities (Scotland) Act' of 1858. Having first written on the need for reform in the 'North British Review' in 1850, Lorimer played a notable part as secretary of the Association for the Extension of the Scottish Universities which he founded in 1853. He also served on the committee of the faculty of advocates that proposed radical new requirements for admission in 1854. Lorimer was critical of the existing Scottish universities as being merely an extension of high school. He considered they should be centres of teaching and original research that promoted the creation of an educated professional elite which could lead the country. The influence of what R. D. Anderson has called 'the neo-humanist ideal of the German universities' (Anderson, 60) is evident in this. Lorimer most clearly expounded these views in 'The Universities of Scotland, Past, Present, and Possible' in 1854, and in the 'Edinburgh Review' in 1858. 
Owing much to Lorimer, reform of the faculties of law favoured a broad liberal approach to legal education. The regius chair of public law and the law of nature and nations in the University of Edinburgh was accordingly revived in 1862 with Lorimer appointed to it through the influence of Sir George Cornewall Lewis. Here Lorimer found his metier and exerted a profound influence, even if he was perhaps not the best of teachers. His class started with an account of the law of nature, and then moved on to public international law and next to private international law. His account of the last was much influenced by F. C. von Savigny. It was Lorimer's practice to begin each year with a special lecture on some topic of current interest, and many of these lectures, which were often separately published at the time as pamphlets or in periodicals and sometimes reported in the Edinburgh newspapers, were collected and published posthumously in 1890 as 'Studies National and International'. 
The first part of Lorimer's course resulted in his 'Institutes of Natural Law' in 1872. This reached a second edition in 1880 and was reprinted in Germany in 1987. Rejecting the historical school and the legal positivism and utilitarianism of Jeremy Bentham and John Austin no less than he rejected the Kantian categorical imperative, Lorimer, following the German Karl C. F. Krause, founded law scientifically in certain universal facts of human nature. He emphasized the autonomy of the individual, by which he meant that one was able to find within oneself the rules of nature that had to be obeyed. In this he showed the influence, as well as of Krause, of his old teacher Adolf Trendlenburg, who also had emphasized that one should view one's ethical life as the result of one's nature as a whole. This led Lorimer to reject any distinction between ethics and law. Moreover, this view of Trendlenburg, reinforced by a reading of Spinoza, led Lorimer to the view that every natural thing had as much right by nature as it had power to enforce. This 'de facto' principle led him to the view that there was a natural right to aggression. While to some extent undoubtedly influenced through Hamilton by the Scottish school of common sense, Lorimer in reality developed a complex system of natural law derived from contemporary German 'Naturrecht', but rejecting a foundation of natural law in mind or reason. Natural law realized in time or place was 'positive law', by which Lorimer meant (rather than the common meaning) the idealized law best suited to the society. It was the duty of legislators and judges to turn this positive law into enacted law. 
Lorimer's account of public international law was founded on these views of natural law, and thus differed radically from that of many of his contemporaries in Britain. He was therefore roundly criticized by the English positivists. Sir Frederick Pollock in particular made a notable attack on his mode of theorizing. For Lorimer, international law was the branch of positive law (in his special sense) by which the freedom of different nations was realized through the reciprocal recognition and enforcement of their real powers. Lorimer thus applied to states his views of the autonomy of individuals, with a similar justification of aggression. Though criticized for cloudy abstractions, Lorimer in fact put considerable intellectual effort into thinking out the institutions necessary for a system of international law. He proposed their creation through an international treaty under which there would be a proportional reduction of national armed forces which would preserve the balance of power but leave money in states' hands to fund an international government with legislative, judicial, executive, and financial powers. Authority to make decisions was to be weighted in favour of the great powers, since they would have to implement them. This aspect of his teaching was published in two volumes in 1883-4 as 'Institutes of the law of nations: a treatise of the jural relations of separate political communities'. 
Lorimer continued to campaign energetically for the further improvement of the Scottish universities and legal education. His active public presence alone achieved much in this respect, especially for his own university and faculty. This ultimately has proved to be of more lasting importance than his scholarly contributions. While his attempt to work out an institutional structure for international law still arouses interest, his theories of natural law and his approach to national and international law are superseded. His 'de facto' principle would now be rejected, as would his right of aggression and his often explicitly racist opinions that some societies are progressive and others degenerative. 
Though Lorimer was awarded the honorary degree of LLD by the University of Glasgow (where, before the institution of a public law lectureship, he had lectured for several summers) in 1882, he generally achieved a greater reputation in continental Europe than in the United Kingdom. He was awarded another honorary doctorate by the University of Bologna in its anniversary year of 1888, while an abridged version of his work on international law -- translated into French by Lorimer's close associate the Belgian professor E. Nys -- was published in Brussels in 1885. This French version was translated into Spanish by A. L. Lopez Coterilla and published in Madrid in 1888. In 1890 Nys published a translation in abridgement of Lorimer's work on natural law. With Nys, Lorimer was one of the founders of the Institute of International Law in 1873, devoting considerable time to its activities, and through it he became acquainted with many scholars of similar interests in other European countries. He was also honoured by appointments as corresponding member of the Academy of Jurisprudence of Madrid, honorary member of the imperial universities of St Petersburg and Moscow, and member of the Royal Academy of Belgium. 
For the sake of his always precarious health, Lorimer preferred to spend his summers outside Edinburgh. On his father's death in 1868 he inherited the small estate of Kellyfield near Dundee. This was too far for him to use regularly in the summers and in 1878 he leased Kellie Castle in Fife, devoting many years to its restoration. He died at his home, 1 Bruntsfield Crescent, Edinburgh, of pleurisy and pneumonia on 13 February 1890. 


@@@@@


doc= 17017


Lorimer, Peter (1812-1879), minister of the Presbyterian Church of England, born in Edinburgh, was the eldest son of John Lorimer, builder. He was educated at the Royal High School and George Heriot's Hospital in that city, and thereafter proceeded, with a bursary, to the University of Edinburgh in 1827. In 1836 he was ordained minister of the Presbyterian church, River Terrace, London, which was then connected with the Church of Scotland. After the Disruption of 1843 he and his congregation joined the synod at Berwick in 1844. On the establishment of the English Presbyterian College, London, in 1844, he was appointed professor of theology; he became its first principal in 1878. In June 1857 the college of New Jersey conferred on him the degree of DD. From his marriage in 1840 to Hannah Fox (1817-1884) of Whitehaven he had a son, John Archibald, surgeon, of Farnham, Surrey, and a daughter, Annie, the wife of James Austin, barrister. He died on 29 July 1879 at Whitehaven, Cumberland, and was buried in the Grange cemetery at Edinburgh. 
Lorimer's Scottish presbyterian background helped shape his approach to church history and to the topics which attracted his attention. His main interest focused on the Scottish Reformation and its leading exponents. As a contribution to tercentenary celebrations of the Reformation in Scotland he published in 1860 'The Scottish Reformation: a Historical Sketch', exploring the subject through the careers of such early reformers as Patrick Hamilton, Sir David Lindsay, Alexander Alesius, Alexander Seton, Henry Forret, George Wishart, and John Knox. He drew attention, too, to the numerous early protestant exiles who settled in England, Germany, and Denmark, and to their contribution to the Reformation on the continent. Earlier, in 1857, his study 'Precursors of Knox', covering similar ground, attached priority to the careers of Hamilton, 'first martyr', Alesius, 'first academic theologian', and Lindsay, 'first poet' of the Scottish Reformation. In that volume Lorimer utilized fresh material by Alesius on Hamilton preserved in the library at Wolfenbuttel, and he dedicated the volume to Thomas M'Crie (1797-1875), professor of church history and systematic theology in the London college of the English Presbyterian church and son of the Scottish presbyterian church historian of the same name. Lorimer's 'John Knox and the Church of England' (1875), his most significant historical work, incorporated fresh source material on Knox's relations with his congregation at Berwick, his 'Memorial' to the privy council on Edward VI's second prayer book, and contacts with English puritans uncovered among the Morrice manuscripts in Dr Williams's Library in London. Appended to that work is 'The life and death of Mr William Whittingham, deane of Durham', printed from Anthony Wood's manuscripts in the Bodleian Library. His encouragement of record scholarship is apparent, too, in his support, as a founding member, for the Wodrow Society, named after the Scottish historian and antiquary Robert Wodrow, and established in Edinburgh in 1841 'for the publication of the works of the fathers and early writers of the Reformed Church of Scotland'. 
Lorimer's other works included 'Healthy Religion Exemplified in the Life of... Andrew Jack of Edinburgh' (1852), 'The Function of the Four Gospels Viewed in Connection with Recent Criticism' (1869), and 'A Good and Faithful Servant: Memoir of the Rev Archibald Jack of South Shields' (1871). He also translated from German, with additional notes, G. V. Lechler's 'John Wiclif and his English Precursors' (2 vols., 1878) and edited, with notes, M. Stuart's 'Critical History of the Old Testament Canon' (1849). He wrote an introduction to the reprint of Thomas Cartwright's 'Book of Discipline, or, Directory of Church Government' (1872). 


@@@@@


doc= 17018


Loring, Sir John Wentworth (1775-1852), naval officer, born in America on 13 October 1775, was the grandson of Commodore Joshua Loring (died 1781), who commanded the flotilla employed on the North American lakes in the Seven Years' War. His father, Joshua Loring, was high sheriff of Massachusetts before the American War of Independence; he moved to England and settled in Berkshire. 
John Loring entered the navy in June 1789 on the 'Salisbury', flagship of Vice-Admiral Milbanke on the Newfoundland station. He returned to England in 1791, continued on the home station and in the Mediterranean, and as midshipman of the 'Victory' was severely wounded at the evacuation of Toulon on 17 December 1793. He commanded a gunboat at the siege of Bastia. On 24 May 1794 he was promoted lieutenant of the sloop 'Fleche' and was shortly afterwards moved to the 'St George', flagship of Sir Hyde Parker. In her he was present in the two actions off Toulon on 13-14 March and 13 July 1795. At the beginning of 1796 he followed Parker to the 'Britannia', in which he returned to England, and towards the end of the year went out to the West Indies in the fireship 'Comet' to rejoin Parker, then commander-in-chief at Jamaica. 
In June 1798 Loring was appointed acting commander of the sloop 'Rattler' (16 guns), and in September of the 'Lark' (18 guns), to which he was confirmed on 3 January 1799. In the 'Lark' he cruised successfully against enemy privateers and merchant ships, for which he was publicly thanked by Sir Hugh Seymour, and appointed acting captain of the 'Abergavenny' (54 guns) in April 1801. In October 1801 he was moved to the frigate 'Syren' (32 guns), and in March 1802, while cruising off Cape Francois, suppressed a dangerous mutiny with a coolness that drew the praise of Sir John Duckworth. On Duckworth's recommendation the Admiralty confirmed Loring's post rank to 28 April 1802, the day before the general promotion in honour of the peace. Loring married on 18 July 1804 Anna, daughter of Vice-Admiral Patton, then a lord of the Admiralty. They had three daughters and three sons, the second of whom was Admiral Sir William Loring KCB (died 1895). 
In 1803-4 Loring commanded the 'Utrecht' (64 guns), flagship of successive admirals in the Downs, and in 1805 the 'Aurora', in a voyage to Bermuda and back; but his war service was chiefly identified with the 'Niobe', a 38-gun frigate, which he commanded on the coast of France from November 1805 until 1813. On the dark night of 28 March 1806 he pursued and took silent possession of the brig 'Nearque' (16 guns) out of a squadron of three frigates of equal or superior force. On 13 November 1810 he took part with Captain Grant of the 'Diana' (38 guns) in driving under the batteries of La Hougue two 40-gun French frigates, one of which got on the rocks and was burnt by her own people, while the other escaped, only to be driven on shore and burnt at Cape Barfleur on 24 March 1811, by a British squadron, of which the 'Niobe' was one. Thirteen days previously the 'Niobe', while watching the port of Le Havre, had captured the privateer 'Loup Marin' (16 guns). 
In 1813-14 Loring commanded the 'Impregnable' as flag captain to Admiral William Young in the North Sea. On 4 June 1815 he was made CB. From 1816 to 1819 he was superintendent of the ordinary at Sheerness, and from 4 November 1819 lieutenant-governor of the Royal Naval College, Portsmouth, until his promotion to flag rank on 10 January 1837. He was made KCH on 30 April 1837, KCB on 4 July 1840, became vice-admiral on 9 November 1846, and admiral on 8 July 1851. He settled in 1837 at Ryde in the Isle of Wight, where he died on 29 July 1852. 


@@@@@


doc= 17019


Lorkin, Thomas (c.1528-1591), physician, was born at Frindsbury in Kent, to Thomas Lorkin and Joan Huxley. He matriculated at Pembroke College, Cambridge, on 12 November 1549, graduated BA in 1552, proceeding MA in 1555, and was created MD in 1560. Lorkin married Catherine (died 1582), daughter of John Hatcher, regius professor of physic, in November 1560. They had a son and six daughters, one of whom married Edward Lively, regius professor of Hebrew at Cambridge. 
Lorkin was at first, from 1551 to 1553, a fellow of Queens' College, but from 1553 until 1560 was a fellow of Peterhouse. On 21 April 1564 he was created regius professor of physic; he was respondent in the 'Physic Act' kept before the queen in the same year, and in 1590 he obtained a grant of arms for the five regius professors. From 1572 until 1585 he was rector of Little Waltham in Essex. He had become a Catholic in his youth, and in later years opposed puritan preaching in the university. 
Lorkin published one work: 'Recta regula et victus ratio pro studiosis et literatis' (1562). His 'Carmen Latinum decastichon' is prefixed to the manuscript 'Historia Anglicana' by John Herd (Cotton. MS Julius, C., ii.136). 
Lorkin died on 1 May 1591, and was buried in Great St Mary's Church, Cambridge. In his will he left certain estates to Pembroke College, Queens' College, and Peterhouse. His medical books he bequeathed to the university library. About 140 volumes reached the library in December 1594; many of them contain annotations by Lorkin, and have his monogram on the title page. 




@@@@@


doc= 17020


Thomas Lorkyn (d. 1625), diplomat, graduated BA from Emmanuel College, Cambridge, in 1601, proceeded MA in 1604, and was incorporated at Oxford on 30 August 1605. He accompanied Thomas Puckering on his travels between 1611 and 1613, and in 1619-20 he journeyed with the second son of Robert Cary, earl of Monmouth. In 1623 he was secretary to the embassy at Paris which negotiated the marriage of Prince Charles and Henrietta Maria. He continued to correspond with Puckering after they had parted, and many of his letters appear in Birch's 'Court and Times of James I' (1848). Two addressed to the earl of Carlisle are in the British Library (MS Egerton 2596, fols. 57, 112). Lorkyn was drowned in a channel storm about November 1625. 


@@@@@


doc= 17021


Lorrain, Paul (d. 1719), Church of England clergyman and criminal biographer, was a Huguenot immigrant to England. Neither the names of his parents nor the details of his education are known, but in 1681 his employer, Samuel Pepys, recorded that, 'his whole family, both by father and mother, are known protestants in France, and sufferers for being so, -- and himself by them bred up as such from the cradle' ('Life, Journals', 1.262). Some of Lorrain's kin found refuge in the Netherlands, while one Pierre Lorrain was admitted a member of the French church at Threadneedle Street, London, on 25 April 1671, bearing a certificate from his old congregation in Paris, where Paul is known to have had family. Paul had arrived in England by the late 1670s. There were those later who certainly thought that Lorrain had come as a religious refugee, but when in 1685 he praised Charles II for the safe haven he had provided for Huguenots, he wrote not of a personal debt he owed the king, but rather in third-person terms of: 'my deep Resentment [sense] of the Favours that many of my owne Country and Religion have so plentifully and seasonably receiv'd from His Bounty Basilick (which has been so graciously pleas'd so as to afford them a sanctuary in His Dominions, whilst it appear'd the whole World besides had no Place of Refuge for them). (BL, Stowe MS 987, fol. 8'r')' 

By the beginning of 1678 Lorrain was employed by Samuel Pepys as secretary, translator, and copyist, a position he held until 1700. He came recommended by 'a protestant minister, a man very eminent both at home and abroad' ('Life, Journals', 1.262). On 1 January 1678 Lorrain presented Pepys with 'Mulieres non Homines, ou, La Femme Deshumanisee' ('Women not Men, or, The Female Dehumanized') as a new year's gift, a beautifully copied translation into French that he had made of a notorious spoof polemic originally published in Latin in 1595. He had, he explained, often heard Pepys in conversation with the fair sex tell them that they were not of the human race, nor capable of salvation, a paradox that he had put down to his master's good humour, but now, coming across this eighty-year-old text, found the argument neither as new nor as extravagant as he had thought. He rounded off the translation with a gallant apology 'Aux Dames'. Lorrain was drawn into the problems of his master as Pepys, who came under suspicion in the wake of the Popish Plot, was falsely accused of treason and for a time imprisoned in the Tower of London. On 4 November 1678 Lorrain was required, as a member of Pepys's household, to display his protestant conformity by receiving the Anglican sacrament. In the following years Lorrain actively helped his master in his attempts to clear his name. In October 1679 he provided letters to two of his kinsmen in Paris as contacts for Pepys's brother-in-law. In January 1680 he witnessed a written statement against the sacked butler who had testified against Pepys in parliament. Most notably, in the summer of 1680 Lorrain helped his master in compiling -- and copied in his own hand -- the two volumes of evidences against Pepys's main accuser, John Scott, known as the 'Book of Mornamont'. Lorrain himself came under suspicion of popery, and in January 1681 dared not leave Pepys's house until he had put together the evidence to prove his protestantism. There was thus something more than the conventional when Lorrain, who had witnessed Pepys's dangers at first hand, alluded to 'YOUR KNOWN INTEGRITY and FORTITUDE', in the dedication of a book to him in 1683 (P. Lorrain, 'Rites of Funeral', 1683, sig. A3'r'). His inscription of the copy he presented to Pepys underlined the debt he owed to his master: '
SAMUELL PEPYS 

Anagram 

ALMES-SUPPLIE 

Whilst Godlike Charity's so much neglected, 

And by the most as fruitless quite rejected 

You do regard the Poor with Piteous Eye, 

And are to them an Heav'n-sent Alms-Supply. 
(Lorrain, 'Rites of Funeral', BL copy)' Lorrain elaborated his taste for anagrams with his new year's gift to Pepys on 1 January 1685, a small handwritten book which echoed his master's toryism by disclosing the secret meaning contained within the letters of Charles II's formal title: '
He's God on Earth, 

an Angelic Blessing of the Land, 

Releef of the Church, 

(that can defend it), 

and Dear Frend of God. 
(BL, Stowe MS 987, fol. 2'v')' Lorrain's thoughts carried on in similarly extravagant loyalist vein, in the course of the book condemning those 'moderne Writers, such as pen Romances, Novels, Pamphlets, and the like', who tailored their style: 'to please the gust [taste] of the Sick, than to give them good and wholesome Food, and choosing rather to set forth a bad piece that will take (as they call it) than a good one that will not relish the distemper'd palate of the squeamish Multitude. (ibid., fol. 6'v')' Lorrain was granted letters of denization on 31 January 1690. In the years following he helped his master in organizing his great library. During his years with Pepys, Lorrain also published a number of translations of protestant polemic and devotion. The first was 'Marcus Minucius Felix Octavus, or, A Vindication of Christianity Against Paganism' (1682), using a French translation collated with the original Latin. Dedicating the book to John Tillotson, dean of Canterbury, Lorrain made clear the contemporary relevance of this third-century apologetic when he praised him as 'a Zealous Defender of our Christian religion against Atheism; of our Reformed Religion against the Romish Superstition, which is the old Paganism reviv'd and varnish'd over' (sigs. A2'v'-A3'r'). 'Rites of Funeral, Ancient and Modern', a translation of a work by the French priest Pierre Muret, followed in 1683, excising a chapter on 'The funerals of hereticks' which Lorrain regarded as 'little less or more, than an Invective against Protestants, in reference to their Rites of Burial' ('The translator to the reader'). There followed three translations of works of Huguenot piety. In 1688 Lorrain published as 'A Preparation of the Lord's Supper, to which are Added, Maxims of True Christianity', a compilation of two works by Pierre Allix. 'A discourse of Christianity: laying open the abuses thereof in the Anti-Christian lives and worship of many of its professors; especially the Romanists; and shewing the way to a holy life in the character of a true Christian' (1693) was the translation of a work by Jean Ogier de Gombauld. 'A way to salvation, or, The way to eternal bliss; being a collection of meditations and prayers suited to the exercise of a true Christian', published in the same year, included pieces by Pierre Du Moulin, Pierre Drelincourt, and others, 'with some Additions of my own' (sig. A3'r') -- an interesting authorial intervention given that Lorrain was at this point himself still a layman. 
By the late 1690s Lorrain's piety was drawing him to a career in the Church of England. He also had practical matters to consider: a future livelihood without his ageing patron and, probably, family responsibilities. The first surviving mention of a wife is in a letter dated 25 March 1700. He does not name her there, and -- especially given evidence of his (also unnamed) wife's bouts of serious illness in the summer of 1700 and in May 1709 -- it not certain that Sarah, his widow, was his first and only wife. In January 1699 Pepys wrote supporting Lorrain's intention of 'consecrating the remainder of his life to His service in the Church, by entring into Holy Orders' and praised his 'sobriety, diligence and integrity' ('Private Correspondence', 1.168). By October Pepys was complaining, in terms which convey both how dependent Pepys had become upon Lorrain and the latter's increasing absorption into his clerical role, of: 'the little time I have Lorraine with mee, and the restraint his praesent character putts upon me as to the uses I should have to make of him relateing to my books, papers and clerkelike services, other than bare sitting at his deske upon solemne works only; the generality of my studys, businesse, and domesticks subjecting mee to many lesser uses for an assistant-pen, more than hee is either in the way for, or I doubt would readily apply himselfe to if hee were... Nor is this a small difficulty with mee, as knowing too well my having no choice towards the solving it, there being noe body but hee that knows my businesse and manner of workeing, and at the same time qualifyed in every respect for doeing it. (ibid., 1.200-01)' Lorrain nevertheless continued to act as Pepys's copyist when the latter was unable to write letters himself, and continued to show concern for his master: in March 1700 he disobeyed Pepys's wishes and wrote a letter to his nephew John Jackson warning him of his uncle's ill health. At Pepys's funeral in 1703 he received a mourning ring worth 15's'. 
Well before that date Lorrain had left Pepys's service. On 7 November 1700 he was appointed ordinary (prison chaplain) of Newgate by the court of aldermen. 'I (who all along have endeavoured to live blameless and suitable to my Holy Profession) was by order of that Court committed to New-gate', he wrote to Jackson, begging his prayers that 'God will enable me to go through that great and important work, and to discharge the office incumbent on me to the Glory of God and the good of those poor wretched souls that shall come under my care' ('Private Correspondence', 2.120). Lorrain's application had been supported by, among others, bishops Edward Fowler of Gloucester and Richard Kidder of Bath and Wells. As ordinary, his responsibility was not only to preach in the chapel and provide spiritual counsel to the prisoners and especially to the condemned. He also was to produce the semi-official broadsheet which followed each execution day, 'The ordinary of Newgate his account of the behaviour, confessions, and last speeches of those that were executed at Tyburn', a publication which had emerged in the 1670s and taken firmer shape under Samuel Smith, ordinary from 1676 to 1698. Lorrain's predecessor but one, John Allen, had been dismissed five months earlier for corrupt practices, which included 'his frequent prevarications in the printing and Publishing the pretended Confessions of the respective Criminalls That are executed at Tybourne' (Corporation of London RO, REP 104, fol. 340). 
An important duty of Lorrain's was, therefore, to guarantee the integrity of the ordinary's 'Account', as it recounted the crimes and fate of the condemned, its record of their confessions to him in Newgate, and behaviour at the gallows dramatizing tales of sin and hard-won redemption. The 'Account' was at once true-crime story and religious tract, and at once moral and commercial in its functions. Lorrain took both functions very seriously. 
In 1712 Lorrain claimed in the case he addressed to the Commons that the 'Account' should be exempt from stamp duty because it was a religious work, but he nevertheless implied the mingling of religious and secular considerations in its intentions. The 'Account' contained 'nothing but DIVINITY, DEVOTION, and what may be most Useful to the World', appearing 'for the general satisfaction of the Publick' and of value both to 'Good Men, in informing them in what they desire and have an Interest to Know' and 'to the Wicked, in reforming them in what they are so very defective, and making them sensible of the Dangers and Miseries which attend a vicious and ill Course of Life, and plainly shewing them how to avoid an Untimely and Shameful Death in this World, and an Eternal one in the next. (Lorrain, 'Case')' As the way to personal salvation lay through the atonement of public confession and execution for sins committed against society and against God, the 'Account' (at its fullest) included details of the early life of the condemned and of how their sins had led them into crime. Lorrain could provide details of receivers and accomplices. Moreover, the 'Account' sought to demonstrate that the condemned criminal was different in degree, not in kind, from the ordinary sinner, who faced the same crisis of salvation, a message underlined by placing criminals not as a breed apart but as ordinary members of the working population of London. Thus Lorrain became the sole biographer of many humble criminals: women such as Elizabeth Tethrington, aged twenty-nine, condemned for housebreaking, who had come to London from Ormskirk in Lancashire six years before to become an oyster-seller at Billingsgate before falling into bad company; or men such as Thomas Hunter, aged twenty-three, another housebreaker, born in St Botolph without Bishopsgate, who after serving a hard master for seven years fled, worked in victualling, and joined the navy before deserting and falling into a life of thieving. 
In the 'Account' Lorrain presented his energetic attempts to win such criminals to salvation: in private and public meetings in the chapel, and in the condemned hold, and in the sermons of repentance he preached on the Sundays between trial and execution. How his message was received has been a matter of debate at the time and among modern scholars, the latter disturbed by the shaping of the experience of the condemned criminal to stereotyped models of the descent into sin and the obvious element of gaining the criminals' consent to the righteousness of the political and social order which was about to hang them. Were the condemned indifferent to Lorrain's message, or angry at the spiritual harrying that it entailed, or did they genuinely find solace in his words? His own accounts provide evidence for all three positions, and in the same person at different times in their last days. At the time observers disagreed on the effectiveness of his ministry. 'The History of the Press-Yard' (1717) condescendingly noted that Lorrain: 'indeed did according to his Sufficiency, read Prayers tolerably well, and gave such Exhortations as might have been of benefit to the poor Souls they were directed to, but they had conceived such an indifferent Opinion of him from common Report, that all he said -- 'was made to go in at one Ear and out at the other'. (p. 49)' 

The profits of the 'Account' in the early eighteenth century have been estimated as $200 per annum, easily exceeding Lorrain's formal emoluments: each year he received a salary of $35, supplemented by a charitable bequest of $6 for preaching to the condemned and the grant to sell each year (usually) one City freedom, worth perhaps $25. Its profitability evidently owed much to Lorrain's own energies. The most thorough study of the 'Account' has argued that 'It would seem that much of the credit for firmly establishing the 'Account' as not only a 'semi-official' publication, but as a lucrative commercial enterprise in its own right rests with Paul Lorrain' (McKenzie, 239). He standardized the title and format (always writing in the first person). He carefully distinguished the authority of his text from the advertisements which appeared at the bottom of the 'Account', informing any readers who objected to their content that 'I have nothing to do with whatever comes in after my Name' (Harris, 18). Indeed, while the advertisements were often for works of piety -- very often Lorrain's own -- they could also include less obviously improving items such as a face-wash which 'plumps and softens the Skin, making it as smooth and tender as a sucking Child's' and 'The court of Venus, or, Cupid restor'd to right, being a history of Cuckolds and Cuckold-makers' (Lorrain, 'Account', 7 Dec 1715). On several occasions he warned readers of the 'Account' to accept no unreliable substitutes. Readers should spurn the 'sham-papers' purporting to be the 'Account' which often got the names and crimes wrong and misrepresented the spiritual state of the condemned. The only true account was the one which came out about eight o'clock the morning after the day of the execution under his name with its standard title and format. 
Above all Lorrain maintained editorial and commercial control of the 'Account', frequently changing publishers and printers -- he employed at least seven over the years. One, Dryden Leach, bitterly complained in 1707 of Lorrain's hard-headed dealings, alleging that, although he had always 'very honestly' paid Lorrain for every copy of the 'Account', when offered with better terms by another printer, Lorrain told Leach: 'in plain Terms, 'That truly he must take him that would pay him best', by this he excluded me: And now whether this is a Practice becoming a Clergyman or a Tradesman, I leave to the judicious part of Mankind, to make their own just Reflections. (McKenzie, 69)' Leach further claimed that he had often received copies of the 'Account' two days before the execution day it was alleged to report. This was not the only charge made against Lorrain to suggest that his greed got the better of his clerical duties. He was accused of having accepted bribes to work to obtain reprieves, and of having administered the sacrament to unworthy recipients for money. He was also charged with accepting cash to soften his account of some criminals. 
Many of these accusations arose from the ambiguity of Lorrain's position as somebody who, through the 'Account', was profiting from his spiritual functions, and as somebody who turned tales of crime into tales of redemption. Daniel Defoe suggested that his high-flown tales of low criminals reaching salvation rather discredited the authority of the church, in 'A Hymn to the Pillory' (1703): '
Where lies the Secret, let us know, 

To make a 'Sheep-stealer' a 'Saint'?... 




If this 'Wise Precedent' the World receives, 


'Newgate' shall ne're be call'd a 'Den of Thieves': 

What Rev'rence ought to such a Place be given, 

That Ships so many Loads of 'Saints to Heaven'? 
(pp. 1-2)' The riposte by or on Lorrain's behalf, 'Remarks on the author of the hymn to the pillory, with an answer to the hymn to the funeral sermon' (1703), not unreasonably cited in his defence the example of the thief on the cross beside Christ. Defoe's attack was sparked by the funeral sermon that Lorrain had delivered at St James, Clerkenwell, for Thomas Cook. Lorrain did indeed speak strongly of Cook's pious death, but the desire to preach a powerful sermon on repentance and salvation to a congregation whom he would not normally have reached was evidently Lorrain's motivation, rather than the fee as Defoe alleged. This is confirmed by reading the published text, 'Walking with God', with its insistent warning that its hearers might not be as lucky as Cook in being able to avoid damnation by timely repentance, and by who Cook actually was. Cook, a booth performer at the May fair, had been hanged a few days earlier for murdering a constable associated with the Reformation of Manners societies who had been trying to implement the queen's proclamation against vice at the fair. Cook, by profession and by his particular crime, was the embodiment of the sin that Lorrain was struggling against. His sincere repentance at the end was a pure example of what God's mercy and a willing soul could achieve. 
Lorrain continued to publish other works. In 1702 he published 'The dying man's assistant, or, Short instructions how to prepare sick persons for death: which are no less worthy the consideration of all good Christians in time of health, as shewing the importance of an early preparation for their latter end'. In 1707 he published the sermon he had preached for the fast day to commemorate the great fire of London, with alternative endings to its message of atonement adapted to the two congregations who heard it: to the worthy parishioners of St Dunstan's-in-the-West he exhorted charity to the poor; to the prisoners of Newgate he preached prayer and sincere repentance. In 1712, in 'Popery Near a-kin to Paganism and Atheism', he returned to his anti-popish strain, on the occasion of the abjuration of a Catholic priest accused of blasphemy. 
Lorrain's struggle to save the souls of the condemned appeared at its most dramatic at the execution of William Kidd for piracy at Execution Dock, Wapping, on 23 May 1701. Kidd had proved fairly resistant to Lorrain's exhortations in Newgate, believing (not without reason) that he was paying for the faults of his crew and his political patrons. Only when it was clear that there would be no reprieve did he at last make the briefest and most general of confessions. While he eventually promised to make a full confession at the gallows, he turned up at Wapping drunk, and 'was unwilling to own the Justice of his Condemnation, or so much as the Providence of God, who for his Sins, had deservedly brought him to this untimely End'. While Lorrain sang psalms with the other pirates who were to die, their captain loudly warned all masters of ships to have a care of themselves and take warning by him. When the condemned were turned off, Kidd's rope split; he was again tied from the gallows. 'Now I found him in much better temper than before', Lorrain recorded, and with Kidd at the top of the ladder and himself perched half-way up, Lorrain redoubled his efforts, urging him to 'embrace (before it was too late) the Mercy of God, now again offer'd him, upon the easy Conditions of stedfast Faith, true Repentance, and perfect Charity. Which now indeed he did so fully and freely express, that I hope he was hearty and sincere in it' (Lorrain, 'Kidd'). 
The Jacobite prisoners in 1715 and 1716 faced Lorrain with another set of challenges. His role as the voice of the state condemning the sin of rebellion earned him an abusive and threatening letter in the autumn of 1715, attacking him as a sycophant to the usurper. It demanded: 'Is there one syllable in all the Doctrine of the Church of England (of which you now declare yourself to be a Member) that can Justifie Deposing King James or abjuring his Son, on acco[un]t of Religion? I know not what you think now, but turn the tables, & I dare say you'l be of my opinion, & soe let me ask you, whether you did not think it a hardship to be driven out of France for your principles? & shall not King James & his Son have the same regard? (BL, Add. MS 38507, fol. 172'r')' This was evidently only one of several Jacobite 'Vile and unseemly Elegies' directed against Lorrain ('Weekly Journal, or, British Gazetteer', 10 Oct 1719, 1419). Other Jacobite prisoners showed the same refusal to accept that their rebellion was a crime. He urged the men awaiting execution in December 1715 that they make 'some publick Token of their Repentance for the publick Crime that had deservedly brought them to this open Shame'. They replied that 'They would not hear me if I harp'd any longer upon this string: and what they only desired of me was, my reading to them the Prayers and Lessons appointed for the Day and no more' (Lorrain, 'Account', 7 Dec 1715). The nonjuror John Hall was even more shocking in his resolution and breach of the basic tenets of civility. At the gallows he refused to join Lorrain in prayer, 'but all the while turn'd his back upon me; a Thing which no Protestant ever did before on such an Occasion'. 'Mr Hall, methinks you might have been more serious, and more civil; what harm have I now done to you, in imploring God's Mercy to your Soul?' (Lorrain, 'Account', 13 July 1716). 
Bolstered by their refusal to accept the validity of Lorrain's claims, these prisoners offered perhaps the most extreme form of resistance to his authority. It was reinforced by suspicions of him as an informer, exploiting his position to 'Expose some things which fell in his way, to the Service of the Government' ('Weekly Journal, or, British Gazetteer', 10 Oct 1719, 1419). 
In the 'Account' of May 1719 Lorrain offered a reward for discovering the author and publisher of a libel which had accused him of getting drunk on gin in a brandy-shop in Newgate Street; going the day after to condemned prisoners in the chapel, 'he shamefully spue'd upon his Cushion and then dy'd'. It went on to accuse him of having been before he took holy orders a French dancing-master who had himself been tried at the Old Bailey (McKenzie, 202). Lorrain showed his accustomed sensitivity to attacks on his position. The kernel of truth may be that he was already ill. He died five months later about 6 p.m. on 7 October 1719, in his house in Town Ditch (now Houndsditch), near Christ's Hospital, where he had moved from the house near St Bartholomew's Close, West Smithfield, in which he had been living in 1715. His will, made on 14 March 1712 and proved by his widow, Sarah, nine days after his death, inevitably paid a more than formulaic attention to the state of his soul: 'I nothing doubting but firmly beleiving that by the power & mercy of Almighty God I shall receive the same [my body] again Glorious and Immortall at the Generall Resurrection in the last day Amen'. To his immediate (unnamed) heir at law he left a mere twelve pence should he demand it; otherwise he left everything to 'my loving and most dearly beloved Wife' (GL, MS 9051/11, fol. 245). The 'Weekly Journal, or, Saturday Post' reported that he left an estate of $5000, but no inventory survives to substantiate this claim. 


@@@@@


doc= 17022


Lort, Michael (1724/5-1790), antiquary, a descendant of a Pembrokeshire family, was the eldest child of Roger Lort (1693/4-1745) of Tenby, a major in the Royal Welch Fusiliers who died of wounds after the battle of Fontenoy, and his wife, Anne (1697/8-1767), only child of Edward Jenkins, vicar of Fareham in Hampshire. His brothers and sisters all died before him; his sister Anne was the mother of William Lort Mansel, bishop of Bristol. Lort was educated at Evans's school, Tenby, and William Cole claimed that he went on to Westminster School, but there is no evidence of that in the school registers (Brydges, 1.469). He entered Trinity College, Cambridge, in June 1743 as a pensioner aged eighteen and proceeded BA (1747), MA (1750), BD (1761), and DD (1780). He was incorporated at Oxford on 7 July 1759. Trinity elected him to a fellowship in 1749 and he vacated it in March 1781. 
After graduation Lort became librarian to one of the great collectors of the age, Dr Richard Mead, until Mead's death in 1754. He was ordained priest in March 1754 and for the rest of his life he held numerous appointments both clerical and lay. Elected to the regius professorship of Greek at Cambridge in 1759 he enjoyed it virtually as a sinecure for twelve years, and left not even so much as a faded reputation as a classicist. Even the Greek verses above his name in several university collections were not his own but those of Thomas Zouch. He was debarred by the terms of this professorship from holding other offices in Cambridge and from proceeding to his doctor's degree so that by 1764 he was considering whether to apply for the university librarianship if it fell vacant. This came to nothing, and in 1768 he also failed to secure the regius professorship of modern history which went to his friend Thomas Gray. 
In 1761 Lort had become chaplain to the bishop of Peterborough, and was vicar of Bottisham, Cambridgeshire, from 1763 to 1770; from 1771 until his death he was rector of St Matthew's, Friday Street, London. During 1776 he accompanied Levett Hanson on a continental tour. He served as domestic chaplain to Archbishop Frederick Cornwallis, a great friend of the dean of Ely whose wife was a kinswoman of Lort, between September 1779 and 1783 when a visiting American, Thomas Hutchinson, heard him race 'through the litany as fast as a clerk would have gone through an instrument which was mere matter of form' ('Diary and Letters of... Thomas Hutchinson', 2.318). He was given a prebend at St Paul's Cathedral in 1780 which he held until his death. Lort married on 19 May 1783 Susannah ('bap'. 1741, died 1792), the daughter of William Norfolk, a Cambridge alderman, and his wife, Susannah. They had no children. In 1785 he became librarian to the archbishop at Lambeth, and he also had a position in the duke of Devonshire's household as keeper of his coins and medals; he was described in the 'Public Advertiser' as 'the Duke's Antiquary' (15 Sept 1788). To these preferments Lort added the living of St Michael, Mile End, near Colchester, to which he was collated in 1789, and the sinecure rectory of Fulham, Middlesex, for six months before his death. 
Lort was in touch with many scholars whose tastes and interests he shared, and he was a fellow of both the Society of Antiquaries from 1755 (he resigned after some time as its vice-president in 1788) and of the Royal Society from 1766. A great deal of his correspondence survives and parts of it, such as those with Walpole and Bishop Percy, have been printed. He was a friend and executor of the numismatist George North and inherited (with Anthony Askew) his books and other collections, and gave John Nichols a memoir of him. He was generous in supplying information to others, and especially obliging to Horace Walpole who had a high regard for him, and was indebted to him for many researches and for acting as an intermediary with Richard Gough. He made careful investigations into Chatterton and the Rowley forgeries, even travelling to Bristol to interview those who knew the poet; he resolutely defended Walpole's conduct in the affair. He helped James Granger with his book on portraiture and was an early patron of John Carter, the architectural draughtsman. His manuscripts are the basis of certain biographies in Alexander Chalmers's biographical dictionary, and of 'The whole duty of man', an account that Nichols later printed in 'Literary Anecdotes'. He also gave Nichols assistance with his history of Lambeth. 
Lort published only a few short pieces on his own account: an obsequious sermon given to the university on the anniversary of the accession of George II (1760), and another preached at Lambeth on the consecration of the bishop of Peterborough (1770); a Tudor document given him by Thomas Astle concerning the constitution and officers of the university whose publication in 1769 coincided with the installation of the duke of Grafton as chancellor; a short commentary on the Lord's prayer (1790); a letter to the 'Public Advertiser' (5 September 1771) to complain of scurrilous attacks on the king in the press; a few notes for the 'Gentleman's Magazine'; and papers for 'Archaeologia'. Like many of his kind he projected works that never appeared; there are, for example, fragmentary notes for a history of Trinity College (Bodl. Oxf., MS Gough Camb. 54), and a life of Bentley was hardly started. He wrote to Walpole in 1760 to say he lived among books and loved to 'tumble them over' (Walpole, 'Corr.', 16.141), and he was an inveterate annotator of his library, which was sold after his death in April and May 1791. Fanny Burney met Lort often and found that -- when not inadvertently embarrassing her with talk of 'Evelina' -- he could be 'comical and diverting', in manner 'somewhat blunt and odd', and 'curious in every species of antiquity, and difficult in none', while Susannah Lort was 'a most light and merry-hearted dame' ('Diary and Letters of Madame D'Arblay', 1.91, 476, 4.408-9). 
In August 1790 Lort was thrown from his carriage on a hill at Colchester; he died from his injuries on 5 November at his London home, 6 Savile Row. He was buried in St Matthew's, Friday Street, where Susannah Lort erected a memorial tablet; she died on 5 February 1792 and was also buried there. When the church was demolished in 1883 their remains were removed to the City of London cemetery at Ilford. 


@@@@@


doc= 17023


Lort, Sir Roger, first baronet (1607/8-1664), Latin poet, was the eldest son of Henry Lort of Stackpole, Pembrokeshire. He was admitted as a gentleman commoner to Wadham College, Oxford, in 1624, aged sixteen, sharing a chamber there in 1625 with his brother Sampson. He matriculated on 3 November 1626, graduated BA on 11 June 1627, and proceeded to the Middle Temple. In 1632 he married Hester, daughter of Francis Annesley, second Viscount Valentia (bap. 1586, d. 1660). The 'ambidextrous' Lorts played a leading role in Pembrokeshire. In 1643 Lort was an active royalist, commissioned by Lord Carbery to raise a regiment, and on 19 April of that year Lort and Robert Rudd, archdeacon of Carmarthen, were sent for as delinquents by parliament. In August 1643 Lort secured possession of Tenby for the king, by threats and lavish financial guarantees. Carbery's royalists then dissipated their forces and Lort's fortified house at Stackpole, a few miles south of Pembroke, was the first garrison attacked, falling on 30 January 1644. He rapidly submitted to parliament, agreed to serve on parliamentary committees (like many other former royalists), and was freed from delinquency and restored to his estates on 26 July 1644, though a fine of $1000 was imposed on 8 September 1645. 
While in London securing his future Lort published his 'first book' of Latin epigrams, 'Epigrammatum Rogeri Lort, armigeri, Cambro-Britanni, Oxoniensis... liber primus' (1646), comprising fourteen pages of reasonably accomplished elegiacs -- evidence of the value of Latin for furthering personal ambition. The book was rare by Wood's time, though Nicholas Lloyd 'commended the poems therein to be very good' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 3.232). Lort reveals a genuine interest in poetry (including Christopher Ocland's 'Anglorum praelia'), and close friendship for Archdeacon Rudd and former Middle Temple colleagues. He presents himself as a loyal parliamentarian, moderate in religion, lamenting the cruelties of civil war (worse than the conduct of wild bears or boars; Lort, 'Epigrammatum', 1), the proliferation of newspapers, and the unsightly brawls of Independents and presbyterians. Driven from home and family by Sir Charles Gerard, leader of a royalist counter-offensive, he describes how he undertook a perilous sea voyage to London. Fairfax receives extravagant praise, as equal to Gustavus Adolphus. The fiercest scorn is reserved for 'J. P. Pembrochiensem rapacissimum' (John Poyer, parliamentary governor of Pembroke Castle), who resented the Lorts' successful trimming. The feud with Poyer continued and Poyer imprisoned the Lorts in 1647, refusing Fairfax's order for their release. Soon afterwards Poyer was in revolt against parliament, with the Lorts now acting as loyal parliamentary commissioners and suppliers. One contemporary thought Roger Lort 'of any principle or religion to acquire wealth', and Sampson no better (Leach, 221); another that Roger fought 'in preservation of no cause but his own' (Jenkins, 26). By the Restoration, Lort was a royalist again, and in 1662 he was created a baronet. He died in 1664, survived by his second wife, Ann Wyndham (who later married Sir Edward Mansel); Lort was buried at St Petrox Church, Stackpole. The baronetcy passed to his son John; it died out in 1698 with Lort's grandson Gilbert. Lort's final epigram of 1646 promises further compositions, if they please the reader (if not, he says, that is more than enough); for whatever reason, there was no second book. 


@@@@@


doc= 17024


Loring, Sir Neil (c.1315-1386), soldier and administrator, was the son of Roger Loring of Chalgrave, Bedfordshire, and Cassandra, daughter of Reginald Perot. The family seems to have been established there since the twelfth century, and Sir Piers Loring served in Edward I's Scottish wars. His mother's family were also from Bedfordshire. Loring apparently entered the royal service at an early age. On 6 October 1335 he was granted a pension of 100's'., and had further grants from the king on 24 September 1338 and in 1339. He married Margaret, daughter and heir of Ralph Beauple of Cnubeston, Devon, with whom he had two daughters. Isabel, the elder, married first William Coggan, and second Robert Harrington, third Baron Harrington ['see under 'Harrington family]; her tomb is in Porlock church, Somerset. Margaret, Loring's younger daughter, married Thomas Peyvre of Toddington, Bedfordshire. 
Loring fought with distinction at the battle of Sluys on 24 June 1340, and was rewarded with the honour of knighthood and a pension of $20 yearly. In 1342 he served in Brittany under Sir Walter Mauny. On 23 February 1345 he went with Michael Northburgh on a mission to the pope to obtain a dispensation for the marriage of the prince of Wales with a daughter of the duke of Brabant. Later in this and in the following year he served under Henry, earl of Derby, in Aquitaine; a grant of 12 November 1346 implies that he was still with the earl following the latter's raid into Poitou and Saintonge during the autumn. Unlike most founder knights of the Garter he almost certainly did not fight at Crecy, but he was in the king's retinue at Calais in 1347, with three esquires and a hobelar. When the Order of the Garter was instituted in 1348-9 Loring was one of the original knights, occupying the tenth stall on the prince's side ['see also 'Founding knights of the Order of the Garter]. On 16 December 1350 he was one of the commissioners appointed to treat concerning the payments due to the king for the government of the Low Countries. By 1351 he had become chamberlain to the prince of Wales and a member of his council. He accompanied the prince to Aquitaine in 1353, and served in the campaign of Poitiers in 1356, distinguishing himself in the skirmish before Romorantin on 29 August. After the battle on 19 September, during which he was 'appointed to be in attendance on the prince's person', he was sent home to England with the news of the victory. Like many other members of the prince's retinue he was handsomely rewarded for his service, being given a pension of $83 6's'. 8died for life, as well as lands in Wales. In November 1359 Loring accompanied the king on his expedition into France, which was followed by the treaty of Bretigny on 25 May 1360. He was one of the guardians of the truce on 7 May, and was one of the commissioners appointed to supervise the transfer of lands and redress any violations. 
In July 1362 Loring went out to Aquitaine to prepare for the arrival of the prince of Wales later that summer. He was one of the four knights whom the prince sent to England in 1366 to obtain the king's opinion on the Spanish expedition, but returned to France in time to join the army at the beginning of the following year. At the battle of Najera on 3 April he fought in the prince's division. Loring was one of the knights whom the prince dispatched at the end of June from Valladolid to Seville in order to urge Pedro the Cruel of Castile to send the assistance he had promised. In 1369 he served under Sir Robert Knolles on his expedition into the Agenais, at the siege of Domme, and in the following year, under John Hastings, earl of Pembroke, in Poitou. 
Loring returned to England and took up residence on his ancestral estate at Chalgrave, where, in 1365, he had obtained leave to enclose a park. He died on 18 March 1386, and was buried in Dunstable Priory church, of which he was a benefactor. Loring also founded a chantry in Chalgrave church, and contributed to building the cloister at St Albans. He made a large number of legacies to religious foundations, including the friars at Truro, Bodmin, and Plymouth, reflecting the places where he had worked in the prince's service. He left his daughters a gold circlet valued at $40 and 2367 'great marguerite pearls' to be divided between them. There is a miniature representing him in his robes as a knight of the Garter in BL, Cotton MS Nero D.vii, fol. 105'v'. 


@@@@@


doc= 17025


Losinga, Herbert de (d. 1119), abbot of Ramsey and bishop of Norwich, was one of the most prominent English ecclesiastical leaders of his time. 
Herbert was born at Exmes, in the old 'vicomte' of the Oximin in southern Normandy, the son of Robert de Losinga. Various explanations of his name have been advanced. That it is of Suffolk origins (from Lothingland hundred, Lowestoft) is patently mistaken; and the chronicler John of Worcester's remark that he was called Losinga because of his skill in flattery ('lozenga' is first recorded as meaning flatterer in 1384) is extremely unlikely, since his father bore the same name. The most likely explanation is that, as in the case of another Robert de Losinga, bishop of Hereford, it is a corruption of Lotharingia, and that Herbert's ancestors had come from that region to Normandy. 
Herbert entered the abbey of Fecamp, where he rose to the office of prior. William Rufus (died 1100), soon after his accession, summoned Herbert to England, and in 1087 or 1088 he was appointed abbot of Ramsey. Three years later, on the death of William de Beaufou, he was elevated to the bishopric of East Anglia, recently moved to Thetford, and was consecrated before 27 January 1091, probably on 5 January. There is no doubt that he paid money to the king for his appointment, and for that of his father as abbot of the New Minster at Winchester (subsequently Hyde Abbey) -- one source specifies $1000 -- and thus committed simony, one of the sins most abhorred by reformers who took their lead from Rome. The episode is the subject of an early thirteenth-century wall painting in Norwich Cathedral. 
In the next three years there is little information concerning Herbert; he attested three royal charters and was present on 4 December 1093 at the consecration of Archbishop Anselm, who may have had considerable influence on his subsequent decision and actions. On 2 February 1094 the king deprived Herbert of office. The reason for this was the bishop's repentance of his simony and his intention to resign his see into the hands of Pope Urban II who, in a time of schism, was not yet recognized by Rufus. The chronology of events is not absolutely clear, but it seems almost certain that the royal action preceded rather than followed Herbert's visit to the pope, who absolved him and restored him to his bishopric. It is remarkable how quickly he was forgiven and reinstated by the king, but Herbert repaid Rufus by joining all the bishops except Rochester in supporting him against Archbishop Anselm at the Council of Rockingham in February 1095. There is, indeed, no evidence of any further conflict between Herbert and the king or his successor. In 1101 he was dispatched by Henry I as one of the envoys to the papal curia to discuss Anselm's refusal of homage; an embassy disrupted by Herbert's capture for ransom in 1102 by Guy of Lyons, and one which was ultimately hardly a success, since not only did Pope Paschal II fully support Anselm, but the envoys misunderstood his message, and a second delegation had to be sent. When Herbert, with other bishops, wrote to the archbishop urging him to return from exile, this was certainly not done against the king's wishes. Although, again with other bishops, Herbert deplored Henry I's depredations of the church during Anselm's exile, he mentioned his affection for the king in a letter to a close friend, and he corresponded with Queen Matilda, for whom he composed a prayer. 
That Anselm did not bear any resentment is suggested by his choice of Herbert in 1108 as his envoy to York to negotiate in the primacy dispute between the two archiepiscopal sees. Herbert attended councils of the English church in 1102, 1108, and 1109, and appears to have supported the archbishop's reforming measures, although after the council of 1102 he told Anselm that pastoral ministry in his diocese would almost come to a stop if all married clergy were to be suspended. On at least five occasions between 1096 and 1115 he was present at the consecration of bishops. He was a prominent figure within the English church, and the abbot of Ely at least hoped that he might emerge as successor to Anselm at Canterbury; it is interesting, however, that Herbert sharply refused the abbot's invitation to become involved in the simmering conflict between regulars and seculars as the champion of the monastic order. 
In the history of his own diocese, Herbert's most obvious contribution is the removal of the see from Thetford to Norwich and his establishment there of a magnificent new cathedral staffed by a chapter of Benedictine monks. The tradition that the bishop embarked on its construction largely at his own expense as atonement for his simony need not be entirely discarded, as his foundation charter stresses the value of penitence; but it is not in fact necessary to explain the move, which was entirely in accord with the programme adopted by the Norman episcopate as a whole to move their sees to thriving urban centres. Although the removal from North Elmham to Thetford was recent, the church of St Mary there was small and was, moreover, held by the sons of Bishop Herfast, while the great magnate houses of Bigod and Warenne had a strong hold on the two halves of the town. The later tradition is that the establishment of the cathedral at Norwich took place on 9 April 1094, but this is too soon after Herbert's deprivation and probably during his journey to Rome. It is likely, in fact, that the king's permission was obtained in 1095, when a royal commission determined the bounds of the land to be handed over to the bishop in addition to the site of Holy Trinity Church, given to the bishopric by the Conqueror, and now to be demolished. Building probably began in 1096. There was inevitably a period of transition; the church of Thetford was not handed over to Roger (I) Bigod for the establishment of a Cluniac priory until 1103, and for some years Herbert was described as bishop of either place. 
By early September 1101 Herbert made reference to the church of Holy Trinity, which he had built and consecrated. This obviously refers to the eastern end of the church, and possibly only the choir. By Herbert's death in 1119 building had progressed probably as far as the fourth or fifth bay of the nave. The building, which substantially survives, was completed under his successor, Everard, and is remarkable both for its scale (a nave of fourteen bays) and for its cosmopolitan sophistication. In essence an ancient Roman basilica, its elaborate decoration broke with the stark simplicity of the first generation of Anglo-Norman Romanesque. Much of the episcopal palace, akin to a miniature keep, was also built by 1119, although the monastic complex was not completed until the late twelfth century. The construction of the cathedral, following on that of the royal castle, totally transformed both the topography and the social structure of medieval Norwich. The liturgy introduced in the cathedral was that of Fecamp, the house of Herbert's profession, and, as the customs of Fecamp were themselves derived from Cluny, Norwich was drawn into one of the great reforming movements of the eleventh and early twelfth centuries. 
Bishop Herbert in the initial years made substantial donations to the new community out of the revenues of the bishopric, both on the outskirts of Norwich and further afield in East Anglia. He imposed an aid on the whole diocese, collected in parishes, to finance the programme. He was also careful to obtain the support of both king and pope. Rufus almost certainly charged heavily for land around Holy Trinity Church, but Henry I gave the manor of Thorpe specifically to fund the building, and also granted valuable privileges. The earliest papal document in the Norwich archives is a bull of Pope Paschal II, issued in April 1102, when Herbert was in Rome. This confirmed the founder's own intentions, that a community of monks should for ever be established in the church of Norwich, and that no future bishop should expel them or in any way infringe the rights granted to them by the king and others of the faithful. 
In fact, lay investment in the new cathedral was not lavish. This did not denote lack of enthusiasm for the monastic order, but was rather the consequence of the foundation by the Norman aristocracy of East Anglia of numerous religious houses, which had first claim on the generosity of the tenants of the honours and which were encouraged by the bishop himself. In 1087 the only Benedictine communities in the region were Bury St Edmunds, St Benet of Hulme and the small cell at Rumburgh, and the earliest Norman foundation by William Malet at Eye. Thereafter, before Herbert's death in 1119, communities of French monks were established at Castle Acre (by the Warenne family, 1089), Clare (1090), Binham (Valognes, 'c'.1093), Thetford (Bigod, 1103), Horsham St Faith (Robert fitz Walter and Sybil, his wife, 1103), and Wymondham (d'Aubigny, 1107). The ecclesiastical geography and religious practice of East Anglia was totally transformed and, as the buildings gradually rose, the influence of Herbert's architectural model at Norwich became apparent. His personal influence in this revolution is more difficult to document, as few episcopal charters survive from the period, which still relied largely on oral testimony. There are, in fact, only twenty episcopal 'acta' for an episcopate of twenty-eight years. Hints are given, however, by Herbert's notification that a monastery was being built at Castle Acre in accordance with his wishes, by a reference to his confirmation for Clare, and by the indulgence which he granted to visitors to Horsham St Faith. His awareness of new trends in religion is indicated by his support for the foundation, towards the end of his life, of a house of Augustinian canons at Great Bricett. 
Herbert's policy as diocesan bishop was assertive. He continued his predecessors' attempts to undermine the exempt status of the great Suffolk monastery of Bury St Edmunds, albeit ultimately unsuccessfully. He was alarmed by the exemption claimed by Thetford as a daughter house of Cluny, and waged a successful battle to ensure that the body of the founder, Roger Bigod, was buried in the cathedral rather than in his own monastery. The cathedral was intended to be a liturgical model for the diocese, and its influence was extended by the foundation of dependent cells at St Leonard's in Norwich and at Aldeby, Lynn, and Yarmouth; at the last of these, episcopal rights were staunchly defended against the claims of the local citizens. The best evidence for Herbert's aspirations is architectural. He built on a grand scale, modelled on the style of the cathedral, at the new town of Bishop's (now King's) Lynn, at Yarmouth, and at North and South Elmham, to the extent that his architectural programme has been described as a manifestation of 'episcopal imperialism' (Batcock, 188). 
It is possible to obtain some appreciation of Herbert's character and intellect because of the rare survival of collections of fourteen sermons and fifty-nine letters. The sermons, which were probably delivered to a monastic audience, reveal an encyclopaedic knowledge of scripture and a determination always to extract a moral from the text; Herbert was an expert in allegory. His knowledge of patristic writers may well have been derived from florilegia rather than from profound study of the texts themselves. His theology was generally conservative, and there is little hint of the application of reason to faith, which was the path of the future. His emphasis on the Real Presence in the eucharist is probably the legacy of Lanfranc. In only one instance does his preaching reflect a theological development of his own time; his Marian theology has been described as more advanced than that of any contemporary except Eadmer, and Herbert described himself as 'pious client of the Mother of God' (Alexander, 204). His effectiveness as a preacher, which of course cannot be fully appreciated from the written word, is suggested by an account of how his sermon at Ely at the translation of St AEthelthryth (Etheldreda) in 1107 reduced the congregation to tears. 
Many of the letters are addressed to monastic students. They indicate that there was a school of liberal arts at Norwich and that the bishop took a keen interest in the education of oblates. The letters reveal a very traditional Benedictine attitude, compassionate and sensible, rigid in essentials and especially on obedience to the rule, flexible on peripheral matters. Herbert appreciated the dangers and temptations of the celibate life, especially for the young, and understood the difficulties caused by the simultaneous study of both Christian and pagan literature. Most especially, in letters and sermons, he stressed continually the obligation of charity: 'the church's poor people are the Body of Christ' (Alexander, 216), and 'alms extinguish sin as water does fire' ('Life, letters and sermons', 2.27). 
Late in 1116 Herbert set out again for Rome, this time with Archbishop Ralph of Canterbury, who was intent on resolving the dispute with York. He fell ill at Piacenza and returned to Normandy. Thereafter he attracted no notice from chroniclers until his death on 22 July 1119. He was buried before the high altar of his cathedral. It is no longer believed that the episcopal figure set in the north wall of the north transept is Herbert's image from his tomb (probably it rather represents St Felix) but the vestments are of the early twelfth century and its presence here is strangely appropriate. At Norwich the memory of the founder was, naturally, still cherished in the early fourteenth century. More significantly, both Orderic Vitalis and William of Malmesbury, who had fiercely condemned Herbert's simony, believed that by his record as bishop he had atoned for his sin. 


@@@@@


doc= 17026


Robert the Lotharingian (d. 1095), bishop of Hereford, was an active and scholarly post-conquest prelate. 
Robert was by origin a Lotharingian, probably from Liege or the surrounding area. Although his name is often given as Robert de Losinga, on the assumption that he was associated with Herbert de Losinga, bishop of Norwich, the most reliable early source which gives him a cognomen, William of Malmesbury's 'Gesta pontificum', terms him 'Lotharingus' ('the Lotharingian'); while in the Hereford Cathedral obit book, itself mid-thirteenth-century but copying older material, he occurs as 'Roberti Lothogaringi'. Supporting evidence of his origins comes in the obit book of the cathedral of Liege, in Lower Lotharingia, where, under 26 June, is recorded 'Commemoratio fratris nostri domini Roberti episcopi de Herdeffordh', which suggests, by its use of the phrase 'frater noster' ('our brother'), that Robert had probably been a canon of Liege Cathedral. If so, he would have been educated at Liege Cathedral school, one of the few places in northern Europe in the period specializing in mathematics, one of Robert's main interests. His date of birth is unknown, but since he became bishop in 1079 it is unlikely to have been after 1049. He had a brother called Gerard, who became a member of Hereford Cathedral chapter. 
Robert's education would have opened prospects in England, where, until the twelfth century, the standard of education for secular clerics, as opposed to monks, was low. It can be debated whether he arrived in England before or after the conquest. On the one hand, most of the Lotharingian clerics who came to England in the eleventh century are to be found there by the death of Edward the Confessor, who, out of all the eleventh-century English kings, seems most to have encouraged their influx. He required learned secular clerics to serve him at court as monks were educated but vowed to stability. A priest called Robert occurs in Edward's time, witnessing charters of 1050 and slightly later, and also occurring as witness in a forgery for Westminster, supposedly of 1065; he may perhaps be identifiable with the Robert who became bishop, or, alternatively, with the Robert who occurs as monk of Stow in 'Domesday Book'. However, if we accept an early arrival for Robert the Lotharingian, the gap in references to him between the 1050s and 1079 is hard to explain, and it is rather more likely that he was invited to England by William the Conqueror, who is known to have invited Walcher, bishop of Durham (1071-80), another cleric from Liege. 
Also unclear is how Robert supported himself before his consecration. It is known, however, that at least by the 1080s he had close relations with the bishop of Exeter (perhaps the Lotharingian-educated Leofric, 1046-72), who gave him the church of Bampton in Oxfordshire which he was holding in 1086. However, this could be explained as a gift to a highly thought-of fellow bishop seeking a resting place on journeys between Hereford and London, paralleled by the grant to Robert by Maurice, bishop of London (1086-1107), of a prebend of St Paul's. One piece of patronage which might, however, be older is the gift of one hide, held in 1066 by one of Harold's priests but in 1086 by Robert, on the manor of Writtle in Essex. William I would have taken over the manor in 1066 and would probably have dispossessed Harold's priest immediately. Another source of support for Robert before his consecration appears to have been Wulfstan, bishop of Worcester, who ordained him priest, and who became a close friend. 
In 1079 Robert was appointed bishop of Hereford in succession to Walter, a fellow Lotharingian; he was consecrated at Canterbury on 29 December. Although evidence suggests that Robert attended court infrequently, the absence of references is deceptive. For example, no source records that he attended the great meeting at Gloucester at Christmas 1085, but he almost certainly was there, for he took a great interest in the 'Domesday' survey, a description of which he entered into his only surviving literary work, a commentary on the method of dating the incarnation adopted by Marianus Scottus, the chronicler. Furthermore, his mathematical abilities could hardly have been overlooked by William I; indeed, it has been plausibly suggested that Robert was one of the 'Domesday' commissioners, possibly for the south-eastern circuit, though there is no decisive evidence to prove it. Robert's particular value to William I and William II probably lay in his knowledge of how to use the abacus. Although the abacus had been brought to England earlier, knowledge of it was still so rare in the eleventh century that he won a reputation for his skill and Geoffrey, prior of Winchester, wrote an epitaph for him referring to it. 
The most significant surviving outcome of Robert's interest in computation is his short commentary on the chronological treatise by Marianus Scottus which formed the preface to the latter's universal chronicle. Marianus's chronicle, composed before 1082 in Mainz, adopted Abbo of Fleury's theory that Christ's nativity had occurred twenty-two years earlier than the dating proposed by Dionysius Exiguus ('fl'. 525), according to a re-examination of the astronomical data in the gospels. The method chosen by Marianus was termed 'anni secundum evangelium' ('years according to the gospel'). Robert appears to have been responsible for having Marianus's work brought to England, where, perhaps under his supervision, a short entry on 'Domesday Book' was added under the year corresponding to 1086 in AD dating in one of the earliest English manuscripts (BL, Cotton MS Nero C.v); he was also probably instrumental in introducing Marianus's work to Worcester, where it was to be used by John of Worcester as one of the main sources for his chronicle (completed in 1140). No copy of Marianus was preserved at Hereford, but Robert's interest in history is suggested by the existence of brief historical works, an extract from Isidore's chronicle and Eutropius's 'Breviarium ab urbe condita', in a manuscript probably made at Hereford in Robert's time (Hereford Cathedral, MS O.ii.9), and lists of popes, patriarchs and emperors, and other figures in another, probably contemporary, Hereford manuscript (Hereford Cathedral, MS O.ii.7). Robert's commentary on Marianus, however, is exclusively about computation, and its only claim to originality lies in a few corrections to Marianus's chronology. It survives in eight manuscripts and was known to William of Malmesbury and John of Worcester. 
Robert imported other ideas from the Holy Roman empire as well. At Hereford he had built a square two-storey episcopal chapel on a central plan, with the upper chapel forming a gallery, around an octagonal well. William of Malmesbury (who mistakenly records this building as the cathedral) likened it to the imperial chapel at Aachen, though a closer parallel can be found in, for example, the chapel of St Martin and St Emmeram built at Speyer Cathedral 'c'.1080-90. The choice of patron saints for Robert's chapel, St Catherine and St Mary Magdalen, also reflects spiritual fashions in Lotharingia, where awareness of eastern Mediterranean cults was stronger than in England in the eleventh century. Although the plan of the chapel shows German influence, the masonry is typical of the Anglo-Norman school. Robert also appears to have commissioned a two-storey chapel at his manor house at Bampton, and he rewarded his mason with a small tenancy on an episcopal manor in Herefordshire. 
The chapel at Hereford was staffed by four chaplains, who also formed part of the cathedral community and who were provided with separate holdings on the estates of the church of Hereford, as were the rest of the cathedral community, described in 'Domesday' as 'clerks' and as 'bishop's clerks'. About half these holdings survived as later prebendal endowments. The number of cathedral clergy in Robert's time, calculated from the 'Domesday' returns, was very close to the 'numerus clausus' ('set limit') of the thirteenth century, and almost certainly it was Robert who established the cathedral chapter of Hereford in the form it was to take for the rest of the middle ages. He almost certainly appointed the first known archdeacon of Hereford and probably also the first dean, his brother Gerard. 
Control of the estates of the church of Hereford remained in the bishop's hands; Robert, while recognizing the rights of the community to a share in them, did not make a formal division of lands between himself and his chapter, and the main heading of the 'Domesday' entry, 'Lands of the church of Hereford', was probably deliberately chosen to underline the unity of the church. Subinfeudation was carefully limited; very few of the tenants were important enough to be named in 'Domesday', and most of the knights' holdings are small subsections of manors, usually no more than a hide apiece. One of Robert's subtenants, however, was powerful: this was Roger de Lacy, for whom Robert issued a charter granting his fee after the death of his father. Robert's grant carefully specified that he was to hold it for one life only, and the form of charter used, a chirograph imitating late Anglo-Saxon episcopal leases, was doubtless chosen to underline this, though in practice the Lacy family could not be dislodged. The hand in which the charter is written is a continental book-hand, probably Lotharingian. 
According to William of Malmesbury, Robert would take refuge from legal business in the household of his friend Wulfstan, bishop of Worcester. His links with the diocese of Worcester were close enough for him to be chosen to lay the first stone of the new church of St Peter's Abbey, Gloucester, on 29 June 1089, and he also attended the translation of the relics of St Oswald of Worcester into Wulfstan's new cathedral there, on 8 October, possibly in 1089 when the choir of the new building was advanced enough for the monks to move in. In 1094 Wulfstan made his confession to Robert and asked to be scourged by him. In January 1095 Robert, then at the royal court at Cricklade, had a vision in which Wulfstan informed him of his death; Robert presided over the funeral. Just before this (according to William of Malmesbury's 'Gesta pontificum') or thirty days after the death (according to John of Worcester), Robert had another vision of Wulfstan, who this time announced to his friend that he too had not much longer to live and ordered him to amend his ways. In March 1095 Robert attended the Council of Rockingham, where he promised William Rufus that he would not recognize Anselm as archbishop; but after Whitsun he met Anselm and did penance for this. He died on 26 June 1095 and was buried in Hereford Cathedral. 


@@@@@


doc= 17027


Lothian, William (1740-1783), Church of Scotland minister and historian, was born in Edinburgh on 5 November 1740, the son of George Lothian, an Edinburgh surgeon, and Elizabeth Hutchison. His mother having died when he was an infant, and his father when he was five years old, he was raised by relatives. After attending Edinburgh high school, he proceeded to the arts and divinity courses at the University of Edinburgh, where he took an active part in the Belles Lettres Society and the Theological Society. Licensed to preach by the presbytery of Edinburgh in October 1762, he was presented to the first charge at the Canongate church on 12 April 1764 and was ordained there on 16 August. A supporter of the moderate party on the controversial subject of church patronage, he represented the presbytery of Edinburgh at the annual general assembly of the church in regular rotation, in 1768, 1773, 1778, and 1783, and earned the respect of his brethren for his 'sound understanding' and 'firmness of mind' in the assembly and other ecclesiastical courts (Dalzel, 50). 
On 1 October 1776 Lothian married the daughter of an Edinburgh jeweller, his cousin Elizabeth Lothian (died 1815), with whom he had six children, five of whom survived him. In the same year two of his sermons were published in 'The Scotch Preacher' (vol. 2). His major work was a large quarto, 'The history of the united provinces of the Netherlands, from the death of Philip II, king of Spain, to the truce made with Albert and Isabella' (1780), published by James Dodsley and Thomas Longman of London and James Dickson of Edinburgh. John Murray had originally planned to publish it but, in a letter of 29 June 1779, declined to do so, citing unfavourable economic circumstances caused by the Spanish war and the closing of the American trade as factors in his decision. Lothian then approached the Edinburgh bookseller William Creech, who raised the matter with his primary publishing partner in London, William Strahan. Lothian viewed his book as a continuation of Robert Watson's successful 'History of the Reign of Philip the Second, King of Spain', which Strahan, Creech, and other partners had published in 1777, and he was apparently unaware that Watson himself was engaged in continuing that work. On 6 August 1779 Strahan informed Creech that they 'can have nothing to do' with Lothian's manuscript because the subject infringed on Watson's. While Lothian continued to negotiate with booksellers, he was granted an honorary DD by the University of Edinburgh on 15 October 1779. His work is for the most part a dry narrative of the Dutch struggle for independence that concludes with praise for the 'firm and determined spirit' of the Dutch, in opposition to the 'oppression' and 'tyranny' of Spanish rule (W. Lothian, 'The History of the United Provinces', Dublin edn, 1780, 455). 
Elected fellow of the Royal Society of Edinburgh on 17 November 1783, Lothian died one month later on 17 December, after a long and painful illness, and was buried in the Canongate churchyard. A memorial by John Logan was inscribed in the wall behind the church's gallery. On 15 March 1784 Andrew Dalzel read a brief biography of Lothian to the Royal Society of Edinburgh, the first eulogy in the history of the society, which was published four years later in its 'Transactions'. 


@@@@@


doc= 17028


Lothropp, John (bap. 1584, d. 1653), minister in America, was baptized on 20 December 1584 at Etton in the East Riding of Yorkshire, the son of Thomas Lothropp (died 1606) and his second wife, Mary (died 1588/9), of Cherry Burton and Etton. He had two brothers, Thomas (died 1629), later rector of Dengie, Essex, and William, and two sisters, Mary and another who later married William Akett of Leconfield, Yorkshire. After matriculating on 15 October 1602 at Christ Church, Oxford, where he was a sizar to Dr John King, he moved to Queens' College, Cambridge, where he graduated BA in 1606 and proceeded MA in 1609. He was ordained a deacon at Lincoln on 20 December 1607, and served as curate of Bennington, Hertfordshire, before becoming perpetual curate of Egerton, Kent, in 1609. On 10 October 1610 he obtained a licence to marry Hannah, daughter of John Howse, minister of Eastwell, Kent. Their children included five sons, Thomas (21 Feb 1613-29 Sept 1675), Samuel, Joseph ('b'. 1624), Benjamin, and Fuller (married 8 April 1635), and three daughters, Jane (1614-1634/5), Barbarah ('bap'. 31 October 1619; married 19 July 1638), and Elizabeth. 
About 1624 Lothropp, perhaps influenced by discussions with a group of separatists at Egerton led by John Fenner, resigned his curacy, renounced his ordination, and moved to Southwark. There he joined the Independent congregation founded by Henry Jacob, was elected its pastor in 1625, and was reordained. The congregation split in 1630 after one of the members had a child baptized in the Church of England, an act that sparked calls by some to renounce the established church and become fully fledged separatists, a course recommended by John Canne. When Lothropp and his supporters refused to do so, 'not knowing what in time to come God might further manifest to them' (Burrage, 2.301-2), John Dupper and his followers seceded. In 1632 Lothropp, having obtained notes of John Davenport's sermon against Independency, sent him a substantive critique that changed his mind. On 29 April 1632 Bishop William Laud's pursuivant, one Tomlinson, arrested Lothropp and approximately forty-one of his adherents as they worshipped in the house of a brewer's clerk in Blackfriars. Eighteen members of the church were either absent or escaped. When Lothropp appeared before the court of high commission on 3 May, he claimed that 'the Lord hath qualified me' to be a minister and refused to take the oath 'ex officio', a position he reiterated before the commission on 8 May (Gardiner, 281). While he was incarcerated, some of his church members left in September 1633 to establish a separatist congregation, the first pastor of which was Samuel Eaton. Lothropp's wife also died while he was in prison. 
On 12 June 1634 the high commission ordered Lothropp's release on bond, with the stipulation that he return in Trinity term and not attend conventicles. When he failed to appear, the commission ordered his arrest on 19 June and again on 9 October, and on 19 February 1635 it cited him for contempt and repeated the call for his apprehension. By this time he had sailed for Massachusetts with his church's approval, taking approximately thirty members with him. Nine days after arriving in Boston on 18 September 1634, he went to Scituate at the invitation of its settlers to organize a church. He had the support of the Plymouth congregation, which dismissed its members in the Scituate area on 23 November so they could join Lothropp's group. Following the church's foundation on 8 January 1635, Lothropp was ordained on 19 January. Some time after 8 January Lothropp remarried, for his new wife, Ann, joined the congregation on 14 June 1635. They had six children, Barnabas ('bap'. 6 June 1636, died 1715), Abigail ('bap'. 2 Nov 1639), Bathsua ('bap'. 27 Feb 1642, died 1724), John (1645-1727), and two who died at or near birth (1638, 1650). On 7 June 1637 Lothropp was admitted as a freeman of the colony of New Plymouth. 
On 1 January 1638 Lothropp and other freemen of Scituate complained to the colony's court of assistants about a shortage of suitable land, and the following month he reported to the governor that he was experiencing numerous problems, including suspicions (which proved unfounded) of plotting between local residents and people in England. He sought new land on which to settle his flock, but not until October 1639 could he and some of his members relocate to Barnstable, in the same colony. He sold his farm at Scituate to Christopher Blackwood, who subsequently returned to England and became a prominent Particular Baptist. A new church was formally organized at Barnstable on 31 October 1639, and John Mayo became Lothropp's assistant the following year. Lothropp served as minister until his death on 8 November 1653. His will bequeathed two houses and several lots at Barnstable to his wife and eldest son, and he left goods valued at $72 16's'. 5died Nathaniel Morton described him as a humble man, a 'lively' preacher, and 'studious of peace, furnished with godly contentment' (Morton, 141). 


@@@@@


doc= 17029


Loudon, Charles (1801-1844), medical writer, was born in Barony, Lanarkshire, and baptized there on 11 October 1801. He matriculated at the University of Glasgow in 1818. By 1826 he had become a member of the Royal College of Surgeons in London; in that year he published his first work, 'A short inquiry into the principal causes of the unsuccessful termination of extraction by the cornea'. In 1827 he graduated MD at Glasgow. 
Loudon established himself in 1828 as a physician at Leamington Spa, Warwickshire, where he published his second work, 'A Practical Dissertation on the Waters of Leamington Spa', which went through three editions between 1828 and 1831. He described the forms of treatment and the amenities that were available in this new spa resort that was already attracting an aristocratic and royal clientele. Contrary to the more 'quack' medical writers of the day he described the waters as 'inapplicable to every ailment'. In Leamington, Loudon first practised at Bedford House before moving to the newly built 3 Clarendon Place, Clarendon Square -- both in the fashionable new town being built north of the River Leam. On 12 July 1830, at Leamington Priors, he married Margracia Ryves of Castle Ryves, co. Limerick. They had no children. 
In 1833 Loudon was appointed one of the royal commissioners for inquiring into the employment of children in factories. One of three medical commissioners, he investigated conditions in the north-eastern district of Yorkshire, in Leicestershire, and in Nottinghamshire. He contributed articles to medical journals, including a paper in 1832 on the use of leeches on the breasts to cure amenorrhoea and a contribution on the medicinal use of laurel leaves for 'The Lancet'. In 1836 he published the first of two works on population and subsistence, 'The equilibrium of population and sustenance demonstrated, showing on physiological and statistical grounds the means of obviating the fears of the late Mr Malthus'. One of many publications of the time that sought to contradict the notion of the 'positive check' to population advanced by Thomas Malthus, this was followed in 1842 by a volume published in Paris, 'Solution du probleme de la population et de la subsistance'. In a series of thirteen epistles, Loudon concluded that an extended physical, moral, and religious education would make for a contented population. Loudon had retired to Paris in 1841, and he died there at 9 rue neuve du Luxembourg, on 2 February 1844. 


@@@@@


doc= 17030


Loudon, Jane (1807-1858), writer on botany and magazine editor, was born on 19 August 1807 at Ritwell House, near Birmingham. Her mother died when she was twelve, and her father, Thomas Webb, a businessman, suffered financial reverses a few years later. Little is known of Jane Webb's early education, but, following the death of her father in 1824, she set out to earn money by writing. In addition to 'Prose and Verse' (1824) she published anonymously 'The Mummy! A Tale of the Twenty-Second Century' (1827), a pioneering work of science fiction that brought together political commentary, Egyptomania, and interest in technology. References to a steam mowing device, telegraph, and other innovations led John Claudius Loudon (1783-1843) to review the book favourably and to seek out the acquaintance of the writer, whom he believed to be male. They met in February 1830, and on 14 September of that year Jane Webb married Loudon, then forty-six, who was an indefatigable landscape designer. They lived with their daughter, Agnes ('b'. 1832), at 3 Porchester Terrace, Bayswater, London, in a suburban villa with an attached circular conservatory and a garden, all designed by Loudon. 
Jane Loudon worked closely with her husband on his 'Gardener's Magazine'. Embarrassed about how little she knew about plants when they married, she attended lectures in London given by the botanist John Lindley, and wrote up her notes as articles. During the 1830s and early 1840s she accompanied her husband on tours through England and into Scotland. She served as his amanuensis, recording his observations about kitchen gardens, conservatories, and great houses and their grounds, as he recommended improvements and endeavoured to promote a taste for gardening as art. 
When production of her husband's 'Arboretum' (1838) saddled the family with debts of $10,000, Jane Loudon turned again to authorship, and tapped the ready Victorian market for books popularizing horticulture, botany, and natural history. 'Instructions in Gardening for Ladies' (1840) was hugely successful; 1350 copies were sold on the day of publication alone. 'The Ladies' Flower-Garden of Ornamental Annuals' (1840), the first in a much-reprinted series of informative illustrated books, was followed by others about bulbs, greenhouse plants, and perennials. 
Jane Loudon also brought information about the natural system of plant classification to popular audiences, in 'The First Book of Botany... for Schools and Young Persons' (1841) and 'Botany for Ladies' (1842). Identifying with readers who had little or no science education, she wrote: 'It is so difficult for men whose knowledge has grown with their growth, and strengthened with their strength, to imagine the state of profound ignorance in which a beginner is, that even their elementary books are like the old 'Eton Grammar' when it was written in Latin. ('Botany for Ladies', vi)' To make scientific knowledge more accessible and interesting, Loudon used familiar narrative forms; 'The Young Naturalist's Journey' (1840) features rail travel by 'Agnes Merton and her Mamma' across the British Isles. 
Jane Loudon was widowed in 1843, and debts from her husband's publications put her into financial hardship for the rest of her life. She received an award from the Royal Literary Fund in 1844, and a civil-list pension of $100 in 1846, and continued to produce many illustrated botanical books and popular natural history titles. She edited the 'Ladies' Companion at Home and Abroad' (1849-51), a weekly magazine that promoted mental cultivation along with 'separate spheres', 'Not to make women usurp the place of men, but to render them as rational and intelligent beings' (29 Dec 1849). Although she did not support feminist initiatives in her day, she wrote sympathetically about women in distress. She died at 3 Porchester Terrace on 13 July 1858, aged fifty, survived by her daughter who later applied to the Royal Literary Fund for money to erect a monument to her mother in Kensal Green cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 17031


Loudon, John Claudius (1783-1843), landscape gardener and horticultural writer, was born on 8 April 1783 at Cambuslang, Lanarkshire, the eldest son of William Loudon (died 1809), farmer, of Kerse Hall, Lothian, and his wife, Agnes, 'nee' Somers (died 1831). 
In 1794 Loudon began working part-time as an assistant to John Mawer, a nurseryman and landscape gardener at Dalry; on Mawer's death in 1798 he became a part-time apprentice to Dickson and Shade, nurserymen at Leith Walk, Edinburgh. At the same time he entered the University of Edinburgh, where he studied until 1802, attending Andrew Coventry's lectures on agriculture, as well as classes in botany and chemistry. While at university, according to his wife's account, he developed the habit of staying up two nights a week to study. His first publication, a translation of the life of Abelard for an encyclopaedia, took place in 1802. 
In 1803 Loudon visited London with letters of introduction from Coventry, and met James Sowerby, Sir Joseph Banks, and Jeremy Bentham, the last of whom became a major influence on his social and political thinking. His first horticultural publication, 'Hints respecting the manner of laying out the grounds of the public squares in London', was published in the 'Literary Journal' for 31 December of that year; it revealed him as a follower of Sir Uvedale Price and a critic of Humphry Repton. His first book appeared in 1804: 'Observations on the Formation and Management of Useful and Ornamental Plantations', which was followed in 1805 by 'A Short Treatise on Several Improvements Recently Made in Hot-Houses' and in 1806 by a two-volume 'Treatise on Forming, Improving, and Managing Country Residences'. 
In 1804, meanwhile, Loudon had exhibited three landscapes at the Royal Academy. On 13 March 1805 he was elected to the Society of Arts, and the following year he was made a fellow of the Linnean Society. He had already begun a career as a landscape gardener in 1803, with proposals for improvements to the grounds of Scone Palace, Perthshire, the seat of Lord Mansfield; 1804 saw commissions from the duchess of Brunswick and others, for properties in the London vicinity and in Scotland (some of these early commissions he was to describe in his book on Scottish farms in 1811). 
In 1806 Loudon moved to 90 Newman Street, London, and exhibited the first symptoms of the ill health that affected him for the rest of his life: following an attack of rheumatic fever, his knee became ankylosed and his right arm permanently contracted. In 1807 he retired to Wood Hall Farm in Pinner, Middlesex, and with his father took out a lease on the nearby Kenton Farm. The following year he published a pamphlet, 'An Immediate and Effectual Mode of Raising the Rental of the Landed Property of England', as a result of which he was invited by General George F. Stratton to appraise his property at Great Tew, Oxfordshire; Loudon took over the tenancy of Tew Lodge Farm on an undertaking to double its rental value. In 1809 he established a small agricultural college at Tew, and in 1811 he published 'Designs for Laying out Farms and Farm-Buildings, in the Scotch Style' (reprinted the next year as 'Observations on Laying out Farms...'), celebrating his accomplishments there. General Stratton bought back the lease in February 1811, but the agricultural reversals of the Napoleonic wars meant that his expected profits did not materialize. Loudon moved to 42 Pall Mall. His father had died on 29 December 1809, and was buried in the churchyard of St John the Baptist, Pinner; Loudon designed a unique monument for the grave, in the form of a pyramid from whose sides projected the ends of a sarcophagus carrying inscriptions on their end-panels. 
Loudon had amassed $15,000 by the time he left Tew. In 1812 he published 'Hints on the Formation of Gardens and Pleasure Grounds', which included designs for formal gardens as well as informal landscapes. He journeyed though the south of England, and in 1813 and 1814 travelled on the continent, visiting Germany, Latvia, St Petersburg, Moscow, and central Europe. According to his wife's account, 'he proceeded by Grodno to Wilna, through a country covered with the remains of the French army, horses and men lying dead by the road-side, and bands of wild-looking Cossacks scouring the country' (J. Loudon, xxii). He arrived in Moscow in time for the celebrations on learning of the allied armies' entry into Paris. When he returned to England he found that his banker had mishandled his finances and largely dissolved the fortune he had built up. During the following year he 'made several fruitless journeys [including one to Paris] in the hope of recovering some part of the property', but ultimately had to resign himself to its loss (ibid., xxv). In 1816 he moved to Bayswater. 
In 1817 Loudon published 'Remarks on the Construction of Hot-Houses' and the next year 'A Comparative View of the Common and Curvilinear Mode of Roofing Hot-Houses' and 'Sketches of Curvilinear Hot-Houses'. Following a suggestion by Sir George Mackenzie, that the ideal design for a greenhouse was spherical, so that light would be admitted equally at all times of day, Loudon invented a glazing bar in wrought iron that could be made in curvilinear sections. He later recorded that he sold his design to Messrs W. and D. Bailey of Holborn, and the patent (no. 4277, granted 11 July 1818) was taken out by them; Loudon's name does not appear on it. Loudon collaborated with Baileys on an unascertained number of glasshouses in the following years. Grandiose plans for glasshouses characterized his plans in 1831 for the Birmingham Botanic Garden, but on these he was overruled by the town council. 
In 1819, carrying letters of introduction from Sir Joseph Banks, Loudon visited France, Italy, Switzerland, and the Low Countries to gather material for a proposed 'Encyclopaedia of Gardening'. The book was published in 1822 as an octavo of nearly 1500 pages, covering plant culture, botany, garden design, and an international survey and history of gardening. It went through six editions, with varying degrees of revision and expansion, during Loudon's lifetime, and posthumous editions continued to appear into the 1870s. The period of writing of this work was one of great physical pain for Loudon: in 1820, an attempted operation fractured his right arm, which in 1825 was amputated. During the intervening years he had become addicted to laudanum as a painkiller, but after the amputation he broke his addiction by progressively diluting the dose he took. Other works of these years include 'The Different Modes of Cultivating the Pine-Apple' (published anonymously, 1823), 'The Green-House Companion' (1824, with further editions in 1825 and 1832), and 'An Encyclopaedia of Agriculture' (1825). In 1823-4 Loudon designed and supervised the building of a villa at 3 Porchester Terrace, Bayswater, which incorporated an entrance conservatory with a wrought-iron dome; he lived there until his death. (The house now bears an LCC plaque, installed in 1953.) 
In 1826 Loudon began publishing the 'Gardener's Magazine', first as a quarterly, priced 5's'.; according to Jane Loudon, 4000 copies of the first issue were sold. From 1827 it appeared bi-monthly, and from 1831 as a monthly, the price per issue declining until in 1834 it reached 1's'. 2died Loudon's magazine, which reached nineteen volumes before it ceased on his death at the end of 1843, was soon imitated by magazines edited by Joseph Paxton, George Glenny, and others, and accusations of plagiarism passed between rival editors; but, in its early years in particular, Loudon himself had republished much material from the more expensive 'Transactions' of the Horticultural Society. The 'Gardener's Magazine' became a forum for the exchange of ideas on gardening on a national scale; it also served as Loudon's main forum for promoting his ideas on a variety of subjects. He recounted in it his various journeys around Great Britain, describing the gardens he visited and commenting freely on how they could be improved. In 1829 he published in it articles recommending a national system of education, workers' dwellings, and a plan for the controlled expansion of London through concentric circles of alternating open space and residential and commercial development. 
The 'Gardener's Magazine' was not Loudon's only venture in periodical publication. Between 1828 and 1836 he edited the 'Magazine of Natural History', and between 1834 and 1839 the 'Architectural Magazine', which provided the young John Ruskin's first opportunity at publication. In 1830 Loudon also launched a folio publication, 'Illustrations of Landscape-Gardening and Garden Architecture', but this was poorly subscribed to and was discontinued after its third number in 1833. 
In March 1828 Loudon had reviewed an anonymous novel called 'The Mummy', published the year before, which favourably impressed him by its account of the scientific and technological advances made in its imagined future. In February 1830 he met the author, who proved, to his surprise, to be a young woman, Jane Webb (1807-1858) ['see 'Loudon, Jane], and he married her on 14 September. They had one child, Agnes (married name Spofforth), who was born in 1832. 
1828 saw Loudon's third continental tour, in France and Germany. In 1829 came the first of his important botanical publications: 'An Encyclopaedia of Plants', with the botanical text contributed by John Lindley. This was followed in 1830 by 'Hortus Britannicus' and an anonymous 'Manual of Cottage Gardening', and in 1832-3 by 'An Encyclopaedia of Cottage, Farm, and Villa Architecture and Furniture'. 
In 1835 Loudon designed a small public garden at an unnamed location, which has been identified as Gravesend, Kent; the site, although built over in the 1870s, marked his practical involvement with the movement in favour of creating public walks and gardens for the country's congested towns. In 1839 he was commissioned by Joseph Strutt to design a public garden for Derby; the 11 acre Derby Arboretum was opened in 1840, and Loudon published a book about its design in the same year. 
Two publishing projects occupied Loudon between the years 1836 and 1838. The first of these was 'The Suburban Gardener and Villa Companion' (1838). Much of the material had been published in the 'Gardener's Magazine'; additional material from that source was included in the second, posthumous, edition of 1850 (retitled 'The Villa Gardener'). A sequel devoted to practical gardening, mostly dealing with the kitchen garden, was published in 1842 as 'The Suburban Horticulturist'. 
The second project was the 'Arboretum et fruticetum Britannicum' (1838), a survey on a scale never before attempted of all the trees grown in the British Isles, whether native or exotic. Again, John Lindley provided botanical assistance. The illustrations for the 'Arboretum' required the employment of seven artists, including James De Carle Sowerby and G. R. Lewis and H. W. Jukes, both of whom were employed by the owners of the estates where the trees were drawn. Even with Jane acting as amanuensis, the expenses of its production left Loudon $10,000 in debt. He placed his other publications in Longmans' hands as a pledge for the debt, and, by the end of 1841, when financial depression hit the book trade, the debt was reduced to $2600. Loudon compiled two smaller publications from the text of the 'Arboretum': the 'Hortus lignosus Londinensis' (1838) and the 'Encyclopaedia of Trees and Shrubs' (1842). 
In 1840, besides another continental tour, Loudon undertook the editing, in a handy, inexpensive, and pocket-sized volume, of 'The Landscape Gardening and Landscape Architecture of the Late Humphry Repton'. He also, for several months in 1840-41, conducted the horticultural department of the weekly newspaper the 'Gardener's Gazette', founded in 1837 by his rival George Glenny, who had been ousted from editorship by the publishers. In 1841 he laid out the grounds of Castle Kennedy, Stranraer. 
The last direction which Loudon found for his talents was the creation of cemeteries. In 1842, with Edward Buckton Lamb as his architect, he designed the Histon Road cemetery in Cambridge, which was laid out on a strict grid plan to facilitate the location of graves, and was planted with specimen trees, mostly evergreen, arranged geometrically. A series of articles on cemetery design, criticizing various aspects of the layout and management of the new cemeteries which had been opened in the preceding twenty years, and advocating grid layout and evergreen planting, was published in the 'Gardener's Magazine' in 1843, to be published towards the end of the year as 'On the Planting, Managing, and Laying out of Cemeteries'. Loudon's financial difficulties led him to accept two commissions for cemeteries in 1843, one for a private company (Bath Abbey cemetery) and one for a local authority (Southampton cemetery). He saw neither project to completion, and his plans for Southampton were the subject of much controversy with the council. 
Loudon had suffered inflammation of the lungs in 1842, which left him in declining condition throughout 1843. Despite his poor health, he was overworking frantically in an attempt to work off his debt resulting from the 'Arboretum', for one of the creditors, the engraver (whose name does not appear in the work), became bankrupt, and his assignees threatened to arrest Loudon for the required sum of $1500. The other creditors refused their consent to the threat, and on 1 December Longmans issued a plea for the sale of additional copies of the 'Arboretum' to help clear the debt (copies to the value of $300 were sold in the next two weeks). Loudon was working simultaneously on plans for Coleshill House, Berkshire, and his two cemeteries, when he was taken ill on a visit to the Isle of Wight. Not long after returning to London he died at his home, 3 Porchester Terrace, on 14 December 1843; his death certificate attributed his death to chronic bronchitis. He was buried in Kensal Green cemetery on 21 December. A public meeting was held in February 1844 to raise funds to clear the remaining debt, and Sir Robert Peel provided Mrs Loudon with an annuity. Loudon's last work, 'Self-Instruction for Young Gardeners', was published in 1845, with a biographical notice by his widow. 


@@@@@


doc= 17032


Lough, John Graham (1798-1876), sculptor, was born on 8 January 1798 in Black Hedley Port, Greenhead, Shotley, Northumberland, the third son of William Lough (1764-1850), a blacksmith and smallholder, and his wife, Barbara Clemitson (1767-1852). John Lough (who later added the middle name Graham, his grandmother's maiden name) is said to have followed the plough in his youth and was apprenticed ('c'.1815- 'c'.1823) to a stonemason, Jonathan Marshall of Shotley Field. He afterwards gained employment in Newcastle upon Tyne as an ornamental sculptor, and carved decorations on the building of the Literary and Philosophical Society in Westgate Road. In early 1825 Lough went to London -- he made the journey on a collier, the captain of which, on their arrival, took him to see the Elgin marbles in the British Museum -- and on 15 December 1826 he was admitted to the Royal Academy Schools. 
Lough gained unusual early success as a sculptor in London. He became the protege of the painter Benjamin Robert Haydon, who organized an exhibition of two of Lough's early works in June 1827 at rooms in Maddox Street. These sculptures, a colossal statue entitled 'Milo' and 'Samson Slaying the Philistines', were hailed by contemporaries as works of remarkable power and originality, based on a study of Phidian sculpture and Michelangelo rather than the standard Graeco-Roman models. Lough received several commissions for these works at this time, and in March 1828 he held a second private exhibition in Regent Street. 
In 1832 Lough married Mary North (1791/2-1888), the daughter of a domestic chaplain of the duke of Kent; they had two daughters, Mary Rebecca ('b'. 1832) and Georgina ('b'. 1834). In 1834 the family travelled to Italy, where they remained for three years. Little is known of this period, though Lough seems to have kept himself apart from the English community of sculptors in Rome and was beset by financial problems and health worries caused by outbreaks of cholera. 
After his return, Lough led a productive career as a sculptor in London, though he perhaps never regained the reputation he had enjoyed in his early years. He was not elected a Royal Academician nor even an associate, though he exhibited some fifty works at the Royal Academy between 1826 and 1863, and he was unsuccessful in major public competitions such as that for the Nelson monument in Trafalgar Square. He did, however, produce some notable public memorials, including those to Thomas Fanshaw Middleton, bishop of Calcutta (1832), for St Paul's Cathedral, and the inventor George Stephenson (1862) for Newcastle upon Tyne. His church monuments included those to the poet Robert Southey (1845) in Crosthwaite, Cumberland, and Bishop William Grant Broughton (1855) in Canterbury Cathedral. He also made a large number of portrait busts. 
Lough designed many 'ideal' works in marble, an area in which he was fortunate to gain the patronage of certain wealthy noblemen. In particular, Sir Matthew White Ridley, fourth baronet, commissioned a large series of Shakespearian statues ('c'.1840- 'c'.1871) from the sculptor, as well as a bronze version of the 'Milo' (1863) and other imaginative pieces. Lough also made ideal works for Charles Hanbury-Tracy of Toddington, Gloucestershire. His work reflected an impulse towards novelty in form and subject matter, and an eclectic mixture of sources -- from Roman to high Renaissance, Gothic revival (in his church monuments), and modern pictorialism -- which mark him as a 'transitional' sculptor, seeking to break the mould of neo-classicism. The results were sometimes boldly original, at other times unconvincing, overambitious, and strangely mannered. 
The writer Cecilia Toulmin described Lough as 'A handsome man... with magnificent eyes that lighted up the whole countenance' (Toulmin, 142), and a painting by an unknown artist portrays the sculptor in his youth as a Romantic, Byronic figure standing before his statue of 'Satan' (Lough and Merson, pl. 4). In old age he was, according to his nephew, the biographer and surgeon Stephen Paget, a 'dear, simple, philosophical old boy, with a tremendous broad accent', the son of a Greenhead blacksmith who had married well (Paget MSS, 10). John Graham Lough died of bronchitis on 8 April 1876 at his home, 42 Harewood Square, London. Soon afterwards his widow presented a large number of the sculptor's models and casts to Elswick Hall, Newcastle upon Tyne, where unfortunately, together with other works given by the Ridley family, they were later destroyed. 


@@@@@


doc= 17033


Lougher, Robert (d. 1585), ecclesiastical lawyer, was born at Tenby, Pembrokeshire, the younger son of Thomas Lougher, alderman and former mayor of the town, and Maud, daughter of Rhys ap Gwilim of Betws, Carmarthen. Elected a fellow of All Souls College, Oxford, as of founder's kin in 1553, he graduated BCL (9 July 1558) and proceeded DCL (19 February 1565), having in the meantime been collated to the archdeaconry of Totnes (21 February 1562). Holding a number of Devon rectories in plurality, he was on the commission of the peace for this county from 1561 and of the quorum from 1564. As proctor for the clergy of the diocese of Exeter in the convocation of 1563, he subscribed the 'Thirty-Nine Articles', but disapproved even of the watered down version of puritan demands embodied in the six articles. 
In 1564 Lougher was elected principal of New Inn Hall, Oxford. On 25 February 1565 he was admitted a member of Doctors' Commons, and about this time became chancellor of Exeter diocese. Appointed regius professor of civil law at Oxford on 10 January 1566, he was among the disputants before Queen Elizabeth on her visit to the university in the following September; and he was one of the original fellows of Jesus College on its foundation in 1571, having resigned the headship of New Inn Hall the previous year. In 1572 he was returned to parliament for Pembroke, being named on 13 March 1576 to a committee to consider a 'Bill for Relief of Vicars and Curates'. In 1574 he became a master in chancery, and on 10 May 1575 was re-elected to the headship of New Inn Hall, which he held for the ensuing five years. In 1576 Archbishop Grindal appointed him as one of the visitors of the diocese of Gloucester. From 1577 he was a justice of the peace for Pembrokeshire (of the quorum from 'c'.1583) and was eventually appointed deputy lieutenant. But these positions were probably chiefly honorary, since in May 1577, resigning his professorship, he was appointed official of the consistory and vicar-general in spirituals to Edwin Sandys, archbishop of York, who described him in a letter to Burghley as 'an honest, learned and wise man' (BL, Lansdowne MS 27, art. 12). As vicar-general he was a leading member of the northern high commission and among the most regular attenders. However, on account of his frequent absences from York, he relied heavily on an unqualified surrogate to preside over cases in the consistory court. Perhaps as a result, testamentary cases were shifted to another of the York diocesan courts, the exchequer, despite Lougher's attempts to prevent the change. 
Lougher married Elizabeth, granddaughter of John Rastell, the printer. They had three sons, John (the heir), Thomas, and Robert, and three daughters, Elizabeth, Jane, and Lettice. Lougher's nuncupative will was made at Tenby (where he was afterwards buried) on 3 June 1585, and proved six days later. Unfortunately his fortune attracted the predatory attention of a certain Rice Morgan, who claimed to have been betrothed to Elizabeth before Lougher married her; his attempts to force the widow into a union with him were foiled only with the assistance of Star Chamber. It was not until 1593 that the terms of Lougher's will were finally confirmed. 


@@@@@


doc= 17034


Louis, Sir Thomas, first baronet (bap. 1758, d. 1807), naval officer, was baptized at Holy Trinity Church, Exeter, on 11 May 1758, the son of John Louis (1720-1815), a schoolmaster, and Elizabeth, 'nee' Atkinson ('c'.1724-1798). His grandfather, according to family tradition, was an illegitimate son of Louis XIV. In November 1769, aged eleven, Louis joined his first ship, the sloop 'Fly' (Captain Mitchell Graham); he served on the home station until September 1771 when he transferred to the frigate 'Southampton' (Captain John Macbride). With Macbride he moved to the frigate 'Orpheus' in April 1773 and thence to the 'Kent' (74 guns). In June 1775 he joined the sloop 'Martin' (Captain William Parker) and saw his first foreign service, off Newfoundland. 
On his return home in January 1776 Louis rejoined Graham in the frigate 'Thetis' in which he remained -- visiting Ascension Island and St Helena -- until November when he transferred to the 'Bienfaisant' (64 guns), again with Macbride. On 18 July 1777 he was promoted lieutenant and in 1780 he became the ship's first lieutenant. He was present at Augustus Keppel's action off Ushant on 27 July 1778 and, on 16 January 1780, at Admiral Sir George Rodney's 'Moonlight Battle' off Cape St Vincent which led to the relief of Gibraltar. The Spanish flagship 'Phoenix' (80 guns) struck to the 'Bienfaisant', and Louis was appointed her prize-master. With great skill he took her, in her shattered condition and in stormy weather, to Gibraltar. Macbride wrote to Rodney on 20 January 1780: 'I beg leave to recommend to your attention Mr Thomas Louis to whose diligent and active behaviour the safety of the prize is in a great measure owing. This is the second line of battle ship he has had the charge of within these eight days' ('Private Papers of... Sandwich', 3.197). The first had been the 'Guipuzcoana' (64 guns) taken on 8 January 1780. 
Louis took the much-damaged 'Phoenix' to England, before rejoining the 'Bienfaisant' in time to partake in the skilful capture of the unusually large privateer 'Comte d'Artois' (60 guns) off southern Ireland in August. Louis was again the prize-master. In January 1781 he followed Macbride to the frigate 'Artois', a recently taken French prize, and on 9 April he was promoted commander with command of the armed vessel 'Mackworth', convoying the Milford-Plymouth trade. Fifteen months later Louis was appointed to the impress service at Sligo and Cork (again under Macbride) where he raised 5000 men, and on 20 January 1783 he was promoted captain. During the ten years of peace he was on half pay, living near Torquay. On 15 July 1784 he married Jacquetta (1752-1824), daughter of Samuel Belfield of Stoke Gabriel. They had three daughters and four sons, of whom the eldest, Sir John Louis, second baronet, died an admiral in 1863 having gone to sea with his father in 1793, and the third fought in the Royal Horse Artillery at Waterloo. 
On the resumption of war in March 1793 Louis commissioned the 'Cumberland' (74 guns); a year later he transferred to 'Minotaur' (74 guns) as flag-captain to Macbride, now a vice-admiral and commander-in-chief in the Downs. In 1796 he escorted a convoy to the West Indies and back, and late the next year he joined the Mediterranean Fleet. His was one of the ships under Captain Thomas Troubridge which, in June 1798, reinforced Nelson's small squadron and won the battle of the Nile on 1-2 August ['see 'Nelson's band of brothers]. 
On that night the 'Minotaur' anchored next ahead of Nelson's flagship and received the surrender of the 'Aquilon' (74 guns) after a two-hour duel. Nelson, who had been badly wounded, summoned Louis to his flagship at about 9 p.m. as 'he could not have a moment's peace until he had thanked him. 'Farewell dear Louis, I shall never forget the obligation I am under to you for your brave and generous conduct; and now, whatever may become of me, my mind is at peace'' ('Naval Chronicle', 1, 1799, 287; 3, 1800, 183). The 'Naval Chronicle' emphasizes that the incident is 'perfectly correct' (ibid.), though it is doubted in Nicolas's 'Dispatches and Letters... of Nelson' (3.56). With the other captains, Louis received the gold medal for the victory. 
In September 1799 the 'Culloden' (Commodore Troubridge) and the 'Minotaur' liberated Civita Vecchia from the French with their marines and seamen, while Louis himself 'went to Rome and arranged the evacuation and taking possession of that place... with great ability and exertion', hoisting British colours over the Capitol (T. Troubridge to the Admiralty, 6 Oct 1799, TNA: PRO, ADM 1/2599/211B). For this he received the Neapolitan order of St Ferdinand and of merit. 
In May 1800 Lord Keith flew his flag in the 'Minotaur' during the siege of Genoa, and as a private ship the 'Minotaur' took part in the Egyptian operations of 1801. She returned home the following year. 
On the resumption of war in 1803 Louis commanded the 'Conqueror' (74 guns) off Brest and in the channel until he was promoted rear-admiral of the blue on 23 April 1804. He immediately hoisted his flag in 'Leopard' (50 guns), with Francis Austen (Jane Austen's brother) as his flag-captain, and commanded some forty vessels off Boulogne where Napoleon was preparing his invasion force. 
In January 1805 Louis (with Austen) sailed to the Mediterranean, joining 'Canopus' (80 guns) just in time to join Nelson, as his second-in-command, in the chase of the Franco-Spanish fleet to the West Indies and back. Off Cadiz on 11 October he was sent by Nelson with six ships to Gibraltar to water, provision, and store, then to escort an east-bound troop convoy past Cartagena, and to return with fresh provisions for the fleet. 'You are sending us away', Louis is said to have reproached Nelson; 'the enemy will come out, and we shall have no share in the battle', at which Nelson explained that he had no choice but to send his ships to water and provision in detachments. 'I look upon 'Canopus' as my right hand, and I send you first to insure your being here to help to beat them' ('Dispatches and Letters', 7.63). 
In November, having missed Trafalgar, 'Canopus' sailed from Cadiz under Vice-Admiral Sir John Duckworth to the West Indies and fought in the battle of St Domingo on 6 February 1806, a brilliant piece of service in which all five French ships-of-the-line were either captured or destroyed, and for which Louis, the second-in-command, was created a baronet (March 1806) and received a second gold medal. 
In November 1806 he was dispatched by Lord Collingwood with a small squadron to reconnoitre the defences of the Dardanelles as a preliminary to the impending expedition to Constantinople to be led by Duckworth. Three months later Louis in the 'Canopus' led Duckworth's squadron up the straits 'with the gallantry and cool judgement which mark his character' (Duckworth to his squadron, 4 March, H. B. Louis, 117); on the return (3 March) through the straits the 'Canopus' was struck by huge stone shots fired by the Turks which carried away her wheel and caused much damage to her hull. The squadron then sailed to the coast of Egypt where Louis was left in command. On 17 May 1807 he died on board the 'Canopus' in Alexandria harbour, aged forty-nine, of a 'sort of complaint' picked up in the West Indies the previous year. His body was taken to Malta where he was buried on Manoel Island on 8 June. To his sailors he was 'our most noble Admiral... all that was good and just' (petition, May 1806, TNA: PRO, ADM 1/5127/34). 


@@@@@


doc= 17035


Lound, Thomas (1802-1861), landscape painter, worked in the family brewery in Norwich and spent his spare time painting landscapes in oils and watercolours. He is said to have had lessons from John Sell Cotman, whose influence is greater in his oil paintings, and his works show the influence of watercolours by John Crome, David Cox, and Joseph Stannard. He collected paintings by other Norfolk artists, including Henry Bright, and at his death he owned seventy-five paintings by John Thirtle. Many of his best pictures are of scenery near Cromer, on Norfolk's north coast; during summer holidays he also painted in Wales and Yorkshire. 
Although not a member of the Norwich Society of Artists, Lound exhibited there regularly from 1820 to 1833 and later at the Norfolk and Norwich Fine Arts Association. Between 1845 and 1857 he showed eighteen watercolours at the Royal Academy, all of which were Norfolk scenes. He was one of the most prolific watercolourists of the Norwich school. 'Framlingham Castle, Suffolk', 'View Looking up the Wensum at Norwich' (1832), and 'View from Rusthall Common, Near Tunbridge Wells, Kent' (1845) are in the Victoria and Albert Museum, London, and 'Yarmouth Beach', 'Richmond Castle', and 'Ely Cathedral' are in the British Museum in London. Two of his etchings are in the National Maritime Museum, Greenwich. 
He was married, though nothing is known of his wife. They had two daughters. Thomas Lound died following a stroke at his home in King Street, Norwich, on 18 January 1861. 


@@@@@


doc= 17036


London, Henry of (d. 1228), archbishop of Dublin and justiciar of Ireland, was a member of the Blund family of London, one of five sons of Bartholomew Blund, alderman of that city (died 1201). Although Henry is never called Blund in contemporary records, his presence in witness lists connected with the Blunds as well as his concern for and generosity to various members of the family make the link incontrovertible. 
Henry is occasionally referred to as 'magister' but there is no indication as to where he earned this title. He first appears in the records 'c'.1190 when Hugh de Nonant, bishop of Coventry, instituted him to the church of Mayfield in Staffordshire. He acquired the archdeaconry of Stafford 'c'.1194, presumably again through Nonant's patronage. In 1195 he is found offering a fine of $200 to obtain the goodwill of the king, indicating that he had allied himself with the bishop of Coventry and Count John in the conspiracy against Richard I. 
Once John became king, Henry of London's career in the royal administration commenced. He served the king in numerous capacities and has been described as 'typical of the 'curiales' operating in a number of areas simultaneously who made Angevin government so effective' (Turner, 91). He served in the judiciary and acted as an officer of the chamber, supervising the transport of the king's treasure and regulating supplies for the court. He also took part in some important diplomatic missions, including a number of visits to Ireland. In 1204 he was among a party of three sent to Ireland to advise the justiciar Meiler fitz Henry and investigate his charges against William de Burgh. On this visit he also accompanied the justiciar to Connacht to negotiate with Cathal O Conchobhair. 
Henry's service to the king was amply rewarded and he amassed a collection of benefices, prebends, and titles. Many of the rewards came during the years of the interdict when his continued loyalty to the king, and his efforts to delay public proclamation of John's excommunication, linked him firmly with the side of the state against the church. King John attempted on two occasions to have Henry appointed to an English bishopric but was foiled, first by the monks of Coventry and later by Archbishop Langton who refused to consecrate Henry as bishop of Exeter. 
In contrast, Henry's election to Dublin in 1212, although undocumented, appears to have provoked no hostility, either in Dublin or Rome. He was confirmed in his new position by Pope Innocent III at some date before March 1213. He was still in England in May 1213, when he was among those who witnessed the king's submission to the papal legate at Dover. However, he left for Ireland shortly afterwards. King John, meanwhile, lost no time in demonstrating that he expected the new archbishop to perform a dual role in Dublin, when in July 1213 he appointed him justiciar of Ireland. 
Henry was in Ireland by August 1213 and he spent the next year and a half in his diocese. His first tenure of the office of justiciar spanned the period 1213-15 and it was marked by military and diplomatic successes. The archbishop enjoyed the support of the English barons in Ireland and ensured their loyalty to King John throughout the crisis in England. As justiciar, Henry was intimately concerned with the rebuilding of Dublin Castle as well as supervising the construction of several other castles in strategic parts of the colony. These included Roscrea Castle from which a successful campaign against Muirchertach O Briain was mounted. The archbishop left Ireland in May 1215 and was present at Runnymede in June where he was named among the king's councillors and was one of the chief witnesses to 'Magna Carta'. 
Henry was relieved of the office of justiciar in July 1215, probably because he was about to set out for Rome. Accompanied by his suffragan bishops of Kildare and Ferns, he attended the Fourth Lateran Council, leaving the affairs of the province in the hands of the bishops of Ossory and Leighlin. There survives no information on the part played by Henry in the affairs of the council, although true to form he did use the occasion to further John's business at the papal court. He spent some of his time in Rome engaged in matters pertaining to the Dublin church, receiving four confirmations from Innocent III and a further three from his successor Honorius III. These included papal confirmations of the incorporation of the diocese of Glendalough into the metropolitan see of Dublin, confirmations of metropolitan rights and privileges, and confirmations of the possessions of the cathedrals of St Patrick's and Holy Trinity. 
When Henry returned to Dublin in 1217 he held the post of papal legate to Ireland and he continued in this role for a period of three years. As papal legate he presided over a general synod of Irish clergy. The decrees of this synod have not survived, but according to the annals of Ireland in the chartularies of St Mary's, Dublin, 'he ordained many things useful for the condition of the Irish church' (Gilbert, 2.280). Henry's tenure of the office was controversial and was terminated abruptly in 1220 with the papacy all but asserting that the archbishop had accepted, if not actively supported, royal mandates relating to the exclusion of Irish clerks from ecclesiastical office. It is not clear how large a part Henry played in the formulation of the policy of 1217 which sought to prevent the election of Irishmen to cathedral churches in Ireland. However, he was closely involved with the administration that pursued this discriminatory policy and he did support the claims of the Anglo-Norman candidate in a number of disputed elections. 
During this period Henry was justiciar of Ireland in all but name and very little was done by the administration without his counsel and consent. However, strains began to appear between the archbishop and other royal officials in Ireland and disputes flared up around the familiar topics of jurisdictional liberties. In 1218 the archbishop complained that the religious of his diocese were being unlawfully impleaded in lay courts. He also became involved in a dispute with Thomas fitz Adam, the royal forester in Ireland, over the temporal liberties of the Dublin church. His most serious dispute, again over jurisdictional liberties, was with the citizens of Dublin, who made a number of complaints to the king concerning Henry's attempts to obstruct secular justice. 
The conflicts never erupted into an outright breach between the crown and the archbishop and in 1221 Henry III underlined his faith in Henry by appointing him justiciar of Ireland for a second time. This second term of office was, however, fraught with difficulty. It coincided with the rebellion of Hugh de Lacy (died 1242), an event for which Henry appeared to be singularly unprepared. He was apparently forced to purchase a truce when Lacy threatened Dublin in 1224 and shortly after this, in June 1224, he was replaced in office by William (II) Marshal. Henry did not hold formal office in Ireland again and during his last years he was much occupied in attempts to obtain compensation for various expenses he had incurred during his years of service. 
Soon after his replacement as justiciar Henry crossed over to England and in September 1225 he was present at the consecration ceremony of the new cathedral of Salisbury. He may also have visited the continent at this time as he had recently purchased an estate in the diocese of Autun in France for the use of the archbishops of Dublin. While his activities in the royal administration, coupled with the temporal responsibilities of his see, left Henry little time for more spiritual matters, he did complete the work of his predecessor John Cumin by raising St Patrick's to cathedral status and instituting the offices of dean, chancellor, treasurer, and precentor. He also continued the building work on the cathedral church of Holy Trinity. During his episcopate most of the nave was completed employing stone and sculptors brought over from England. In 1220 he granted rents to the prior and convent to enable them to construct a new entrance to their church. In return they agreed to celebrate his obit in perpetuity. The archbishop also made gifts to several religious houses in and around Dublin, including the hospital of St John the Baptist and the priory of Grace Dieu. He also founded 'c'.1216 the hospital of St James at the Steyne. 
Henry of London died on 12 November 1228 in Dublin and was laid to rest the same month in the cathedral church of Holy Trinity. During his lifetime he held the highest offices of church and state in Ireland, as well as functioning as papal legate for three years. The events of his episcopate in Dublin clearly demonstrate the problems faced by a man with divided loyalties and responsibilities. His attempts to dispense simultaneously secular and spiritual justice involved him in frequent disputes which threatened to alienate the goodwill of the crown, while his identification with the discriminatory aims of the royal administration in Ireland caused him to lose the trust of the papacy. Although he demonstrated through his patronage and church-building a practical piety, his career as the second Anglo-Norman archbishop of Dublin, and one of the most active and controversial occupants of that see in the thirteenth century, was marked by his administrative expertise rather than by his spirituality. 


@@@@@


doc= 17037


Loutherbourg, Philippe Jacques de (1740-1812), landscape painter and scene designer, was born on 31 October 1740 according to the baptismal register of the Neue Kirche in Strasbourg, Alsace. However, his monument in the cemetery of St Nicholas in Chiswick, London, notes his birth as taking place on 1 November in Fulda, some 60 miles north of Darmstadt, Germany. His mother was Catherine Barbe Heitz and his father Philippe Jacques (or Jacob) Loutherbourg (1698-1768), who worked as a miniaturist and engraver to the court of Darmstadt. The painter Johann Rudolf Loutherbourg (1652-1727), noted by Benezit as working in Basel, is likely to have been the artist's grandfather. His father planned an engineering career for his son, while his mother held hopes for his future in the ministry of the Lutheran church. He studied mathematics, theology, and languages at the University of Strasbourg, but a talent for drawing led him to seek instruction from his father. On the family's move to Paris in 1755, he began his formal artistic training with Carle Van Loo, rector of the Academie Royale. He studied engraving with Jean-Georges Wille and began his lifelong concern for the chemistry and technology of pictorial reproduction. While still a pupil of Wille, Loutherbourg worked in the studio of Francois Joseph Casanova, and exhibited his first paintings at the salon, in 1763. Critical acclaim was swift, and Diderot identified the abilities to depict space and atmosphere that were to become distinctive features of de Loutherbourg's work, both in the theatre and for the easel (D. Diderot, 'Salons', ed. J. Seznec and J. Adhemar, 2nd edn; 1975, 1.225). 
Loutherbourg regularly exhibited in subsequent salons and, in 1766, he was nominated as a 'peintre du roy' of the Academie Royale. In the following year he was elected a full member -- a mark of his celebrity in that he was three years away from the qualifying age of thirty. He was now unhappily living with Barbe Burlat, whom he had married in 1764. But rumours of criminal activity on her part sufficiently tainted the painter's name to prevent the final bestowal of the Academie award. His father died in 1768, and it was perhaps a combination of personal reasons (as well as artistic imperatives) that caused Loutherbourg to leave Paris that year. Significantly, he chose to make his grand tour to southern France, Switzerland, and the Rhineland, and not to Venice, Naples, and Rome. By 1771 he was the most prolific painter exhibiting at the salon. He adopted the 'de' and used this almost exclusively with his name thereafter. 
It is possible that de Loutherbourg considered his journey to England in the autumn of 1771 as a continuation of his tour of Europe, and not with a view to permanent residence. Although there is no direct evidence of theatrical activity in Paris, de Loutherbourg's letter of introduction was from Jean Monnet (1703-1785), the retired manager of the Opera Comique, and a friend of David Garrick, who was patron to a number of easel artists, including Zoffany, Gainsborough, and Richard Wilson. On arrival in London, de Loutherbourg stayed with Domenico Angelo, a fencing-master, stage machinist, and good friend of both Monnet and Garrick. It was here, according to Henry, Domenico's son, that de Loutherbourg met Garrick. 
The result of this meeting was de Loutherbourg's letter to Garrick that proposed radical change to the scenic arrangements at Drury Lane Theatre (Harvard Theatre Collection). Garrick was sufficiently impressed to engage de Loutherbourg and to give him control over all aspects of the scenic department at Drury Lane. He was paid an unprecedented salary of $300, which was increased to $500 during his second season for Garrick. 
De Loutherbourg's most significant designs were for Garrick's pantomime 'A Christmas Tale' (1773); Alexander Dow's tragedy 'Sethona' (1774); John Burgoyne's comedy 'The Maid of Oaks' (1774); Henry Woodward's pantomime 'Queen Mab' (1775); and Charles Dibdin's ballad opera 'The Waterman' (1776). Contemporary comment valued his work for the unification of all scenic elements; for his skill in creating lighting effects of considerable sophistication; and for his ability to create scenes of great topographic power and association. 
Sheridan continued to employ de Loutherbourg when he took over the management of Drury Lane in 1776. New work included Sheridan's afterpiece 'The Camp' (1778), which was noted for its representation of the military camp at Cox-Heath and in which reference is made to de Loutherbourg as 'Mr Leatherbag the great painter'. Sheridan's comedy 'The Critic' (1779) presented de Loutherbourg's recreation of Tilbury Fort and battle against the Armada for which 'The deception of the sea was very strong, and the perspective of the ships, together with the mode of their sailing truly picturesque' ('General Advertiser', 1 Nov 1779). The harlequinade-travelogue written by Sheridan and de Loutherbourg, 'The Wonders of Derbyshire' (1779), for which a model survives in the Theatre Museum, London, may well have been his finest work in this period. The scenographic coherence of this is probably rare, and Sheridan increasingly economized by extracting scenic effects from earlier work, or requiring de Loutherbourg to design a spectacular scene to rejuvenate revived pieces -- for example the revival in 1780 of Isaac Bickerstaff's 'Love in a Village', concluded with 'a Grand View of Greenwich Hospital'. 
Sheridan's financial mismanagement may well have prompted de Loutherbourg to leave Drury Lane after completing 'Robinson Crusoe' in 1781. Additionally, de Loutherbourg was elected a member of the Royal Academy early in 1781 and the next decade saw him committed to pursuing his easel career. He undertook extensive tours of the Peak District of Derbyshire, the Lake District, and north Wales, and exhibited some twenty-one paintings between 1784 and 1787. Some of his most powerful and typical landscapes include: 'Dovedale in Derbyshire' (exh. RA, 1784; York City Art Gallery), 'View of Snowdon from Llan Berris Lake' (exh. RA, 1787; Musee des Beaux-arts, Strasbourg), and 'Smugglers Landing in a Storm' (1791, Victoria Art Gallery, Bath). 
De Loutherbourg made two important interventions in matters theatrical during the 1780s. In 1782, at his home in Lisle Street, London, he presented his actor-less miniature theatre, the Eidophusikon, which presented scenes from Milton; topographical scenes that prefigured the great panoramas and dioramas of the nineteenth century; and scenes of immediate interest such as the loss at sea in January 1786 of the Indiaman 'Halsewell'. De Loutherbourg perhaps achieved the visual unity and compositional control in miniature that current theatre technology was unable, or unwilling, to allow. 
With John O'Keefe, de Loutherbourg prepared the pantomime 'Omai, or, A Trip Round the World' (1785) at Covent Garden Theatre. This built upon the excitement created by Captain Cook's voyages in the south seas. John Webber, the artist who accompanied Cook, assisted and added authority to the scenic spectacle. Two models survive in the Theatre Museum, London, and seventeen costume designs exist in the Commonwealth National Library, Canberra, Australia. 
In 1781 de Loutherbourg transformed rooms at Fonthill Abbey, Wiltshire, into an environment of Arabian fantasy for William Beckford, and concerns with alchemy, mysticism, and the occult underlie his later career. In 1787 he left England with the notorious theologian and freemason Count Cagliostro. Their partnership ended acrimoniously and de Loutherbourg and his wife, Lucy, returned to London to offer faith-healing services through 'heavenly and divine Influx'. He abandoned this in late 1789 and returned to his easel. During the 1790s he celebrated Britain's growing naval eminence in 'Lord Howe's Action, or, The Glorious First of June' (1795; NMM), 'The Battle of Camperdown' (1797) and 'The Battle of the Nile' (1800; both Tate collection). Robert Bowyer published William Pickett's engravings of de Loutherbourg's 'The Picturesque Scenery of Great Britain' (1801) and 'The Romantic and Picturesque Scenery of England and Wales' (1805). He contributed many of the plates in Thomas Macklin's 'Bible' (1800) and to Robert Bowyer's 'History of England' (1812). In 1807 he was made 'Historical painter to HRH the Duke of Gloucester', but no paintings have been identified from this appointment. He died peacefully at his home in Hammersmith, Middlesex, on 11 March 1812, and was buried at St Nicholas's Church, Chiswick, where his second wife, Lucy, who died in 1828, and his son, William Philip James Lodder (1779-1867), were also interred. 


@@@@@


doc= 17038


Love, Christopher (1618-1651), clergyman, born in Cardiff, Glamorgan, was the youngest son of parents 'of the middle sized people, who had neither poverty nor riches' (DWL, MS 38.34, pp. 278-9). In his youth Love was brought up to play cards in the houses of local gentlemen, but he was converted to evangelical Christianity in 1633 when he heard William Erbury preach. 
Under Erbury's ministry Love became depressed for the 'fifteen years of his life past which he had spent in vanity' (Sloane MS 3945, fol. 81'r'- 'v'). His father, Christopher Love, a merchant, suggested that he play cards with local gentlemen to take his mind off his anxieties, but Love declared that he could no longer 'endure to see cards or dice in any hand or house' (ibid.). This new-found faith caused a rift between Christopher and his father, who complained that his son had changed from having 'the name of a young Gaimester' to being known as 'a young Puritaine' (ibid.). In an attempt to stop this new faith Love's father confined his son in the top room of the family house. Yet Christopher, who had an 'impatient longing desire to heare the Word' (ibid.), escaped to church by sliding down a rope attached to the window of the room. 
At seventeen Love's father arranged for his son to be apprenticed in London. However, Erbury had coached Love for the ministry and, with the support of his mother, Love convinced his father to let him go up to Oxford. Although poor, Love arrived in Oxford desiring to attend a college where he could share the fellowship of the godly. Love decided to go to New Inn Hall when he heard some students complain that Christopher Rogers, the college's principal, was 'an Arch Puritaine' (Sloane MS 3945, fol. 81'v'). He matriculated as a servitor in July 1635. Love's poverty at New Inn Hall meant that he worked hard to finish his degree early in order to enter the ministry. While at Oxford he practised the skills that would allow him to follow this calling. Wood relates that he preached in St Peter's Church, 'prating for more than an hour before academical as well as lay auditors' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 3.228). 
At New Inn, Love was 'looked upon by the generallity as a melancholy [and] sad dejected man' (Sloane MS 3945, fol. 82), but this was perhaps due as much to dire poverty as to worries about his salvation. Love could not afford to complete his degree and so resolved to go to London to join the godly as a schoolteacher. But Love fortunately benefited from the estate of a gentleman who left money for poor scholars in his will, and he was able to proceed BA on 2 May 1639. However, he refused episcopal ordination, considering it corrupt. 
In June 1639 Love became chaplain to the household of John Warner, the newly elected sheriff of London. His role followed a rigorous pattern of puritan spiritual exercise. Every morning he examined the family's knowledge of scripture, and he marked Mondays as a day for catechizing. Saturday afternoon and evening would be spent preparing the family for the sabbath with tests on the catechism and on the previous week's sermon. While in Warner's household Love met his wife, Mary Stone ['see 'Love, Mary (fl. 1639-1660)], an orphaned daughter of Matthew Stone, a wealthy London merchant: they married some six years after they first met. As Warner's chaplain Love was well protected in his nonconformity. In 1640 he was the first clergyman to refuse subscription to the Laudian canons. His notoriety brought him to the notice of William Juxon, the Laudian bishop of London, who used Love's refusal of episcopal ordination as a pretext to suspend him. Prior to his suspension Love received the call of the parish of St Anne and St Agnes within Aldersgate, London. In order to preach again Love needed ordination and so sought to receive holy orders from a presbytery in Scotland. However, the Scots refused Love on the basis that he had no call to a cure of souls in their national church. 
On his return from Scotland, Love was invited to preach in Newcastle; he took this opportunity to attack the 'Book of Common Prayer' and the Laudian ceremonies, an act that earned him a spell in prison. He was removed to London on a writ of habeas corpus but was acquitted after trial at king's bench. Despite his suspension, Love appears to have been something of a wandering firebrand: on 26 March 1642 he proceeded MA but was also expelled from the University of Oxford for his nonconformity. Later that year he preached a sermon at Tenterden in Kent on the lawfulness of a defensive war against the king. This brought a charge of treason, but Love was again acquitted. In Autumn 1642 Love and George Lawrence, a fellow New Inn Hall student, published 'The Debauched Cavaleer, or, The English Midianite'. This tract compared royalists to the biblical enemies of Israel and advised parliament to prepare for a bloody war. 
Love's talents as a parliamentarian preacher did not go unrecognized and in late 1642 he was appointed chaplain to the regiment of the parliamentarian MP John Venn, later governor of Windsor Castle. While at Windsor, Love excelled as a chaplain, catechizing soldiers and, when plague broke out, caring for the sick and dying. He also earned the respect of Sir Thomas Fairfax by preaching a sermon on the sixtieth psalm, comparing the parliamentarian forces to the army of biblical Israel. On 23 January 1645 Love finally received presbyterian ordination when the House of Lords empowered the Westminster assembly to form an 'ad hoc' presbytery to ordain clergymen. Love's ordination took place at St Mary Aldermanbury, London, under a presbytery presided over by Thomas Horton. 
During the peace talks between parliament and the royalists at Uxbridge, Love was invited to preach the market day sermon in that town. His sermon, 'England's Distemper Having Division and Error as its Cause', preached on 30 January 1645, was a warning to parliament not to appease the crimes of the cavaliers in order to obtain peace. Love counselled the parliament not to 'doate... too much on this Treaty of Peace' because the royalists 'lye under the guilt of much innocent blood, and are not meet persons to be at peace with, till all the guilt of blood be expiated and avenged, either by the sword of Law, or law of the Sword' (C. Love, 'England's Distemper', 1645, 42, 37). Love's sermon caused immediate scandal and the royalist newspaper 'Mercurius Aulicus' falsely reported that he preached that the king himself was to be punished as a man of blood. This led the royalist commissioners at Uxbridge to lodge a complaint; on 3 February the House of Commons ordered that Love be put into safe custody pending investigation. Love's arrest, however, seems to have been merely to appease royalists; he was confined to his garrison at Windsor and on 5 March, after the Uxbridge negotiations collapsed, the Commons ordered that his confinement be lifted. 
On 25 November 1646 Love was chosen to preach the afternoon fast sermon to the House of Commons. He used his sermon to advise Fairfax and parliament to purge the army of heretics, preaching that 'the requittal of men for their good service, must not extend so farre as to tolerate them in their evils' (C. Love, 'Short and Plaine Animadversions', 1646, sig. A2'v'.). Love also caused some scandal when he broke both ministerial and parliamentary protocols by disputing with William Dell on the floor of the Commons. Dell, an antiformalist who opposed all fixed church structures, had used the morning fast sermon to preach against a presbyterian reformation of the Church of England. When Dell published his sermon without the consent of the Commons, he added criticisms of Love's principles as an appendix. Love was forced to reply with some 'Short and Plaine Animadversions', arguing that a presbyterian national church was the divinely warranted prescription for 'peace, union, and brotherly love' in a Christian commonwealth (ibid., 25). Love argued that the purpose of formal church government was to win souls to Jesus Christ, to nurture them in their growth, and to protect them from soul-damning errors. In defence of church discipline Love cited 'Jude' 23: 'others save with fear, pulling them out of the fire; hating even the garment spotted by the flesh' (ibid., 12). 
Although Love had been nominated by parliament to become the preacher at Newcastle, in May 1645 he was re-elected to the parish of St Anne and St Agnes within Aldersgate and so left the service of Venn's regiment to take up the cure of souls. In London, Love joined with the other ministers who were constructing a presbyterian church government in the City. From 1646 the London ministers increasingly believed that heretics in the army were the greatest threat to presbyterianism and so became vocal critics of the army's activities. Love appears to have been a central figure in this attack. In May 1647 Colonel John Lambert's regiment petitioned the council of officers at Saffron Walden, complaining that 'the ministers in their public labour... do make us odious to the kingdom... [and] have printed many scandalous books against us, as Mr Edwards's 'Gangraena' and Mr. Love's 'Sermons'' (Woodhouse, 399). 
The fruit of Love's sermons appeared in his pamphlet 'Works of Darkness Brought to Light'. In this tract, published in July 1647 under the pseudonym Tom Tell-Troth, Love accused the army of rigging elections, of desiring to abolish the House of Lords, and of having designs on the life of the king. He declared: 'O Ye Inhabitants of ENGLAND... Wil ye suffer the Army under pretence of justice to bring you under oppression, and under the notion of Liberty to bring you into bondage, and under the name of the Saints of Light to act the part of Angels of darkness? (Love, 'Works of Darkness', 7)' Like many presbyterian ministers, Love opposed the call for religious toleration on the grounds that it would encourage religious libertinism and lead to social turbulence. Instead of tolerating error, Love counselled his flock not to get lost in trivial doctrinal speculation but to 'let it be your endeavour to get Christ's kingdom to be erected in your hearts' (Love, 'Heaven's Glory', 76). The volumes of posthumously published sermons show that Love was an able preacher whose method was to apply Calvinist doctrine to both comfort and humble his flock before God. 
In March 1649 the vestry of St Lawrence Jewry, London, offered to make Love its minister. In return for his stipend Love was asked to preach twice on the sabbath and once on fast days. Love followed the policy of his fellow presbyterian ministers by insisting that parishioners were conversant with the fundamentals of Reformed Christianity before they attended holy communion. This policy resulted from the presbyterians' insistence that communicants should be able to examine their consciences in line with St Paul's instructions in '1 Corinthians' 11: 26-34. Upon election to St Lawrence Jewry, Love was asked 'To admit all of his parish to that table that desire it, and are not knowne to be either grosly scandalous, or notoriously... of ill and scandalous life'. Despite this request, the figures for the purchase of communion wine in the churchwardens' accounts suggest that Love admitted no more communicants to the Lord's supper than his presbyterian predecessor Anthony Burges. 
With the army's purge of parliament on 6 December 1648 and the trial of Charles I, Love joined his fellow presbyterian ministers in condemning the army's political 'coup d'etat'. Between 28 December 1648 and 20 February 1649 Love joined the London presbyterians in holding private prayer meetings designed to 'find out some way to disappoint... [the regicides'] bloody intentions' (DWL, MS PP.12.50*.4 (21), fol. 85). Love was also a signatory to the printed letters published by the London presbyterian ministers in January 1649 protesting against the regicide and revolution. 
After the regicide Love declared that he was 'a friend to a regulated Monarchy, a free Parliament, an obedient Army, and a Godly ministry; but an enemy to Tyranny, Malignity, Anarchy and Heresie' (Love, 'A Modest and Clear Vindication', frontispiece). He accused the army of political cynicism and selfish factionalism. At the same time he attempted to counter allegations that the presbyterians had converted to royalist principles. Love declared that although the presbyterians were 'zealous Anti-Cavalierists' they were not 'Anti-Carolists'. Likewise, the presbyterians were 'for the Army while they used the sword to subdue malignants in arms; but against them when they use the sword to cut off the King and force the Parliament'. 
Love was at the forefront of the presbyterians who attacked the republic. He opposed the engagement of loyalty and preached against the millenarian fantasies of the republican 'saints'. On 29 July 1649 he told his flock: 'This is not the way to usher in Jesus Christ; to cut off Protestant kings, destroy lawes, government and rule, this is not the fruit of saintshipp' (DWL, MS PP.12.50*.4 (21), fol. 88). Because of his opposition to the republic, Love was soon in trouble with the new regime. On 6 September 1649 he appeared before the parliamentary committee for plundered ministers charged with seditious preaching but was acquitted when witnesses failed to show. A newspaper reported that 'a great company of people' gathered to meet him after his acquittal, crying out 'Not a persecutor durst appear against him' ('Perfect Weekly Account', 5-13 Sept 1649, 596). 
In summer 1649 Love became involved in a plot to assist the Scottish covenanters to bring the exiled Charles II to the throne of England. The ringleader of the plot was William Drake, a mercer, who was in contact with presbyterian leaders at the exiled royal court. Drake convinced Love to convene meetings at his house, and some of the most committed presbyterian ministers and laity were invited to attend. The purpose of these meetings, which continued until April 1651, was to hear letters detailing the efforts of the Scottish covenanters and their allies to restore the Stuart monarchy. The exiled royalists hoped that the presbyterian ministers would use their influence with London's merchants to fund a Scottish invasion of England. Despite these plans, Love and his fellows continually refused to send money; Love wrote to Major-General Edward Massey, telling him that 'it was neither safe, nor fit for us to ingage in a business of that nature' ('State trials', 5.118; 'Mr. Love's Case', 12). 
The plot was discovered by the republican regime when Thomas Coke, a royalist agent, was arrested in March 1651. His long depositions led the government to Love and the presbyterian conspirators and on 2 May 1651 Love was arrested on suspicion of treason. Love's trial for treason took place in late June and early July 1651; unsurprisingly, he was found guilty and condemned on 5 July. Although Love was technically guilty, it is clear that the trial was little more than a demonstration of the republic's brute power dressed up as legal sovereignty. This point is graphically exemplified by Sir Henry Vane, who told Cromwell that Love should be executed because the presbyterians 'do not judge us a lawful magistracy, nor esteem anything treason that is acted by them to destroy us, in order to bring in the king of Scots as the head of the Covenant' (B. Worden, 'The Rump Parliament', 1974, 244). 
Love himself admitted to the high court that he desired an 'agreement between the king and Scots' and was unrepentant for his actions. After sentence he told his wife: 'I bless my God that, notwithstanding all that is come upon me, I have not forsaken Him, nor dealt falsely in his Covenant, and therefore... never had I more joy in my spirit... than when the sentence of death was this day read against me. (DWL, MS PP.12.50*.4 (21), fols. 115-16)' A campaign was organized by Love's wife and friends to get his condemnation overturned. Many petitions were submitted to parliament for Love's release. However, the pleas for Love's life were to no avail. Although on 15 July Love earned a month's reprieve, it appears that ardent republican Independents were set on Love's destruction. In a last, desperate attempt to save her husband's life, Mary Love sent a petition to Cromwell in Scotland. It arrived on 29 July, and the council of war debated whether to intervene in the affair. Colonels Goffe and Okey were 'tooth and nayle' for Love, but colonels Pride and Lambert spoke 'high against' a pardon. In the end the council advised Cromwell that he 'should not at all ingage or write in the businesse for him' (F. M. S. Henderson, 'New material from the Clarke manuscripts: political and official correspondence and news sent and received by the army headquarters in Scotland, 1651-1660', DPhil diss., University of Oxford, 1998, 80). 
The last petition for Love's pardon was rejected on 18 August and he learned that on 22 August 1651 he would die by beheading on Tower Hill. With his death imminent, the London presbyterian ministers spent the days preparing Love for martyrdom. On the morning of his execution Love told his friend James Lever that he 'blessed God [that] his heart did not soe much as leape or pant in his breast, but hee was as cheerfull as hee were to live till the Day of Judgement' (A. Wallis, 'The diary of a London citizen in the seventeenth century', 'The Reliquary', new ser., vol. 3, 1889, 89). His wife relates that the grim procession to the scaffold 'made the hill ring with [the] bitter-weeping and lamentations' of the crowd gathered to witness his death (DWL, MS PP.12.50*.4 (21), fol. 137). 
In a long execution speech Love declared himself to be 'a Spectacle unto God, Angels and men,... a Grief to the Godly; a Laughing stock to the wicked and a Gazing stock to all'. He declared that 'I desire this day to magnifie God... that such a one as I, born in an obscure Country in Wales... that God should look upon me, and... single me out to be an Object of his everlasting Love'. However, he warned the republic that 'my blood will be bad food for this Infant Commonwealth... Mine is not malignant blood, though here I am brought a grievous and notorious Offender' ('Mr. Love's Case', 25-6). 
Love's body was privately buried at his parish church, St Lawrence Jewry, three days later. After his death his executors, including the London presbyterian ministers Edmund Calamy, Simeon Ashe, William Taylor, and Matthew Poole, published fifteen volumes of Love's sermons. The thought behind this endeavour, they claimed, was not 'to make old sores bleed' but to mourn the 'great loss the Church of God had in the death of so useful and hopeful a minister'. Thirteen days after Love's execution his widow, Mary, gave birth prematurely to the fifth of their children. Mary Love later wrote a manuscript biography of her husband. 
By the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries Love had gained a further reputation. In a host of cheap pamphlets in both Britain and America, sometimes laced with versions of last letters to his wife or his scaffold speech to lend verisimilitude and the authority of a martyr, Love was reinvented as a prophet of the last days. He had foretold the Restoration, the plague of 1665, and the great fire of London. From his studies of 'Daniel' and 'Revelation' he had predicted the American War of Independence and the French Revolution, the last 'the destruction of popery, or Babylon's fall', 'the revolution in France, which is properly Babylon's fall, as it hath broken off the tenth horn of the beast, so that the Pope hath become as weak as another man' ('The Strange and Wonderful Predictions of Mr Christopher Love', n. d., 8; 'Prophecies of the Reverend Christopher Love: and his Last Words', 1794, 7). 


@@@@@


doc= 17039


Love, David (1750-1827), pedlar and poet, was born at Torriburn (Torryburn) on the north shore of the Firth of Forth in Fife, Scotland, on 17 November 1750 and baptized in nearby Culross on 2 January 1751. His parents were Anne, 'nee' Robertson (died 'c'.1773), and her husband, William Love (1696-1788), a work-shy, hard-drinking coalminer, who had two sons and three daughters by a previous marriage. Another son, John, was baptized at Culross on 22 June 1752, soon after which William abandoned his family and Anne lost her sight and became a wandering beggar. 
David had a year's schooling to the age of nine, probably in Culross, then worked as an errand boy and farmer's boy, and spent a year driving ponies underground in the earl of Dundonald's coalmines at Culross, where his arm was broken; he kept a village school for five months, but from an early age his chief occupation was selling tracts and small books as a pedlar. 
About 1775, having accumulated $3, Love married Mary Thomson ('c'.1755-1806), with whom he had five sons and a daughter in eight years. They kept a shop in a village near Falkirk, but when they ran into debt Love resumed his itinerant bookselling as a 'flying-stationer' ('Life, Adventures', 31) and began to print, sing, and sell satirical ballads, 'godly poems for Christians of all denominations', and other verse of his own composition. He advertised himself as 'a lame man, who makes verse on any subject, if employed' (Love, 'A Few Remarks', title-page). Sadly, the verse is also lame. 
Love served for about four years (probably 1778-82) in the duke of Buccleuch's regiment of fencibles before resuming his pedlar's and balladeer's trade, which he now extended into England. If his wife was as shrewish as he claimed ('Life, Adventures', 36-7) this may have been because she was obliged to leave their children with her sister in Scotland and unwillingly take to the road with her husband. They travelled over much of England, with settled spells in London and Bristol, where Love met his aged father, now a reformed pedlar of religious books, and they spent nearly a year in Gosport, Hampshire, where there was good trade among sailors just returned from Earl Howe's victory on 1 June 1794. Love experienced religious conversion at Newbury, Berkshire, on 17 April 1796, and thereafter celebrated that date as a new birth, but he had been writing and publishing religious verse from the 1770s. 
Mary Love died in November 1806. On 20 July 1807, at Duffield, Derbyshire, Love married Mary Falconer, 'nee' Thomson, aged about forty-nine and widow of an artilleryman. She died in March 1809. Both wives were buried at Rugby, Warwickshire: the first on 26 November 1806, the second on 17 March 1809. 
Love married his third wife, Elizabeth Laming ('c'.1775-1853), a silk spinner, on 21 May 1810 at Nottingham and they had five children together, the last when David was nearly seventy. Nottingham now became their chief home, though they still sometimes tramped as pedlars and were persuaded by the poor-law overseers to travel to Edinburgh in 1812 and later to London: Love published his prose account of the second trip in 'David Love's Journey to London and his Return to Nottingham' ('c'.1814). A stay in Nottingham workhouse as well as occasional imprisonment in other towns for vagrancy and a spell on the treadmill in Hull at the age of seventy-five provided further material for Love's rough, comic, topical ballads. Nicknamed Old Glory, singing his own hymns and ballads, composing acrostics on demand, selling haberdashery as well as books, and proclaiming his evangelical faith, Love became a familiar figure in Nottingham, and very popular 'considering his extreme lack of talent' (Sutton, 18). 
Love undertook to publish his autobiography by penny numbers at least three times. Incomplete sets of a chapbook version in stanzaic verse (n.d.) and of a different broadside version in octosyllabic couplets ('c'.1818) survive, as do complete sets of 'The Life, Adventures, and Experiences of David Love, Written by himself' in twenty-four numbers (1814-23). This largely prose autobiography thriftily incorporated his stanzaic 'Life' as well as many other poems, and ran to a fifth edition (1825). Some copies contain an engraved portrait of the author, aged seventy-four. 
Love remained active to within a few weeks of death. He died in Nottingham on 12 June 1827 and was buried on 14 June in St Mary's churchyard. 'In person David was below the middle stature; his features were not unhandsome for an old man; his walk was exceedingly slow, deliberately placing one foot before the other, in order perhaps to give his customers time to hear what he had got; his voice was clear, and strongly marked with the Scotch accent. He possessed a readiness of wit and repartee. (Hone, 3, col. 179)' 



@@@@@


doc= 17040


Love, Sir James Frederick (1789-1866), army officer, son of John Love and his wife, Mary ('nee' Wyse), was born in London. Commissioned ensign in the 52nd foot (26 October 1804), he advanced to lieutenant (5 June 1805), and served with the regiment during 1808 in Sweden and in Portugal, where after the convention of Cintra (30 August 1808) he was one of 107 officers and men to escort repatriated French troops to their point of embarkation. The following year he took part in the retreat of Lieutenant-General Sir John Moore's force to Corunna, but returned to Portugal with the 1st battalion of the 52nd later in 1809, fighting with it in various engagements until 1812 and securing a captaincy (11 July 1811). On the night of 11 March 1810, with courage and initiative, Love discovered that the enemy had abandoned Pombal, and at Busaco on 27 September 1810 he took prisoner the French general Simon. On 3 April 1811 at Sabugal, with his company he recaptured a howitzer lost by the 43rd earlier in the day, and three weeks later repulsed a dangerous French attack on the Marialva Bridge. With good sense and knowledge of his men, at Aruda in October 1810 he refused to declare one soldier a deserter, and shortly afterwards was vindicated when Tobin reappeared, having escaped from captivity. At Fuentes de Onoro, on 5 May 1811, compassionately he released an enemy sergeant who had strayed across the line, after addressing him in fluent French. 
Having returned to England in December 1813 with the 52nd's 2nd battalion, Love joined Lieutenant-General Sir Thomas Graham's expedition to the Netherlands, and three months later was engaged in the attack on Merxem and bombardment of Antwerp, after which he commanded the rear-guard as British troops withdrew. In January 1815 he acted as Major-General Sir John Lambert's aide-de-camp during the assault on New Orleans, where he was wounded in the arm and had two horses killed under him. Promoted brevet major (16 March 1815), he rejoined the 52nd in time to fight at Waterloo, where he was wounded four times during the regiment's decisive advance against the imperial guard on the evening of 18 June. Subsequently, he served with the 52nd in North America, and was made inspecting field officer of the New Brunswick as a brevet lieutenant-colonel on half pay (5 May 1825). In 1825, also, he married Mary Heaviside of Halifax, Nova Scotia; they had no children, and she survived her husband. He resumed regular service after obtaining a majority in the 11th foot on 9 November 1830. Learning of anti-reform riots in Bristol on 31 October 1831, while commanding troops in Cardiff, he swiftly gathered 170 men, commandeered a steamer at Newport, and that evening restored order to the relief of worried citizens: 'Thanks, thanks, brave fellows, you are come to save us from pillage and death' (Aggett, 44). He became lieutenant-colonel of the 76th (6 September 1834), then of the 73rd foot (6 March 1835), for three years commanding it in the Mediterranean, while also acting as British resident at Zante. He took the 73rd to Canada in May 1838, where it successfully quelled unrest, and returned with the regiment to England in June 1841. Meanwhile, he had been promoted colonel (28 June 1838) and appointed CB (30 March 1839), the same year that he became KH. Back in south Wales, he deployed troops effectively during the Chartist and Rebecca riots in 1842-3. 
Love went on half pay on 23 September 1845, having surrendered nominal command of the 73rd the previous day. Promoted major-general (11 November 1851), he was appointed lieutenant-governor of Jersey (1 April 1852), becoming KCB (4 February 1856) after leaving that post. He then briefly commanded the training camp at Shorncliffe, and became colonel of the 57th foot (24 September 1856) and temporary lieutenant-general (6 January 1857). He served as inspector-general of infantry for four years from April 1857, being promoted substantive lieutenant-general on 26 September 1857. Having advanced to general (10 August 1864), he was appointed colonel of the 43rd foot (5 September 1865) and GCB that same year. He died at 17 Ovington Square, Brompton, London, on 13 January 1866. 


@@@@@


doc= 17041


Love, John (1695-1750), literary scholar, was born at Dumbarton in July 1695, the son of John Love, bookseller and stationer; he was probably the John Love presented for baptism there on 11 July 1695 by John Love and Elizabeth Thomsone. From about 1700 he was educated at Dumbarton grammar school and then at Glasgow University; later he became assistant, and in 1721 successor, to his old schoolteacher. The school was inspected in 1729 by a presbytery committee which found it to be in a flourishing condition and expressed full satisfaction with the master. Smollett was among his pupils and later showed his regard by seeking help for one of Love's sons. Love married Elizabeth, daughter of Archibald Campbell, a Glasgow surgeon, in 1722, and they had thirteen children. He also had two children from his second marriage, to Gelis Elphinston, a minister's daughter. At Dumbarton, Love was also clerk to the presbytery from 1717 to 1735; his minister, Archibald Sydserf, was forced to apologize following an accusation of brewing on a Sunday. In 1735 Love was appointed a master of the high school in Edinburgh and in 1739, at the request of the duke of Buccleuch, he moved to his final post as rector of Dalkeith grammar school. 
Love's publications centred on three controversies. First, he produced in 1733 two treatises on Latin grammar, criticizing a grammar by Robert Trotter, schoolmaster at Dumfries, and defending Thomas Ruddiman's 'Grammar' respectively. The second controversy concerned the Latin paraphrase of the 'Psalms' by George Buchanan. With Robert Hunter, later professor of Greek at Edinburgh University, Love prepared an edition of this work in 1737 that made considerable use of Nathan Chytraeus's commentary to earlier editions and emphasized the work's educational as well as religious value. In 1740, writing as 'Philo-Buchananus', Love defended Buchanan against William Lauder and William Benson who had asserted the superiority of the version of the 'Psalms' by Arthur Johnston. Thus far Love had the support of Thomas Ruddiman. Third, in his 'Vindication of Mr. George Buchanan' published in 1749, Love discussed other aspects of the author's life, refuting the accusation of ingratitude to Mary, queen of Scots, and William Camden's suggestion that at the end of his life Buchanan had repented of his treatment of her. By this time, however, Ruddiman's estimation of Buchanan had fallen for political reasons and he wrote a critical reply to Love. 
Love also corresponded with Sir John Clerk on literary matters and he appointed John Traill, bookseller in Edinburgh, as factor and curator to his children. He died at Dalkeith on 20 September 1750, survived by his second wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 17042


Love, John (1757-1825), Church of Scotland minister, was born at Paisley on 15 June 1757, the son of James Love of Paisley and his wife, Margaret Lang. He was educated at Paisley grammar school and, aged ten, entered the University of Glasgow, where he received a bursary for his excellent performance in Latin, Greek, and mathematics. On 24 December 1778 he was licensed by the presbytery of Paisley and was assistant in the parishes of Rutherglen and Greenock before being ordained to the Hoxton Presbyterian congregation at Artillery Street, Bishopsgate, London, on 22 August 1788. 
During his residence in London, Love was active in moves to promote the foreign missions movement and, in January 1795, published on this subject in the 'Evangelical Magazine'. Along with Alexander Waugh and David Bogue he was a co-founder of the London Missionary Society (LMS) at Aldersgate Street in September of that year ['see 'Founders of the London Missionary Society]. Thereafter he served as the society's secretary for five years and, on his return to Glasgow in 1800, he performed the same role for the Glasgow Missionary Society. Love was especially interested in missions to the south Pacific and in 1796 published his 'Addresses to the People of Otaheite' which provided the Tahitians with a highly personal 'system of Christian theology' (Morison, 261). The Church of Scotland's first important missionary station in Africa, at Kaffaria (established in 1830), was named Lovedale in his honour. 
Despite the success of the LMS and his reputation as a dignified and well-respected preacher, Love felt increasingly dissatisfied with his London ministry. He returned to Scotland after twelve years to become minister of the Anderston chapel of ease in Barony parish, Glasgow, where he was inducted on 11 July 1800. In 1815 he was a candidate for the chair of divinity at Aberdeen University and, though unsuccessful, he was awarded the degree of DD at Marischal College in the following year. Love remained at Anderston until his death at his manse in Clyde Street, Glasgow, on 17 December 1825. He was survived for several years by his wife, further details of whom are unknown. 
In addition to his 'Addresses', during his lifetime Love published a collection of 'Nine Occasional Sermons' (1788) and several additional sermons, including 'Benevolence Inspired and Exalted in the Presence of Jesus Christ' (1794). After his death there appeared his 'Discourses on Select Passages of Scripture' (1838), 'Letters of the Late John Love, DD' (1838 and 1840), and, best-known, his 'Memorials' (1857-8) which were praised as models of forthright evangelical devotion. According to the ecclesiastical historian John Macleod it was once said in criticism that his written works were only skeletons, to which came the reply that, if so, they were the bones of a mammoth. 


@@@@@


doc= 17043


Love, Nicholas (bap. 1608, d. 1682), politician and regicide, was baptized on 26 October 1608 in St Swithun's, Winchester, the son of Dr Nicholas Love (died 1630), headmaster of Winchester College, and his wife, Dousabell Colnett. He matriculated at Wadham College, Oxford, on 3 November 1626. On 12 November the next year he was admitted to Lincoln's Inn, whence he was called to the bar on 4 February 1636. He was created MA at Oxford on 31 August 1636. At Lincoln's Inn he appears to have formed some kind of connection with the Lenthall family of Oxfordshire, which helps explain his appointment in 1644 to one of the six clerkships, a lucrative office in the court of chancery under the master of the rolls, a post then held by the speaker of the House of Commons, William Lenthall. He was made an associate to the bench at Lincoln's Inn on 26 November 1644 and a bencher on 18 November 1648. 
Love was active on behalf of parliament in his native Hampshire by the end of 1643 and was recruited to the House of Commons, winning election to one of the vacant seats at Winchester in November 1645. Having strongly opposed the conclusion of talks with the king at Newport in 1648, he was appointed to the high court of justice in January 1649, serving on four of its committees, including those for drawing up the charge against the king and for drafting the sentence. He was present at the sentencing of the king, though he did not sign the royal death warrant, and has been called as good a king-killer as any of the signatories ['see also 'Regicides]. Certainly he became a forward revolutionary but his express confidence, before the trial began, that the charge would be 'nothing, but what he knew the K[ing] could cleerely acquit himselfe of' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Clarendon 34, fol. 17'v') suggests a more moderate spirit. It also lends some credibility to the otherwise standard self-exculpatory rhetoric of Love's plea for mercy in 1660. 
Love was closely involved in the constitutional revolution which ran parallel with developments in the great hall at Westminster, and served energetically the kingless Commonwealth set up in the wake of the regicide and the abolition of the monarchy. In parliament he chaired the debates of the committee of the whole house which issued in the passage of the 'Navigation Act' in November 1651. In the following year he shared special responsibility for the legislation annexing Scotland with his fellow Winchester MP, Lord Commissioner John Lisle. He also sat on the last three councils of state down to the interruption in 1653. In the year of Worcester he had assumed some of the conciliar responsibility for placing urgent matters of home defence and militia organization before the house. At the council board he also had a hand in Scottish and Irish affairs, foreign policy, trade, and government finance, as well as press regulation. Finally he was influential in the transformation of English political iconography witnessed under the Commonwealth. 
It has been claimed that Love joined the angry chorus of dissent which greeted Cromwell's abrupt termination of the council of state on 20 April 1653, but an unfortunate gap in the state papers precludes confirmation of Love's presence in council on that occasion. Certainly by 1655 Major-General William Goffe, keeping a watchful eye on Hampshire, appears to have had his suspicions about Love's intentions towards the Cromwellian regime. But if he had gone into overt opposition, his hostility to the protectorate was doubtless connected with the controversial ordinance of 1654 for the reform of chancery, which abolished Love's office as one of the six clerks in chancery. At least one of his colleagues protested mightily against this arbitrary destruction of patentees' property rights. 
The six clerks' low fortunes revived in 1659, when the Rumpers, Love included, returned to government. Yet within months the Commonwealthsmen were once again assailed by their military protectors and by December Love was at Portsmouth, where the corporation had raised the standard of opposition to the military junto. There he joined the co-ordinators of the resistance to Fleetwood and Lambert, Sir Arthur Hesilrige MP and Valentine Walton MP. All three were made burgesses of the town. In January 1660 the Rump, returned to power, elevated Love to the council of state (where he was appointed president), and gave order for repayment of his substantial expenditure for the Commonwealth cause during the stand-off at Portsmouth. 
By 1660 Love had become too big a fish, and his appetite for church and royalist lands too rapacious, for his plea for leniency to receive special treatment from the restored Stuart regime. In the spring he arranged to embark for the continent together with Hesilrige and Robert Wallop, but when the other two changed their minds Love was left to make the voyage alone, 'he being resolved not to trust the mercey of enraged beastes of prey' (Ludlow, 281). He survived pirates and tempests in his passage to Hamburg via Norway before joining his friend Edmund Ludlow and other regicides in Vevey, Switzerland, where he died on 5 November 1682; he was buried in St Martin's Church there. The fate of his wife, Elizabeth ('nee' Buggs), of Lambeth, whom Love had married on 6 October 1655, is unknown. 


@@@@@


doc= 17044


Love, Richard (1596-1661), college head, was born on 26 December 1596 in Great St Mary's parish, Cambridge, the second of three children and the only son of Richard Love (died 1605), an apothecary, and Margaret, daughter of William Bosome. Margaret remarried in 1607, her new husband being Henry Mowtlowe (died 1634), Gresham professor of law and public orator, one of the friends the apothecary entrusted with his son's education in the advent of Margaret's death. Love matriculated from King's College, Cambridge, in 1611, gaining his BA in 1615 from Clare College and proceeding MA in 1618. He was ordained deacon and priest in 1624, was a university taxor in 1625-6, and became a fellow before 1628, the year in which he was senior proctor. He was in La Rochelle when that stronghold of Calvinism was besieged in the summer of 1628, and about the same time was made chaplain in ordinary to Charles I, who on 27 October 1629 presented him to the living of Eckington, Derbyshire. In January 1631 he proceeded DD on the king's recommendation. The following October he received the prebend of Tachbrook in Lichfield Cathedral. 
By mandate from Charles I, Love was made master of Corpus Christi College on 4 April 1632, immediately after Dr Butts's suicide. A quarrel followed between Love and the earl of Warwick that demonstrates Love's tactfulness and powers of persuasion. Warwick, supported by Charles, tried to press his nominee for a vacant fellowship, but the master and fellows resisted. The king eventually withdrew his candidate, after receiving a letter of apology and explanation from Love. His most notable act as vice-chancellor in 1633/4 was to cause the arrest of Peter Hausted in the pulpit of St Mary's while preaching a sermon against the neglect of religious duties in the university. Love also contributed on occasions when the university presented congratulatory verses. 
Love married, about 1632, Grace, his stepfather's daughter, and settled in St Benedict's parish, Cambridge. Their daughter Anne ('b'. 1633) later married Thomas Tenison, archbishop of Canterbury, who bequeathed Love's portrait to Corpus Christi College. Grace ('b'. 1635) married John Lawson, an eminent physician. Sons Richard ('b'. 1637) and Thomas ('b'. 1638) followed; Henry ('b'. 1640) died soon after birth; John arrived in 1648. 
Despite the difficulties of the times Love retained his headship during the civil war. He preached a sermon at Whitehall to parliament at the monthly fast on 30 March 1642, 'The watchman's watchword', in which he criticized the threats both from Laudianism and from radical protestants' attacks on church hierarchy, and appealed for the promotion of preaching. It was subsequently published by royal command at Cambridge with the aim of attracting religious moderates to Charles's side. This did not make Love's position in parliamentarian-controlled Cambridge untenable. He probably took the solemn league and covenant as, when in July 1643 a general leave of absence was granted to the fellows, he was one of the four heads of college at Cambridge who, 'by the special favour of the friends and their own wary compliance, continued in their places' (Fuller, 'History of Cambridge', 169). When in December 1643 William Dowsing cleansed the colleges' chapels he found Love's conservatism had prevented the installation of Laudian furnishings at Corpus Christi. Love survived the rash of ejections prompted by the earl of Manchester's visitation of the university, and was included in February 1646 with those heads directed by parliament to preach at St Mary's. In 1647 he was appointed to a syndicate to maintain the university muniments. 
Love also remained in place throughout the interregnum. Oliver Cromwell addressed him as 'my worthy friend' in 1649. In the same year he was made Lady Margaret professor of divinity, and despite staunchly defending Anglican doctrines and disciplines appears to have retained his prebend. Love's friend Colonel Valentine Walton, the regicide, was said, at an unspecified time, to have protected him. When faced with the engagement in 1650, Love joined other heads of colleges in petitioning, requesting that a promise not to disturb the present government might be accepted as their subscription. Grace informed a relative that they anticipated ruin if he was compelled to resign the professorship and claimed the stress of the situation prompted the return of 'His Olde Disease of the Spleen' ('Masters' History', appx, 73). By November he was suspended, but rumours that a way would be found for him to appear to have satisfied the engagement proved correct, and he retained his preferments. Love's retrospective explanation was that, having demonstrated his disapproval of the trial and execution of Charles I, inviting an expulsion would be abandoning what power he retained to do good. His sermons about this time questioned the Calvinist emphasis on faith rather than works. He was appointed a member of the assembly of divines, but took no part in the proceedings. Although he survived the purge of college masters, he was omitted from the 1654 commission to regulate the university. In 1656, however, he and Anthony Tuckney were praised in the 'Publick Intelligencer' for the international eminence they brought to the university and the nation. Love undertook a limited smartening up of the college chapel in 1659-60. J. B. Mullinger states he was the only head to retain his position until the Restoration. 
Love composed two Latin congratulatory pieces. The first, delivered at Cambridge, discusses the calamities of the rebellion and excuses his temporary acquiescence. The second (published by the king's command) was presented by Love in person, acting as deputy vice-chancellor at Whitehall on 5 June 1660. He also contributed to the Cambridge collection of verses which were published at the Restoration. He made such a good impression that Charles II, besides allowing him to retain his posts, made him dean of Ely by patent dated 14 August; he was installed on 28 September. 
Love died at the beginning of February 1661, and was buried in his college chapel. In his will, which was proved on 26 May 1661, his wife was the executor and main beneficiary and was entrusted with the education of their son John. Love's Latin books were bequeathed to John if he fulfilled his father's hopes that he would join the ministry. His daughters were provided with dowries, but his sons Richard and Thomas were intentionally omitted from his will. Among the larger bequests he laid out $100 on the college, gave a window to the master's lodge, and left $10 and a polyglot 'Bible'. To his old college, Clare, whose master, Dr Paske, was his friend, he left $50. Love's moderation and remarkable levels of tact and discretion, which allowed him to retain the good opinion of so many enemies in such turbulent times, no less than his eminent reputation, suggest he was an extraordinary man. 


@@@@@


doc= 17045


Love, William Edward (1806-1867), impressionist, the son of a merchant in the city of London, was born in London on 6 February 1806, and was educated at Harlow in Essex and at Nelson House Academy, Wimbledon, Surrey. At the age of twelve, while still at school, he began to imitate the noises of machinery and other objects, and soon went on to mimic the sounds made by musical instruments, beasts, birds, and insects. From about 1820 to 1826 he was connected with London journalism, but he then turned his attention to the theatre, and in 1827 performed throughout England and France. One year later he appeared for a benefit in a solo entertainment at the Olympic Theatre entitled 'The False Alarm', a performance whose success, it was said, led to his professional career in the theatre. Thereafter he became renowned as the best ventriloquist in England; he assumed various characters, making rapid changes in dress while talking, singing, and displaying remarkable powers of mimicry and ventriloquism. 
In June 1829, at the start of his theatrical career, Love produced and appeared solo in 'The Peregrinations of a Polyphonist', with which he toured major English towns. He then went to Scotland, where in 1830 he brought out 'Love in a Labyrinth, or, The Adventures of a Day', and in 1833 he opened at Oxford with a piece called 'Ignes fatui'. In 1834 he made his first appearance in London, and acted at the City of London assembly rooms, Bishopsgate Street, for several months. Over the following years he divided his time between touring in France, America, and the West Indies, and performing in London in such theatres as the Strand, Almack's, and the Hanover Square Rooms. On 26 December 1854 he took possession of the Upper Hall, 69 Quadrant, Regent Street, London, where he produced 'The London Season'. On 8 February 1856 Love played at the Regent Gallery for the 300th consecutive night, which was reputed to be his 2406th performance in London. In 1858 he became paralysed and, in keeping with the professional benevolence of the time, his colleagues at Sadler's Wells organized a benefit for him. He died at his home, 33 Arundel Street, Strand, on 16 March 1867. 


@@@@@


doc= 17046


Loveday, John (1711-1789), antiquary and traveller, was born on 5 February 1711 at Cateaton Street, London, the elder child of Thomas Loveday (1680-1720) of Caversham and Feens and his wife, Sarah Lethieullier (1682-1761), daughter of William Lethieullier of Clapham, a Turkey merchant, and his wife, Mary. His paternal grandfather, a successful London goldsmith who had bought the lease of the old rectory at Caversham in 1666, had left the family well off financially. In 1739 Loveday married Anna Maria Goodwin (1717-1743), daughter of William Goodwin of Arlescote, near Edgehill. They had a son, John ['see below'], and a daughter, Mary (1741-1749). He married, secondly, in 1745, Dorothy Bagshaw (1709-1755), daughter of Revd Harington Bagshaw of Bromley, Kent. His third marriage was in 1756 to Penelope Forrest (1723-1801), daughter of Thomas Forrest of Jamaica. They had a son, Arthur (died 1827), and three daughters: Penelope (1759-1846), who married Revd William Benwell (1765-1796) in 1796 and Revd John Hind (1759-1882) in 1808; Sarah (1766-1832); and Mary (1768-1840), who remained single. 
Loveday had been educated at Reading School, under the sympathetic supervision of H. J. Hiley. He matriculated at Oxford as a gentleman commoner of Magdalen College in 1728, graduated BA in 1731, and proceeded MA in 1734. On arrival at Oxford he called on the antiquary Thomas Hearne, with whom he had corresponded, volunteering information about St Anne's Chapel on Caversham Bridge. A lasting friendship was struck up, and Hearne described Loveday in his diary as 'an ingenious Gentleman [who] takes great delight in antiquities' ('Remarks', 9.402). Loveday became a youthful member of Hearne's antiquarian circle in Oxford. Until his death in 1735 the older man was supplied by the younger with information from churches and graveyards, both near and far. Loveday made many friends and enjoyed Oxford life so much that he kept rooms there for ten years. In the vacations he returned to Caversham but from 1730 began to travel further afield and, undeterred by the poor roads, made a number of extensive tours on horseback throughout the British Isles, often with one or two companions. He described in great detail the architecture and monuments of many cathedrals and churches and also visited numerous country houses. He noted the progress of new buildings and gardens and was especially interested in the paintings and sculpture. He recorded on loose papers over 100 tours and short visits between 1729 and 1765, to which he added references throughout his life. His only visit to Europe was in 1737, when he travelled through the Low Countries to Aachen. His 'Diary of a tour in 1732 through parts of England, Wales, Ireland and Scotland' was published in 1890 by his great-grandson J. E. T. Loveday as a contribution to the Roxburghe Club. 
Loveday was brought up and remained a deeply committed member of the Church of England, regularly attending Magdalen College chapel or St Mary the Virgin at Oxford, and St Peter's in Caversham. He adhered to high-church principles and was always a tory, but not an Oxford high-church tory in the political sense, as was Hearne. He bought and read books extensively, being particularly interested in church history. He assembled a fine library and a good collection of coins. His only publications were occasional articles for the 'Gentleman's Magazine' under pseudonyms. He corresponded with many scholars, to whom he was always ready to give assistance. Thanking him for 'many useful corrections and excellent hints', Thomas Warton begged in vain for permission to disclose his name, arguing that 'the public have a right to know by whom they have been obliged' (Loveday MSS). In 1802 Charles Coates used his notes on Reading ('The History and Antiquities of Reading', preface and text) and those on the margins of his copy of Wood's 'Athenae Oxonienses' were used by Philip Bliss in his edition (preface, 14). Loveday always kept open house at Caversham. The 'old Tory country gentleman' was described in a visit by Mary Berry in 1774 as 'an elegant and accomplished scholar' ('Extracts', 1.9), and John Byng referred to the 'well-known hospitality... where learning and virtue grace the mansion' ('Torrington Diaries', 1.195). 
Loveday was short and slight in stature, but blessed with physical courage and stamina. He died at the old rectory, Caversham, on 16 May 1789 of an internal disorder, leaving between $5000 and $6000 in bank stock. He was buried at St Peter's Church, Caversham, on 22 May. His directions for his diaries, excluding the tours, to be burnt were eventually carried out by his grandson Thomas, after he had copied the major part. 




@@@@@


doc= 17047


John Loveday (1742-1809), antiquary, born at the old rectory, Caversham, on 11 November 1742, was also educated at Reading School and Magdalen College. He graduated BCL in 1766, was made DCL in 1771, and was admitted an advocate in Doctors' Commons in 1771. He retired in 1777 on his marriage to his ward Anne Taylor Loder (1756-1837), daughter and heir of William Taylor Loder (died 1772) of Williamscote, near Banbury, where they continued to live. They had four sons and a daughter. He assisted his friend Richard Chandler, and compiled the index for the 'Marmora Oxonienses'. He contributed papers on antiquarian and orthographic subjects to the 'Gentleman's Magazine' and continued to correspond with many other British and foreign scholars. In 1788 he inherited Arlescote from his grandmother Abigail Goodwin. He succeeded to the Caversham property in 1789 and retained it until his sons left Reading School. He sold the lease in 1799 and transported the books and their presses to a new library wing he had built for them and his own at Williamscote. He died there of pneumonia on 4 March 1809 and on 11 March was buried at the church of St Mary the Virgin at Cropredy. Over 2000 volumes from his library were acquired by Pennsylvania State University in 1969. 


@@@@@


doc= 17048


Loveday, Robert (1620/21-1656), translator, was a scion of the Loveday family seated at Chediston, Suffolk, but his exact parentage is unclear. He went to school at Metfield, Suffolk, was admitted as a pensioner at Peterhouse, Cambridge, on 20 December 1636, aged fifteen, and matriculated in the following year. Loveday did not complete his studies because of the civil war, and became a secretary in the Clinton family; in this capacity he travelled extensively throughout England, spending time at the Clintons' seat, Tattershall Castle, Lincolnshire, and at the Clares' residence, Thurland House, Nottinghamshire (a county Loveday disliked). 
Having become proficient in French and Italian under the instruction of another member of the Clinton household, Loveday translated into English the first three parts of La Calprenede's 'Cleopatre' under the title 'Hymen's praeludia, or, Love's master-piece'; these appeared respectively in 1652, 1654, and 1655, and were reprinted many times. Despite the erroneous attribution of other parts of the romance to Loveday's hand in some later editions, it was only with the collaboration of John Coles that part 4 was completed and published in 1656. Loveday was an agreeable writer, and his translation is accurate and idiomatic. After Robert Loveday's death his brother Anthony edited a selection from his correspondence under the title 'Loveday's Letters, Domestick and Forrein' (published 1659, reprinted several times), at the beginning of which is a portrait of the author by Faithorne. The work includes some verses by Loveday that intimate a facility in metre. A hard-working and kind man, Loveday was also sickly and died, probably of a consumptive disease, in 1656. As he has been plausibly but contentiously identified with the patient in Sir Thomas Browne's 'A Letter to a Friend' (published 1690), his death may have taken placed in mid-May 1656. 


@@@@@


doc= 17049


Loveday, Samuel (1619?-1677), General Baptist preacher, was the son of William Loveday, scissorer (tailor) of Helions Bumpstead, Essex. On 5 October 1638 he was bound apprentice in London to John Hanson, a member of the Company of Merchant Taylors. At an unknown date he married his wife, Jane; they brought up several children, of whom at least five survived him. 
In 1642 Loveday published in defence of recent damage caused to Cheapside Cross (or Jasper), a 'monument of idolatry': '
Old Charing Cross has lost its head 

and so't may be your feare 

that Jasper's noddle would be gone 

but for the watchman's care 

His case is bad, but to conclude 

If Jasper for me send 

when he assaulted is againe 

No help to him I'll lend 
(Loveday, 'Cheap-side Crosse', 4)' Loveday was made free of the Company of Merchant Taylors on 12 November 1645. About this time, and until at least 1651, he seems to have been living and perhaps working with another Baptist merchant tailor, Edward Barber, in Threadneedle Street, London. In late 1645, it was reported, Barber, assisted by another unnamed, instituted the ceremony of the laying on of hands in his congregation, and in 1654 a church now led by Loveday was reported to be one of those which followed the custom of 'the supper', a church meal, usually preceding communion, which was accepted only by churches which baptized by the laying on of hands. All this may suggest that Loveday acted at first as Barber's assistant. 
In November 1650 Loveday published his 'Hatred of Esau' as a 'Servant of the Church of Christ', which suggests he was an elder or pastor. By that time, he had come to the view that saints might fall away, the first General Baptist known publicly to embrace that doctrine, and eagerly anticipated the imminent conversion of the Jews: 'none of us shall enter into glory until the Jews come up too; therefore let us use all means possible to publish that light, and put forth that power we have to bring them up' (Loveday, 'Hatred of Esau', 15). 
In September 1654 there were plans to divide Loveday's congregation, apparently because of internal dissension, though the source of this is unknown. Loveday's name does not appear as an elder or messenger in the reports of the intercongregational assemblies of the General Baptists in 1654 and 1656. In October 1655, however, members of his congregation subscribed a petition in support of the Socinian John Biddle, though apparently not unanimously, and perhaps against the opposition of the pastor himself. 
Reports of December 1657 indicate that there were close and continuing links between Loveday's congregation and the influential church of Fenstanton, Huntingdonshire, whose members sometimes lodged with Loveday's on visits to London. By this time the church was meeting at Tower Hill. In March 1660 Loveday and several followers subscribed 'A Brief Confession... of Faith', and in January 1661 they joined in the denunciations of Thomas Venner's uprising. Most of the Baptist churches were anxious to dissociate themselves from Venner, and were generally drawn towards quietism after the Restoration. The government was not always convinced by this. In 1670 Loveday's meeting-place, now at Looking Glass Alley in East Smithfield, was raided, and many of the congregation, who had come to hear a sermon by John Jennings, were arrested. 
But Loveday himself had never been a very militant or populist leader in the style of Samuel Oates or Jeremiah Ives. Crosby tells us he was 'noted for his great moderation, and very seldom concerned himself with controverted points' (Crosby, 4.250). His interpretation of the twenty-fifth chapter of 'Matthew' was expounded over 'the space of one year' in 'that small congregation over which I am concerned by the providence and grace of God as a pastor or feeder' (Loveday, 'Alarm', 'Letter to the reader'). 
Loveday seems to have prospered in business: on 3 October 1673 he was admitted to the livery of the Company of Merchant Taylors, and at his death was able to leave two houses to his wife, Jane. There were bequests of $50 to his two sons, John and Samuel, but $150 to Elizabeth, evidently his favourite; Mary and Hester, on the other hand, got 'twenty shillings apiece', in satisfaction of 'all claims they may have or pretend to have on my estate' (PROB 11/355, sig. 128, fol. 262'r'). We may suspect their mode of life and belief, or their marriages, did not meet with his approval. 
Loveday retained firm Baptist convictions until his death. 'An elegy on the much lamented death of Mr. Samuel Loveday... on the 15th of December 1677 in the 59th year of his age' stresses the many years of his service to the congregation in east London -- 'bless the Lord that lent us him so long' -- and warmly recalls his 'pious, rare and vertuous life'. 


@@@@@


doc= 17050


Lovegrove, William (1778-1816), actor, the son of a plumber, was born at Shoreham, Sussex, on 13 January 1778, and was apprenticed to his father. After playing Hamlet as an amateur at a private theatre in Tottenham Court Road, London, he made his first professional appearance at the Richmond theatre in June 1799. From there he went to Dublin, where he appeared as Anhalt in 'Lovers' Vows', an adaptation from the German by Elizabeth Inchbald. In a stagecoach on his way to Manchester he was shot in the leg when a passenger's pistol was accidentally discharged. This delayed his arrival, and hampered his eventual performance in the city. After playing in Guernsey and Plymouth he made his first appearance at Bath in November 1802 in the part of Lazarillo in Robert Jephson's farce 'Two Strings to your Bow'. During the season he played other roles, including Edgar in 'King Lear', and gained some popularity. When John Edwin left Bath for Dublin, a large range of comic characters fell to Lovegrove, whose name appeared in Bath and Bristol in roles from Dr Pangloss in George Colman's 'The Heir-at-Law', Sir Anthony Absolute in 'The Rivals', and Isaac in 'The Duenna', to Autolycus, Dogberry, Sir Martin Marall, and Alphonse in Beaumont and Fletcher's 'The Pilgrim'. During the summer season he played at Margate and Worthing. Bath proved, as it often did, the portal to London, and Lovegrove appeared on 3 October 1810 at the Lyceum, the temporary home of the Drury Lane company, as Lord Ogleby in Colman and Garrick's 'The Clandestine Marriage'. Job Thornberry in Colman's 'John Bull' and many favourite characters followed, and he played original parts in dramas by Dimond, Masters, Millingen, Arnold, and other writers. His Lopez in 'Kiss', an alteration of Beaumont and Fletcher's 'The Spanish Curate', won him much applause. 
Lovegrove remained with the company in the new Drury Lane Theatre until his retirement, and rose to be one of the principal supports of the house. He married a Miss Weippert, the daughter of a harp player; she died shortly after giving birth to a daughter, who did not long survive her. These two shocks produced a visible effect on Lovegrove's health. He took a benefit in June 1814, when he appeared as Wilford in Colman's tragedy 'The Iron Chest' and played in a piece entitled 'Cheating', by a friend named Parry. In October that year he was the original Old Fathom in 'Policy, or, Thus Runs the World Away', attributed to Henry Siddons. Soon afterwards he broke a blood vessel and was ill for many months. He did not reappear until June 1815, when for the first time, for his benefit, he played Sir Peter Teazle; his reception was enthusiastic. He acted during the next season and was allowed a full salary until a relapse occurred and his recovery was seen to be hopeless. He was granted a half salary until his death, on 25 June 1816, near Bath, where he had been taken by his sister. 
Lovegrove was an excellent actor, and his premature death was a misfortune. A prudent and a reserved man, he mixed little with his colleagues and though much respected had few close friends. He was the victim either of a singular outrage or of an extraordinary delusion. George Raymond, the biographer of R. W. Elliston, records how Lovegrove once rushed to the Lyceum at midnight, covered with brickdust and mortar, and in a state of frenzy, stating that at the end of Dyott Street, Bloomsbury, he had been seized and pinioned by two stalwart women, forced into a house, and thrust into a room, where a third woman was dying from the result of violence. By supreme efforts he escaped. After his recovery he took refuge in customary taciturnity, and no elucidation was afforded of the story. Raymond says that Lovegrove was strong, natural, and free from caricature. 


@@@@@


doc= 17051


Lovekyn, John (d. 1368), merchant and lord mayor of London, was descended from an ancient Surrey family. The sources variously describe him as the son of Edward Lovekyn, citizen of London, and a native of Kingston, who built a chapel in that parish in 1309, and of Edward's brother, Robert, who left lands and rents for the endowment there of various family obits. John is described in letters patent of 26 Edward III as the son of Edward, but in the register of Bishop Stratford as the son and heir of Robert. The former seems more likely to have been his father. He re-endowed the family chapel in 1352 with two messuages in the parish of St Michael, Crooked Lane, of the annual value of $4. 
A wealthy man, recorded at different times as a stockfishmonger, pepperer, and draper, John Lovekyn carried on an extensive merchandise in salted or stockfish, corn, wheat, oats, beans, herrings, and sea coal, and traded much abroad. In 1358 he claimed as a citizen of London the right to bring a freight of sea coal from Newcastle to London free of custom. In 1360 he supplied provisions to the royal army in Normandy, and in 1365 he successfully protested through the mayor and aldermen to the authorities of Nieuport in Flanders against the seizure of a cargo of red herrings which he and his agents at Great Yarmouth were importing to London. Lovekyn first lived in the parish of St Mary-at-Hill, in a house afterwards occupied by his 'servant' and apprentice, Sir William Walworth. Early in Edward III's reign he moved to the parish of St Michael, Crooked Lane, where his large mansion in Thames Street overlooked the river between Oystergate and Ebbegate by the bridge foot. He brought with him his fellow tradesmen, and the locality became known as Stockfishmongers' Row. His mansion descended to Walworth, and afterwards to Henry Preston, citizen and stockfishmonger, who left it in 1434 to the Fishmongers' Company for their hall. 
Lovekyn was alderman of Bridge ward, became sheriff in 1342, and was one of the representatives of the city in parliament in 1344, 1346, 1348, and 1365. He was four times lord mayor, in 1348, 1358, 1365, and 1366. He owed his third tenure of office to the direct appointment of the king on 21 January 1365, in place of Adam Bury, who was discharged by a royal order, although he had been re-elected after serving as mayor in the previous year. He also held numerous other civic offices, including city attorney at Boston fair, in Lincolnshire (1333), warden of London Bridge (1342-50), auditor of the bridge accounts (1351), and supervisor of the city's supply of ships to the royal fleet (1359). Leader of the Fishmongers in 1351, he had contributed to a gift by the city to the king in 1337, and to London's loans to the crown in 1340 and 1346. He lent sums ranging from $100 to $200 to the king between 1356 and 1365. 
In 1338 Lovekyn went overseas in the king's service, and later held royal appointments in Surrey. He stood surety for Adam Fraunceys, mercer and citizen of London, as guardian of Simon, son of Thomas Leggy, skinner, and he benefited his ancestral home at Kingston by repairing his father's chapel and making further endowments. He was also the second founder of the church of St Michael, Crooked Lane, which he entirely rebuilt at his own cost. According to Leland, he founded St Michael's College, in connection with the church. John Stow says that Walworth was the founder, 'peradventure for John Lofkin his master' (Herbert, 'History and Antiquities', 125). 
Lovekyn was married twice: first to Mabel, who brought him a stepdaughter, Leticia, and then to Margaret. He died on 4 August 1368 and was buried in the choir of St Michael, Crooked Lane, under a handsome tomb, with images of himself and his first wife in alabaster. Stow relates that Lovekyn's monument was removed, and a flat stone of grey marble, garnished with plates of copper, substituted. The brass plate containing his epitaph in three Latin verses found its way to Walkern church, Hertfordshire, where it served as a palimpsest brass inside the church for Richard Humberstone, who died in 1581. Both Lovekyn's and Walworth's monuments were restored by the Fishmongers' Company in 1562, with the addition of an English inscription in doggerel verse. In the original Latin inscription Lovekyn is erroneously said to have died in 1370. His will, dated 25 July 1368, was enrolled in the court of husting on 11 November 1368. Walworth acted as his executor and later married his widow. He appears to have possessed, besides his house in Thames Street, other houses further east towards Billingsgate, and property in St Martin Vintry, Crooked Lane, Candlewick Street, Oyster Hill, and Tower Street. Lovekyn left no issue, but he bequeathed some London property to a nephew, John. 


@@@@@


doc= 17052


Lovel, Philip (d. 1258), administrator and royal councillor, was a kinsman of the Lovels of Minster Lovell in Oxfordshire, perhaps a younger son of William Lovel (died 1213); the kinship is proved by the fact that the manor of Snorscomb, Northamptonshire, in Philip's possession in 1257, passed after his death to John Lovel the justice, an illegitimate son of John Lovel of Minster Lovell (died 1287). Before entering the church Philip Lovel had married and fathered at least three children. He first appears in 1223, as witness to a grant of property in Blewbury, Berkshire, involving Richard Poore, bishop of Salisbury (died 1237), and had been ordained subdeacon by 1231/2, when he was presented to the living of Lutterworth in Leicestershire by Nicholas de Verdun. The Verduns were subtenants of the earls of Winchester, and it may have been through his Verdun connection that Lovel entered the service of Roger de Quincy, earl of Winchester, lord of Galloway, and constable of Scotland (died 1264). He witnessed Earl Roger's charters from before 1240, and rose to become the earl's steward for his English estates, earning the favour of the Scottish royal family. In 1246/7 he obtained promotion to the church of Hanslope at the presentation of William Mauduit, chamberlain of the English royal exchequer, which suggests that he was already active on the fringes of the court. By the time of his death, he was also rector of Stanground in Huntingdonshire, and of Rock in Worcestershire, and was a canon of London, with the prebends of Weldland (from 'c'.1255) and (later) Islington. 
By 1249 Lovel had entered court service and in November of that year, through the influence of John Mansel (died 1265), was appointed a justice of the Jews. In 1250, styled clerk and counsellor of the king, he took the cross but did not go on crusade. At Michaelmas next year he was accused of taking bribes from various wealthy Jews of the north of England, in return for a reduction in their liability for tallage, allegations which the chroniclers suggest were inspired by the personal rivalry of Robert de la Ho, another of the justices of the Jews. Lovel was briefly disgraced, but on offering a fine of 10 marks of gold, and through the mediation of John Mansel and Alexander III of Scotland, he recovered the king's favour. On 27 August 1252 he was appointed treasurer of the royal exchequer, again through Mansel's advice, and in 1255 he was appointed to an inquiry into the king's revenues and rights in eight midland counties, an inquiry he is said to have conducted with great harshness. In 1257 Henry III unsuccessfully petitioned the monks of Coventry to elect Lovel as their bishop. His years as treasurer coincided with a crisis in royal finance, resulting in the levying of forced loans, harsh exploitation of Jewish debt, and a great increase in the sums demanded from the king's sheriffs. In the early stages of the baronial reform movement Lovel was allowed to retain his offices, but in October 1258 he was arraigned on a series of trumped-up charges relating to his infringement of forest law, and on 2 November 1258 he was replaced as treasurer by a candidate more acceptable to the baronial council. He was handed over to the keeping of the earl marshal, but released on the payment of large sums of money. He retired to his rectory of Hanslope, where he died on 29 December 1258, through vexation at the king's refusal of reconciliation, according to Matthew Paris. His estates at Little Brickhill in Buckinghamshire, Littlebury in Essex, Dunton in Warwickshire, and Snorscomb in Northamptonshire, for the most part acquired by purchase after 1252, were seized by the crown, but were eventually divided between his kinsman John and his own three children, Philip the younger, Amicia, the wife of Richard de Curzon of Derbyshire, and Master Henry Lovel, a clerk who served as his father's executor. 


@@@@@


doc= 17053


Lovelace, Francis (c.1621-1675), colonial governor, was the fourth of eight children of Sir William Lovelace ('bap'. 1584, died 1627), politician and army officer, of Bethersden and Woolwich, Kent, and Anne (died 1633), daughter of Sir William Barne and his wife, Anne Sandys. Lovelace was a zealous supporter of Charles I in the English civil war, serving as a colonel in the royalist forces. In June 1644 he was appointed governor of Carmarthen Castle in Wales. He lost the castle to parliamentary forces in October 1645, after a sharp fight in which his brother William was killed. Another brother, Richard Lovelace, the cavalier poet, memorialized these events in 'Lucasta'. For a time he served on the continent with his brothers Richard and Dudley in the forces of Louis XIV, then in 1650 joined his sister Anne Gorsuch in Virginia. When the colony was seized by parliamentary commissioners in 1652, Governor Sir William Berkeley dispatched him to France to inform Charles II. In 1658 he returned to England to aid the royalist cause. About a year later he secretly married Blanche Talbot. They had two children. On 5 August 1659 he was arrested and thrown into the Tower of London, but was freed in 1660 when Charles II ascended the throne. 
In the years following the Restoration, Lovelace apparently lived in London and worked for the Admiralty. He appears to have been appointed deputy governor of Long Island in 1665 but it is unclear if he took up the post. In 1667 he succeeded Richard Nicolls as governor of New York. Samuel Maverick, a New Englander in high standing with the royalists, had recommended Lovelace to the earl of Clarendon, lord high chancellor, as a person eminently qualified for the office. A contemporary newsletter announcing the appointment mistakenly identified him as the brother of Lord Lovelace, which has led to him being confused with his near contemporary Francis Lovelace, son of Richard, first Baron Lovelace of Hurley, who died in 1673. On 13 June 1667 Lovelace was commissioned lieutenant-colonel in Sir Walter Vane's regiment. He arrived in New York in March 1668, and spent the summer receiving instruction from Nicolls in his new duties. In August he assumed full powers, attempting to maintain English authority over the diverse Dutch, Swedish, and English populations while keeping frictions to a minimum. Unlike Nicolls, he held regular council meetings, but usually did not follow the councillors' advice. Recognizing the religious diversity among New Yorkers, he guaranteed them liberty of conscience, 'provided they raise not fundamentalls'. He expressed his concern for the American Indians by sending missionaries among them and by paying them for Staten Island. He stimulated prosperity by developing land and water transportation, founding new townships, establishing a merchants' exchange, and regularizing postal service between New York and Boston. Looking to the colony's defences, he organized infantry and militia companies and enlarged New York's fortifications. 
Over the years Lovelace's conduct in office was generally prudent and cautious, but difficulties mounted. He had altercations with neighbouring colonies over borders, and in 1672 had to contend with a political uprising in New Jersey. Frontier Indians were a continual concern; on one occasion he rushed troops to Esopus to defend settlers. His colony was rent by religious and cultural squabbles between fractious nationalities, and he lived in constant dread of Dutch invasion. He sometimes acted unilaterally, without taking into account the wishes of the Dutch residents. In 1672 he refused to entertain citizens' demands for a representative assembly, and, when they in turn communicated their refusal to pay taxes, 'he was so wroth he ordered the papers publicly burned'. A year later, while he was visiting Connecticut, a Dutch fleet seized New York with little opposition, and he was arrested and shipped off to England. 
Lovelace was not responsible for this loss, but he was undone by it. Dutch creditors seized his New York property, and the duke of York confiscated his English estates for a debt of $7000. Other creditors enmeshed him for years in litigation. In January 1675 he was imprisoned in the Tower, and on 2 and 9 March 1675 crown officials questioned him about the loss of New York. His answers were deemed unacceptable, but the matter was not pursued and he was released in April because of his health. He retreated to Woodstock, Oxfordshire, where he had died by 22 December 1675, when administration of his estate was granted to his brother Dudley, a further administration being granted on 10 May 1686 to his sister Joan Caesar. 


@@@@@


doc= 17054


Lovelace, John, third Baron Lovelace (c.1640-1693), politician, was the only son of John Lovelace, second Baron Lovelace (1615/16-1670), and his wife, Anne ('bap'. 1623, died 1697), third daughter and ultimately coheir of Thomas Wentworth, earl of Cleveland. His father supported the royalist cause during the English civil wars, much to his financial detriment, and subsequently served as lord lieutenant of Berkshire from the Restoration until 1668. His mother was the Lady Anne to whom Richard Lovelace dedicated his poem 'Lucasta'. 
Lovelace matriculated from Wadham College, Oxford, on 25 July 1655 (the same year that his father was briefly incarcerated in the Tower of London on suspicion of plotting against the government) and was created MA on 9 September 1661. He married Martha Pye ('c'.1642-1704?), the eldest daughter and coheir of Sir Edmund Pye, baronet, of Bradenham, Buckinghamshire, on 28 August 1662. Their only son died an infant; of three daughters -- Anne, Martha, and Catherine -- only Martha survived her father. She subsequently succeeded to the title of Baroness Wentworth upon the death of Lovelace's mother, while the Lovelace title passed to a collateral male heir, John Lovelace ['see below'], at the time of her father's death. 
Returned to the House of Commons in 1661 as one of the members for Berkshire, Lovelace's opposition to the hearth tax (which extended outside the house as far as beating up a collector) attracted a reference by Andrew Marvell in his 'Last instructions to a painter' (1667). In 1667 Lovelace was a teller against the bill imposing double taxation on nonconformists. Otherwise he seems not to have distinguished himself in the Commons and, notwithstanding these policy stands, both in 1664 and later in 1669-71 he was noted as a court dependent and supporter. After the death of his father in 1670, however, Lovelace took his seat in the House of Lords and by the end of the 1670s he had emerged as a leading whig partisan. In 1675 he was one of the country peers who voted against the government's attempt to impose an oath on all peers, MPs, and office-holders to forswear any attempt to alter the government of church or state. Two years later he was one of the two country peers who, like the duke of York (the future James II) and his supporters, dissented from the government's bill to impose limitations on a Catholic successor, but for very different reasons to theirs: to Lovelace, the bill provided too weak a bulwark against what a Catholic monarch could do. 
Lovelace was an active participant in the upper chamber's continuing investigation of the Popish Plot in 1678 and 1679. At the local level, Anthony Wood reported sourly his success at influencing the election of whig burgesses at Oxford (and elsewhere) to the exclusion parliaments. Made a freeman of Oxford in the summer of 1680, Lovelace further scandalized Wood by drinking a health to the king at the entertainment that followed, and then, in a deliberate insult to the duke of York, a second health to the confusion of all popish princes. In September of the same year he arranged for the duke of Monmouth to visit Oxford, an occasion studiously ignored by the university community and the bishop of Oxford but one which prompted a considerable popular response. 'My Lord Lovelace', according to one report, 'rode all about the town shouting... he was for a Protestant Duke, no Papist, and God damn him, he was for the Protestant religion' ('Ormonde MSS', new ser., 5.449). Lovelace was also a member of the Green Ribbon Club. Not surprisingly, tokens of royal displeasure multiplied over these years. In 1679 he lost his place as steward of Woodstock manor and park, to which he responded by inviting Titus Oates to preach there twice while attending the horse races as his guest. In 1680 he was removed from the commissions of the peace for both Berkshire and Oxfordshire and then two years later he was dropped from the deputy lieutenancy of Berkshire. 
It has been suggested that Lovelace's political views, and perhaps also his outlook on religion, were shaped in his early youth by John Owen, the prominent Independent minister who had served as his father's chaplain. If so this would have depended on continuing links between Owen and the Lovelaces, as the clergyman had moved on from his chaplaincy when Lovelace was only a small child. The most that can be proved is that Lovelace had connections with the nonconformist leadership in Berkshire and Oxfordshire during the exclusion crisis, and that he continued to meet with Owen and others even after the dissolution of the third Exclusion Parliament in March 1681, with a view to preparing a suitable slate of candidates in case new elections were held. Such planning came to nothing after the revelations of the Rye House plot rapidly transformed the political landscape, and in early July 1683 Lovelace found himself briefly incarcerated in the Tower of London at the same time that William, Lord Russell, and a number of other whig extremists were arrested on charges of having participated in the plan to assassinate Charles II and his brother. Certainly Lovelace's penchant for political provocation was sufficient to have raised suspicions, but even in the charged atmosphere of the moment no solid evidence against him could be found. Released on bail after an appearance before the council, Lovelace was hardly intimidated by this brush with royal authority and was again in the newsletters in 1684 having tried, albeit unsuccessfully, to persuade both Oxford and Reading not to surrender their charters. 
His earlier support for Monmouth notwithstanding, Lovelace steered clear of any involvement in that duke's futile rebellion. However, his name subsequently appears on almost every list of those opposed to the policies of James II and, later, of those peers of the realm who might be expected to countenance a movement against the king. In February 1688 he again found himself hauled before the council, this time accused of telling some constables that they need not obey Roman Catholic justices of the peace. According to Lord Macaulay's version of the incident, Lovelace was closely examined but managed to extricate himself from trouble, although not before James personally taxed him severely for playing political tricks. Lovelace's record of rash behaviour and his reputation as a whig extremist probably account for the fact that he was not included in the early network of contacts established by the prince of Orange, but he was finally drawn into the conspiracy against James shortly after the die was cast by the dispatch of the invitation to William in late June. Tradition has it that, in a series of meetings held in the cellars of his house at Hurley, Lovelace plotted his part in the uprisings to occur when William landed. More certain is the fact that his high tolerance for risk was put to good use when he served as courier for a final round of messages from the prince to his associates in England. To this end, Lovelace left for the continent early in September, travelling on an official pass permitting him to go abroad to take the waters. Although a warrant for his arrest as an abetter of the prince was issued just after he returned at the end of the month, he successfully managed to drop out of sight. 
Within a week after William landed at Torbay -- well before most of the other principal conspirators were in motion -- Lovelace gathered a party of some fifty horse made up of tenants and neighbours. From a staging point at Woodstock the group moved on to Cirencester to spend the night of 12 November, but there it encountered a detachment of militia horse sent out by the duke of Beaufort, perhaps the only lord lieutenant actually to make some effort to block supporters from reaching the prince. In one of the few violent encounters in England of the 'bloodless' revolution, a confused skirmish ensued during which the commander of the militia unit and his son were killed and Lovelace and several of his followers arrested; a few days later they were taken under close guard to Gloucester Castle. News of the affair circulated quickly and widely, with Lovelace's fate becoming a matter of some concern to both James and William at a point in time when many had yet to decide whether to take an active role in the events unfolding or, in some cases, which way to jump. According to the earl of Clarendon, James was anxious to have Lovelace sent to Salisbury, presumably so that an example could then be made of what would happen to anyone taking up arms against the king. William is also supposed to have made vigorous efforts to secure his release or at least to guarantee his personal safety, including a threat to burn Badminton as a way to put pressure on the duke of Beaufort. In the end Lovelace was freed by an advance party of troops accompanying Lord Delamer and the earl of Stamford on their march south to join the prince. James having long since withdrawn to London, it was apparently decided that Lovelace should take a party of men and occupy Oxford in anticipation of the arrival of Princess Anne and the sizeable force escorting her south from Nottingham. On 5 December Lovelace entered the city at the head of some 200 horse and was welcomed by the mayor and council and, with the writing on the wall, by the university community as well. 
In the Convention Parliament, Lovelace was a strong proponent of declaring the throne vacant and William and Mary king and queen, and he was suspected by Clarendon of having incited popular protests to accelerate the political process. Once the new regime was settled in, Lovelace was rewarded for his efforts almost immediately by appointment as captain of the band of gentlemen pensioners, a position that carried an annual stipend of $1000 and, more to the point, was sufficiently important to please Lovelace but also keep him well removed from the front lines of administration. He was also named chief justice in eyre of royal parks and forests south of Trent, a post largely without function but one with a variety of perquisites to supplement the annual salary of $165. That same spring a regiment of foot was raised in his name to be sent to Ireland, but it was poorly officered and organized from the first and was disbanded within less than a year. Both in 1689 and 1690 Lovelace was active in the House of Lords, taking an interest in legislation intended to improve the lot of dissenters, to protect the rights of peers, and generally to set right the wrongs of the past decade. As the record of his protests reveal, he not infrequently ended up voting with a small minority of the more radical whigs when it came to matters such as the attempt to pass a bill reversing the 1685 conviction of Titus Oates for perjury or abolishing the strictures of the 'Test Act' for the benefit of the protestant nonconformists. 
Although he cut a dashing figure during his time, Lovelace's political extravagance and flaws of character were such that neither contemporary chroniclers nor more recent commentators have always treated him kindly. Elias Ashmole used the phrase 'vitae virtutis degener heres' ('a moral degenerate, you cling to a life of virtue') to signal his conflicted view of this intemperate whig partisan who almost certainly was an alcoholic as well as a compulsive gambler and given to sexual excess (Ashmole, 2.478). Thomas Hearne weighs in with the opinion that he was 'a Man of good natural parts, but of very ill and very loose principle' (T. Hearne, 'Remarks', ed. C. E. Doble, 3, 1889, 349). Hearne then goes on to report hearsay to the effect that Lovelace was rarely sober, a point echoed on more than one occasion by Narcissus Luttrell and other observers of the period. Certainly Lovelace wasted whatever remained of his patrimony, and after his death the estate at Hurley was sold for $41,000 by order of the court of chancery to help pay off accumulated debts. In spite of his personal failings, however, it would be a mistake to dismiss Lovelace as no more than a Restoration rake. He contributed significantly to one extreme in the political dialogue of the period, used his personal popularity and public flair effectively to rally support for the whig cause before and during the revolution of 1688, and played a role of some substance in the overthrow of James II. Only in the year or two before he died in London on 27 September 1693 did his personal habits and declining health overwhelm all capacity for effective action. He died at Lincoln's Inn Fields and he was buried at Hurley on 6 October 1693. 
Lovelace was succeeded in the peerage by a second cousin, another 
Lovelace inherited little but a title from his cousin and was reputed to be of relatively modest means himself. He took his seat in the House of Lords on 11 November 1693 but was not very active politically. None the less, the family's whig connection was sufficiently strong to secure him a series of appointments in the military, starting in the Life Guards in 1699 and then as colonel of his own regiment of foot in 1706. Two years later Lovelace was appointed governor of New York and New Jersey as replacement for Lord Cornbury, an administrator singularly deficient in talent and much disliked. (Lovelace was, incidentally, no relation of the Francis Lovelace who had served as governor of New York some forty years earlier.) He first arrived in the New World in the late autumn of 1708 after a difficult transatlantic crossing. He adopted a conciliatory stance with his constituents, even allowing the assemblies in both colonies for the first time to make specific appropriations of tax revenues rather than simply delivering up a lump sum to the governor. However, his death from a stroke on 6 May 1709 cut short Lovelace's administrative career at too early a stage for there to be a record of significant accomplishment or any challenge to his initial popularity. Six days later, after a funeral at Trinity Church, New York, Lovelace was buried in the churchyard there. 


@@@@@


doc= 17055


John Lovelace, fourth Baron Lovelace (d. 1709), army officer and colonial administrator. He was the son and heir of William Lovelace (died 1676) of Hurst, Berkshire, and grandson of Francis Lovelace, the second son of the first baron. His mother, Mary, was the sister and co-heir of Sir Edward Nevill, baronet, of Grove, Nottinghamshire. A chance contemporary reference suggests a birth date sometime during the decade before his father's death in 1676. About 20 October 1702 Lovelace married Charlotte Clayton (died 1749), daughter of Sir John Clayton of Richmond, Surrey. The couple had four children: three sons -- John, Nevill, and Charles -- and a daughter, Martha. 


@@@@@


doc= 17056


Lovelace, Richard (1617-1657), poet and army officer, was born on 9 December 1617, the eldest of five sons and the second of eight children of Sir William Lovelace the younger ('bap'. 1584, died 1627) of Woolwich, Kent, and his wife, Anne Barnes (died 1632/3), the only daughter of a wealthy merchant, Sir William Barnes. Court documents relating to an action taken by Sir William Barnes against Richard Lovelace's grandfather Sir William Lovelace the elder (1561-1629) show that William and Anne married 'on or about 17 May 1611'. Their first daughter was born about 1612, and there were no further children until Richard's birth in December 1617 (TNA: PRO, WARD 7/77/128), perhaps because the couple may have lived apart following their marriage. Later in 1611 William's patron Viscount L'Isle had been informed that his charge 'leadeth a moste leaude and wicked lyfe... and as often as he is drunck shee is forsed to hyde herself from his outragious sworde' (De L'Isle and Dudley MSS, 4.286). Before his death at the siege of Groll (12 August 1627) Sir William Lovelace the younger had, as his widow notes, 'served about thirty yeares in the warres', part of which time she was with him 'in the Low Countries' ('Poems', xvi). Later their son Richard would also live in the Netherlands; he too would follow the family tradition of military service. His grandfather Sir William Lovelace the elder had been knighted by the lord lieutenant of Ireland during Essex's 1599 Irish campaign; other forebears further justified the contemporary reputation of the Lovelaces as 'a Race of Gentlemen... who have in Military Affairs atcheived Reputation and Honour, with a prodigal Losse and Expence' (T. Philipot, 'Villare Cantianum', 1659, 72). Though Richard Lovelace's military exploits are largely unrecorded, chivalric honour has long been associated with his life and poetry. 
The essential source of his biography, Anthony Wood's account in 'Athenae Oxoniensis' (1691), states that Lovelace studied at Charterhouse School, though other than a 1629 petition of the widowed mother on behalf of 'one of hir Sonnes' no records have survived. A warrant in the Public Record Office dated 5 May 1631 does, however, document the appointment of Richard Lovelace to the honorary position of 'A Gent Wayter extraordinary' to the king (Berry and Timings, 396). He matriculated as a gentleman commoner at Gloucester Hall, Oxford, on 27 June 1634, 'being then accounted the most amiable and beautiful person that ever eye beheld, a person also of innate modesty, virtue and courtly deportment'; two years later he received a master of arts degree, not merely because he had won the favour of a 'great lady belonging to the queen' as Wood suggests (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 3.460). Among the 'persons of quality' honoured with this degree on 31 August 1636 at the conclusion of Charles and Henrietta Maria's visit to Oxford, the strikingly handsome, remarkably prepossessing young man had by then shown a precocious literary promise by writing a comedy entitled 'The Scholars'. The only parts of the play that remain, the prologue and epilogue, indicate that Henrietta Maria's company performed the comedy at Whitefriars, probably after late 1637, when the theatres closed by the plague reopened. Meanwhile, if Wood is correct, Lovelace 'retired in great splendor to the court'. But he did not abandon the scholarly world: at Cambridge his name was entered in the book of subscriptions on 4 October 1637. 
During an indeterminate stay at Cambridge, Lovelace probably met Andrew Marvell and some of the other writers who later commended the publication of his first volume of poetry; his relationship with Oxford and the court, however, occasioned his first datable poems. An elegiac piece by 'Rich. Lovelace. Mag. Art. A. Glouc.' was added to the Oxford University collection of verse, 'Musarum Oxoniensium Charisteria' (1639), commemorating the 20 January 1639 death of the infant Princess Catherine. Among the contributors was Anthony Hodges, whose translation of a Greek romance Lovelace had praised the year before in verses prefaced to its Oxford publication, and George Ashwell, perhaps the 'learned Friend' G. A. similarly honoured in another prefatory poem. Court connections may then have brought Lovelace and the earl of Norwich's son George, Lord Goring, together, for with the outbreak of the bishops' wars the former Oxford poet and playwright served in Goring's regiment as an ensign and later a captain. The royalist poem to General Goring written after the first Scottish expedition ended badly at Berwick in June 1639 softens the defeat of a peace achieved 'at the Foes rate' with rounds of drink celebrating the general and his wife Lettice. During the second unsuccessful campaign the next year Lovelace apparently expressed a more sombre note in 'The Soldier', an unpublished tragedy that was not staged before the theatres were closed in 1642 and was later lost. 
With the cessation of armed hostility Lovelace withdrew to Kent and the family estate at Bethersden, which under the terms of his father's will became part of his inheritance on his twenty-fourth birthday (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/153/167). Lovelace quickly became embroiled in the growing national conflict. On 29 April 1642 he and other young Kent royalists disrupted the Maidstone quarter sessions at which parliament supporters were discussing a response to the moderate Kentish petition advocating, among other local concerns, 'just and regal authority' (Everitt, 97). The intruders 'in a furious manner cried, 'No, No, No', and then with great contempt of court clapped on their hats'; raising a copy of the parliamentarian counter petition above his head, Captain Richard Lovelace tore it to pieces (Steele Young and Snow, 2.249). At the head of between 280 and 500 Kent supporters, Lovelace then marched from Blackheath to London. The next day, 30 April, he and Sir William Boteler delivered to the House of Commons a petition similar to the one already burnt by the hangman. For their defiance Lovelace was sent to the Gatehouse at Westminster and Boteler committed to the Fleet. During the seven weeks spent in prison Lovelace possibly, though not probably, 'made that celebrated song called Stone Walls do not a Prison make, &c' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 3.461). A petition from prison written in his own hand does survive, however, requesting 'conditionall freedome' and the opportunity to serve 'his Kinge and Countrie' in Ireland ('Poems', xxxviii-xxxix). After he was released on bail on 21 June his whereabouts are less certain. 
Lovelace seems to have taken no active role in the military conflicts that threatened the monarchy; instead he appears to have been, in the words of his close friend and distant cousin Thomas Stanley, '
During our Civill Wars confin'd to peace, 

Expos'd to Forrein Wars, when ours did cease. 
(T. Stanley, 'Register of Friends', in 'Poems and Translations', ed. G. M. Crump, 1962, 360)' Part of that confinement was passed in London; there, Wood reports, Lovelace lived beyond his means 'by furnishing men with horse and arms, or by relieving ingenious men in want, whether scholars, musicians, soldiers, &c' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 3.462). The precarious nature of his financial position may have derived from his disposal of the family's property around Bethersden between June 1642 and September 1648, presumably in the royalist cause (CKS, U2035 T8-T11, T17/1, T18/1). Lovelace's presence, if not his patronage, is apparent in the 1643 dedication to him of poems written by Henry Glapthorne, who the year before had named his daughter Lovelis. William Lawes also set three of Lovelace's lyrics to music during this period, and the first of the manuscript versions of 'To Althea, from Prison' began to circulate. But Lovelace did not remain solely in London. A poem, 'Upon my Noble Friend, 'Richard Lovelace'', written no later than 1645 by John Tatham stresses the absence of the author's friend, 'his being in Holland' (J. Tatham, 'Ostella', 1650, 82-3). Another by Samuel Holland published in broadside recalls that France and Holland had found Lovelace 'excellent in Arms, and Art' ('On the Death of my much Honoured Friend, Colonel 'Richard Lovelace'', 1660?). Although no record of military service in Holland has been found, he may have accompanied Goring on the mission in late 1642 to recruit volunteers from the English soldiers there. Lovelace's poem on the exiled queen of Bohemia's daughter Louise Hollandine does confirm his presence in The Hague, where his 'Art' might have been both developed and known. Unlike his brothers, one of whom was mortally wounded during a royalist campaign in Wales, he may well have taken up arms only in France. He was in the service of the French at Dunkirk, and Wood reports that he was wounded before the siege ended in October 1646. 
Back in England by 1647, Lovelace seems to have been among the authors gathered at Stanley's Middle Temple chambers. By then the reputation of his 'Art' was not limited to poetry. Along with Peter Lely he and two others were given the freedom of the Painter-Stainers Company on 26 October 1647, the same year he contributed one of the poems prefaced to the folio edition of the plays of Beaumont and Fletcher. A year later he was once again imprisoned. Marvell's claim that his lands were sequestered, however, has not been corroborated from extant records in the National Archives. Some time in October, following a search of his lodging in connection with the 1648 uprising in Kent, he was committed to Peterhouse 'upon pretence of answering some matters contained in papers of his' (D. Gardiner, ed., 'The Oxinden and Peyton Letters', 1937, 145). While in prison, Wood believes, 'he fram'd... for the press' the collection dedicated to his relative Anne Lovelace entitled 'Lucasta'. 
The volume of poems licensed on 4 February 1648 and entered for publication on 14 May 1649, a month after Lovelace's release from Peterhouse, was not written during his incarceration; nor has the Lucasta said to have inspired them been identified with any certainty. The licensing implies the completion of a collection whose publication was delayed, Marvell speculates in one of the dedicatory poems, because Lovelace had supported the Kentish petition, 'wrong'd' the 'Houses Priviledge', and was now 'under sequestration'. The 'gentlewoman of great beauty and fortune named Lucy Sacheverel', who in Wood's account married soon after she heard falsely that Lovelace was fatally wounded at Dunkirk, appears at the very least to have been someone the poet knew, though the suggestions that she was the daughter of Ferdinando Sacheverel or a member of the Lucas family remain unsubstantiated. She is in the poetry 'Lucasta that Bright Northerne Star', literally perhaps from the north but figuratively 'lux casta' or pure light. As such she recalls William Habington's Castara and to a lesser extent Edmund Waller's Sacharissa or Thomas Carew's Caelia. Among the other verses in the volume to Althea, Amarantha, Ellinda, and Gratiana, those to Lucasta are not limited to deft variations of Petrarchan conventions or graceful formulations of Caroline compliment. Her symbolic light illuminates a darkening world of civil conflict. 
The love and honour commonly associated with Lovelace's cavalier loyalties and unmistakable in the initial poems addressed to Lucasta 'Going beyond the Seas' and 'Going to the Warres' are distinctly Caroline and chivalric. Lucasta resembles the transcendence and inspiration celebrated in the court masques; the lovers' world of Mars and Venus recalls on a lesser scale the valour of Rubens's 'Landscape with St. George and the Dragon'. The royal dimensions of her radiance and his own devotion are explicit in a poem written about the time of the Kentish petitions, 'To Lucasta: from Prison'. England itself metaphorically becomes the prison, and the king both displaces and merges with Lucasta as the light that might dispel the enveloping world of darkness. By the end of the volume in 'Calling Lucasta from her Retirement' a triumphant Lucasta assumes the mythic proportions accorded the royal couple in the Whitehall masques; the hope that she too can reorder the world is, however, now limited to the realm of the lovers. Ultimately the long pastoral 'Amarantha' added to the completed collection abandons the world of Mars and its honour for the love the poems have come to value more. 
Though Lovelace recognizes the destruction and futility of civil war, the poems in 'Lucasta' never forsake a loyalist commitment, embracing neutralism or succumbing to disillusionment. The poem he allegedly wrote in the Gatehouse, 'To Althea, from Prison', stoically sings the goodness and greatness of the king. 'Stone Walls' and 'Iron bars' cannot confine 'Mindes innocent and quiet'. It is a belief affirmed in his complex royalist tribute to the image of Charles and his son James captured by Peter Lely in the portrait painted at Hampton Court by late 1647. The tacit recognition of the king's separation from his wife adds a poignant note to the heroic resolve Lovelace sees in 'griefe triumphant' despite 'clouded Majesty'. Earlier he encouraged Francis Lovelace to accept the battlefield death of their brother William with a similar 'firme selfe' and 'thorough-made Resolve'. Caught now in the bleak winter realities of 'The Grasse-hopper', a poem fraught with royalist overtones, Lovelace assures Charles Cotton that together they can recreate 'A Genuine Summer in each others breast'. The friendship, abundant wine, and good poetry celebrated in this justly famous poem are meant to sustain the spirits of loyalists forced to turn inward. 
The volume of poetry entered in the Stationers' register on 14 November 1659 and published posthumously the next year by Lovelace's brother Dudley Posthumus and Eldred Revett reflects the suffering brought about by the civil war. The extent of Lovelace's diminished fortunes after the sale of his Bethersden estate and his whereabouts after his release from prison are not, however, entirely resolved. The secretary of state, John Thurloe, believed Lovelace maintained his association with the royalist cause, at least until a few years before his death. He appears to have been implicated in the failed Ship tavern conspiracy of early 1654 and was named as being 'of the council' ('Thurloe State Papers', 2.96, 114). Though Lovelace was not questioned after the conspiracy's discovery he was clearly concerned for his status. According to a letter received by Thurloe on 21 March 1654 'Col Lovelace... sent one Mr Doubledee... to desire to know, what was against him, and wished me to inquire the utmost' (ibid., 2.183). And while the association of 'Colonel Lovelace' with Richard Lovelace is not absolute it seems likely that it was he, rather than his younger brother, who was always known as 'Colonel Francis Lovelace'. As well as involvement in the Ship tavern plot, Lovelace may have been in Holland during part of this time; later in London he might also have been subjected to the searches in 1656 for royalists in the city who had not posted required securities. An allusion to William Davenant in the Sanazar satire and the dating of Revett's elegy on Lovelace, in any event, indicate that the poet died in 1657 (Duncan-Jones, 408-9; 'Poems', liv). Wood made considerable efforts to find out the circumstances of Lovelace's death. On his behalf Sir Edward Sherburne established from Lovelace's sister, Joan Caesar, that 'she was at his ffunerall, being buried in St Brides Church London, in which Parish he dyed coming from the Country of a sicknesse he had there taken' (LMA, ACC/3259/SF3/004). 'Lucasta: Posthume Poems' and its appended 'Elegies Sacred to the Memory of the Author' question the image Wood creates of an increasingly melancholic author reduced to dependence upon the charity of his friends before his death. None of the elegies mentions the dire straits, which Wood elsewhere says are the curse of poets; the various poems Lovelace addressed to his peers in the last years of his life suggest, moreover, that he was neither isolated nor disconsolate, though his tribute to Charles Cotton and especially the long final poem on Sanazar may convey personal dismay about the lot of the writer. Whatever his level of poverty at the time of his death, Lovelace's life after the king's execution and his release from prison altered but did not entirely transform his spirited convictions. 
Though the much less familiar poems in Lovelace's posthumous collection were long ignored as decidedly inferior, their increasing sense of detachment and even alienation provides a valuable complement to the first volume. Lucasta's light belongs to the initial poems, her radiance now dimmer and more limited. Opposing her invitation to sportful play in the last of the Lucasta poems is the austere ant, an obvious counterpart to the grasshopper. In a significant series of poems the fates of the ant, the fly, the spider, the falcon, and the toad bleakly underscore the realization that all are caught up in consuming forces, destroyed as they themselves destroy. Without the conviviality celebrated in the earlier poems, libertine abandonment is attractive; the graceful saraband of the previous volume becomes a drunken dance suited to a reeling world scornful of honour. An alternative, however, is the composure of the self-contained snail and the brave struggle of the dying falcon to rise triumphant. In a benighted and treacherous world Lovelace can still counsel his brother Francis once again to defy fate; he also sees in Charles Cotton a semblance of the enclosed life celebrated in the earlier grasshopper poem addressed to Cotton's father. While the optimism is tempered, the final poem, 'On Sanazar's being Honoured', nevertheless invokes a spirit of stoic integrity despite isolation and rejection. 
Together the two volumes of 'Lucasta' modify the long-established impression that Lovelace is an uneven, careless poet who wrote several memorable verses. The handsome features in the Dulwich portrait, a painting that re-enforces a common comparison to Sir Philip Sidney, only adds to the romantic biography of a dashing poet driven by his lofty ideals to imprisonment, poverty, and early death. The poems themselves, especially those in the posthumous publication, challenge the stereotype of chivalric love and cavalier honour. Sensitive to the earlier writing of John Donne as well as Ben Jonson and an influence on the verse of Andrew Marvell, Richard Lovelace embodied in his life and poetry the loyalties, conflicts, and violent loss of the Caroline world. 
The two volumes of 'Lucasta' are the only legacy of the poet who never married; contemporary paintings, engravings, and songs, however, further confirm the spirit of his life and poetry. Besides the portrait of 'Colonel Lovelace' in the Dulwich Picture Gallery, an oil painting at Worcester College, Oxford, attributed to John de Critz is said to be the young Lovelace richly robed in the academic regalia of the Oxford MA. A Wenceslaus Hollar engraving depicts Lovelace in his early twenties; another Hollar engraving of the poet drawn by his brother Francis appears in 'Lucasta: Posthume Poems'. Lovelace is also seen as Orpheus in an engraving attributed to Richard Gaywood, and engraved variations of the Dulwich portrait exist. Musicians Lovelace knew at court or in private circles set sixteen of the poems in 'Lucasta' to music; many of the songs in the settings of Henry Lawes, Thomas Charles, John Gamble, John Cave, and John Wilson are reprinted in Wilkinson's 1925 Oxford edition and in a series of articles by Willa McClung Evans. Numerous twentieth-century musical transcriptions and recordings attest to the enduring attraction of Richard Lovelace's lyric poetry. 


@@@@@


doc= 17057


Lovell, Daniel (1758/9-1818), journalist, was for many years proprietor and editor of 'The Statesman' (1806-24), a radical daily newspaper projected in 1806 by John Hunt. His outspoken criticism of the tories subjected him to much government persecution. In 1811 he was sentenced to twelve months' imprisonment for copying the remarks of the Manchester papers on the conduct of the troops at Sir Francis Burdett's arrest, while the originators of the libel were only called upon to express regret at their carelessness. 
In August 1812 Lovell was tried and found guilty of a libel on the commissioners of the transport service. He pleaded that it was published without his knowledge or sanction while he was in prison, but was sentenced to pay a fine of $500, to be imprisoned in Newgate for eighteen months, and to find securities for three years, $1000 on his own account and two sureties of $500 each. Unable to pay the fine or find sureties, he remained in gaol. 
At last on 23 November 1814, Samuel Whitbread MP presented a petition from Lovell asking for a remission or reduction of his fine, and after some time the government remitted the fine and reduced the amount of security; but he was still unable to obtain this, and on 17 March 1815 Whitbread again presented a petition from him, stating his complete inability to obtain the required security, and seeking the merciful consideration of the house of his sorry condition, having been confined nearly four years in Newgate. He was finally released, broken in health and financially ruined. 
In 1817 Lovell was again heavily fined for speaking of the ministerial evening journal as 'the prostituted 'Courier', the venerable apostate of tyranny and oppression, whose full-blown baseness and infamy held him fast to his present connections and prevented him from forming new ones', while he further accused the editor, Daniel Stuart, of pocketing $600 or $700 of the Society of the Friends of the People. Lovell died aged sixty in Salisbury Court, Fleet Street, London -- probably his business address -- on 27 December 1818, shortly after selling 'The Statesman' to Sampson Perry, formerly editor of 'The Argus'. He was buried at St Bride's, Fleet Street, London, on 3 January 1819. 
In his will, Lovell bequeathed an annuity of $50 yearly to Ann Field, formerly Ann Hill, of whom he speaks as 'now residing with me'. This wording indicates that it was unlikely that they were married, although Lovell goes on to speak of their son and daughter, born in 1810 and 1814 respectively. 


@@@@@


doc= 17058


Lovell, Francis, Viscount Lovell (b. c.1457, d. in or after 1488), administrator and rebel, was the only son of John, Lord Lovell, and Joan, daughter of John, first Viscount Beaumont. Francis Lovell is variously described as aged seven and nine at his father's death in January 1465; given the date at which he received livery of his lands the former is more likely. The wardship and custody of Lovell and his lands were granted on 13 November 1467 to Richard Neville, earl of Warwick. Lovell had already married (by 17 February 1466) the earl's niece, Anne Fitzhugh, the daughter of Henry, Lord Fitzhugh, and Alice, daughter of Richard Neville, earl of Salisbury. Henry Fitzhugh followed Warwick into rebellion in 1469-70, and Lovell and his wife were among those pardoned by Edward IV in September 1470. After Warwick's death at Barnet, Lovell's wardship was granted, on 11 July 1471, to the king's brother-in-law John de la Pole, duke of Suffolk, although the grant specifically excluded lands which Lovell had yet to inherit -- notably those of his grandmother Alice Deincourt, which passed to the crown rather than to Suffolk at her death in February 1474. Lovell was still regarded as a minor on 19 February 1477, but on 28 February he was given livery of his Cheshire lands, and was licensed to enter his land elsewhere, including substantial estates in Yorkshire, on 6 November. 
In 1480 Lovell was named to commissions of array in the North Riding as a preliminary to the planned Scottish campaign, in which he served under Richard, duke of Gloucester, and was knighted by him beside Berwick on 22 August 1481. On 4 January 1483 Lovell was elevated to the rank of viscount. His rise to power accelerated a few months later with the accession of Richard III. While still protector of the young Edward V, Gloucester made Lovell chief butler of England and granted him effective control of the castle and manor of Thorpe Waterville, Northamptonshire, part of the Holland inheritance which Lovell had previously been disputing with Edward IV's stepson Richard Grey. Two days after Richard's assumption of the throne, Lovell replaced Grey as constable of Wallingford and was made the king's chamberlain. The latter post, which set him at the head of that part of the household closest to the king, is the clearest evidence for Lovell's intimacy with the new king. He was also a councillor and was elected knight of the Garter early in the reign. Lovell and his wife attended Richard's coronation, where Lovell bore the third sword of state. 
When the duke of Buckingham rebelled in October 1483 Lovell deputed William Stonor to raise his men in Oxfordshire and bring them to the king. Stonor, however, joined the rebels, and the episode suggests that Lovell was out of touch with his family interests in the south. Certainly most of the men who can be closely associated with him after his coming of age were northerners. Richard III may have hoped that Lovell would strengthen his links with Oxfordshire and Berkshire, where, as the rebellion had showed, he was in need of reliable allies. Lovell was given extensive grants of forfeited land in the region, including several Stonor manors, but there is little evidence of his involvement there, although in 1484 he joined with the duke of Suffolk in refounding a fraternity in St Helen's Church, Abingdon. His power seems to have been primarily exercised at the centre, within the royal court, where his influence is suggested by the gifts of those anxious for the king's favour, including Selby Abbey and the city of Salisbury, and by his inclusion in William Collingbourne's famous couplet: '
The Cat, the Rat and Lovell our Dog 

Rule all England under the Hog. 
(Horrox, 222)' Lovell continued to receive royal patronage throughout the reign, including (with William Catesby) the constableship of Rockingham (Northamptonshire). 
As the threat of invasion intensified in the summer of 1485, Lovell was sent to guard the south coast. Henry Tudor landed instead near Milford Haven, and Lovell had probably rejoined Richard in time to fight at Bosworth on 22 August. Although he is not mentioned in any of the chronicle accounts of the battle, his presence is suggested by early reports that he was among the dead. In fact he escaped and took sanctuary at Colchester. He was attainted in Henry's first parliament. In spring 1486 Lovell and his companion in sanctuary, Humphrey Stafford of Grafton (Worcestershire), sought to stir up rebellion against the new regime: Stafford in the west midlands and Lovell in Yorkshire. But the leading northern families failed to support the rising, and by the time Henry VII entered York on 20 April Lovell's forces had dispersed. By 19 May Lovell was believed to be in the Isle of Ely, seeking to escape abroad or take sanctuary once again. He subsequently made his way to the court of Margaret of York, dowager duchess of Burgundy, where he was joined in the following spring by John, earl of Lincoln, the son of Lovell's former guardian, Suffolk. 
In 1486 Lovell and Lincoln, with military backing supplied by Margaret, launched an invasion of England. They went via Ireland, where, on 24 May, a boy claiming to be Clarence's son, Edward, earl of Warwick, was crowned 'King Edward VI' in Dublin Cathedral. The rebels landed on the Furness peninsula, near the lands of one of their allies, Sir Thomas Broughton, on 4 June, and moved rapidly south. As in the previous year, few former Ricardians of any standing joined them. On 16 June the rebels met the king's army at Stoke, near Newark (Nottinghamshire), and were routed. Lincoln was killed. Lovell, according to the reports which reached York, 'was discomfited and fled' (Attreed, 2.573). His fate thereafter is obscure, but there seems no reason except coincidence to identify him with the body of a man said to have been found in a hidden room in Minster Lovell in the early years of the eighteenth century. After the battle he probably headed northwards. It was to the north that his wife sent his associate Edward Franke in search of him, although by the following February Franke had reported failure. Lovell ultimately arrived in Scotland, where on 19 June 1488 James IV granted a safe conduct to him, Sir Thomas Broughton, Sir Roger Hartlington, Oliver Frank, and their associates. Hartlington, reduced to his former status of gentleman (which perhaps implies that his knighthood had been conferred by 'Edward VI'), was pardoned in July 1489, but there is no further official reference to Lovell or Broughton. In July 1491 a 'simple and poor person' of the city of York was said to have spoken to Lovell and Broughton in Scotland, although he subsequently denied it and no date is given for the meeting. 
Lovell's wife was granted an annuity of $20 p.a. from the exchequer in December 1489. She was still alive in 1495, when her interests were protected in her husband's attainder. The 1487 act had omitted him -- negligently, it was claimed, although it is more likely to have been because he was then already under attainder. Lovell had no children, and his heirs were his sisters Joan Lovell, who married Sir Brian Stapilton, and Frideswide Lovell, who married Edward Norreys. Henry VIII later granted their heirs some of the Beaumont lands, but Lovell's attainder was never reversed. 


@@@@@


doc= 17059


Lovell, George William (1804-1878), playwright and novelist, was for many years secretary of the Phoenix Insurance Company. Little is known of his early life, but in 1830 he married Maria Ann Lacy, an actress, who, after her marriage, became a playwright under her married name, Maria Ann Lovell (1803-1877). Lovell himself wrote six plays starting with 'The Avenger', staged at the Surrey Theatre in 1835. This was followed by the tragedy 'The Provost of Bruges' in 1836, produced at Drury Lane with W. C. Macready and Ellen Tree in the leading roles. Lovell based the work on a story called 'The Serf' found in Leitch Ritchie's 'Romance of History'. According to 'The Times', the opening night 'audience applauded loudly and unanimously, and the public may be congratulated on the appearance of a play which presents such unquestionable claims to their favour as this' ('The Times', 11 Feb 1836). In 1841 Lovell's literary career was further enhanced with the publication of his novel 'The Trustee'. On 12 September 1842 his play 'Love's Sacrifice, or, The Rival Merchants' was staged by Charles Kemble at Covent Garden and had George Vandenhoff in the lead role. The 'Theatrical Journal' praised the author's wit in the humorous sections of the play and 'The Times' noted that Lovell had written 'a 'very' clever piece' ('The Times', 13 Sept 1842). A comedy, dealing with the romantic lives of two Oxford students of differing temperaments, entitled 'Look before you Leap', was then produced at the Haymarket on 29 October 1846. 'The Times' stated that: 'The merit of the piece lies in the freshness and cheerfulness with which the subject is treated. There is little or no repartee properly so called, but the language flows on smoothly and naturally, and the characters speak out for themselves with much force. ('The Times', 30 Oct 1846)' The first production of Lovell's most famous play, 'The Wife's Secret', took place at the Park Theatre, New York, on 12 October 1846, and proved to be a success with American audiences. The work was staged at the Haymarket, London, on 17 January 1848, and ran thirty-six nights with Mr and Mrs Charles Kean in the lead roles. According to Wilbur Dunkel, Charles Kean paid Lovell $300 for the piece and then gave the author an extra $100 when the play was performed in London. The work became popular and there were notable revivals staged in October 1850, at the Princess's Theatre, and in February 1861, at Drury Lane with the Keans again taking the lead roles. Later productions took place at the Surrey in November 1868, the Olympic in March 1877, and at the St James's in April 1888. This final revival was produced by John Hare with Lewis Waller and Mr and Mrs W. H. Kendal taking the leads. Regarding the original London production, 'The Times' said: 'the 'Wife's Secret' is a plain story effectively told, with the advantage that the ruling sentiment, though often treated before, is one that is sure to appeal to a large portion of an audience. And it may be laid down as a fixed maxim, that he who can tell a story well upon the stage has accomplished nine-tenths of his work as a practical dramatist. ('The Times', 18 Jan 1848)' The noted theatre historian Allardyce Nicoll stated that 'The Wife's Secret' was 'certainly one of the best plays I have read in this period' (Dunkel, 52). Lovell's last play, 'The Trial of Love', was written for Charles Kean and staged at the Princess's Theatre on 7 June 1852. It ran for twenty-three nights, but was not critically acclaimed. Lovell's playwrighting career is best summed up by Wilbur Dunkel: 'His was not a distinguished talent. Yet he wrote highly actable plays which kept alive original playwrighting at the nadir of the English theatre' (ibid., 58). Lovell died on 13 May 1878 at his home, 18 Lyndhurst Road, Hampstead, leaving at least one daughter and one son, William Henry Lovell. 


@@@@@


doc= 17060


Lovell, Sir Lovell Benjamin Badcock (1786-1861), army officer, a descendant of Sir Salathiel Lovell, was the eldest son of Stanhope Badcock of Little Missenden Hall and Maplethorpe Hall, Buckinghamshire, who served in the American War of Independence as a subaltern in the 6th regiment, and with the Royal Buckinghamshire militia in Ireland in the 1798 rebellion. His mother was the daughter of William Buckle of Mythe Hall and Chasely, Gloucestershire. Educated at Eton College, he was appointed cornet on 18 December 1805 in the 4th light dragoons, in which he became lieutenant on 19 May 1808 and captain on 12 December 1811. He served in the expedition to Montevideo in 1807, on the staff of Sir Samuel Auchmuty. After landing with his regiment in Portugal in December 1808, he served with it throughout the Peninsular campaign of 1809-14, much of the time with the light division. He was present in all at ten general actions, seven sieges, and forty other engagements. In 1811 he was much employed on the left of the army as an unofficial intelligence officer, and was strongly recommended by Wellington for promotion. After the war Badcock was given a brevet majority (21 January 1819) for his Peninsular services. 
On 28 October 1824 Badcock was brought into the 8th light dragoons, after the return of that regiment from India, and on 21 November 1826 obtained a lieutenant-colonelcy, half pay unattached. He was one of the military reporters under Lord William Russell at the siege of Porto during the Miguelite War in Portugal. He published 'Rough Leaves from a Journal in Spain and Portugal in 1832, '33, and '34' (1835). On 21 March 1834 he exchanged to the command of the 15th light dragoons (later hussars) with Lord Brudenell, later earl of Cardigan. In 1835 he was made KH. In 1839 he took his regiment out to Madras. In 1840, together with his brother, Captain William Stanhope Badcock KH, Royal Navy, he assumed the surname of Lovell under royal sign manual. He became brevet colonel on 23 November 1841. On 8 March 1850 he exchanged from the 15th hussars to half pay with the 11th hussars. He became major-general on 20 June 1854, and in 1856 was made KCB and appointed colonel of the 12th (Prince of Wales's) Royal lancers. He died at his residence, Brunswick Terrace, Brighton, on 11 March 1861, aged seventy-five. 


@@@@@


doc= 17061


Lovell, Maria Ann (1803-1877), actress and playwright, was born in London on 15 July 1803, the daughter of the younger Willoughby Lacy (died 1817) and granddaughter of the elder Willoughby Lacy (1749-1831), patentee of Drury Lane and actor. She first appeared on the Belfast stage in 1818 as Mrs Haller, in August von Kotzebue's 'The Stranger', and achieved a certain degree of fame as an actress while in Ireland. In 1820 she performed at Glasgow and Edinburgh in conjunction with Edmund Kean and Charles Young. She was later engaged at Covent Garden where, on 9 October 1822, she performed the role of Belvidera, which she followed with the representation of Isabella. Henry Harris, who was the lessee of the theatre, then engaged her for three years. In 'Our Actresses' Mrs C. Baron states that Maria excelled in pathetic parts. According to the 'Theatrical Journal', Maria was 'a good actress of secondary standing' ('Theatrical Journal', 16, 31 Oct 1855), and the 'Era Almanack' described her as 'an esteemed tragic actress' ('Era Almanack', 1869, 19). 
On her marriage in 1830 to George William Lovell (1804-1878), playwright, Maria retired from the stage and employed herself in writing plays. Her five-act drama 'Ingomar the Barbarian, or, The Son of the Wilderness' was adapted from the German and was produced at Drury Lane in June 1851. According to the 'Theatrical Journal', the play 'was very successful', owing mostly to the performance of Miss Charlotte Vandenhoff in the character of Parthenia, who 'was truly the Greek heroine, nothing more truly Greek in look, and generally in spirit it is possible to conceive'. It was also noted that 'At the fall of the curtain the lady authoress curtsied to the audience from a private box' ('Theatrical Journal', 12, 12 June 1851). In contrast, 'The Times' complained that the 'idea might have been fairly worked out in a couple of acts, with plenty of room for all the graduations in Ingomar's character' ('The Times', 10 June 1851). The play was staged again in October of the same year at Sadler's Wells with Samuel Phelps taking the title role and Fanny Elizabeth Vining playing Parthenia. According to the 'Theatrical Journal' the production 'attracted a large audience... although its novelty was forestalled at Drury Lane a few months ago' ('Theatrical Journal', 12, 29 Oct 1851). The play was also revived in June 1854, December 1867, and at the Victoria Theatre in June 1857. An 1883 staging by the American actress Mary Anderson at the Lyceum in London met with mixed critical response. 
Another of Maria's plays, 'The Beginning and the End', was a four-act drama first staged at the Haymarket in 1855, but, despite the talents of Charlotte Cushman, William Henry Chippendale, and Henry Howe, the play was a failure. The 'Theatrical Journal' noted, 'It is a drama of the Victorian stamp, the plot hinging on a forged will; and contains neither exciting interest nor well developed character' ('Theatrical Journal', 16, 31 Oct 1855). 'The Times' mockingly cited the moral of the play as: 'When you burn a will in the kitchen, take care that no one is in the pantry' ('The Times', 30 Oct 1855). Maria Lovell died on 2 April 1877 at her home, Grove Lodge, 18 Lyndhurst Road, Hampstead. 


@@@@@


doc= 17062


Lovell, Robert (1630?-1690), naturalist, was born at Lapworth, Warwickshire, the son of Benjamin Lovell ('b'. 1607/8), rector of Lapworth, and his first wife, Mary Godwin (died 1658). Sir Salathiel Lovell was his brother. In 1648 he became a student of Christ Church, Oxford 'by favour of the visitors appointed by Parliament' (Wood, 296), studying botany with the benefit of the recently established Physic Garden, zoology, and mineralogy. He graduated BA in 1650 and MA in 1653. 
Lovell was apparently still in Oxford when his two books were published. The first, ''Pambotanologia'' (1659), was a pharmacopoeia rather than the 'compleat herball' that its sub-title proclaimed. Dedicated to Charles II, it demonstrated Lovell's industry in ransacking libraries to list nearly two hundred and fifty authors, rather than any understanding of botany. There was nothing original in its content or arrangement, which followed the antique Galenic principles of the four elements, temperaments, and qualities. Remarkably, the work reached a second edition in 1665, Lovell having meanwhile issued a companion volume, ''Panzooryktologia'', claiming to be a complete history of animals and minerals. 
'Afterwards he retired to Coventry, professed physic, and had some practice therein, lived a conformist, and died [there] in the communion of the church' (Wood, 296). Lovell died in November 1690 and was buried in Holy Trinity Church, Coventry. 


@@@@@


doc= 17063


Lovell, Robert (1771-1796), poet, was born at his parents' home in Thomas Street in Bristol on 25 October 1771, the son of a wealthy Quaker, initially a cabinet-maker and later a pin manufacturer, Robert Lovell (died 1804), and his first wife, Edith, 'nee' Bourne (1741-1781), a Quaker minister. He probably followed some business (he was described on his death as a pin manufacturer), but the vehemence of his 'Bristoliad', a satire in Churchill's style and not deficient in vigour, shows that he was ill at ease in the commercial atmosphere of Bristol. He estranged himself still further from his original circle when on 20 January 1794 he married Mary (1771-1861/2), daughter of Stephen Fricker, a girl of much beauty and some talent, with whom he had one child, Robert Lovell the younger ('b'. 1795). Lovell's family disapproved of the match because she was not only a non-Quaker, but had become an actress after her father's bankruptcy. It is not precisely clear when Lovell first made Southey's acquaintance, but it was early enough for Southey to have become engaged to his sister-in-law, Edith, before Coleridge's visit to Bristol in August 1794. Lovell introduced the two poets to Joseph Cottle and before long Coleridge was betrothed to a third Fricker sister, Sara, whom he married on 14 November 1795. In the same month of August 1794 the three friends co-operated in the production of a wellnigh improvised three-act tragedy on the fall of Robespierre. Each wrote an act, but Lovell's was rejected as out of keeping with the others, and Southey filled the void. The tragedy was published as Coleridge's at Cambridge in September 1794. Southey and Lovell nevertheless combined to publish a joint volume of poetry under the title of 'Poems by Bion and Moschus' (1794); this was mistaken for a translation, and so was reissued in 1795 in an edition bearing the authors' names. Southey's mature opinion of his own pieces may be inferred from the fact that he reprinted none of them. This notwithstanding, they were reprinted in Park's 'British Poets' with the addition of the 'Bristoliad', which does not seem to have been published before. 
Next to their poetry, the young men were chiefly occupied with the project for their Pantisocratic colony. This was an idealized democratic community of self-governing equals with no private ownership of land and an emphasis on living in harmony with nature. It was to be based in Kentucky, and Lovell was to have brought to it not only his wife but his brother and two sisters. The design had practically collapsed before Lovell's death from a fever contracted at Salisbury and aggravated by his travelling home without taking medical advice. Edith Southey, in Southey's absence, nursed him for three nights at the risk of her life. After his death in Bristol on 3 May 1796, Lovell's father refused all aid to his daughter-in-law on the ground of her having been an actress and she and her infant son were provided for by Southey. Mary Lovell lived in his family during his life, and afterwards with his daughter Kate until her death at the age of ninety. Robert Lovell the younger settled in London as a printer in 1824. Some years afterwards he went on a tour of Europe and mysteriously disappeared, last being heard of at Marseilles. Enquiries were made by the Foreign Office, and Henry Nelson Coleridge journeyed in quest of him, but no trace was ever discovered. 


@@@@@


doc= 17064


Lovell, Sir Salathiel (1631/2-1713), judge, was the son of Benjamin Lovell (1607/8-1680) and his first wife, Mary Godwin (died 1658). The naturalist Robert Lovell was his brother. Benjamin Lovell was rector of Preston Bagot, Warwickshire, from 1636. During the civil war Benjamin exchanged the word for the sword; he served briefly as a captain in the cavalry regiment raised in the county by Colonel William Purefoy and was present at the siege of Gloucester in 1643. He became rector of Lapworth, Warwickshire, where he resisted paying the sequestered minister's wife her due out of the revenues of the parish. In 1646 he was threatened with the loss of the living unless he did so, and by May 1649 owed her two years' arrears. Benjamin Lovell conformed at the Restoration, and was still alive in 1677. 
In June 1648 Lovell was admitted to Gray's Inn. In 1652 he was created one of the trustees for the parish lands in Lapworth (and twenty-five years later he helped defeat an attempt to convey the lands into the trusteeship of local gentry rather than of parishioners). For a time he worked as an attorney's clerk in Buckingham, and was called to the bar in November 1656. By 1661 he had moved to Northampton, where on 2 June he and his wife, Mary (1641/2-1719), baptized their son Salathiel in the parish church of All Saints. They may already have had a daughter, Maria. Nine sons and three daughters followed between September 1662 and June 1681. 
Lovell established himself as a significant figure in the politics of Northampton. In 1663 he acted as the local agent for Christopher Hatton when the latter stood in a parliamentary by-election in the town with the backing of the town's dissenting interest and the council members recently secluded under the 'Corporation Act'. On 31 January Lovell headed the list of signatories -- 'your vestalls' -- appealing to Hatton to stand as 'our Publicola & most noble Consull, to see restored our faythfull Senators of late most violently irregulated' (BL, Add. MS 29551, fol. 9'r'). On the day of the election, while the corporation proceeded to choose Sir William Dudley on a restricted franchise in the town hall, Hatton's supporters elected him at the market cross on an open franchise, and Lovell importuned the sheriff for four hours to issue a double return (unsuccessfully, though Hatton won on appeal to the Commons). Lovell's local position was doubtless advanced by the triumph by 1672 of the 'fanatic party' -- the secluded councillors and their supporters on the corporation -- and by their demand for his legal expertise as Northampton's partisan politics were fought out in king's bench. He became deputy recorder (the town's chief legal officer, as the recordership itself was always held by an influential local peer), a testimony both to his local importance and to the success of his legal career in London. Following the devastation of Northampton by fire in 1675 Lovell was one of the named commissioners appointed to adjudicate in disputes arising from the rebuilding of the town. He also picked up the post of deputy to the earl of Arlington as steward of the royal manor of Higham Ferrers, Northamptonshire. At some point he acquired an estate at Harleston, 4 miles to the west of Northampton. 
Lovell also became a significant figure in Gray's Inn. Although in November 1669 he had to apologize to the pension (the meeting of the governing bench) for 'his error in his Behaviour and carriage and for words spoken at a former Pencon' (Fletcher, 2.4), he was called to be an ancient of the inn in November 1671 and became a bencher in November 1677; thereafter he was a frequent attender at the pensions until 1688. 
Early in 1684 Lovell's politics brought him under suspicion with the government, when he was accused of involvement with the fugitive radical whig Thomas Hunt. On 18 January Sir Roger L'Estrange wrote to Secretary of State Jenkins that a prominent Northampton tory had informed him that Hunt had 'sent his libels to Northampton as by direction from Mr Lovell of Gray's Inn, and that the thing is proved upon Lovell, it appears under Hunt's own hand that he corresponds with Lovell, who knows where he is' ('CSP dom.', '1683-4', 219). L'Estrange recommended that Lovell's chambers be searched. However, Lovell had already written to Arlington to forestall the charge a few days earlier. About midsummer 1682, he explained, Hunt, a fellow member of Gray's Inn whom he hardly knew, had asked him what booksellers there were in Northampton; he had given him a couple of names and thought nothing more of it. However, on 9 January, while attending the sessions on behalf of a client, Lovell heard Hunt's 'Postscript' (an attack on the clergy who preached up passive obedience and the divine right of kings from their pulpits) presented as a seditious book, and saw a letter produced in court from Hunt to one of the booksellers which had been sent with a consignment of 150 copies of the book, asking him to send the money for them by Lovell. Lovell protested that he had known nothing of this: 'I never read that book and am far from promoting that or any book touching the government and have never concerned myself in public affairs' (ibid., 206). Lovell's protests appear somewhat disingenuous (Hunt was already a notorious figure when he spoke to Lovell), and later in 1684 he acted as counsel for the whig William Sacheverell and others charged with riot in the disputes in defence of the borough charter of Nottingham. 
Superficially, Lovell accommodated to the regime of James II. He was one of a group of lawyers installed as serjeant on 26 June 1688. The rings which they presented by custom at Westminster Hall acknowledged the recent birth of the king's son and the declaration of indulgence with the inscription 'Rex princeps et Christiana libertas' ('King, prince, and Christian liberty'; Baker, 'Serjeants', 418). However, Lovell's name also appeared on a list drawn up by an unknown but evidently informed hand of those who might act in opposition to James. 
On 10 June 1692 Lovell was elected as recorder of London by the court of aldermen; the defeated candidates were the whig MP and lawyer Sir John Tremayne and James Selby, and, in a tied vote with Selby, Lovell was elected on the casting vote of the lord mayor. On 22 October 1692 he was knighted when the City dignitaries attended the king at Kensington Palace to congratulate him on his safe return from the Netherlands. In 1695 Lovell was made a king's serjeant and appointed second justice of Chester and of Denbighshire, Flintshire, and Montgomeryshire, a position he held in tandem with the recordership. 
Lovell showed himself a loyal agent of William III's regime. In September 1695 at the Old Bailey he heard the case of the Jacobite Captain Waugh, charged with procuring an escape from a government messenger: where the judges in king's bench had worried away at the legal technicalities in a similar case, Lovell 'cut asunder the Gordian knots of law he could not untie, and the fact being proved refused a special verdict, and directed the jury to bring him in guilty, which they did' ('Downshire MSS', 1.691). Later that year Lovell helped prepare the evidence for the bill of attainder against Sir John Fenwick. 
Lovell became recorder at a time of rising concern with crime in the metropolis, fed by economic disruption and by political and religious anxieties. The 1690s saw high levels of prosecution of thieves, and of the coiners and clippers who endangered a currency in a state of crisis; it also witnessed the drive against vice offences by the societies for the reformation of manners (of which Lovell was a supporter). Lovell was a very active magistrate, and, when in 1702 he sought the grant of the forfeited estate of a convicted coiner, he presented himself very much as the committed crime fighter, declaring that over the past nine years he had had more 'trouble & fateague in the discovery and Conviccon of such Offenders [coiners] and other Criminalls than any person in the Kingdome' (TNA: PRO, T1/78, fol. 130). 
Others took a less positive view of Lovell's activities. Daniel Defoe was savage in his denunciation in 'The Reformation of Manners' (1702), portraying him as the archetype of the bad judge who shamelessly played to the gallery in his public pronouncements '
The 'City-Mouth', with eloquence endu'd, 

To Mountebank the list'ning Multitude 

' glorying in his power of life and death, and sadistically hectoring the condemned from the bench: '
L -- l, the Pandor of thy Judgment-Seat, 

Has neither Manners, Honesty, nor Wit; 

Instead of which, he's plenteously supply'd 

With Nonsense, Noise, Impertinence, and Pride... 

With awkward scornful Phiz, and vile Grimace 

The genuine Talents of an ugly Face; 

With haughty Tone insults the Wretch that dies 

And sports with his approaching Miseries 

God-like he nods upon the Bench of State; 

His Smiles are Life, and if he Frown 'Tis Fate: 

Boldly invading Heaven's Prerogative; 

For with his Breath he kills, or saves alive. 
(Defoe, 70-71)' This much is arguably no more than condemning Lovell as the hard face of the war against crime and vice: at each sessions at the Old Bailey, Lovell not only sat in judgment on many of the cases, but at the end delivered the sentences on all of them. But most troubling of all to his critics was precisely how Lovell pursued the 'discovery and Conviccon' of offenders: the linked questions of his relationship with thief-takers and his role in the granting of royal pardons. 
Even the rulers of the City had serious reservations about the report that Lovell presented to the king and (increasingly) the cabinet after each sessions recommending who should be pardoned, apparently appropriating to himself the role of sole intermediary between the Old Bailey bench and the City on the one hand, and Whitehall on the other. Seven months after his appointment, on 15 January 1693, the court of aldermen complained that a pardon of Newgate convicts was passing the great seal without their prior notification. Three days later they ordered that after every sessions, 'Mr Recorder doe before he attend his Matie with his Report Come unto this Court and take the sense and Judgment of the same in what Character and Circumstance he shall Represent to his Majesty the severall Condemned Persons' (CLRO, REP 97, 100). The issue rumbled on until September, when Lovell himself admitted that 'the present Method of reporting to their Majesties' had led to 'great and intollerable troubles and many unjust Jealousies and Reflections'. The court accepted his proposal that the justices present should together decide before the end of each sessions who should be recommended for pardon (ibid., 454-5). Nevertheless, in spring 1700 the court of aldermen again attacked Lovell for making his report to the cabinet without due consultation, and unanimously voted to deny him the recorder's customary annual gratuity of 100 guineas 'for his disrespects to the Chayre and his not Obeying the Orders of this Court' (CLRO, REP 104, 296). The aldermen relented a few months later upon Lovell giving them 'full Satisfaccon' (CLRO, REP 105, 4). 
The court's objections were in part a matter of defending jurisdictional territory, and it is uncertain how far the aldermen were responding to a real rather than a formal change in the recorder's role in the pardoning process; the impetus for the change probably came more from the cabinet than the recorder, and their objections did little to halt it. In 1693 the aldermen were also responding to complaints that far too many criminals were being reprieved. Some may have opposed Lovell for his whig politics. But the court was evidently concerned about his lack of accountability and about 'who' was being pardoned. What the court thought of Lovell's motives is unknowable, but they were addressing an issue which in the bitter satire of Defoe and Tom Brown was taken as evidence of corruption. To them Lovell was a man who misused the power of life and death, which he exercised through his influence in court and his voice in the granting of royal pardons; to Defoe, Lovell was a man who could be bought, who actively shielded and took a share of the spoils of criminals: '
Definitive in Law, without Appeal, 

But always serves the Hand who pays him well: 

He trades in Justice, and the Souls of Men, 

And prostitutes them equally to Gain: 

He has his Publick Book of Rates to show, 

Where every Rogue the Price of Life may know 

Fraternities of Villains he maintains, 

Protects their Robberies, and shares the Gains; 

Who thieve with Toleration as a Trade, 

And then restore according as they paid. 
(Defoe, 70-71)' This was an accusation about Lovell's relationship with thief-takers, the ambiguous figures who inhabited the borderland between the law and crime, mediating between the authorities and victims of theft on the one hand and criminals on the other. They detected and brought to trial some offenders for private or official reward, while often simply helping people get their stolen goods back for a fee. These were men who in some cases were as much organizers as detectors of crime. 
The charges of corrupt dealings with thief-takers dogged Lovell's memory. In 1725, at the time of the downfall of Jonathan Wild and twelve years after Lovell's death, a correspondent of the 'British Journal' related how Lovell had colluded with the thief-taker John Connell in his attempt to get one of the latter's clients, Rogers, acquitted of theft. Connell brought into court one of his henchmen, Joseph Hatfield, who swore that he and Morris Evans (who was then a prisoner in Newgate, and whom Connell tried to bribe to confess to the crime) were the actual thieves. Lovell spoke in Hatfield's favour and attempted to have the case dismissed, then and at the next sessions. In the hope of getting a judge other than Lovell, the prosecutors then had the case held over to a further sessions, when Lovell defended Hatfield to the presiding judge, the lord chief justice, Sir John Holt, as: 'a poor young unhappy Man, that had been drawn in to be an assistant in conveying away a Truck with some Clothes in it... who was now dead in Prison; and that Hatfield's Conscience having prick'd him, he came voluntarily, and made a Confession in Court of his Crime, to prevent another Man's being wrongfully hang'd for what he had done; and that we [the accusers] had been maliciously and cruelly prosecuting several Sessions for it, when he appeared to be a true Penitent, that it was hoped he would never attempt a dishonest Act again. ('British Journal', 24 April 1725, 2)' According to Morris Evans, 'Hatfield had always a Purse of five or six hundred Pounds to bribe the R -- r, and Court Officers, or their Servants, and had, by that Means, many Times escap'd hanging'. And if Evans was doing no more than retail street gossip or tell the writer what he thought he wanted to hear, the latter noted that at the trial, 'it look'd as if the Lord Chief Justice thought H. had then brib'd the R -- r for his Speeches in his Favour: For he reproached him for it with such a Shew of Contempt, as one would scarcely use to a Slave. ('British Journal', 1 May 1725, 1)' This account, made many years later, receives some support from the bare record of the case in the Middlesex sessions rolls, while Hatfield is elsewhere identified as helping Connell in an attempted extortion by helping him frame someone with a theft. And Hatfield was at the least remarkably lucky: a frequent defendant at the Old Bailey in the years around 1700, he survived to die in Newgate in 1725, while other men and women no more guilty than he had been hanged long before. 
Ultimately, it can never be known whether Lovell took bribes from the thief-takers. He undoubtedly looked to them for many prosecutions. He inevitably knew these men: they came to him with accusations seeking arrest warrants (though he was certainly not the only magistrate they resorted to), and his signature appears on the depositions they made and on the bonds to prosecute that they took out. In May 1693 he threw his weight behind the petition for reward of Anthony Dunn and Anthony St Leger as men 'Eminently Serviceable to the Government' in the prosecution of clippers and coiners, who had 'Apprehended prosecuted and Convicted near Forty such notorious Offenders' (TNA: PRO, T1/22, fol. 152'v'). He failed to mention that they were also convicts who had been pardoned only the previous January in the pardon which had so concerned the court of aldermen. They went on to be leading thief-takers, frequently bringing their accusations to Lovell. In 1698 the forger William Chaloner alleged that he was being pursued by Lovell and his thief-catchers. 
Lovell's relationship with thief-takers provided grounds for his own claim to be a vigorous crime fighter as much as it did for his critics' charge of corruption. The combination of policing, judicial, and pardoning functions offered an active recorder both a powerful weapon against crime and the opportunity for favour and corruption. Doubts about his partiality in pardoning evidently stemmed from how he exercised this range of powers in his dealings with thief-takers and (at the least) high-profile examples of its deployment on behalf of particular offenders such as Dunn, St Leger, and Hatfield. The institution of statutory rewards (against highwaymen in 1693 and especially against coiners in 1695) encouraged reservations about the motives of prosecutors, especially when the offence was the apparently 'victimless' one of coining, where thief-takers were particularly prominent in obtaining convictions. The relationship between Lovell and the thief-takers was mutually beneficial. They could provide him with names, information, and prisoners at the bar, using their influence within, and knowledge of, the capital's criminal networks. In turn, Lovell could protect them and their clients, in practice upholding their authority by allowing them to demonstrate their powerful connections. Lovell was neither the first nor last recorder to work with thief-takers, and some degree of horse-trading with criminal contacts is no doubt an essential part of policing in any period. Nevertheless, Lovell and the thief-takers exploited the particular opportunities provided by the anxieties and reforms of the 1690s. The evidence of his relationship with the thief-takers is consistent with either outright bribery or with favour derived from sacrificing the stricter tenets of justice to the demands of policing the city, which mainly required that the authorities inflict exemplary punishment on some individuals, while at the same time acquiring a sense of the criminal networks of the capital. These readings of Lovell's behaviour -- outright corruption or a ruthlessly pragmatic partiality -- need not be mutually exclusive. 
Lovell himself claimed in 1702 that the recordership was 'a place of great trouble & little profitt' and that he had 'long served the public at his own charge, to the damage of his fortune' ('Calendar of Treasury Papers, 1697-1702', 561, 89), although in declaring his salary to be only $80 per annum he omitted both the City's annual 100 guinea gratuity and the $100 a year he received for the Chester and Welsh judgeships. The king accepted that Lovell 'hath been a great loser by that servis', noting that recorders were usually quickly promoted to a judgeship in the great common-law courts of Westminster Hall (ibid., 562). Lovell's career had stalled. In June 1700 he was expected to succeed Sir Nicholas Lechmere as baron of the exchequer, but the king opposed his appointment because he had impeded his attempts to woo the tories by refusing to make way for Sir Bartholomew Shower as recorder. Five years later it was noted that Lovell 'is pushing hard for the Judge's place and is like to have it', but that the plan to appoint his intended replacement, upon which his promotion depended, was unlikely to pass the court of aldermen ('Downshire MSS', 1.842). 
By now Lovell was in his seventies. As early as 1693 Jacobites gleefully retailed his unfortunate choice of words at the trial of highwayman James Whitney, condemning him for his cruelty in shedding Christian blood by shooting his pursuers' horses from under them. As he grew older, other stories accrued around his alleged senility: that he should be called Obliviscor ('forgetter') rather than recorder. His great-grandson Richard Lovell Edgeworth told a story of Salathiel inadvertently condemning his failing memory out of his own mouth. When a young lawyer protested that Lovell had forgotten the law on a certain point, he replied, 'Young man, I have forgotten more law than you will ever remember' (a story which, however, has been told about several judges). In 1707 Lovell resigned the Chester and Welsh judgeships. However, in June 1708 he was finally promoted and sworn in as an additional baron of the exchequer when John Smith was appointed to serve in the newly created Scottish court of exchequer. Lovell's new position carried a salary of $1000 per annum. He resigned the recordership and was succeeded by Peter King. He continued to advise on matters of crime, writing to the Treasury in October 1709 about rewards for the conviction of burglars. 
While on the western circuit in April 1710 Lovell's charge to the grand jury at the Devon assizes was in large part a rant against the high Anglican toryism of Henry Sacheverell and the riots which had accompanied the latter's trial. Intemperate and intellectually somewhat incoherent, it is interesting for what it says about Lovell's lifelong politics. He drew on the classic seventeenth-century smear of identifying the political threat of popery -- 'A Wild Fire is running about, to the great Disturbance of the Peace. And whence comes it? From Priests and Jesuits' (Lamoine, 77). In his contempt for the high Anglican doctrine of passive obedience to the monarch, Sir Salathiel was very much the son of the martial Benjamin Lovell, very much the man who had advised Thomas Hunt on booksellers: 'I would ask you of all those, that cry up the Doctrine of Passive Obedience what they mean; or what Necessity there is for trumping up that damnable Doctrine? Many may say I am hot; I am fervent as the Subject on which I am requires. I doubt not, but some may still remember the dismal Consequences of it some 60 Years ago and upwards. Or at least most of you have heard the deplorable Calamities it drew upon this Nation. (ibid., 78)' Lovell died on 3 May 1713, aged eighty-one, and was buried at Harleston ten days later. His widow, Mary, survived him by six years, dying on 9 December 1719, aged seventy-seven. Their son Samuel had become a Welsh judge, but like all but one of the Lovells' sons did not outlive his parents, although at least two of their daughters shared their longevity. 


@@@@@


doc= 17065


Lovell, Sir Thomas (c.1449-1524), administrator and speaker of the House of Commons, was the son of Ralph Lovell of Beachamwell, a cadet of the Lovells of Barton Bendish, a minor family of Norfolk gentry. Like many men of his station, he sought his fortune through study of the law. He was admitted to Lincoln's Inn in 1464, when he was perhaps about fifteen, was treasurer there from 1472 to 1475, and rose to be reader in autumn 1475 and Lent 1482, meanwhile developing a practice among East Anglian clients and finding a seat on the Norfolk commission of the peace. He joined the revolt of 1483 against Richard III, probably as a follower of Thomas Grey, marquess of Dorset, and was attainted in the following year's parliament. His resultant attachment to the cause of Henry Tudor, though it cannot be shown to have led to his fighting for Tudor at Bosworth, was the key to his subsequent career. In 1485 he served as speaker of the Commons in Henry's first parliament. In the years that followed he became an established member of the inner ring of less than a dozen councillors most influential with the king. 
Lovell's primary responsibilities were financial. He was treasurer of the king's chamber from 1485, an increasingly important office as Henry gradually restored the chamber to the supremacy it had enjoyed in Yorkist financial administration but lost for some years after Bosworth. From 12 October 1485 he was also chancellor of the exchequer, smoothing relations between the older financial institutions and the new. By 1503, when much of his work in the chamber seems to have been taken over by his former clerk John Heron, he became treasurer of the king's household. These offices were combined with more flexible but no less important roles. He regularly travelled to Calais to collect the king's French pension, audited accounts with the king and other councillors, and took bonds for payment from many victims of the king's exactions. 
Lovell also worked to ensure Henry's security on the throne. As deputy lieutenant and later, from Michaelmas 1512, lieutenant of the Tower of London, he took custody of many state prisoners. By the end of his life he was keeping Lambert Simnel, pretender to the throne in 1487, as a falconer in his household. In a task of similarly sensitive implications, he and Sir Reynold Bray arranged for the construction of Richard III's tomb. He fought at Stoke in 1487, where he was knighted, in France in 1492, and at Blackheath in 1497, where he was made banneret. In 1500 his loyalty was rewarded with election to the Order of the Garter. His relationships with other leading councillors were close, in particular, it would seem, those with Richard Fox, bishop successively of Exeter, Durham, and Winchester, with Giles, Lord Daubeney, and with John de Vere, thirteenth earl of Oxford. Their co-operation was an important key to the stability of Henry's regime. 
Henry's councillors took their judicial function very seriously, and Lovell was no exception. Statistics based on the thin surviving records make him the second most regular attender of the reign in the Star Chamber, and one of the most regular in the judicial sessions of the council attendant. He was frequently involved in the arbitration of suits and attended occasional sessions of the commission of the peace in half a dozen counties. As steward of the universities of Oxford from 1507 and Cambridge from 1509 he oversaw the exercise of their privileged jurisdictions. As steward of the manorial courts of many crown and church estates, he administered through his deputies justice at the most local level. 
Such stewardships were also the foundation of Lovell's considerable military power. In 1492 he raised 143 men for the king; in 1497 it was 493. By 1508, when he listed the followers he had been allowed to retain under royal licence, they numbered 1365, more than half drawn from estates on which he was steward, including significant boroughs such as Derby, Lichfield, and Nottingham. These retainers were often the leading men in their communities: seven past and future mayors of Walsall, seven churchwardens of Thame, seven of the nine richest men in Hitchin. Lovell acted as their patron at the centre of power and reaped his reward not only in service but also in gratitude. In 1507, after he had helped secure a new borough charter, the town council of Wallingford ordered that he be prayed for in each of the town's parish churches every Sunday for the rest of his life. Thus he helped to tie the elites of towns and villages to the developing Tudor regime. 
Lovell made considerable profits in Henry's service. His fees for offices and the pensions paid to him by those who valued his influence with the king enabled him to spend freely on the land market, until by 1522-3 he enjoyed a clear landed income of over $450 a year, from estates spread across twelve counties from Yorkshire to Kent and from Wiltshire to Norfolk. Between 1486 and 1513 perhaps double this sum accrued to him annually from the estates of his brother-in-law, Edmund, Lord Ros. In 1485 or 1486, doubtless with the king's backing, he had married Isabel (1451-1508/9), daughter of Thomas, Lord Ros, and widow of Sir Thomas Everingham (died 1484/5). She brought him not only a share in the Tiptoft inheritance derived from her mother, but also, under the terms of a deal struck with the king in 1486, the keeping of her brother's lands, he being adjudged mentally incapable of managing them. Lovell extended the lands under his control yet further by leases from the crown, religious houses, university colleges, and noblemen. Some of his profits he put into building: a brick house with battlemented gatehouse and polygonal turrets at East Harling, Norfolk, a London house next to Holywell Nunnery in Shoreditch, and a brick palace sufficient to receive the court on progress at Elsings in Enfield. He also made generous contributions to other building projects: the clerestory and glazing of Enfield parish church, the windows of Malvern Priory (where the remains of his likeness survive), the gatehouse of Lincoln's Inn, the walls of Gonville Hall, Cambridge, and the repair of Dover harbour. He made large donations to Holywell Nunnery, where he built himself a burial chapel inscribed: '
All the nunnes in Holywel 

Pray for the soul of Sir Thomas Lovel. 

' Enough remained to sustain a splendid style of life, with eighty-five liveried servants, expensive tapestries on the wall, and scores of printed books. For the subsidy of 1524 he was taxed on goods worth $2000. Little of this grandeur survives except for his portrait, executed in a bronze medallion attributed to Pietro Torrigiano, now at Westminster Abbey. His interests seem to have been wide: he often made use of his ecclesiastical patronage to support clerics who were continuing their education, and at the end of his life he made efforts to meet the explorer Sebastian Cabot. 
At the accession of Henry VIII, Lovell remained a leading member of the king's council. He continued to sit regularly in Star Chamber, helped untangle the complex financial legacy of the previous reign, and became involved in new ventures such as the campaigns against enclosure in 1517 and vagrancy in 1519. On 6 February 1510 he became chief justice of the royal forests south of Trent and from 14 June 1513 he served as master of the wards, improving the local administration of what would later become the court of wards. In the wars of 1511-14 he supervised the procurement of artillery and the fortification of Calais. Advancing age reduced his activity and he gave up some of his offices: the treasurership of the household in 1519, the mastership of the wards in 1520. Yet he remained a trusted councillor, taking part in the interrogation of Edward Stafford, third duke of Buckingham, in 1520. At length, after a year or more of illness, he died on 25 May 1524 at his house at Elsings in Enfield. After a sumptuous funeral he was buried in his chapel at Holywell Nunnery on 8 June. Having no children, he had made arrangements for the advancement of the children of his brother Sir Robert and of his cousin Sir Gregory. His niece Ursula he had married to William Hussey, son of his colleague Sir John, at a cost of $666 13's'. 4died; her sister Elizabeth he had matched with his great-nephew Thomas Manners, heir to the Ros estates and later first earl of Rutland. The bulk of his estates he left to Francis, second son of Sir Gregory, who founded the Norfolk gentry family of Lovell of East Harling. 


@@@@@


doc= 17066


Lover, Samuel (1797-1868), miniature painter and author, was born in Dublin on 24 February 1797, the eldest son of William Frederick Lover (died 1833) and his wife, Abigail Maher (died 'c'.1810). His father was a stockbroker and had various other commercial interests. His mother was an accomplished singer and musician, who encouraged the young Samuel's artistic and musical interests, in particular an appreciation of Irish poetry and songs. As a child Lover suffered from poor health and at the age of twelve he was sent for a rest-cure to a farm in co. Wicklow. There he was introduced to the customs and traditions of country people. Despite his artistic interests and against his will, Lover was sent to work in his father's office and in 1814 he went to London to work in another business house. Lover thrived on the artistic atmosphere of London and on his return to Dublin there was a family disagreement and Lover left home to pursue a career as an artist. 
It was probably at this time that Lover attended the Dublin Society's drawing schools: his presence there is recorded by James Dowling Herbert (1762/3-1837) in his memoirs. Lover supported himself by painting marine views and landscapes, copying music, and teaching drawing. He became a pupil of the prolific miniaturist John Comerford, and as a result of his influence Lover turned to miniature painting and adopted his master's meticulous technique. Lover had learned to draw at the Dublin Society schools and he combined this skill with painting in watercolour on ivory to produce extremely accomplished portraits. His work gradually became larger and he relished the details of theatrical props and fancy dress which he included in much of his work. His portraits are posed and he often painted his sitters singing or reading, as may be seen in the many examples of his work in the National Gallery of Ireland. Lover passed on his skill as a miniaturist to his pupil Frederic William Burton. 
However, it was as a songwriter that Lover was first celebrated. In 1818 he composed a musical tribute to Thomas Moore which he performed at a banquet held in Dublin for the poet. In the song, entitled 'Election of a Poet Laureate for Olympus', Venus and the Graces vote for their favourite, Moore, who of course wins the award. Lover's connection with Moore and Moore's family proved useful: he drew on Moore's work for inspiration for his pictures, such as 'Flow on thou Shining River' (National Gallery of Ireland, Dublin) from Moore's 'Irish Melodies' (1807), and many of his early commissions were from people in the musical, literary, and theatrical world. His artistic and social accomplishments obtained for him an entree into Dublin society. His friend and patroness Lady Morgan, the art historian and novelist, was the doyenne of literary and musical society. She encouraged him to paint and to write musical comedy; he produced several portraits of her (National Gallery of Ireland and the Royal Irish Academy, Dublin). Lover was also introduced to the LeFanu family and their intellectual circle. 
Lover began publishing and illustrating stories about Ireland in the leading literary journals of the 1820s and 1830s such as the 'Dublin Penny Journal', the 'Dublin Literary Gazette', the 'Irish Penny Magazine', and the 'Dublin University Magazine'; with Charles Lever, George Petrie, and William Carleton he was joint founder of the last of these publications, an anti-nationalist journal which was something of an innovation in its commitment to serialized fiction. He was a member of a number of convivial clubs in Dublin, and the official portrait painter of the Burschenschaft Club, founded by Lever; Lover was also a prominent member of the Dublin Glee Club. In 1826 Lover wrote his most famous ballad, 'Rory O'More', and in 1827 he composed his first musical drama, 'Grana Uile', based on the story of Grace O'Malley, the pirate queen. In that year he married Lucy (died 1847), the daughter of a Dublin architect, John Berrel. 
In 1817, 1819, and 1823 Lover exhibited drawings at the Artists of Ireland exhibitions. He began to exhibit at the Royal Hibernian Academy at its first exhibition in 1826. In 1828 he was elected an associate of the academy, becoming a full academician in 1829; he was appointed trustee and secretary in 1831. Between that first exhibition and 1863 he exhibited 115 pictures at the Royal Hibernian Academy. In 1831 Lover was commissioned to paint a portrait of the violinist Paganini when he came to Dublin. The portrait was exhibited at the Royal Academy in 1832 and at the Royal Hibernian Academy in 1833. This important commission led to requests from other well-known sitters. He was offered a commission to paint Princess Victoria, but this never materialized because family circumstances prevented him from travelling to England. 
In the early 1830s Lover developed a new talent for humorous political caricature, a medium that had become very popular due to the skill of John Doyle, the principal exponent of the genre at the time. The 'Parson's Horn Book', a satire on religion, was published in 1830: Lover contributed the illustrations and much of its literary content. The book gained notoriety as a result of a crown prosecution. In 1832 Lover published a less contentious work, 'Legends and Stories of Ireland', which he also illustrated. This drew on his knowledge of rural Ireland, its customs, and characters. 
Through his writings and the success of his portrait painting -- such as the Paganini portrait -- Lover had become known in London. In 1835 he went to live there permanently and he quickly established himself as a miniaturist. He became a member of the Garrick Club and part of London-Irish literary, musical, and artistic society. Among his friends were Father Mahony, who wrote under the pseudonym Father Prout; Michael Banim; John Banim; and Anna Jameson, the art historian and daughter of the miniaturist Denis Brownell Murphy. Through the literary patroness Lady Blessington, Lover became a friend of Charles Dickens, with whom he was associated in founding 'Bentley's Miscellany'; he made an important contribution to the design of the journal, which was characterized by an effective combination of text and image. 
In 1837 Lover published his first novel, 'Rory O'More: a National Romance', set at the time of the 1798 rebellion. This he successfully dramatized, but it was just one of a series of plays: 'The Beau Ideal' (1835), 'The White Horse of the Peppards' (1838), and 'The Happy Man' (1839). He subsequently composed a musical drama, 'The Greek Boy' (1840), and a burlesque opera, 'Il Paddy Whack in Italia' (1841), which was produced by Michael William Balfe in the Lyceum Theatre. In 1842 he published 'Handy Andy', his most significant novel and the vehicle for a hero who has been described as 'the great, amiable, awkward, moronic lout of Irish literature' (Hogan, 725); in 1844 he published 'Treasure Trove'. 
In 1844 Lover abandoned miniature painting as a result of failing eyesight but continued to paint and exhibit landscapes. He invented a new form of entertainment which he called Irish Evenings, a monologue of songs, recitations, and stories, all of his own composition. These he performed at the Princess's Concert Rooms, London. Lover spent the years 1846-8 touring North America with a theatrical company, performing his Irish Evenings with great success, and painting landscapes and views such as 'The Cabildo, New Orleans' (British Museum, London). He composed his best-known song 'The Alabama' there. Back in London, he continued to perform his Irish Evenings, which he renamed Paddy's Portfolio, and wrote the drama 'The Sentinel of Alva' (1854) for the Haymarket Theatre; he also composed two librettos for Balfe. 
While Lover was in the United States his wife died and on his return in 1848 his daughter, Meta, died. On 1 January 1852 he married Mary Jane Wandby from Cambridgeshire, and in 1856 was granted a civil-list pension of $300 p.a. in recognition of his services to art and literature. In 1858 he published 'The Lyrics of Ireland' with biographical and musical notes. In 1860 the London Irish rifle volunteers was formed and Lover took an active part, writing songs which were published in 'Original Songs for the Rifle Volunteers'. He fell ill in February 1864 and in 1865 he went to live in the Isle of Wight and then in St Helier, Jersey. He died at Clear View, St Lawrence Valley, Jersey, on 6 July 1868 and was survived by his second wife, Mary. Lover was buried in Kensal Green cemetery, London, on 15 July. His memory is commemorated on a tablet in St Patrick's Cathedral, Dublin. 
Lover's career as artist, writer, and composer reflects his versatile talent; as a painter he produced not only miniatures but also landscapes and literary and historical genre paintings. His wide-ranging productivity has attracted the criticism that he spread his talents too thinly: his biographer in the 'Dictionary of National Biography' comments that he 'never reached a great height in any department of his many-sided efforts' and describes his literary works rather harshly as 'only those of a second-rate Lever and a third-rate Moore'. His novels made an important contribution to the development of Anglo-Irish literature, and recently his artworks have deservedly attracted more attention (although his miniatures can vary in quality). He belonged to an important generation of Irish literary and artistic figures who achieved success in England and America in the early nineteenth century. 


@@@@@


doc= 17067


Lovett, Richard (bap. 1692, d. 1780), writer on electricity, was baptized on 31 July 1692 at Chalfont St Giles, Buckinghamshire, the son of Richard Lovet, member of a landed family long established in the district. On 25 November 1722 he was admitted to a lay clerkship in Worcester Cathedral, and retained this position until his death. The name of his wife is not known; a son, Timothy, a pupil at Worcester Infirmary, predeceased him. Lovett witnessed the lectures given by J. T. Desaguliers in 1739, which included simple demonstrations of electrical phenomena. From about 1750, when he was able to obtain a friction machine, electricity became Lovett's main interest. He read widely, in particular the works of Benjamin Franklin, and wrote a number of books and pamphlets for the benefit of his provincial neighbours. 
Lovett's interest soon concentrated on the medical effects of electricity and his books included lists of those afflicted by a wide variety of ailments and disabilities; he claimed to have cured many of these or at least to have alleviated their suffering. In 1758 he advertised himself as able to effect cures, especially of a sore throat, by electricity. His first book was 'The subtil medium prov'd, or, That... power... call'd sometimes aether, but oftener elementary fire, verify'd' (1756): it was savaged in the 'Monthly Review' of December 1756, and Lovett was condemned as ill-educated, ignorant of his subject, and adding nothing beyond the lengthy title, a view echoed by Augustus De Morgan in 'The Athenaeum' of 1863. 
While this criticism was justified, Lovett, with his 'electrical fluid', was only one of many would-be natural philosophers seeking to explain effects for which adequate concepts and vocabulary did not yet exist. Lovett responded in 1759 with 'Sir Isaac Newton's aether realised, or, The second part of the subtil medium proved and electricity rendered useful', in which he admitted a lack of polite education and contested at length the arguments made against him. His 'Philosophical essays... containing an enquiry into the nature and properties of the electrical fluid etc.' (1766) contained lengthy extracts from the 'Philosophical Transactions' of the Royal Society and from the works of Franklin, and drew praise from the editor of 'Critical Review' in October 1766, who considered it 'evidently a work of genius' (Chambers, 364). In 1774 Lovett published 'The electrical philosopher: containing a new system of physics, founded upon the principle of an universal plenum of elementary fire'. This was cast as a dialogue, which Lovett considered the easiest form to convey his unfamiliar material to local uneducated readers, whom he sought to impress with copious extracts ranging from Newton and Franklin to minor writers on electrical science. In the latter part of the book Lovett dealt with what he considered to be related effects: lightning, magnetism, earthquakes, gravity, and motion. In reaction to the criticism voiced against his 'Philosophical Essays', he appended 'a postscript containing strictures upon the uncandid animadversions of the monthly reviewers on those essays'. He died on 8 June 1780 and was buried on 11 June at St Swithin's Church, Worcester. 


@@@@@


doc= 17068


Lovett, William (1800-1877), Chartist and radical, was born in Newlyn, Cornwall, on 8 May 1800, the son of William Lovett, captain of a small trading vessel and a native of Hull, who was drowned before Lovett's birth. His mother, Kezia ('nee' Green) ('c'.1778-1852), proceeded to raise Lovett and his four siblings with the help of her family and by her own efforts, which included selling fish in Penzance market. He was sent to the local dame-schools, but he was always to regret the limitations of this education and of the reading materials available during his youth, inadequacies accentuated by his strict Methodist upbringing. After serving seven years' apprenticeship to a rope maker, he was unable to secure employment at the trade and turned instead to his natural skills as a woodworker. So it was that when, in June 1821, he left Cornwall for London he was to learn a second trade of cabinet-making by working for 'a trade-working master' in Somers Town ('Life and Struggles', 28). Within a few years he was able to serve a qualifying period at a respectable shop and eventually gain admittance to the elite West End Cabinet-makers' Society, of which, remarkably, he was later elected president. 
It was as a young man in London that Lovett was able to indulge his passion for the pursuit of knowledge, by joining several mutual improvement societies and attending lectures, as he recalled, at the recently opened mechanics' institute, as well as frequenting the radical coffee houses, where he was influenced by such speakers as John Gale Jones, Richard Carlile, and the Revd Robert Taylor. On 3 June 1826 at All Souls, Langham Place, he married Mary Solly, a lady's maid from Pegwell, Kent, who was to be his unobtrusive, uncomplaining support. Of their two daughters, Kezia died from an accident in infancy, and the other, also Mary, was at the end of Lovett's life attempting to make a living in the theatre. The Lovetts proceeded to open a confectioner's shop off St Martin's Lane, but this was the first of several failed business ventures. 
By now an advocate of Owenism, Lovett had joined the First London Co-operative Trading Association and, having given up the shop, he took over from James Watson as storekeeper at the close of 1829. This position too did not provide a livelihood and he was for much of 1831 secretary of the nationally important British Association for Promoting Co-operative Knowledge, launched after the First London Association had hived off its propagandist functions. By the late 1820s, in addition to Watson, Lovett had also got to know his other principal lifelong radical associates Henry Hetherington and John Cleave. This key grouping, which was to provide a highly visible leadership within metropolitan working-class radicalism for most of the 1830s, differed from Owen himself in considering political reform to be as important as the transforming powers of co-operation, and they engaged in both activities concurrently. 
The first political society to which Lovett belonged was Henry Hunt's Friends of Civil and Religious Liberty of 1827. Two years later this was renamed the Radical Reform Association, with a programme of universal male suffrage, annual parliaments, and the ballot, and held weekly meetings at the Rotunda amid the excitement occasioned by the French revolution of July 1830 and Wellington's cancellation in November of the king's annual visit to the City for fear of insurrection. Lovett's traditional reputation as an uncompromised proponent of moral force, while entirely valid for the Chartist period, is out of kilter with his outspoken militancy during the years of the reform agitation. An experienced police spy described him as 'a dangerous man' for advocating arming and declaring 'he for one would fight' against the aristocracy (Large, 'Pressure from Without', 116); and Lovett vehemently opposed Hunt's efforts to prohibit the display of the tricolour at meetings and to purge Gale Jones, Carlile's supporters, and other revolutionaries when the Radical Reform Association disintegrated in December 1830. 
Although Lovett was also a member of the councils of both the Metropolitan Political Union and the National Political Union, these were organizations created by the middle-class reformers -- at the inaugural mass meeting of the latter, after Cleave was howled down for seconding his amendment in favour of universal suffrage, he denounced the middle class for wanting to make the working class 'tools of their purposes' (Large, 'DLB', 167) -- and it was the National Union of the Working Classes, founded in April 1831, that was the ultra-radical successor to the Radical Reform Association. Despite joining the union belatedly, in September 1831, he rapidly became a member of its committee and one of the twenty-four class leaders, as well as drafting with Watson the rules, including the widely circulated 'Declaration of the National Union of the Working Classes'. The union's most successful demonstration was against the national fast day of 21 March 1832, proclaimed by the whig government in expiation of the outbreak of cholera, when tens of thousands attempted to march from Finsbury Square to Westminster. Lovett, Watson, and William Benbow were arrested but acquitted, amid acclamation, of the charge of causing a riot. The previous year, on refusing as a non-voter either to serve in the militia or to find a substitute, Lovett had had, to great publicity, his household goods distrained and auctioned; balloting for the militia was thereafter discontinued. His intensive activity of these years also included a significant contribution to the campaign for an unstamped press, for whose victim fund, in operation from July 1831, he acted as sub-treasurer and secretary. 
Lovett was 'a tall, gentlemanly-looking man with a high and ample forehead, a pale, contemplative cast of countenance, dark-brown hair, and... a very prepossessing exterior, in manner quiet, modest and unassuming, speaking seldom, but when he does so always with the best effect', although for Place 'his is a spirit misplaced', being 'in ill-health', and 'somewhat hypochondriacal'; 'a man of melancholy temperament, soured with the perplexities of the world' (Hovell, 55-6). 
From 1832 the Lovetts took over the former Hatton Garden premises of the First London Co-operative Trading Association and ran them as a coffee house and discussion centre, with a reading-room and library. While financially unsuccessful, these two years served as a key transitional phase for Lovett, in the aftermath of the failure of both co-operative trading and radical parliamentary reform. He began to allot education a major role in the attainment of political and social change, and to move towards his ultimate repudiation of Owenism. He was shortly to enter into collaboration with the middle-class reformers Dr James Roberts Black and Francis Place. 
The outcome of these developments was the foundation on 16 June 1836 of the (London) Working Men's Association (LWMA), with Lovett as secretary, whose membership, costing 1's'. monthly, was further restricted to 'persons of a good moral character among the industrious classes' (Goodway, 22) -- over three years only 318 were admitted -- although honorary members could be elected from the middle class. During its first year the working men listened receptively to lectures on, and discussed, orthodox political economy. In February 1837 a public meeting was held at the Crown and Anchor tavern in the Strand to petition parliament for what were to become known as the 'six points' of the 'People's Charter'. Meetings in May and June between the working men and radical members of parliament led to a committee of six from each group, and then (probably in December) to Lovett and J. A. Roebuck alone being appointed to draw up a parliamentary bill incorporating the Crown and Anchor petition. When Roebuck withdrew from the task it was Place who provided the drafting expertise. The writing of the 'Charter' was therefore the combined work of Lovett and Place, although suggestions of the committee of twelve and of the LWMA did result in revisions to the original document. 
The 'People's Charter' was published on 8 May 1838 and adopted by the Birmingham Political Union, but was also taken up by the very different movement which was mobilizing in the north and the midlands and increasingly under the influence of Feargus O'Connor and his 'Northern Star'. Already the LWMA had been wrong-footed when in the winter of 1837-8, during the trial -- ending in the transportation -- of the five Glasgow cotton spinners, Daniel O'Connell, one of its parliamentary coadjutors, made his extreme hostility to trade unions explicit and was successful in instituting a select committee to investigate them. In February O'Connor's attack on the LWMA was answered by Lovett's denunciation of him as 'the great 'I AM' of politics, the great personification of Radicalism' ('Life and Struggles', 161). Open conflict between its two opposing wings had broken out even before the new movement of Chartism had emerged. The LWMA was still able to control events in the capital sufficiently to fix the election of its eight candidates, including Lovett, at the New Palace Yard meeting of September as London's delegates to the first Chartist convention, which when it met in February 1839 unanimously appointed him as its secretary; but both the LWMA and its leading member, Lovett, were now relegated to the sidelines, never to recover their former influence. 
After the convention had moved to Birmingham, Lovett, as the signatory of its resolutions condemning the Metropolitan Police's dispersal of the Bull Ring meetings, was arrested on 6 July and sentenced four weeks later at Warwick assizes to twelve months' imprisonment for seditious libel. On his release from Warwick gaol in July 1840, he declined to join the newly established National Charter Association, which he condemned as an illegal organization; and, after publishing the short book 'Chartism: a New Organization of the People' (1840), which he had written in prison with John Collins, he proceeded to launch in 1841 in London only the National Association for Promoting the Political and Social Improvement of the People, which it had proposed. This ambitious vision of a network of halls, schools, and libraries was denounced as 'knowledge chartism' and a 'new move' by the National Charter Association and the 'Northern Star', and all who wished to participate were compelled to isolate themselves from mainstream Chartism. Financial support was barely enough for a national hall to be opened in High Holborn in 1842; W. J. Linton, himself a member, provided a damning assessment: 'Lovett was impracticable; and his new association, after obtaining a few hundred members, dwindled into a debating club, and their hall became a dancing academy, let occasionally for unobjectionable public meetings' (Goodway, 41). Lovett's espousal of class collaboration made him a natural supporter of the Complete Suffrage Union, of which he became a council member; yet at its second conference, in December 1842, he rejected a proposed 'bill of rights' in place of the 'Charter' and, seconded by O'Connor, his resolution was carried overwhelmingly. This caused the exodus of the middle-class delegates but, equally, Lovett spurned the detested O'Connor's offer of reconciliation. 
For the remainder of his career Lovett scraped a living as a teacher in various schools and published two textbooks, one on 'Elementary Anatomy and Physiology' (1851); but in old age he was reduced to poverty, dependent on the charity of friends: 'Perhaps few persons have worked harder, or laboured more earnestly, than I have; but somehow I was never destined to make money' ('Life and Struggles', 400). Although he had begun his memoirs as early as 1840, not until the year before his death at his home, 137 Euston Road, London (long since a deist inclining to Christianity), on 8 August 1877, did he publish 'The Life and Struggles of William Lovett, in his Pursuit of Bread, Knowledge, and Freedom'. It is one of the outstanding working-class autobiographies, but in it Lovett underplays the importance of his early political activities and excises their extremism, distortions that have been followed until recently by most historians. He was buried in Highgate cemetery. 
Lovett was a creative leader of metropolitan artisan radicalism in the late 1820s and early 1830s, he was joint author of the 'Charter', and he was the perfect political secretary. He also became a respectable Victorian Liberal and thereby estranged himself from the great and turbulent movement of Chartism which he had helped to create. 


@@@@@


doc= 17069


Lovibond, Edward (bap. 1723, d. 1775), poet, was the son of Edward Lovibond (died 1737), a director of the East India Company, and his wife, Mary, and was baptized at St James's, Clerkenwell, London, on 6 July 1723. He was educated at Kingston upon Thames under Richard Wooddeson and at Magdalen College, Oxford, where he matriculated as gentleman commoner on 15 May 1739. Having inherited a competence from his father, Lovibond spent the greater part of his life in the neighbourhood of Hampton, Middlesex, 'where he seems to have divided his time between the occupations of rural economy, the amusements of literature and poetry, and the gaieties of elegant society' (Anderson, 577). On 26 December 1744 he married Catherine Hamilton, third daughter of Gustavus Hamilton of King's county, Ireland. The marriage was reputed to have been unhappy. Lovibond died on 27 September 1775 at his home in Hampton, which had formerly belonged to Charles Jervas. In 1776 Horace Walpole bought some pictures, including one by Cowley, 'at Mr. Lovibond's sale', which he had admired previously on a visit to Lovibond's estate in the early 1770s (Walpole, letter to Lady Ossory, 20 June 1776; 'Walpole's journals', 69). 
Through his involvement with Edward Moore's weekly newspaper 'The World' -- to which he contributed five papers (Chalmers, 283-4) -- Lovibond may have been acquainted with Walpole, who was one of the paper's original contributors. His best-known piece, 'Tears of Old May Day', occasioned by 'the reforming our style or calendar to the general usage of the rest of Europe', first appeared in 'The World' on 25 July 1754 and was praised for its 'plaintive melody which has only been surpassed by the inimitable Churchyard Elegy' (Anderson, 577, 579). This poem, along with another entitled 'Mulberry Tree', on the contrasting characters of David Garrick and Johnson, was later noted with approval by Boswell (Boswell, 1.70-71). 
Although it circulated privately in his lifetime, the majority of Lovibond's poetry was published posthumously as 'Poems on Several Occasions' (1785) under the superintendence of his brother, Anthony Lovibond Collins. Lovibond's poetical voice chiefly draws its inspiration from Gray, though in the case of 'Julia's Printed Letter' Pope's 'Eloisa to Abelard' is evidently his model. His 'demi-platonic' love verses directed to Miss K -- P --, identified by Chalmers as Miss Kitty Philips, also suggest the influence of his subject's namesake, Katherine Philips, the matchless Orinda. Lovibond's poems were reprinted in Anderson's 'British Poets' (1794), together with a panegyric sneeringly described by Croker as 'hyperbolic' (Boswell, 1.71). His life was subsequently revised by Alexander Chalmers for the 'General Biographical Dictionary' (1816) and his edition of the 'British Poets' (1820). Selections of his poetry reappeared in two early nineteenth-century collections. 


@@@@@


doc= 17070


Low, David (1768-1854), Scottish Episcopal bishop of Ross and Argyll and the Isles, was born in November 1768 in Brechin, Forfarshire, one of four children. He came from a traditional Episcopalian family which was staunchly Jacobite, and his father, a tradesman, was particularly solicitous of his education. Educated in the local school, he later attended Marischal College, Aberdeen, in preparation for his ordination in the Scottish Episcopal church. Episcopalian necessity dictated that he receive his theological education in the home of one of the more learned clergy, in Low's case with Bishop George Gleig at Stirling. He was then tutor to the family of a Mr Patullo of Balhouffie, Fife, for a year and a half. Appointed to the tiny nonjuring congregation at Perth, he was ordained deacon on 5 December 1787 and priest on 4 February 1789. In September 1789 he was elected priest of the nonjuring congregation at Pittenweem, an appointment he retained until his death. Much of his local influence was due to his alliance with influential local gentry, particularly Archibald, earl of Kellie. Low's ministry was hampered by shyness and a disposition to solitude, which could become irritability under pressure. This did not prevent him from also ministering to nearby congregations in Craill and Cupar. Low's personal appearance was described by a contemporary as 'most striking -- thin, attenuated, but active -- his eye sparkling with intelligence' ('GM', 2nd ser., 43, 1855, 423). 
In 1819 Low was elected bishop of the united dioceses of Ross and Argyll and the Isles; he was consecrated bishop at Stirling on 14 November 1819. Marischal College consequently awarded him a DD in 1820. Two of his charges to his diocesan clergy, in 1823 and 1826, were his only publications, although he retained a particular interest in genealogy. He was a constant, though necessarily intermittent, visitor throughout his huge dioceses with their small Episcopalian populations. To support them, he was instrumental in 1831 in founding the Episcopalian Gaelic Society to provide Gaelic religious literature and financial support. Low was also active in the wider support of his church, lobbying influential peers and MPs during the 1820s for the resuscitation of the 'regium donum' grant to the Episcopal church, which became regular again in 1830. He also pressed for the removal of the legal disabilities on Episcopalian clergy ministering in England, a restriction resulting from the legal toleration granted to the Episcopal church in 1792. This concern made Low hostile to Episcopalian traditions at odds with the Church of England; he desired the suppression of the Scottish communion office traditional to nonjuring episcopalianism. He was elected bishop of Moray in 1838. 
Low was a central figure in the legal mitigation of Episcopalian disabilities in 1840, but his most enduring legacy to his own church was a consequence of his unmarried state and frugal nature. As incumbent of one of the few wealthy Episcopalian incumbencies, he was able to become a generous benefactor to various Episcopal causes, such as the Episcopalian Church Society for the development of church infrastructure and Trinity College, Glenalmond, as a public school and seminary. When Argyll and the Isles became a separate diocese in 1847, he was able to endow it with $8000. Low kept up a regular correspondence with American Episcopalians, which resulted in the award in 1848 of an honorary DD from Hartford College, Connecticut, and another from Geneva College, New York. He was also an early connection between the Episcopal church and the Oxford Movement in the Church of England through his practice of inviting English priests to tour his dioceses with him during the summer months. In 1838 John Henry Newman's curate, William Copeland, was his chaplain. 
In his last years Low was able to overcome his lack of self-confidence to an extent and became in Episcopalian circles a figure venerated for his personal connections with the penal days of their church. He died at his home in the restored Pittenweem priory on 26 January 1854. His funeral at the Pittenweem Episcopal Church was on 1 February 1854; he was buried at a specially consecrated site adjacent to the chancel of the priory's chapel. 


@@@@@


doc= 17071


Low, David (1786-1859), agricultural economist, was born on 25 November 1786, probably at Woodend, Berwickshire, the eldest son of Alexander Low, land agent, of Laws, Berwickshire, and his wife, Susan Anderson. He was educated at Perth Academy and the University of Edinburgh. He assisted his father on his farms, and soon showed special aptitude as a land agent and valuer. In 1817 he published 'Observations on the present state of landed property, and on the prospects of the landholder and the farmer', dealing with the slump which followed the battle of Waterloo (1815). In 1825 he settled in Edinburgh, and in the following year the 'Quarterly Journal of Agriculture' was established at his suggestion; he edited it from 1828 to 1832. 
On the death of Professor Andrew Coventry in 1831 Low was appointed professor of agriculture in the University of Edinburgh. His first step was to urge on the government the necessity of forming an agricultural museum, for which the chancellor of the exchequer, Thomas Spring-Rice, consented in 1833 to allow $300 a year. Low also contributed collections of his own, and employed the artist William Shiels to travel, taking portraits of the best specimens of different breeds of animals. Altogether $3000 was expended on the museum -- $1500 from the government, $300 from the Reid fund, and the rest from the professor's private resources. The museum led to increased attendance in the class of agriculture. 
In 1834 Low published 'Elements of Practical Agriculture' (4th edn, 1843); it was translated into French and German. In 1842 he brought out a splendid work in two volumes, 'The Breeds of the Domestic Animals of the British Islands', with coloured plates. This was translated for the French government immediately on its appearance. Two years later he published 'On Landed Property and the Economy of Estates', and in 1850 an 'Appeal to the Common Sense of the Country Regarding the Condition of the Working Classes'. He was also much devoted to chemistry and had a private laboratory. His controversial work 'An Inquiry into the Nature of the Simple Bodies of Chemistry' (1844) suggested that carbon and hydrogen were the only fundamental chemical elements, and opposed the atomic theory of John Dalton. It provoked a reply from J. J. Berzelius. 
Low resigned his chair in 1854, and died, unmarried, at Mayfield, Edinburgh on 7 January 1859. He was buried at the Edinburgh cemetery, Warriston. 


@@@@@


doc= 17072


Low, George (1747-1795), naturalist, born at the farm of Meikle Tullo, near Edzell, Forfarshire, and baptized at Edzell on 29 March 1747, was the third of five children of John Low (died 1760), tenant farmer and church officer, and his wife, Isobel Coupar 
(or possibly Cooper; 'fl'. 1730-1760)
. He was educated at the parish school, and then for one year at Brechin grammar school. In 1762 he enrolled in the faculty of arts at Marischal College, Aberdeen, but left the following year for the University of St Andrews, where he studied first under Robert Watson, professor of philosophy, at St Salvator's College (1763-6), and then took up divinity at St Mary's College (1766-7). A remarkable commonplace book written by him while at St Andrews, entitled 'A cabinet of curiosities' and dated 1766, is still extant in manuscript and indicates his early eclectic interests. 
Low went to Orkney in late 1767 or early in 1768 as tutor to the sons of Baillie Robert Graham, merchant of Stromness, where he devoted most of the remainder of his life to the study of the natural history and antiquities of the Orkney and Shetland archipelagos. He commenced by careful observations of the birds, fishes, and flora of Orkney, and became enthralled with the study of microscopy, constructing a 'water microscope', and in 1769 beginning a series of 'Microscopical observations', a work illustrated with attractive Indian-ink sketches. 
Isolated as he was from other scientific workers, with much of his time occupied as a tutor (an occupation which he disliked), and possessing hardly any books, the zeal with which he conducted these pioneer studies can hardly be overestimated. He also set to work about 1770 upon what became perhaps his major work, a 'History of Orkney', in which he contemplated embodying accounts of the history and antiquities, as well as of the natural history and topography of the islands, and for this purpose translated into English Torfaeus's 'Orcades' (1697), a history of Orkney. Low was licensed as minister by the presbytery of Cairston in 1771, but remained for three years longer at Stromness. 
In 1772 Sir Joseph Banks visited Orkney on his return from Iceland, in company with Daniel Solander and James Lind. Low acted as their guide and assisted them in the excavation of Bronze age burials at Skaill, an event which probably first aroused his interest in antiquities. Low was introduced by them to the antiquary and bibliophile George Paton of Edinburgh, who lent him books and became his friend, and to Thomas Pennant, with whom he began corresponding, and from whom his antiquarian studies derived further important stimulus. In the summer of 1774 Low made, at Pennant's expense, an extended tour of the south islands of Orkney and the whole of the Shetland group, and sent Pennant some materials for his 'Tour in Scotland' (1776). Low began writing, with a view to publication, an exhaustive account of his tour, which dealt with the commerce, the population, and language, as well as with the archaeological and other records of the islands. On 14 December 1774 he was appointed minister to the remote parish of Birsay and Harray, on the mainland of Orkney, through the patronage of Sir Laurence Dundas. On 25 August the following year he married Helen, only daughter of James Tyrie, minister of Stromness and Sandwick; she died on 2 December 1776, after giving birth to a stillborn child. 
In the seclusion of Birsay, Low completed his 'History' together with his accounts of 'Fauna' and 'Flora' respectively of the islands of Orkney. In 1778 to complete his survey of the islands he made a tour through the north isles of Orkney, the manuscript of which was published eventually in 1915. In 1781 he became a corresponding member of the Society of Antiquaries of Scotland. From this date until 1790 he was engaged in a succession of futile endeavours to get his manuscripts published. Though not published during his lifetime, his writings were extensively circulated and employed by others. Richard Gough introduced quotations from him into his 'British Topography' (1780), and Pennant inserted, besides descriptions, several engravings from Low's drawings into his 'Arctic Zoology' (1784-7). The manuscript of Low's 'History' was extensively plagiarized by George Barry in his 'History of the Orkney Islands' (1805), which includes important samples of the Norn language of Shetland (a dialect of West Norse) collected by Low in 1774. Such was the extent of use of Low's information by others that Samuel Hibbert, writing in 1822, managed only with some difficulty to cull information respecting the earlier customs of Shetland that had not already been used. The 'Fauna Orcadensis' was eventually published in 1813 by William Elford Leach. Pennant's attempts to find a publisher for Low's 1774 tour proved futile, and it remained unpublished until edited by Joseph Anderson, with an introduction containing extracts from Low's correspondence, in 1879. 
The fate of Low's manuscripts became the subject of an increasingly acrimonious correspondence between Pennant, Gough, and Paton. Disappointed at the scant recognition of his labours, and embittered and disillusioned by the increasing coldness of Pennant and other friends, Low's health began a steady decline from about 1781, with recurrent episodes of cough, pleurisy, and latterly of rheumatism and weight loss. In particular, his eyesight began to fail, and from 1793 he became almost completely blind. Nevertheless, he did manage to provide a description of Birsay parish for Sir John Sinclair's 'Statistical Account' (1791-94). Low died on 13 March 1795 at Birsay, and was buried on the 16th beneath the pulpit in Birsay church. He was clearly a good naturalist and was remembered as an eloquent preacher. His hobbies included fishing and shooting, and, particularly after his eyesight failed, music. 
Many of the unfortunate naturalist's manuscripts fell into the hands of his friend Paton, at whose death they were distributed; their subsequent history is complex. Important collections were made during the nineteenth century by Dr Omand, Professor Thomas Stewart Traill, and David Laing. These manuscripts, including those of the important 'Tours', the 'Flora Orcadensis', and the 'History of Orkney', are now located mainly in Edinburgh University Library, the National Museums of Scotland, and the National Library of Scotland. 


@@@@@


doc= 17073


Low, James (1791-1852), army officer in the East India Company and Siamese scholar, was born at Kettle, Fifeshire, on 4 April 1791, the son of Alexander Low and his wife, Ann, 'nee' Thomson. He received a Madras army cadetship in 1811, and on 11 June 1812 was appointed ensign 25th Madras native infantry. He became lieutenant in 1817, and captain 46th native infantry in 1826. He retired as lieutenant-colonel 16th native infantry in 1845. He was for many years in civil charge of Wellesley Province, Penang, in the Straits Settlements, Malaya. He published 'A Dissertation on the Soil and Agriculture of... Penang' (1828), 'A Grammar of the T,Hai, or Siamese Language' (1828), 'On Buddha and the Phrabat' (1831), and treatises on the literature and laws of Siam. Low, who was unmarried, died on 2 May 1852, at 10 Minto Street, Newington, Edinburgh. Copies of his Siamese drawings were deposited in the British Museum. 


@@@@@


doc= 17074


Low, Sir John (1788-1880), army officer in the East India Company and political officer in India, born at Clatto, near Cupar, Fife, on 13 December 1788, was the eldest son of Captain Robert Low of Clatto, and his wife, the daughter of Dr Robert Malcolm. He was educated at St Andrews University, attending the sessions of 1802-3, and in 1804 obtained a Madras cadetship on the nomination of J. Hudleston. On 17 July 1805 he was appointed lieutenant in the 1st Madras native infantry. For the part taken by six of its companies in the uprising at Vellore the regiment was disbanded in January 1807, the loyal men and the officers (Low included) being re-formed into the 24th Madras infantry; in 1816 it was renumbered the 1st Madras infantry, for its conduct at the battle of Sitabaldi. Low became captain in the regiment in 1820, major 17th Madras infantry (late 2nd battalion 24th Madras infantry) in 1828, and lieutenant-colonel 19th Madras infantry in 1834. In 1839 he obtained the colonelcy of the 1st Madras infantry, which he held up to his death. 
Low saw in his early years varied military service. He was attached to the office of the quartermaster-general from 11 May 1810, rejoined his regiment in February 1811, was attached to the 59th regiment in the Java expedition of 1811, and was wounded at the storming of Fort Cornelis. He was afterwards brigade major in the Ceded Districts, and was Persian interpreter and head of the intelligence staff to Colonel Dowse in the southern Marattha country in 1812-13; he was in commissariat charge of Brigadier William Tuyl's force sent against the Guntur rebels in 1816, and was present at the final defeat of the Maratthas at Mehidpur in Malwa, on 21 December 1817, as extra aide-de-camp to Sir John Malcolm. In March 1818, as first political assistant to Malcolm, he was employed with a force of over 3000 men and ten guns in pacifying the Chindwara district, and his services were afterwards publicly acknowledged. He efficiently performed the delicate task of inducing the peshwa, Baji Rao, to place himself under British protection; and when Baji Rao retired to Bithur, near Cawnpore, Low was appointed resident there. He filled that post for six years to the entire satisfaction of governors-general the marquess of Hastings and Lord Amherst. From that time onwards Low's services were chiefly political, although later at Lucknow and afterwards at Hyderabad his functions included the control of large local contingents of Indian troops. In 1825 he became political agent at Jaipur. In 1830 he was appointed by Lord William Henry Cavendish-Bentinck political agent at Gwalior, where he displayed much determination and wisdom in defeating the intrigues of the regent Bai. In 1831 he was sent as resident to Lucknow. Low married in 1829 Augusta Ludlow, second daughter of John Talbot Shakespear of the Bengal civil service, and sister of Sir Richmond Shakespear, one of Low's assistants at Lucknow; they had four sons and two daughters. The eldest son, William Malcolm Low (1835-1923), Bengal civil service, was Conservative MP for Grantham from 1886 to 1892. Another son was General Sir Robert Cunliffe Low. 
In 1837 the long misrule in Oudh caused the court of directors to agree to a proposal of Lord William Bentinck for the temporary assumption by the East India Company of the government of that state. Low was certain that this effective annexation would be misunderstood by the inhabitants, and suggested instead deposing the king and placing the heir-apparent on the throne. The new governor-general, Lord Auckland, left the decision to Low. Meanwhile the king died suddenly -- from poison, or possibly from strong drink. A pretender, the favourite of the late king's chief widow, had been placed on the throne, the palace and city swarmed with turbulent soldiers, and the rightful heir was a prisoner. Summoning a Bengal regiment to his aid, Low, after unsuccessful negotiation, had the gates of the palace blown open and the pretender seized. The rightful heir was then installed by the British resident. In recognition of his services Low received the special thanks of the court of directors, and was made CB (20 July 1838). Low was not the author of the Oudh treaty which was subsequently quashed. Ill health compelled him to return to Britain in 1842, after thirty-eight years of almost uninterrupted service in India. 
Low returned to India in 1847, and in 1848 was appointed governor-general's agent in Rajputana and commissioner at Ajmer and Mewar, where he remained until 1852, when he was sent by Lord Dalhousie to Hyderabad, in succession to James Stuart Fraser, as resident with the nizam. There he negotiated the treaty by which Berar was assigned to the British government in return for the organization and maintenance of the Hyderabad subsidiary force. For his services on this occasion he again received the special thanks of the court of directors. On 22 September 1853 Low was appointed a member of council. 
In 1854 he was promoted major-general. Low's experience of Indian princes was by then unrivalled. In two able minutes (both dated in February 1854) he protested against the impolicy and injustice of the Nagpur annexation; but on this, as on other occasions, his views were largely ignored by Dalhousie. In the deliberations that ended with the annexation of Oudh, Low strongly advocated interference, showing in a minute drawn up in March 1855 that the paramount government was bound, by considerations of justice as well as by treaty obligations, to interfere. The king, he showed, would never become an efficient ruler, and the non-enforcement of Lord Hardinge's threats of seven years previously had had a widespread influence for dissatisfaction and uncertainty. When, early in May 1857, news arrived of the mutinous refusal of the 7th Oudh irregulars to use the greased cartridges, Low advocated leniency. He refused to credit the troops with disloyalty or disaffection, but only with fear that biting the cartridges would injure their caste. The news of the outbreaks at Meerut and Delhi was received a day or two later, and Low -- in opposition, it is said, to his civilian colleagues -- advised a determined and immediate effort for the recovery of Delhi, an enterprise which might have cut short the uprising. In April 1858, when the rising was practically suppressed, Low returned to Britain, receiving, as on many previous occasions, the thanks of the government of India. Lord Canning described his services as 'invaluable', and acknowledged that he had exceptional knowledge of the people of India. Low was promoted lieutenant-general in 1859 and general in 1867, and was placed on the retired list in 1874. He was made KCB in 1862, and GCSI in 1873. He died at Strathallan, Upper Norwood, Surrey, on 10 January 1880, in his ninety-second year, and was buried at Kemback, Fife. His wife survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 17075


Low, Sampson (1797-1886), publisher, was born in London in November 1797, the son of Sampson Low (died 1800), printer and publisher, of Berwick Street, Soho. He served an apprenticeship with Lionel Booth, the proprietor of a circulating library, and, after a few years spent in the house of Longman & Co., began business in 1819 at 42 Lamb's Conduit Street, London, as a bookseller and stationer, with a circulating library attached. His reading-room was frequented by many literary men, lawyers, and politicians. In 1821 Sampson married; his wife's name was Mary (1796/7-1881), and they went on to have several children, among whom his eldest son, Sampson Low jun. (1822-1871), and his second son, William Henry Low (died 1881), were to assist with the family business. 
Until 1837 'Bent's Literary Advertiser' was the only trade journal connected with bookselling; at this period the publishers became dissatisfied with the manner in which it was conducted, and established a periodical of their own called the 'Publishers' Circular', appointing Low as editor. The first number appeared on 2 October 1837. Low gradually introduced many changes and improvements, and in 1867 the 'Circular' became his sole property. The periodical, which was published fortnightly, supplied a list of new books, and from these lists an annual catalogue was made up, the first appearing in 1839. Upon these annual catalogues Low based his 'British Catalogue', the first volume of which, containing titles under authors' names of all books issued between 1837 and 1852, was published in 1853; it was continued as the 'English Catalogue', with four further volumes appearing between 1864 and 1882. Subject indexes were issued in 1858 and in 1876, the first being reprinted in 1976 and the second in 1979, as important sources for literary historians. Low was also manager of a society for the protection of retail booksellers against undersellers until the dissolution of the society in 1852. In 1841 Low compiled and published 'Low's Comparative Register of the House of Commons, 1827-1841', six years later producing an updated version covering the years 1841 to 1847. About 1844 he met Fletcher Harper of New York, and became his literary agent and correspondent, and one of the chief American booksellers in London. In 1848, in conjunction with his eldest son, Low opened a publishing office at the corner of Red Lion Court, Fleet Street. In 1852 they moved to 47 (and later to 14) Ludgate Hill, where, with the aid of David Bogue, an American department was opened. In 1856 Edward Marston became a partner, and Bogue retired. The firm moved in 1867 to 188 Fleet Street, and, two years after publishing 'Low's Literary Almanack and Illustrated Souvenir for 1873', Low retired in 1875. In 1887 the firm moved again, to St Dunstan's House, Fetter Lane, and subsequently to Paternoster Row. 
In addition to his business commitments, Low found time for many philanthropic projects. With his son he was mainly instrumental in establishing in 1843 the Royal Society for the Protection of Life from Fire, and supervised it until 1867, when it was taken over by the Metropolitan Board of Works. From its foundation in 1837 he took the deepest interest in the Booksellers' Provident Institution, serving on the committee and acting as a vice-president, and bequeathing it a handsome legacy in his will. 
The death of Low's eldest son on 5 March 1871 was a great blow. Sampson Low jun. had been an invalid, but had taken a considerable share in the business, compiling 'The Charities of London' in 1850, a popular and useful reference work which formed the basis for four further editions between 1854 and 1870. Low's wife died on 26 May 1881, in her eighty-fourth year, within a month of their anticipated diamond wedding anniversary, and a few months later, on 25 September 1881, Low lost his second son. Low himself died at home on 16 April 1886, at 41 Mecklenburgh Square, London, and was buried in Highgate cemetery. He was survived by his daughter, Mary Ann. 


@@@@@


doc= 17076


Low, William (1814-1886), civil engineer, was born on 11 December 1814 at Rothesay, Bute, Scotland, the eldest son of John Low, a leather currier, and Mary McKinzie, a labourer's daughter. In 1815 the family moved to Glasgow where William was raised. He was apprenticed to Peter MacQuisten, a Glasgow engineer and surveyor. 
In the late 1830s Low was at Bristol working on the construction of the Box Tunnel near Bath for the Great Western Railway, and while there married Elizabeth Cameron (died 1896) in October 1838. By 1841 Low was an assistant engineer to Isambard Kingdom Brunel, moving to Chester to work on the Chester to Holyhead line. He was also consulted on the Shrewsbury to Hereford, and the Shrewsbury to Chester lines, especially about tunnelling. He probably returned to Glasgow to work in partnership with MacQuisten until the latter's death about 1847. In 1850 Low submitted plans for a loan fund to finance the construction of railways in Ireland. 
In 1852 Low became joint owner with Mortimer Maurice of the Vron colliery, near Wrexham, and Low set up home at Adwy'r-clawdd near Coed-poeth, moving in 1864 to Roseneath, a house he built himself, in Wrexham. He pursued a career locally, as the managing partner of Vron colliery with about 400 employees, and as a consulting colliery engineer. He advocated the Vale of Llangollen Railway, which opened in 1858; subscribed to Wrexham Infirmary; served as a Denbighshire JP; and was an active supporter of the local Liberal Party. In 1875 Low built the Westminster Buildings in Wrexham for the Great Exhibition of Industry and Art in 1876. 
Low maintained professional interests at the national level, and was especially known for his advocacy of the channel tunnel. In the 1860s he worked with Sir John Hawkshaw on plans for a tunnel, but disagreed with Hawkshaw's proposals for a single-bore tunnel with a double-track railway, arguing that a twin-bore tunnel with a single track in each would be cheaper to construct and could be better ventilated. His suggestions are considered to be the first practical proposals for a channel tunnel, and the present tunnel was constructed on similar principles. He and a colleague, George Thomas, submitted plans to Napoleon III in 1867, and Low played an important role in subsequent Anglo-French investigations and reports in favour of the scheme. 
The Franco-Prussian War interrupted these discussions, but afterwards interest arose once more, and in England two competing private companies emerged, one backing Hawkshaw's proposals, while that of the railway entrepreneur Sir Edward Watkin backed those of Low. Both companies obtained enabling legislation, both sank trial shafts, and drove short stretches of tunnel, but the idea aroused opposition, and in 1883 British military authorities vetoed construction on the grounds of national security. All work on both sides of the channel came to a halt. Such was Low's enthusiasm that his study at Roseneath became known as the Channel Tunnel Office, and it may have been a reason for his move to London in 1882. 
In 1867 Low was elected a member of the Institution of Civil Engineers. In 1871 he and Thomas submitted plans for a railway from England to India, Low having surveyed part of the route in 1870, and in 1876 he advocated a line from Constantinople to Karachi. In the mid-1870s Low advocated a tunnel under the Mersey, and a bridge over the Severn, both of which were authorized but remained unbuilt. Some years before his death an attack of paralysis compelled him to cease active work, and his colliery may have closed down during the 1878-9 trade depression. In 1882 Low moved from Wrexham to 88 West Cromwell Road, London. He died there on 10 July 1886 and was buried at Brompton cemetery on 13 July. His widow lived in Oswestry until her death in 1896. The 1861 census records ten children. 


@@@@@


doc= 17077


Lowder, Charles Fuge (1820-1880), Church of England clergyman, the eldest of the two sons and four daughters of Charles Lowder (1789-1876), banker, and his wife, Susan Fuge (1788-1871), was born at 2 West Wing, Lansdown Crescent, Bath, on 22 June 1820. After early schooling in Bath (1827-34) and at Bruton grammar school (1835), he attended King's College School, London, from 1835 to 1839 and in February 1840 went up to Exeter College, Oxford, from which he received his BA, a second in classics, in 1843, and an MA in 1845. Ordained deacon at Michaelmas 1843, he went as curate to Walton, near Glastonbury, and following his priesting in December 1844 began work as chaplain to the Axbridge workhouse. In 1846 he became curate of Tetbury, and in September 1851 moved to London as assistant curate to James Skinner, senior curate of St Barnabas's, Pimlico, then a chapel of ease to St Paul's, Knightsbridge, and in the vanguard of the Anglo-Catholic revival. 
In 1854 Lowder was briefly suspended for encouraging choirboys to throw eggs at the placard-bearer of an anti-ritualist churchwarden. During the suspension he read Louis Abelly's 'Vie de S. Vincent de Paul' (1664) and conceived the idea of a secular order of priests to upgrade the clergy's spiritual life and to establish home missions among the poor. In February 1855, with five other priests, he founded the Society of the Holy Cross, which in the following February, at Lowder's suggestion, both revived retreats in the Church of England and began a home mission in Bryan King's parish of St George-in-the-East. As the Society of the Holy Cross grew and came to include most of the notable figures in the Anglo-Catholic movement, it exercised an increasing influence on its members and the church through its rules of life, its publications and monthly chapters, and its support for Anglo-Catholic parishes and beleaguered ritualist priests. 
On 20 August 1856 Lowder left St Barnabas's to take charge of St George's mission, living in the recently bought mission house in Calvert Street, Wapping. In November 1856 the mission opened the iron chapel of the Good Shepherd in Wapping, and in the following March began services in the rented Danish chapel of St Saviour at Wellclose Square. Elizabeth Neale, sister of John Mason Neale, came in May 1857 to found under Lowder's aegis the Community of the Holy Cross, which enabled the mission to expand its work in the provision of schools, a refuge for prostitutes, a hostel for homeless girls, night classes and parish clubs, visiting, and general poor relief. From the opening of the iron chapel Lowder wore eucharistic vestments, almost certainly the first priest in London to do so. Bishop Tait complained of this and other ritual, but from May 1859 attention focused on the parish church, which with brief interludes was the scene of riots, ostensibly about ritual, until the summer of 1860. The mission clergy, especially Lowder and A. H. Mackonochie (Lowder's assistant from November 1857 to Easter 1862), bore the brunt of the disturbances, but the mission chapels themselves were relatively free of trouble. Despite accusations of Romanism Lowder was resolutely loyal to the Church of England. The secession to Rome of some of his assistants and curates in 1857-8 and 1868 deeply distressed him, and on his deathbed he instructed that it should be witnessed he died an Anglican. 
In 1860 Lowder acquired a site for a church and began to raise funds to build St Peter's, London Docks, which was consecrated on 30 June 1866. Lowder was first licensed as perpetual curate and then, on the resignation of the rector of St George's in 1873, became vicar. From July until September 1866 cholera attacked the East End, with Wapping one of the worst hit districts. The work of the clergy and sisters during the epidemic ensured their acceptance among the people, and from then on Lowder was known simply as 'the Father'. The love of his parishioners and the esteem in which he was held in the wider church, even by those who disagreed with him, foiled efforts to prosecute him for allegedly illegal ritual. A complaint by the Church Association in 1869 under the 'Church Discipline Act' was quashed by Bishop Jackson, and an attempt in 1877-8 under the 'Public Worship Regulation Act' was vetoed by Archbishop Tait on the advice of Jackson, who in November 1878 wrote privately to Tait that, if the prosecution of Lowder proceeded, he doubted whether the unamended 'Public Worship Act' 'could ever be put in force again'. The failure of the prosecution and the unabated ritual at St Peter's was a moral victory for the Anglo-Catholic movement, and undoubtedly contributed to the eventual acceptance of high-church ritual within the Church of England. 
Throughout the 1870s Lowder struggled to raise the funds needed for parish work. In 1877 he published 'Twenty-one Years in St George's Mission', an update of his earlier 'Ten Years in St George's Mission' (1867), in the hope of re-exciting interest and encouraging contributions. At the same time, the combination of overwork and what was probably a peptic ulcer told on his health, and he was increasingly forced to spend time out of the parish. During the 1870s his self-imposed reserve and sternness mellowed, and he allowed a natural warmth and sense of humour to show itself to colleagues and parishioners. Tall for his generation, slimly but strongly built, he impressed those who knew him with his physical courage and self-discipline, and as he grew older he won those who knew him by his gentleness and love. 
Lowder died at Hotel Krone, in all likelihood from a perforated ulcer, while on a climbing holiday at Zell am See, Austria, on 9 September 1880. After a requiem at St Peter's on 17 September, several hundred clergy and a few thousand parishioners and friends made their way to St Nicholas's churchyard, Chislehurst, for his burial. 


@@@@@


doc= 17078


Lowe, Edward (c.1610-1682), organist and composer, was born in the parish of St Thomas's, Salisbury, probably into the family of John Lowe (died 1632), lawyer, of Salisbury, and his second wife, Elizabeth (died 1639?), daughter of Thomas Hyde, chancellor of Salisbury Cathedral from 1588 to 1618. Although there is no direct evidence that Edward Lowe was their son, he called a Humphrey Hyde 'cousin' (BL, Add. MS 29396). According to Anthony Wood, Lowe was 'bred a chorister' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Wood D.19 (4), fol. 87'v') at Salisbury Cathedral under John Holmes, master of the choristers from about 1621 to 1629. 
After Michaelmas 1631, but before 1641, Lowe succeeded William Stonard as organist and master of the choristers at Christ Church Cathedral, Oxford. On 14 December 1633 he married Alice (1607/8-1649), daughter of Sir John Peyton of Doddington, Isle of Ely, at St James's, Clerkenwell, in London; they had nine children. Since Alice's coat of arms was depicted with Lowe's in a pane of painted glass in the house at Hampton Gay, near Shipton-on-Cherwell, Oxfordshire, which he occupied fifty years later, he may already have been living there during this period. Alice died on 17 March 1649, and Lowe probably married his second wife, Mary, about 1654. 
During the interregnum Lowe gave private lessons and took part in weekly music meetings at the house of William Ellis, formerly organist of St John's College, Oxford. The vice-chancellor's accounts for 1657-8 name him as university organist, and he acted as deputy to the professor of music appointed in 1656, John Wilson, whom he succeeded in 1661. 
Soon after the Restoration Lowe became one of the three organists of the Chapel Royal (with William Child and Christopher Gibbons), a post he retained along with his Oxford appointments until his death, and he compiled 'A short direction for the performance of cathedrall service, published for the information of such persons as are ignorant of it, and shall be call'd to officiate in cathedrall, or collegiate churches where it hath formerly been in use' (1661; rev. 1664), containing simple settings of the liturgy for newly reconstituted choirs. Lowe's enduring achievement, however, was in administration. As professor of music he fostered performance at the Thursday afternoon meetings of the music school and continued the development of the school's music collection (Bodl. Oxf., MSS mus. sch.), an outstanding source of English music of the early and mid-seventeenth century. Despite his long service in Oxford, however, Lowe was not granted university privileges until 19 August 1667. 
The music school's holdings at Lowe's death are outlined in a catalogue made in 1682 by his successor Richard Goodson (Bodl. Oxf., MS mus. sch. C.204* [R]), which also lists 'The Gift of Mr Lowe late Professour'. Manuscripts purchased for the music school during Lowe's professorship included the North family's collection of works by John Jenkins and other composers, bought for $22 from 'Mr Wood' (possibly but not certainly Anthony Wood) in 1667 (MSS mus. sch. C.81-91, C.98-101, and E.406-9). Lowe's regular contact with court musicians was a great advantage: John Hingeston, formerly Cromwell's household musician, presented music of his own, encouraged by 'what I have heard & seen of the care, dilligence and industry, of the present Professor of that faculty in the University, my Honored frind and fellow servant Mr Edward Lowe' (MSS mus. sch. D.205-11), and four books in William Lawes's autograph (MSS mus. sch. D.229 and 238-40), together with mus. sch. B.2 and 3 in Lowe's private collection, were probably given by Henry Lawes, whose will Lowe witnessed in 1662. Other material was donated by Oxford musicians, commissioned from copyists or copied by Lowe himself, many manuscripts being annotated by Lowe with informative practical or historical details. 
The professor's duties included the organization of music for the degree ceremony or 'act' and for other official occasions. Lowe copied performing parts for several of the odes, known as act songs, performed at these events, among them two works of his own; one of these, 'Nunc est canendum', might have been composed for the opening of the Sheldonian Theatre on 9 July 1669; the other, 'Eia eruditam', was performed on 7 July 1671 and may have given rise to the unfounded assertion that he was not formally installed as music professor until that year. For Christ Church Lowe copied twenty-seven anthems, including several composed by himself, into the cathedral partbooks (Mus. 1220-24): a competent but minor composer, he also wrote a few songs and partsongs, and one keyboard piece is ascribed to him (Christ Church, Mus. 1177). Further sources in Lowe's handwriting include a Christ Church organ accompaniment book (Mus. 1002), a collection of voluntaries in Christ Church (Mus. 1176), and a song anthology at Edinburgh University Library (MS Dc.I.69) and its companion volume (Bodl. Oxf., MS Mus.d.38). 
Lowe was described by Anthony Wood as 'a proud man' who 'could not endure any common Musitian to come to [Ellis's] Meeting, much less to play amongst them' (Clark, 1.205), but this observation may reflect Lowe's concern for the status and standards of his profession rather than personal vanity. In his will he described Richard Goodson, an Oxford innkeeper's son who succeeded him in his university appointments, as his friend, and his manuscripts suggest that he actively encouraged local composers, including at least one, Henry Bowman, with no official connection with the university. 
Lowe died on 11 July 1682 and was buried near his first wife in the divinity chapel of the cathedral. Two children were living from that marriage: Edward (1635-1711), who had become vicar of Brighton in 1674 and rector of Slinfold, Sussex, in 1681, and Elizabeth, who had married Thomas Burtchall of London, a comb maker and dissenter, at St James's, Duke's Place, in 1667. There were also at least two surviving children from his second marriage: Susanna, who married John Strype, the church historian, at Christ Church on 7 February 1682, and, almost certainly, Charles Lowe ('b'. 1654/5), of St Katharine Cree, London, who was aged twenty-three when on 28 August 1678 he obtained a faculty office licence to marry Mary Downes. Lowe's place in the Chapel Royal was granted to Henry Purcell; at Christ Church the next organist was probably William Husbands, then too young to collect his payment in person. 


@@@@@


doc= 17079


Lowe, Edward William Howe de Lancy (1820-1880), army officer, youngest son of Sir Hudson Lowe (1769-1844), colonial governor, and his wife, Susan (died 1832), daughter of Stephen de Lancey and widow of Colonel William Johnson, was born in St Helena on 8 February 1820. He was educated at the Royal Military College, Sandhurst, and on 20 May 1837 was appointed ensign in the 32nd regiment. He became lieutenant in 1841, captain in 1845, major in 1857, lieutenant-colonel in 1858, and colonel in 1863. He served with the regiment in the Second Anglo-Sikh War of 1848-9, including the two sieges and capture of Multan and the battle of Gujrat. He was with the regiment at Lucknow at the outbreak of the Indian mutiny, and on 18 May 1857 was sent with his company to Cawnpore. General Wheeler, on hearing the state of affairs at Lucknow, sent the reinforcement back some days later, which thus escaped the massacres. When Inglis took command at Lucknow, on Sir Henry Lawrence's death, Lowe took command of the 32nd, which he held throughout the defence of the residency. On 26 September 1857 he commanded a sortie which captured seven guns, and he also commanded the party sent out to bring in the guns and stores with the rear-guard of Havelock's relieving force, which had arrived the day before. In these operations he was severely wounded. After the second relief by Colin Campbell, in October, Lowe commanded the 32nd at the defeat of the Gwalior rebels at Cawnpore on 6 December 1857 and during the ensuing campaign in Oudh from July 1858 to January 1859. He was mentioned in dispatches, given brevet promotion, and made a CB. Some letters sent by Lowe to his sister during the defence of the residency formed the basis of an article in the 'Quarterly Review' (vol. 103, 1858). Lowe afterwards commanded in succession the 2nd battalion 21st regiment (Royal North British Fusiliers) and the 86th Royal County Down regiment. He retired on half pay in 1872 and became a major-general in 1877. He married Anne Louisa Russell, daughter of Maurice Peter Moore (1809-1866) of Sleaford, Lincolnshire, solicitor and clerk of the peace for Kesteven; she survived her husband. Lowe died at his home, 11 Upper Berkeley Street, London, on 21 October 1880. 


@@@@@


doc= 17080


Lowe, Sir Hudson (1769-1844), army officer and colonial governor, born in Galway, Ireland, on 28 July 1769, was the son of Hudson Lowe (died 1801) and his wife, the daughter of J. Morgan of Galway. 
The elder Hudson Lowe, from a Lincolnshire family long settled near Grantham, was for over thirty years surgeon of the 50th foot, and afterwards, as staff surgeon-major and assistant inspector of hospitals, head of the medical department at Gibraltar, where he died. The younger Hudson was born while his father was with his regiment in Galway, and he went with it to Jamaica in late 1772. After nearly four years the 50th moved to North America, where most of the men were dispersed to other regiments. However, in November 1776 Lowe's father returned to England with a recruiting party to Salisbury, and the younger Hudson attended school there. In the autumn of 1778 the regiment, now up to strength, settled at Plymouth. Hudson Lowe apparently became an ensign in the East Devon militia, passing review with it before the age of twelve, which does not necessarily prove that he joined his father at Plymouth. The 50th moved to Gibraltar in 1784, where Lowe served as a volunteer in 1785-6, and was gazetted ensign on 25 September 1787, advancing to lieutenant in the regiment on 16 November 1791, and captain-lieutenant and captain on 6 September 1795. Meanwhile, he had travelled on leave through Italy, picking up an intimate knowledge of Italian and French. On the outbreak of war he rejoined his regiment at Gibraltar and served with it at Toulon (1793) and at the capture of Corsica (1794), taking part in the attack on the great Martello tower, the storming of the Convention redoubt, and the sieges of Bastia and Calvi. He remained two years in garrison at Ajaccio, then went with the 50th to Elba, where he was deputy judge-advocate. Subsequently he was stationed in Portugal for two years and became proficient in Portuguese, having already obtained a good knowledge of Spanish. From Lisbon he moved in 1799 to Minorca, where he was made one of the inspectors of foreign corps and put at the head of 200 anti-republican Corsicans -- styled the Corsican rangers -- with the rank of major-commandant from 5 July 1800. He commanded the corps in Egypt in 1801 at the landing and in the operations before Alexandria and the advance on Cairo, winning the approval of Brigadier-General John Moore, who remarked on one occasion: 'When Lowe's at the outposts I'm sure of a good night'. For his services in Egypt he received the Turkish gold medal. The Corsican rangers were disbanded at Malta after the peace of Amiens, and Lowe was put on half pay. 
In 1803, on the recommendation of Moore, Lowe was appointed one of the new permanent assistants in the quartermaster-general's department and was stationed at Plymouth, from where, in July, he was dispatched to Portugal to inspect the troops and defences on the north and north-eastern frontiers; and he reported the feasibility of defending the country with a mixed British and Portuguese force. He was then sent to Malta to raise a new and larger corps of foreign men, to be called the Royal Corsican rangers, as major-commandant from 15 October 1803 and lieutenant-colonel-commandant from 25 June 1804. Following a mission to Sardinia, where his report on the state of the island saved a proposed subsidy, in 1805 Lowe went with his corps to Naples, under Lieutenant-General Sir James Henry Craig, and commanded the advance from Castellamare towards the Abruzzi. When the British retired to Sicily he was detached with part of his corps, the rest joining him, after the battle of Maida in July 1806, at Capri, where he was reinforced later by the Malta regiment. On his own responsibility he humanely appealed to Marshal Louis-Alexandre Berthier, chief of the staff of the army of Naples, against the frequent French military executions of Calabrese fugitives. Lowe occupied Capri from 11 June 1806 until 20 October 1808, when, after thirteen days' siege -- the Malta regiment having been made prisoners and the defences of Capri breached -- he surrendered to a French force under General Count Jean-Maximin Lamarque. He blamed the disaster on the absence of naval aid and the conduct of the Malta regiment. Deeply upset by the omission from the 'London Gazette' of his detailed dispatch, he thought of leaving the service. 
Lowe commanded the Royal Corsican rangers in the expedition to the Bay of Naples in 1809 and distinguished himself at the capture of Ischia. He then acted as second in command of the expedition to the Ionian Islands (1809-10), led the attacking force at Zante (Zakynthos), was present at the capture of Cephalonia and Ithaca, and the capture of Santa Maura (Leukas). Lowe was put in command of the left division of the troops in the Ionian Islands and entrusted with the provisional government of Cephalonia, Ithaca, and Santa Maura, which he administered without remuneration for two years. He also addressed a general report about the Ionian Islands to the Colonial Office. On leaving, the inhabitants presented him with a sword of honour. He was promoted colonel-commandant of the Royal Corsican rangers on 1 January 1812 and retained that post until the corps was disbanded at the beginning of 1817. He returned home on leave in February 1812, reputedly having been on active service continuously since 1793, with only six months in England during the peace of Amiens. 
In January 1813 Lowe was sent to inspect the Russian German Legion -- a force composed of German fugitives from the Moscow retreat -- which was to be paid by Britain. He travelled to Stockholm, then crossed the Gulf of Bothnia on the ice to inspect the legion, which was scattered along the Baltic coasts. Afterwards, he went on to Kalisch (Kalisz) in Poland, where an anti-French treaty had been signed by Russia and Prussia. He remained with the Russian army for the ensuing campaign, being present at the battles of Bautzen (where he first saw Napoleon) and Wurschen. During the short-lived armistice (June-July 1813) he inspected some 20,000 levies in British pay in north Germany, and joined Major-General Sir Charles Stewart at the headquarters of Crown Prince Bernadotte of Sweden. Stewart sent Lowe to the headquarters of the Prussian army of Silesia under Marshal Blucher, with whom he was present at Mockern, at the great battles around Leipzig, and at the pursuit of the French to the Rhine. He then resumed his inspections in north Germany and at the end of the year was ordered to organize a new body of Dutch levies in the Netherlands. This plan was abandoned, apparently at his own request, and on 24 January 1814 he rejoined Blucher at Vaucouleurs, being subsequently present with the Prussians at thirteen general engagements. As the only British officer of rank with Blucher's army, Lowe was privy to many important deliberations, especially during the conferences at Chatillon, where he strongly advocated the advance on Paris. He was the first officer to bring to England the news of Napoleon's abdication, arriving in London on 9 April 1814, after having ridden from Paris to Calais through potentially hostile country attended by a single cossack. 
Lowe was knighted on 26 April 1814 and promoted major-general on 4 June. He also received the Russian cross of St George and the Prussian order of military merit. When the allies withdrew from France, he became quartermaster-general of the army in the Low Countries under the command of William Frederick, prince of Orange. Upon the news of Napoleon's return from Elba, which reached Brussels early in March 1815, Lowe, with permission of the prince of Orange, dispatched a British staff officer to the Prussian commanders between the Rhine and Meuse, urging a concentration on the Meuse, to co-operate in the defence of the Southern Netherlands. After the Prussians had begun to move, the prince of Orange changed his mind; but Lowe refused to issue counter-orders. Six years later, on 18 March 1821, in a letter to Earl Bathurst from St Helena, Lowe asserted that Napoleon had made a firm proposal for the king of the Netherlands to give up his claims to the Southern Netherlands, offering to procure for him indemnities in the north of Germany. The duke of Wellington assumed command in the Netherlands early in April 1815, and Lowe remained for a few weeks under him as his quartermaster-general, but he was condemned by the duke as a 'damned old fool' (Longford, 482) for hesitant map-reading and was replaced in May by Colonel Sir William Howe de Lancey. The day after the battle of Waterloo, Lowe took command at Genoa of troops gathered to co-operate with Austro-Sardinian forces. In July, in conjunction with a naval squadron under Admiral Sir Edward Pellew, he occupied Marseilles, and then marched against Toulon, where, in concert with the royalists, he drove out the Napoleonic garrison. 
At Marseilles, on 1 August 1815, Lowe received intimation that he would have the custody of Napoleon, who had taken refuge on the 'Bellerophon', in Aix Roads, a fortnight previously. On Lowe's departure from Marseilles, the citizens of the town presented him with a silver urn bearing an inscription alluding to his having saved the city from being pillaged. The island of St Helena in the south Atlantic was a possession of the East India Company, and on 23 August the court of directors notified him that they had appointed him governor with a salary of $12,000 a year. No stipulation was made as to pension, which explains why his critics could later claim that he was not considered eligible for pension. On 12 September he received from Bathurst, secretary of state for war and the colonies, preliminary instructions about dealing with Napoleon. He obtained the local rank of lieutenant-general on 9 November, and on 4 January 1816 he was made KCB. 
In London, on 16 December 1815, Lowe married Susan Johnson (1779/80-1832), daughter of Stephen de Lancey, sister of Colonel Sir William Howe de Lancey, and widow of Colonel William Johnson. From her first marriage she had two daughters surviving, one marrying Count Balmain, the Russian commissioner at St Helena during Napoleon's captivity. With Lowe she had two sons and a daughter, all of whom were born on St Helena. The younger son was Edward William Howe de Lancy Lowe. Lady Lowe died in Hertford Street, Mayfair, Westminster, on 22 August 1832. 
In mid-January 1816 Lowe left Portsmouth for St Helena, accompanied by his wife and her two daughters; they reached the island on 14 April. Two days earlier, a warrant had been issued, addressed to Lowe as 'lieutenant-general of his Majesty's army in St Helena and governor of that island', requiring him to detain and keep Napoleon as a prisoner of war, under such directions as should be issued from time to time by one of the principal secretaries of state. Indeed, frequent dispatches from Bathurst would reiterate Napoleon's status as a prisoner and the government's persistent fear that he might again escape captivity, as he had from Elba. Lowe, therefore, felt compelled to restrict Napoleon's freedom of movement. Nevertheless, he was not inhumane: shortly after his arrival, he raised the annual allowance for running Longwood, where Napoleon and his entourage lived, from $8000 to $12,000. 
Lowe was unable, however, to establish a satisfactory relationship with Napoleon. Supposedly at their first meeting, when the governor addressed him as 'General Buonaparte', Napoleon observed: 'His eye is that of a hyena caught in a trap' (Rosebery, 66); and his dislike intensified, as Lowe insisted on still-tighter security. Lowe and Napoleon met six times in four months, then no more. The last two encounters were particularly acrimonious; though, by all accounts, Lowe maintained self-control in the face of considerable verbal abuse. After 18 August 1816 he refused to make further visits to Longwood, though a contrary version holds that Napoleon declined to see Lowe again because 'he makes me too angry and I lose my dignity' (Markham, 235). He also told a nephew of the prime minister, Lord Liverpool, that Lowe 'was one of the few men that your uncle should never have sent here', due to his association with 'the Corsican battalion', which Napoleon considered a collection of renegades and deserters (ibid., 233). Indeed, views similar to Napoleon's were independently expressed. Wellington thought Lowe 'a very bad choice... wanting in education and judgement... a stupid man... [who] was suspicious and jealous' (Rosebery, 69). Count Balmain (who later married Lowe's stepdaughter) declared him 'not a tyrant, but he is troublesome and unreasonable beyond endurance' (ibid.). Officers who were on the spot all the time, and were personal friends of various members of Napoleon's staff, pointed to the real origin of many calumnies that have found general acceptance. Walter Henry, assistant surgeon in the 66th foot, which formed part of the St Helena garrison from 1816 to 1821, became convinced that Lowe's vigilance and his firmness in suppressing plots at Longwood were the cause of the hostility towards him, rather than any want of temper or courtesy. Lieutenant Basil Jackson, a Royal Staff Corps officer at St Helena, after noting reliance placed by the exiles on party sympathy in England, concluded: 'The policy of Longwood -- heartily and assiduously carried out by Napoleon's adherents, who liked banishment as little as the great man himself -- was to pour into England pamphlets and letters complaining of unnecessary restrictions, insults from the governor, scarcity of provisions, miserable accommodation, insalubrity of climate, and a host of other grievances, but chiefly levelled at the governor as the head and front of all that was amiss. (Jackson, 104)' Napoleon died on 5 May 1821. At the end of July Lowe handed over the governorship to Brigadier-General John Pine Coffin and left St Helena. Peace was made, at the dying wish of Napoleon, between the exiles and the governor before the general exodus. At his departure, the people of the island presented Lowe with an address praising his rule. The confidence felt in him was evinced by the unanimous acceptance of his measures for the abolition of slavery (without compensation), which took effect from Christmas day 1818. The abolition of slavery was also warmly acknowledged by Sir Thomas Fowell Buxton in the House of Commons in May 1823. 
Back in England, Lowe was cordially received by George IV; and on 4 June 1822, he was appointed colonel of the 93rd foot (Sutherland Highlanders). 
In August 1822 Barry Edward O'Meara, who had been Napoleon's doctor at St Helena, and who had resigned complaining of restraints placed on him by the governor, had been ordered off the island in July 1818, and on 2 November 1818 had seen his name removed from the navy list for defamatory allegations about Lowe, published in London his highly critical 'Napoleon in Exile: a Voice from St. Helena'. The glaring inconsistencies between some of its statements and others previously made by O'Meara were exposed in the October 1822 issue of the 'Quarterly Review'; nevertheless, the book went through five editions in a few months. Lowe sought legal redress, and a rule 'nisi' for a criminal information against O'Meara was obtained in Hilary term 1823 but was afterwards discharged on a technical objection in respect of time. Lowe was then advised that he had done everything necessary by denying the various charges on affidavit, as O'Meara, if he challenged the truth of the denials, could proceed against him for perjury. He was, therefore, dissuaded from further proceedings against O'Meara, though he was strongly advised by Lord Bathurst to publish a full and complete vindication of his governorship of St Helena from the materials in his possession. He appears, however, to have thought that the government was bound to defend his character as a public servant, whose conduct it had approved. 
In 1823 Lowe was appointed governor of Antigua but quickly resigned for domestic reasons. He was then appointed to the staff in Ceylon as second in command under Lieutenant-General Sir Edward Barnes. He left his family in Paris and late in 1825 set out for Ceylon, where he remained until 1828, at which time implied criticisms in the last volume of Sir Walter Scott's 'Life of Napoleon' brought him home on leave. He met with a hearty welcome at St Helena on the way, but his return was not well received in official quarters because the reasons for it were deemed inadequate. Appeals to Bathurst and also to Wellington, who advised him to go back to Ceylon and look forward to succeed to the chief command, proved fruitless. His promotion to lieutenant-general on 22 July 1830 virtually coincided with the opposition party coming to power. Ceylon received a new governor, and Lowe's hopes of further preferment or pension were never fulfilled. He returned to England in 1831 and from that time until his death in 1844 incessantly pressed the government in respect of his claims. Letter after fastidious letter went to the Colonial Office, year by year, without result. He became colonel of the 56th foot on 22 July 1832, and then, on 17 November 1842, of his old regiment, the 50th. In 1842 also, he advanced to the highest class of the Prussian order of the Red Eagle, which was notified in a highly flattering letter from Baron von Bulow recalling his 'signal services to the common cause in the glorious campaigns of 1813-14'. Previously, in 1838, he had been made a GCMG. 
Lowe was a slightly built man of below average height. He had reddish hair, bushy eyebrows, a ruddy freckled face, an aquiline nose, and a tight mouth. His manner was quick and restless, though he was never a fluent speaker. 
On leaving St Helena, Lowe possessed $20,000 and much valuable property, including a fine and extensive library. However, before his death the heavy expenses in which he had been involved made him a much poorer man. He died at Charlotte Cottage, near Sloane Street, Chelsea, London, of paralysis on 10 January 1844, aged seventy-four. 
Lowe's papers were entrusted to Sir Harris Nicolas to prepare for publication, but the arrangement was abandoned after many delays. Subsequently, they were placed by the publisher of the 'Quarterly Review' in the hands of William Forsyth, who compiled the 'Captivity of Napoleon at St Helena, from the Letters and Journals of Sir Hudson Lowe' (3 vols., 1853). 


@@@@@


doc= 17081


Lowe, James (d. 1865), journalist and translator, was the only son of James Lowe of Liverpool. In his early career he was editor of a newspaper at Preston, and from 1843 to 1863 edited 'The Critic of Literature, Science, and the Drama'. He was also a contributor to 'The Field' and 'The Queen', and was one of the secretaries of the Acclimatisation Society. 
Lowe projected a 'Selected Series of French Literature', to consist of translations from memoirs and letters, of which the first volume, containing part of Madame de Sevigne's correspondence, appeared at London in 1853; no more seems to have been published. In 1857 he published a translation of Victor Schoelcher's 'Life of Handel'. He died of erysipelas on 29 October 1865 in London, at 10 Lancaster Place, the Strand. 


@@@@@


doc= 17082


Lowe, James (1798-1866), inventor of a screw propeller, was born on 13 May 1798 at Rotherhithe, London, where he was baptized, the son of James Lowe and his wife, Elizabeth. He was apprenticed on 2 November 1813 to Edward Shorter, a London master mechanic and a freeman of the City, who had in 1800 taken out a patent for propelling vessels, which he had named 'the perpetual sculling machine'. In 1816 Lowe joined a whaling ship, but after three voyages returned to his employer. Later on he commenced business as a mechanic and a manufacturer of smoke jacks for roasting spits. On 30 May 1825 he married Mary (1804-1871), the eldest daughter of George Barnes, builder, of Ewell, Surrey. They had at least two sons and six daughters. 
Lowe's spare time was subsequently taken up with experimenting on screw propellers for ships. On 24 March 1838 he took out a patent, no. 7599, for 'improvements in propelling vessels' by means of a screw of one or more curved blades, set or fixed on a revolving shaft below the waterline of the vessel. His propeller was first practically used in the 'Wizard' in 1838, and then in the navy's steamships the 'Rattler' and the 'Phoenix'. On 16 December 1844 he brought an action in the court of queen's bench against Penn & Co., engineers at Greenwich, for infringement of the patent. The evidence was contradictory, but it was shown that Lowe, although not the original inventor of propellers, was the inventor of a combination of them never before applied to the propulsion of vessels. This combination consisted of three parts: a segment of a screw; a segment of a screw applied below the waterline, so as to be totally immersed; a segment of a screw applied on an axis below the water. The jury gave a verdict in his favour. 
However, it was a popular field for inventors: at least forty other people proposed screw propellers before 1836. The main advantage of a submerged propeller was to reduce its risk of damage from naval bombardment; side and centre paddle wheel propulsion was developed earlier, but found to be too exposed. F. P. Smith (1808-1874) and John Ericsson (1803-1889) in the USA are generally accorded recognition for the innovation of practical marine screw propulsion (see 'Introduction of the Ironclad Warship', 1933, by J. P. Baxter). 
On 19 August 1852 Lowe took out another patent, no. 14263, for his propeller. He apparently spent his wife's fortune of $3000 in his experiments, reduced himself to poverty, and never succeeded in obtaining any compensation for the use of his invention. On 12 October 1866 Lowe was run over by a wagon in Blackfriars Road, London, and killed. He was buried at St Mary's, Ewell. His wife died in 1871. Their third daughter, Henrietta ['see 'Vansittart, Henrietta], who in July 1855 married Frederick Vansittart, continued her father's experiments, and on 18 September 1868 took out a patent, no. 2877, for a further improvement, which she called 'the Lowe-Vansittart propeller'. This useful device was subsequently fitted to many government ships. 


@@@@@


doc= 17083


Lowe, John (c.1385-1467), bishop of Rochester, is said by the Worcestershire antiquarian T. R. Nash (died 1811) to have been a member of the Lowe family of Lindridge parish in that county. His namesake John Lowe (archdeacon of Rochester from 1452 until at least 1467), who was probably a relation, was described as of noble birth. Born near Droitwich about 1385, Lowe entered the Augustinian friary in that town, but in 1400 moved to the Lincoln house where, aged at least fourteen, he was ordained acolyte (18 September 1400) and deacon (22 December 1403). He studied theology in Oxford; by 1420 he was a master of arts, and received his doctorate in theology by 1426. In 1420 he obtained conventuality in the London house of Augustinian friars, and was its prior by 1423. He was prior provincial of the order in England from December 1427 to December 1433. He was provided to the bishopric of St Asaph on 17 August 1433, and consecrated on 1 November 1433. On 22 April 1444 he was translated to the bishopric of Rochester, which he held until his death. 
Lowe was a learned man and a strongly orthodox theologian, who before and after he became a bishop was a noted prosecutor of heretics. He was involved in the examination of William Taylor, burnt in 1423, of Ralph Mungyn and others in 1428, and above all in the condemnation of Reginald Pecock, bishop of Chichester, in 1457. He was also involved with the production of the detailed refutation of Pecock's errors written by Master John Bury of Clare, the 'Gladius Salomonis', and Lowe's learning and orthodoxy were praised by Bury in his dedicatory letter to the archbishop of Canterbury. On 23 July 1441 Lowe preached at the public recantation of the necromancer Roger Bolingbroke. John Capgrave (died 1464), a fellow Augustinian friar, dedicated his 'Corona super libros regum' to Lowe. John Bale credits Lowe with a number of sermon collections and theological writings. He also left many manuscripts to the library of the Augustinian friars in London which Bale and Leland credit him with having built up. Little is known of his period as bishop in St Asaph, but his register shows him to have been a conscientious bishop of Rochester. He attended parliaments and convocations regularly, but spent most of his time in his diocese, in particular at his episcopal manor of Halling, Kent. He was responsible for some rebuilding and remodelling of the episcopal palace in Rochester before 1459. 
Lowe probably owed his introduction to court circles to Humphrey, duke of Gloucester (died 1447). On 25 February 1432 he became confessor to the king, delegating his duties as provincial, and was dispensed from the liturgical rules of his order while at court. Although Gloucester may have been behind his promotion to the episcopate in the following year, it is also true that Lowe ceased to be the king's confessor, so his provision to St Asaph may have represented a discreet dismissal when Duke Humphrey's brief period of dominance ended. But he retained his connection with the court, where he was a noted preacher, and he has been suggested (by R. A. Griffiths) as a possible author of the treatise 'On the Rule of Princes' written for Henry VI between about 1436 and 1442. In 1440 he was one of the twelve feoffees in whom all alien priory lands in royal hands were vested so as to provide an endowment for Eton College, and in the decade following was among the men responsible for overseeing various aspects of the development of Eton and of King's College, Cambridge. He was paid $100 for his services on a diplomatic mission to the emperor Friedrich III ('r'. 1440-93) at Frankfurt, Germany, between 15 March and 14 August 1442. Late in 1443 he became a member of the king's council, attending its meetings with moderate regularity. Late in 1455 he was a member of the committee appointed to define the powers of the duke of York as protector, and like many Augustinian friars, he adopted a political stance increasingly favourable to York. In June 1460 he joined the earls of Warwick and March at Rochester, and in the following month was sent as an emissary to Henry VI at Northampton. In the Yorkist administration established at the end of July, Lowe was appointed master of the mints. In February 1461, after the second battle of St Albans, Lowe formed part of a deputation from the citizens of London to ask Edward of York his intentions, and in the first months of Edward IV's reign he was one of the bishops who lent money to the new king. 
According to Hardy's edition of Le Neve's 'Fasti', in 1465 Edward IV wrote to the pope seeking his permission for the aged and infirm Lowe to resign. However, Lowe died in 1467, probably in September and certainly by 21 November, at Halling, before permission could be obtained. His will, dated 15 August 1467, includes bequests to his cathedral of vestments and a 'beautiful chalice' depicting Christ and his apostles. He was buried in an inscribed tomb (later moved), sited before the 'golden image of St Andrew' opposite the bishop's chair in Rochester Cathedral. 


@@@@@


doc= 17084


Lowe, John (1750-1798), poet, was born in Kenmure, parish of Kells, East Galloway, the son of a gardener at Kenmure Castle. Having left the parish school he was apprenticed in New Galloway with John Heron, hand-loom weaver, father of Robert Heron (1764-1807). He improved his education at Carsphairn parish school, and with the help of friends (he was handsome, talented, and always popular) entered Edinburgh University in 1771 to prepare for the church. He studied for two sessions, being tutor in the interval in the family of Mr M'Ghie of Airds on the Dee, East Galloway. He became engaged to Jessie M'Ghie and found the subject for 'Mary's Dream', his chief lyric, in the grief of her sister, whose lover, a ship surgeon, had been recently drowned. Near the house he had constructed an arbour in which he studied and which, known as 'Lowe's seat', Burns piously visited when he was in the neighbourhood in 1793. 
Doubtful of success in the Scottish church Lowe went to the United States in 1773 as tutor to the family of a brother of George Washington, leaving Jessie behind to follow at an unspecified date. Later he ran a private school at Fredericksburg, Virginia, which failed in 1784. There he shortly afterwards took orders and obtained a living as a clergyman of the Church of England. For a time he was, at least poetically, faithful to Jessie but he was at length fascinated by a beautiful Virginian, whose indifference impelled him to marry her more accommodating sister 'from a sentiment of gratitude'. Burns reproved this treatment of Jessie, and the marriage proved unhappy. When Lowe discovered that his wife was unfaithful he began to drink, and a downward spiral ensued. He died in poverty in December 1798 of an overdose of laudanum, at Windsor Lodge, Culpepper county, Virginia, and was buried in the cemetery of Little Fork church, in the same county. 
The remaining fragments of Lowe's poems (quoted from manuscript by Gillespie and Murray in their notices of him) show a vein of deep genuine feeling. His command of pathos is fully displayed in 'Mary's Dream', his only complete lyric, which seems to have circulated in Galloway in a printed form before appearing in any collection. When Robert Hartley Cromek was preparing his 'Remains of Nithsdale and Galloway Song' (1810) Allan Cunningham foisted upon him as an antique an ingenious Scottish paraphrase of 'Mary's Dream'. Cromek was fooled and gives both versions. 


@@@@@


doc= 17085


Lowe, Mauritius (1746-1793), painter, was the illegitimate son of Thomas, second Baron Southwell (1698-1766), from whom he had a small annuity, but he claimed connection with the family of John Lowe, bishop of Rochester in 1444. He studied with G. B. Cipriani RA at the duke of Richmond's gallery, and was one of the first students to enter the Royal Academy Schools on 9 August 1769, in which year through the interest of Giuseppe Baretti he was the first to obtain the gold medal awarded by the Royal Academy for a historical painting, 'Time Discovering Truth'. In 1771 he was the first student selected to receive the travelling scholarship for study at Rome, but was 'indolent and spent his time in dissipation' and, as he failed to comply with the regulations of the academy, the scholarship was withdrawn in 1772 (Redgrave, 'Artists', 276). 
Lowe exhibited at the Society of Artists in 1776 and 1779, sending miniatures and his picture 'Venus'. Lowe enjoyed the friendship and protection of Dr Samuel Johnson, who left him a small legacy. In 1783 he sent a huge picture to the Royal Academy, entitled 'The Deluge -- there were Giants on the Earth in those Days'. This was justly rejected, but at the earnest solicitation of Dr Johnson it was ultimately admitted, though it was hung in an empty room by itself, and universally condemned. In 1777 he exhibited his drawing 'Homer Singing the Iliad to the Greeks'. He was reputed to be the author of the 'Ear-Wig' 'an abusive art periodical published in 1787' (Redgrave, 277). Lowe married Sarah, a servant, and had a large family, to one of whom Johnson was godfather. In her diary (2.41) Madame d'Arblay described Johnson's efforts to obtain work as a portrait painter for Lowe, and the state of filth and misery to which Lowe and his family were reduced. Lowe resided for some time in Hedge Lane, London, and later in a miserable lodging in Westminster, where he died on 1 September 1793, leaving one son and two daughters. (For Johnson's god-daughter see 'The Examiner', 28 May 1873.) In the print room at the British Museum there are three drawings by Lowe, two being for a large painting, 'Royal Power, assisted by Wisdom and Virtue, defending the constitution of Great Britain against the attacks of Sedition and Licentiousness', which was engraved by George Graham and published in 1793. Other drawings, in the style of Fuseli, are 'Abraham Offering up Isaac', 'Adam and Eve', and 'Daedalus and Icarus'. 


@@@@@


doc= 17086


Lowe, Peter (c.1550-1610), surgeon and founder of the Faculty of Physicians and Surgeons of Glasgow, may have been born in the west of Scotland. The exact date and location of his birth are unknown and have been the subject of debate. Lowe described himself variously as 'Arellian' (perhaps relating to Errol, or to the University of Orleans) and 'Scottishman'. He left Scotland about 1566 and travelled to France, where he remained for some thirty years, serving the Spanish army, the French army, and the French royal household, and experiencing the traumas of events such as the St Bartholomew's day massacre, when he is reputed to have been hidden in the king's wardrobe to avoid capture and probable execution (Finlayson, 'Life', 23). The nature of his medical and surgical training is unclear, although the available evidence suggests that he may have received some medical training at the University of Orleans and also become a master surgeon (academic, or 'gown-surgeon') of the College of St Come, the historic fraternity of surgeons in Paris, the latter being the stronger possibility. Travel, study, and service abroad were entirely typical pursuits for the physicians and surgeons of the time, and the natural destination for Scots was Europe. Whatever his real qualifications, Lowe was clearly an educated man and highly regarded within the upper ranks of French society. He left France around 1596 after serving as surgeon to Henri IV for some six years, and was in London at the time of the publication of his treatise 'An Easie, Certain and Perfect Method to Cure and Prevent the Spanish Sickness', dedicated to Robert Devereux, earl of Essex. 
Lowe returned to Scotland and was in residence in Glasgow by early 1598. In August of that year he fell foul of the Glasgow presbytery, being ordered to 'mak as yet two Sondayes his repentance on the pillar', no doubt for some minor moral misdemeanour (Finlayson, 'Life', 26). In March 1599 he was contracted by the town council to treat the poor of the town, at a salary of 80 merks a year. Later that year, after petitioning James VI about the unorganized and primitive state of medicine and surgery in Glasgow, Lowe, together with physician Robert Hamilton and apothecary William Spang, was granted a charter (dated 29 November 1599) allowing them to supervise and examine all surgical practitioners in the west of Scotland. Thus came into being a unique organization, encompassing both physicians and surgeons, which continues as the Royal College of Physicians and Surgeons of Glasgow. 
In addition to his historical significance in terms of the Glasgow institution, Lowe's publications were equally important. His major work, 'The Whole Course of Chirurgerie' (1597), was written in the vernacular, a move which could have attracted much criticism from contemporaries, who favoured Latin as the legitimate medium for academic discourse. It was constructed partly in the form of a catechism, or conversation between the author and a student, and partly a description of surgical techniques, medical treatments, and examples from his practice in France. The second edition of the book implies that his son John was the second party in the catechism, although at the time he was still a child. Lowe's translation, probably from the French, of the 'Presages of Hippocrates' is included in the work, which was republished on a number of occasions, being retitled 'A Discourse of the Whole Art of Chirurgerie' from the second edition, published in 1612. Interestingly, though perhaps typically, many of the illustrations in the book are copied directly -- in some cases with the French titles reproduced -- from the works of Ambroise Pare. He refers frequently in his published works to several other books in preparation, notably a 'poor man's guide', a treatise on parturition and the diseases of women, sometimes referred to as the 'Book of the infantment', and a book on the plague, but there is no evidence that any of these was published formally. 
It is evident from his testament that Lowe had married twice, as it is stated that 'Helen Wemyss now his spous should have nane of his guidis nor geir quhill his first wyffis bairnes were payit of sevin thousand and fyve hundreth merkis' (Finlayson, 'Testament', 2). Helen Wemyss was the daughter of David Wemyss, the first protestant minister in Glasgow after the Reformation, who was rector of Glasgow University on several occasions between 1593 and 1602. Lowe's son John was apparently the son of his first wife, while Helen Wemyss was the mother of his daughter Christian, who was also provided for under the terms of the testament. Lowe died in Glasgow on 15 August 1610 (Finlayson, 'Testament', 2, from Commissariot Records). The preface to the second edition of 'Chyrurgerie' is dated 1612, but this is likely to be a publisher's error. He was buried in the grounds of Glasgow Cathedral. He had been active in practice until a few months previously, as he was paid $40 by the Glasgow town council on 15 May 1610 as his fee for 'bowelling' (embalming) the laird of Houston. Lowe's memorial stone bears an appealing inscription: 'Stay, passenger and view this stone, for under it lyis such a one who cuired many whill he lieved, soe gracious he noe man grieved. Yea when his phisicks force oft failed, his pleasant purpose then prevailed. For of his God he got the grace to live in mirth and die in peace. Heavin hes his soul, his corps this stone, sigh, passenger, and soe be gone.' 



@@@@@


doc= 17087


Lowe, Richard Thomas (1802-1874), naturalist, was born on 4 December 1802 in Derbyshire, the only child of Thomas Lowe (died 1803/4), a naval officer, and his wife, Susanna Dorothy (1778/9-1841). He was educated at Brewood School, Staffordshire, and in 1821 entered Christ's College, Cambridge. In 1825 he graduated BA as senior optime, and in the same year took holy orders. In 1831 he graduated MA, and in 1843 was admitted 'ad eundem' at Oxford. At university he acquired a fondness for natural history from his friend, the botanist Miles Joseph Berkeley (1803-1889), who introduced him to the professor of mineralogy at Cambridge, John Stevens Henslow (1796-1861). Henslow, a founder of the Cambridge Philosophical Society, was responsible for organizing botanizing tours of the local countryside for a number of students, including Charles Darwin (a devoted beetle hunter) and Lowe's lifelong friend, the entomologist Thomas Vernon Wollaston (1822-1878). 
In 1827 Lowe was awarded a travelling bachelorship for a year. It enabled him to visit Madeira with his mother in May 1828 -- a visit partly intended to improve his health. On arriving at Funchal Lowe took up rooms at the Quinta da Lavada, and soon began attending the English church there. His botanical field trips and collecting of specimens began almost immediately. He sent copies of his work, along with specimens, to the professor of botany at Glasgow, William Jackson Hooker (1785-1865). 
In 1830 Lowe returned to England owing to his mother's ill health, and in November that year the Cambridge Philosophical Society agreed to publish his work, 'Primitiae faunae et florae Maderae et Portus Sancti', in its 'Transactions'. In January the following year he returned to Madeira, again accompanied by his mother. Soon after arriving he was offered the chance to stand in for the Anglican chaplain, and about 1832/3 he took up the post on a permanent basis. On reading 'Tract Number One', a pamphlet of the Oxford Movement, Lowe became the cause's first and most 'notorious' combatant abroad. His support for the movement and Tractarianism led him into a prolonged conflict both at home and with a number of his fellow islanders on Madeira. 
In the spring of 1835 Lowe once again visited England. He published papers on the flora of Madeira in several periodicals; his 'Novitiae florae Maderensis' (1838), also published in the 'Cambridge Philosophical Transactions', was perhaps his most valuable contribution. Lowe's mother died in 1841. In 1843 he again returned to England, to organize the publication of his work 'A History of the Fishes of Madeira' (1843). While in England, on 5 July 1843, he married Catherine Maria ('bap'. 1802, died 1874), eldest of seven children of the Revd Joseph Guerin (died 1863), rector of Norton Fitzwarren, Somerset. The couple had no children. 
In January 1844 Lowe and his wife travelled to Madeira. In the winter of 1847 Wollaston visited the island, and accompanied Lowe on one of his explorations of its flora and fauna. While Lowe worked on describing new species, Wollaston concentrated on examining species variation and distribution. Lowe was still embroiled in conflict with some of his parishioners, and with the church in England -- a situation which Queen Adelaide attempted to resolve during her 1847 visit to the island. However, on 22 December Lord Palmerston removed Lowe from his position as chaplain, to be replaced by Thomas Kenworthy Brown within a couple of months. On 28 March 1852 Lowe and his wife sailed back to England. 
On his return to England Lowe accepted the living at Lea, near Gainsborough, Lincolnshire, given to him by Sir Charles Anderson, a cousin of his wife. Wollaston was a frequent visitor to Lea, and Lowe also paid visits to his botanist friend Berkeley, who lived nearby at King's Cliffe. Lowe made a further journey to Madeira in January 1855, returning to England in August the same year. At Lea he set to work on 'A Manual Flora of Madeira and the Adjacent Islands of Porto Santo and the Desertas', of which the first part of volume one appeared in 1857; the fifth (and concluding) part of the volume appeared in 1868. In August 1857 Lowe returned to Madeira to collect more botanical specimens. He made further journeys to his beloved island and its neighbours in 1860, 1863, 1865, and 1871. He also made trips to the Cape Verde and Canary Islands. He continued work on his 'Manual Flora of Madeira', but did not publish more than the first part of the second volume, which was issued in 1872. 
On 10 April 1874 Lowe and his wife sailed from Liverpool for Madeira on the steamship 'Liberia'. However, the ship never reached its destination. In the following month the 'Volta' arrived in Liverpool with news of 'Liberia' wreckage observed 200 miles off the Isles of Scilly; it was assumed that the 'Liberia' sank with all hands at some time between 11 April and mid-May 1874. Wollaston, as executor of Lowe's will, carried out his friend's wishes to destroy all his notes (scientific and religious), but Lowe's botanical collection was presented to the herbarium at Kew, and the British Museum. The botanist John Lindley (1799-1865) dedicated the rosaceous genus 'Lowea' (which has subsequently been absorbed in 'Hulthemia') to him, and a memorial was erected in the English cemetery at Funchal, in honour of both Lowe and his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 17088


Lowe, Robert, Viscount Sherbrooke (1811-1892), politician, born at Bingham, Nottinghamshire, on 4 December 1811, was the second son of Robert Lowe (1780-1845), rector of that parish and prebendary of Southwell, and Ellen (died 1852), second daughter and coheir of the Revd Reginald Pyndar, rector of Madresfield in Worcestershire. He was an albino, and his eyes were extremely sensitive to light; moreover, he had imperfect vision in both eyes, and one was useless for reading. At Winchester College, which he entered as a commoner in 1825, he was much bullied, and unable to identify his tormentors; later in life, too, he suffered from his inability to recognize people, especially in large groups. Lowe was, however, very intelligent and very determined. Conscious that his logical mind and taste for scholarship would be his best assets in life, he responded to his affliction by developing great powers of memory and labour. He also became very self-reliant. Confident in his superior intellectual ability and the correctness of his views, he quickly developed a talent for blunt, fearless assertions, and never lost the clever schoolboy's pleasure in undermining established orthodoxies and pricking complacency. He matriculated at University College, Oxford, on 16 June 1829. At Oxford he spoke often at the union, adopting unpopularly radical opinions and relishing the controversy and notoriety that this brought him. He retained his intellectual ambitions too; but though he took a first class in classics in 1833, he achieved only a second in mathematics, which he later claimed was unsuited to his questioning mind and imperfect eyesight. 
The church was among the institutions against which the young Lowe rebelled, and so that career was closed to him (in 1841 he was to conduct a pamphlet war with the Tractarians about the interpretation of the 'Thirty-Nine Articles'). He decided to read for the bar, and so remained in Oxford as a private tutor until a lay fellowship at Magdalen College, for which he was eligible, became vacant in 1835. But he resigned this after his impetuous marriage to Georgiana (died 1884), second daughter of George Orred of Tranmere, Cheshire, on 29 March 1836. In order to make a living, he had to return to private tutoring. He quickly developed a reputation as the most efficient coach in the university, but the work was hard. His experience of it intensified his contempt for the low general standard of university education and his animosity to the complacency of college fellows, which he thought was caused by the protection given to them by lavish college endowments. It also convinced him that teaching was drudgery. Having failed to be appointed professor of Greek at Glasgow University in 1838 he gave up hope of an academic career, and in 1840 went to London to resume his law studies. He was called to the bar at Lincoln's Inn on 28 January 1842. Shortly afterwards he decided to emigrate to Australia in the hope of making a quick fortune at the Sydney bar, a decision which he later claimed was the consequence of mistaken medical advice that he must expect to be blind in seven years. 
Lowe spent eight years in Australia. He was quickly drawn into New South Wales politics, at first in the hope of benefiting his legal practice. He was a member of the legislative council from November 1843, nominated by the governor, Sir George Gipps. Lowe justified this allegiance on the grounds that Gipps's opponents were supporters of tariffs and the manipulation of interest rates in order to benefit vested interests; but he soon came to quarrel with Gipps, and in August 1844 resigned his nominated seat, claiming that Gipps was abusing his powers by taxing graziers in order to pay immigrants to come to the colony. In the following year he returned to the council as an elected representative, but quickly became a vigorous opponent of his former allies, the graziers, who used their influence to acquire quasi-permanent tenure of many thousands of acres under an act of 1846. Lowe's opposition to this assertion of vested influence in turn made him a hero of the populace, and he was elected for Sydney as their candidate in 1848. However, he then refused to support many of their demands. Though abused for lack of principle throughout his Australian political career, Lowe was in fact consistent in his stand against the potential domination of powerful interests, wherever he encountered them. He opposed the Australian constitutional reforms brought in by the British government in 1850, partly on the ground that they failed to provide guarantees against such domination. His major legislative achievement was the abolition of imprisonment for debt; he battled with less success to establish a system of non-denominational schools. He also acquired substantial sums from his law practice, which he judiciously invested in the purchase of real property at Sydney. In 1850 he returned to England with enough money to be able to afford a small country house at Warlingham in Surrey as well as a town residence. 
Lowe aimed at a political career in Britain, and was elected to the Reform Club soon after his return. From April 1851 he was a regular leader writer in 'The Times', and moved in the circle of its editor, John Delane. Like most of that group Lowe was a Liberal but not an admirer of the government of Lord John Russell, which seemed too socially exclusive, dominated by 'the family system' and other manifestations of patronage, and insufficiently attuned to the sentiments of middle-class administrative reformers. Through his contacts with this group, Lowe was returned MP for Kidderminster at the general election of 1852, presenting himself to Lord Ward, whose influence carried the seat, as an independent Liberal beholden to neither Russell nor Lord Palmerston. 'The Times' was then at the height of its influence, and the need to conciliate it probably explains his appointment as joint secretary to the Board of Control in the Liberal-Peelite coalition government formed by Lord Aberdeen in December 1852. In this post Lowe was largely responsible for the 'India Act' of 1853, which threw open all writerships to public competition. But he quickly became bored by the routine of subordinate office, and when, on the break-up of the Aberdeen ministry in early 1855, he was offered the same post by the new premier, Lord Palmerston, he declined it. 
This decision may not have been unconnected with the fragility of Palmerston's position and the vociferous public criticism of the military and political conduct of the Crimean War. Lowe joined in this criticism, blaming the patronage system for the appointment of so many incompetents. However, he did not work against Palmerston, believing that the war must be won and that he was by far the best man to do this. (Lowe's attitude to foreign policy in the 1850s was that Britain had a major role to play in Europe; that a strong, reformed, professional army was needed in order to assert her place; and that Russia was the enemy of civilization and progress.) In August 1855, after the clamour had died down, and with Palmerston still in place but needing to strengthen his position, Lowe was offered and accepted the vice-presidency of the Board of Trade, and was sworn of the privy council. His most significant achievement in this post, which he held until the fall of Palmerston in early 1858, came in 1856, when he had charge of the act allowing associations of seven or more shareholders to become limited liability companies. Previously the Board of Trade had had discretion over the award of limited liability status. Lowe hoped that the reform would liberate capital for investment and allow poorer men access to the benefits of free enterprise. In the same session he demonstrated his shortcomings as a parliamentarian by an ill-fated attempt to reform the structure of shipping dues, offending many representatives of shipping interests by casting aspersions on their motives and causing Palmerston to abandon the reform. None the less, his combination of Palmerstonianism in foreign policy and advocacy of administrative reform at home gave him a high profile among commercial men and led to a request to be the Palmerstonian candidate for Manchester at the 1857 general election. Lowe declined this request on account of the difficulty he faced in seeing large audiences and deputations. He was elected for Kidderminster in 1857 and in 1859 for Calne (by most of its 174 electors), which he held until 1868. 
When Palmerston returned to power in June 1859 Lowe was again -- to his resentment -- given a difficult but non-cabinet post, this time at the privy council. His major responsibilities were to the committee of council on education and to the medical department, which had taken over the bulk of the state's duties in the sphere of public health on the demise of the General Board of Health in 1858. Health and education were difficult areas for central government, since social conditions supplied weighty reasons for an assertive approach but this generated a great deal of local jealousy. As he was not in cabinet, Lowe could not change broad policy in either area, but he was determined to use his powers to the utmost to improve efficiency and attack complacency. In dealing with health, this meant strengthening the hand of the civil servant who was secretary to the medical department, John Simon. Simon's position was subject to annual review by parliament, which greatly reduced his scope for innovation. In 1859 Lowe persuaded the Commons to give him permanent tenure. Thereafter he gave Simon substantial independence, which he used in a number of ways, such as by building up a powerful vaccination inspectorate. By these means government influence over sanitation could be improved without enduring risky divisions in parliament. Lowe and Simon also raised public consciousness about sanitary matters through the publication of official reports and through Lowe's leading articles in 'The Times'. 
Lowe's task in education was harder. There was great opposition in parliament to the idea of a national system of elementary education imposed by central government, yet there was also strong feeling against the ever expanding annual grant given to assist existing voluntary schools, while it was believed that the only alternative, local rating, would create too many tensions between sects about the kind of religious teaching which the locality should offer. Lowe and the civil servant in charge of education, Ralph Lingen, did not wish to increase substantially the power of the central educational bureaucracy, but were anxious to raise the committee's profile, to improve standards, and to prevent public money being wasted on inefficient teaching, mostly in church schools protected by over-sympathetic inspectors. In 1861 they responded to parliamentary pressure for cost cutting by issuing a revised code. This laid down that the grant would in future be allocated on the basis of the number of children in each school passing an examination by inspectors in reading, writing, and arithmetic, a system notoriously known as 'payment by results'. The code was greeted with great hostility by schoolteachers, inspectors, and Anglican and dissenting opponents of state activity, a hostility all the more intense because it had, provocatively, been published just as the parliamentary session ended. 
Palmerston ordered a delay in the introduction of the code until 1862, when it was amended so that some money would be paid no matter how badly children performed. Between 1862 and 1866 the grant fell by 16 per cent, while average attendance increased by 18 per cent. But the opponents of the code depicted Lowe in an unfairly philistine and anti-clerical light. Its object was not to save money at the expense of standards, since the cost to government was potentially open-ended. The 'three Rs' were chosen not because these were deemed to be the only proper components of an elementary education but because they could be examined most easily and provided a good basic test -- a test which many schools failed. The grant continued to depend on schools satisfying inspectors about the general quality of their education, including religious instruction. 
Opposition to the code was motivated primarily by clerical hostility to the assertiveness of the committee of council on education, exacerbated by anger from inspectors and schoolteachers at the extra workload imposed on them. Relations between the government and the voluntary schools did not improve, and in April 1864 Lord Robert Cecil persuaded the Commons to censure the committee of council for heavily editing inspectors' reports before publishing them. The charge was not quite justified, and a select committee subsequently acquitted the committee of impropriety; but Lingen frequently returned offending reports to inspectors for amendment as part of a mission to infuse professionalism into a self-indulgent corps of amateur, strongly Anglican gentlemen. Lowe resigned his post immediately on the censure. 
Lowe was out of office until 1868, and free to speak his mind. During these years he came to acquire an extraordinary reputation as a parliamentary debater; Gladstone later said that in 1866 Lowe was 'at the very top of the tree'. He had believed since 1859 that he deserved cabinet office but was being sacrificed to the 'domination of cliques and coteries' in the Liberal-Peelite coalition government and forced to tackle the dangerous and thankless tasks which aristocrats would not touch. His resentment partly explains his vehemence in the mid-1860s, especially after the advent of Earl Russell to the premiership on Palmerston's death in October 1865. But the basic cause of his behaviour was his increasing determination to make a controversial name for himself by opposing what he saw as the illogical and dangerous fad of parliamentary reform. 
Why did Lowe's views on government lead him to oppose the reform bills of 1866 and 1867? His aim for politics can be deduced from a definition he later gave (1877) of the 'ideal of the Liberal party': 'a view of things undisturbed and undistorted by the promptings of interest or prejudice,... a complete independence of all class interests, and [a reliance] for its success on the better feelings and higher intelligence of mankind' ('A new reform bill', 'Fortnightly Review', Oct 1877, 441). Lowe was an admirer of Bentham and Adam Smith (he was elected a member of the Political Economy Club in 1852). He believed that men tended to be selfish and pleasure seeking, and that while their search for pleasure was in general to be encouraged, because it was the motor of human progress, there was a constant temptation for powerful men to advance their own interests, sometimes in ways contrary to the general good. Government should provide security and justice, and restrain these anti-social tendencies by opposing monopolies, oligarchies, and other vested interests. Lowe disapproved of government interference where it distorted the workings of the natural laws which determined human progress, but not if it worked to uphold them. Government had to be conducted by someone; ideally, it should be entrusted to those committed to empirical, unprejudiced analysis of data and human behaviour in order to identify those natural laws. 'The cause of true progress' could be promoted only 'by pure and clear intelligence' (Martin, 2.263). Lowe was a meritocrat. 
In the 1850s Lowe's meritocratic image had driven him to team up with radicals in criticizing the social exclusiveness and legislative timidity of official Liberalism. He remained an opponent of the patronage network all his life. But Lowe was never a fully-fledged radical. He preferred to promote his ideas anonymously through the columns of 'The Times' (and later in periodicals) rather than through mass meetings. When he became a minister and mixed with men like Palmerston, he quickly saw that the greatest threat to good government was not the selfishness of propertied Liberals but the unpredictability and narrow-mindedness of parliament, much of which was caused by ignorant and obstructive pressure from popular representatives. Appreciating the merits and sharing the prejudices of his leading civil servants at the Board of Trade, such as Thomas Farrer and Henry Thring, he wrote an article in 1857 criticizing parliament as venal and superficial, and advocating giving more power to central regulatory agencies staffed by disinterested officials -- 'true votaries'. His experience at the privy council intensified these views, as did the furore over the cattle plague of 1865-6, when he criticized, on the one hand, the delay in response caused by the selfish behaviour of railways and farming interests in parliament and, on the other, the narrow-minded commercial Liberals who resisted compensation to farmers who had served the public interests by killing their cattle. 
In the mid-1860s, then, Lowe was impatient at the obstacles to good government thrown up by parliament even under the existing franchise. He feared that the evils would multiply if the electorate was expanded. Lowe argued that working-class voters would be bound to follow their interests as they perceived them -- that is, as trade union leaders and other demagogues portrayed them. A reformed parliament would press for sectional legislation to benefit trade unions against employers at law, to reduce the stringency of the poor law, and to redistribute taxation. The changes would strike at the principles of political economy which Lowe believed that educated men should uphold. And some working-class voters would act in the way that Lowe had witnessed as a candidate at Kidderminster in 1857, when he had stood out against the beer and other wealthy lobbies and had been viciously stoned by the mob, who fractured his skull. In other words, they would respond to bribes and influence, to the benefit of a plutocracy of elderly commercial men who would uphold their own interests in parliament and be useless for administrative work. 
Lowe's opposition to the 1866 'Reform Bill' threw him into alliance with aristocratic Palmerstonian Liberals such as Earl Grosvenor -- an alliance which, to some of his critics, appeared inconsistent with his earlier radical politics. Lowe in fact believed that property and intellect stood or fell together. He was a staunch defender of property rights and freedom of contract. For example, he regarded the cry for land reform as outdated, suited to a period when peasants sought land for subsistence but not to a modern economy in which capital investment was as badly needed in land as it was in manufacturing industry. 
Lowe was the intellectual leader of the so-called 'Adullamites', who irritated the Russell ministry throughout the 1866 session and finally defeated its 'Reform Bill' in June, causing its resignation. Lowe may have hoped that this would lead to a coalition of talented politicians from both parties who were lukewarm about reform, supplanting the patronage-driven party system. But this did not materialize, and Lowe and other Adullamites declined office in the minority Conservative government formed by Lord Derby. In 1867 this government passed a much more radical 'Reform Bill' than the one defeated in 1866. Lowe, impotent to resist it, felt 'deceived and betrayed' by Disraeli, the Commons leader. On its third reading, Lowe told the Commons: 'I believe it will be absolutely necessary that you should prevail on our future masters to learn their letters' ('Hansard 3', 188, 15 July 1867, col. 1549); this was soon attributed to him as 'We must educate our masters.' Other such trenchant phrases on the political capacity of working-class voters were widely publicized in exaggerated form by radical reformers, and his political future looked uncertain. 
In 1868 Lowe was elected for the new London University seat, owing to the support of doctors who admired his work for public health reform, and other intellectuals with whom Lowe's elitist but meritocratic views struck a chord (he was made LLD by Edinburgh University in 1867 and DCL at Oxford in 1870). He further appealed to such men because of his urgent advocacy of education reform in the winter of 1867-8 in speeches at Edinburgh and Liverpool. 
Despite his warning to the Commons in 1867, his interest in the next twelve months was not in elementary education so much as in its higher branches, with a view to improving the quality of the political leadership given by the elite and the political judgement exercised by the middle classes. In particular he urged an overhaul of the syllabuses in universities and middle-class schools so as to embrace more science, history, and language work, and to develop the power of dispassionate and discriminating reasoning and criticism. He also advocated the separation of teaching from examining (as in London University) and the rational reorganization and regulation of school endowments by the state. 
Lowe's liberalizing educational agenda extended to Ireland; he mounted a fierce opposition to the Conservative government's Irish university policy of 1868, which he thought retrograde in its encouragement of a separate Catholic university. He used this episode to justify his adhesion to Gladstone's alternative policy of Irish church disestablishment. Though Lowe did not believe that disestablishment was a panacea for Ireland, or indeed that any concession compatible with Liberal ideals could conciliate Irish Catholic activists, this return to the party fold made him a strong candidate for a post in the new Liberal cabinet which Gladstone formed after the 1868 election. In order to facilitate this eventuality, Lowe finally broke his connection with 'The Times' in April 1868. Gladstone, impressed with Lowe's expenditure reductions as education minister and his capacity for resisting pressure, made him chancellor of the exchequer in December, supplying him with a detailed list of 'remnants' left from his own chancellorship and needing attention (Gladstone, 'Diaries', 10 Jan 1869). 
Lowe's outstanding achievement at the Treasury was the introduction of competitive examinations almost across the civil service by an order in council of 1870. He was single-handedly responsible for the change, for which there had been little public pressure; it developed naturally from his views about the importance of trained administrators and his dislike of the patronage system, which had been only slightly damaged by the introduction of limited competition in 1855. Lowe was responsible for the division of appointees into two rigid classes -- policy makers and clerks. The qualifications for the higher grade were set so as to complement university syllabuses, in the hope that the new administrative class would enter a 'freemasonry' of educated gentlemen, able to hold their own in parliamentary company. He also devised the machinery for the scheme, which was controlled by the Treasury and greatly increased its dominance of the service. Departments were given incentives to participate, and after Lowe himself ended the Home Office's resistance when he became home secretary in 1873, the Foreign Office was the only significant department to opt out. 
Lowe also had considerable influence on government policy in other areas. For example, he approved the mixture of central and local powers created by the 1870 'Elementary Education Act'. In particular he was responsible for the dual system by which voluntary schools were funded from central taxation while the new board schools were to be supported from local rates. This pragmatic and successful solution to the religious difficulty which had obstructed the development of a national system was the result of Lowe's long-held awareness of ratepayers' unwillingness to pay for sectarian teaching. He influenced the separation of teaching and examining in Gladstone's failed Irish university scheme of 1873 (though he disliked the arrangement whereby subjects like history and philosophy might not be examined in deference to Catholic scruples). But he was dissatisfied with the handling of the reform of middle-class education (1869) and the failure to take English university reform beyond the abolition of tests (1871). 
Despite his early successes, Lowe's time at the exchequer became unhappy and unsuccessful because of the controversy surrounding his budget policy. Taxes were cut, but his supervision of departmental expenditure was not rigorous enough to satisfy Gladstone, while his parsimony on small points lowered his reputation among the electorate. 
During Lowe's tenure, $12.5 million was cut from taxes and over $26 million from the national debt; income tax was reduced from 6died to 3died; the 1's'. duty on a quarter of corn was abolished (1869); the sugar duty was halved in 1870 and again in 1873, and that on coffee halved in 1872. But the uncommon economic prosperity of these years played the major part in this success: in 1873 the government's surplus reached $6 million. Lowe was over-cautious about cutting taxes and Gladstone complained that he was 'wretchedly deficient' in reducing expenditure. One of the reasons for Lowe's caution was his favouritism for particular civil servants and spending projects, which he probably thought needed defending against popular pressure for economy. Lowe was generous, for example, to both education and health: the number of assistant secretaries in the education department was doubled and many more inspectors were appointed as a result of the 1870 act, while Simon persuaded him to sanction the appointment of five permanent general health inspectors between 1869 and 1871, despite opposition elsewhere in the Treasury. On several occasions he overruled the parsimonious policy of the first commissioner of works, A. S. Ayrton. More important was Lowe's ambivalence about cuts in defence expenditure. Though the prosperity and reforming atmosphere of 1869-70 provided fertile ground for reductions in the army and navy, this mood ended with the outbreak of the Franco-Prussian War, which forced government to budget for a temporary increase in the army. Lowe, who before taking office had hoped for a large trained professional militia and a 'very strong Navy', now indicated his anxieties about Britain's international position; thenceforth he became less aggressive in demanding defence cuts and less confident about the wisdom of tax cuts. 
Paradoxically, Lowe's indifference to giving offence and tendency to preach sermons on the merits of self-reliance and political economy encouraged in the public mind the view that he was a brutal cost-cutter of the Ayrton breed; in 1873 they were the subject, with Gladstone, of a memorable burlesque at the Court Theatre, 'The Happy Land', co-written by W. S. Gilbert. In particular, some of Lowe's policies damaged his reputation among working men already suspicious of his attitude towards them because of the reform debates. This was the effect, for example, of his attempt in 1871 to sell crown land in Epping Forest, depriving working-class voters of access to it; he gave way after an embarrassing defeat in the Commons. His worst mistake also came in 1871, when he needed to raise taxes in order to fund the extra defence spending. He planned to distribute the burden between the classes by increasing the succession duties and the income tax, and by putting a small stamp tax on each box of matches sold. This created fears of unemployment among match girls, many of whom marched on the Commons in protest; Lowe had to be conducted into the Palace of Westminster through the passage from the underground station. He had introduced the tax with a Latin tag, 'Ex luce lucellum' ('Out of light, a little gain'); a 'Punch' writer retorted with the couplet, '
Ex luce lucellum, we all of us know, 

But if Lucy can't sell 'em, what then, Mr. Lowe? 

' Characteristically Lowe thought this very funny; but the furore did him great damage. He was forced to withdraw his budget (largely, in fact, because of propertied objections to the increased succession duties, which the match tax drama allowed them to disguise), and never recovered his standing. 
In 1873 Lowe's reputation was also worsened by financial irregularities at the Treasury involving the Post Office and the Zanzibar mail contract -- a legacy of his excessive trust of his officials (this was partly explained by his appalling eyesight). These scandals made it possible and probably necessary for Gladstone to move him. He became home secretary in August 1873, and produced an important plan to revise legislation of trade unions, but the government was defeated at the general election in February 1874. 
Lowe never held office again. For some time he played an active part on the opposition front bench, where his most important achievement was to amend the Conservative government's trade union legislation of 1875 so as to clarify the legality of peaceful picketing. This solved a major union grievance; Lowe justified it on the ground that the existing law discriminated against union members. He was also a fierce critic of the imperial policy and posturing of Disraeli -- whom he disliked intensely. Disraeli's behaviour entrenched his view that democracies could not be trusted to conduct an aggressive foreign policy responsibly, and this led him to cause a pleasurable stir by asserting, in the 'Fortnightly Review' in November 1877, that Britain's colonies brought her fewer benefits than costs. Eighteen months earlier he had unwisely implied in public that Queen Victoria had previously urged her prime ministers to make her empress of India, but that only Disraeli had been craven enough to agree; he was forced to retract. 
Lowe expected to be offered a cabinet post on the formation of the Liberal government in 1880, but was not. Despite the queen's reluctance, Gladstone obtained a viscountcy for him; Lowe chose the title Sherbrooke, the name taken by his elder brother on inheriting their great-grandmother's estate. He refused a government pension in 1882 and was made GCB in 1885. His lack of sympathy for Irish grievances about religion and land, his defence of political economy, his distrust of politicians who gave way to populist sectional pressures, and his belief in the crucial significance of the Union for the international standing of Britain all made him a convinced Liberal Unionist in 1886. But he now took little part in politics. His plain-spoken, garrulous, eccentric wife, Georgiana, from whom he had unsuccessfully tried to separate in the late 1860s, suffered a stroke in 1882 which left her partially paralysed; he tended her until she died on 3 October 1884 after another seizure. On 3 February 1885 he married Caroline Anne Sneyd, daughter of Thomas Sneyd of Ashcombe Park, Staffordshire. His sight declined further and in the late 1880s failed completely, a condition which he tolerated with equanimity. After sustained weakness he died on 27 July 1892 at his home, Sherbrooke Lodge, Warlingham, Surrey, and was buried at Brookwood cemetery, Woking. He left no children. 
Lowe saw himself as an outsider who had overcome inherited adversity by dint of hard work and intelligence. He accepted his lot without bitterness. Indeed, he had an enormous capacity for enjoying life. He was placid, cheerful, and blessed with great energy, a strong muscular body, and a lack of fear. He relished athletic sports -- rowing, horse-riding, skating, and, as he aged, fast rides in carriages and tricycles down Surrey lanes. He was a bright, charming, and stimulating conversationalist with a clear, penetrating voice and a fine head and face, and a great taste for witty epigrams, dexterous repartee, and apt quotations. He was a popular and invigorating member of London intellectual society -- an enthusiastic debater at the Political Economy Club, the Metaphysical Society, and the X-Club. He was a trustee of the British Museum and a fellow of the Royal Society. He sat on many royal commissions, especially in the 1860s. Though blunt and sceptical about human nature and incapable of suffering fools gladly, he was neither malicious nor pompous and was always true to himself; in that respect, he was a real Victorian gentleman. He did not disguise his principles in order to curry political favour; but nor was he as dogmatic as he sometimes appeared. In fact he delighted -- too much for his own good -- in questioning orthodoxies and fashions of the day. His real dislikes were bigotry, injustice, complacency, and inefficiency, especially in the upper classes and in religion (he had no time for London club life and preferred the company of ladies such as the countess of Derby, the countess of Airlie, and the duchess of St Albans, who also provided sympathy and relief from his trying wife). He was, as his niece remarked, a firm protestant. His motivating beliefs were in the need to strive for disinterested government and in the capacity of energetic, ambitious, and open-minded men like himself to offer it. 


@@@@@


doc= 17089


Lowe, Thomas (c.1719-1783), singer and actor, was probably born in London. His singing career began when he was a child; a benefit was held for him on 27 March 1732, and on 2 May that year he sang in Handel's oratorio 'Esther' at the King's Theatre. 
Lowe was singing professionally as a tenor by 1740, when in August he took part in the performance of the masque 'Alfred' at Cliveden, the Buckinghamshire residence of Frederick, prince of Wales. 'Alfred', written by James Thomson and David Mallet, with music by Thomas Arne, saw the first performance of 'Rule, Britannia'. Lowe's debut at Drury Lane was on 11 September, when he appeared as Sir John Loverule in Charles Coffey's 'The Devil to Pay' and introduced the popular song with which he was identified throughout his career, 'The Early Horn' by John Ernest Galliard. In the course of his first two seasons he played or sang a wide variety of roles, including Macheath (John Gay's 'The Beggar's Opera', 17 October 1740), songs in Arne's 'Oedipus' (19 November), Bacchanal (Arne's 'Comus', 10 December), Amiens (with Arne's music, in 'As You Like It', 20 December), Arne's songs in 'Twelfth Night' (15 January 1741), Welford ('The Blind Beggar of Bethnal Green', by John Day, adapted by Robert Dodsley, 3 April), Lorenzo ('The Merchant of Venice', 11 January 1742), and Marcus (in Joseph Addison's 'Cato', 4 March). 
While Lowe passed the winters at Drury Lane, he spent summer 1741 in Bristol and summer 1742 in Dublin. In protest at Charles Fleetwood's management of Drury Lane he remained in Dublin during the 1742-3 season, not returning until December 1743. In summer 1744 he joined the Arnes at Smock Alley in Dublin. His greatest achievement there was to sing the lead in the first performance of Arne's 'The Death of Abel'. He was again at Drury Lane for the 1744-5 season and, after a winter at Aungier Street Theatre in Dublin, he returned to Drury Lane for 1747-8. 
The great tenor John Beard returned after five years' absence to supersede Lowe at Drury Lane, and Lowe migrated to Covent Garden, where he appeared on 26 September 1748 as Macheath. His Arviragus in 'Cymbeline' (15 February 1749) and Colonel Bully in John Vanbrugh's 'The Provoked Wife' (4 October 1752), appear to have been, with some small singing parts, the most notable impersonations which he added to his Drury Lane repertory. It was probably at some point during his Covent Garden period that he married his wife, Mary (died 1770). 
Beard moved to Covent Garden in 1759, and the two tenors shared roles for a season. When Beard moved to Covent Garden Lowe returned to Drury Lane, taking part, among other performances, in John Stanley's 'The Tears and Triumphs of Parnassus' (first performed 17 November 1760), in Shakespeare's 'Much Ado about Nothing' (as Balthazar), and in 'The Tempest' (as Hymen). After summer 1763 his connection with the great theatres ceased. 
During his career in the patent houses Lowe was associated with several roles, but most particularly with musical comedy and with 'speciality' songs introduced to vary otherwise non-musical pieces. He was also a member of Handel's oratorio company between 1742 and 1760, most often taking secondary roles. Prominent among his performances were Zadok in 'Solomon' (1749) and Septimus in 'Theodora' (1760). Lowe was a member of the Madrigal Society between 1741 and 1751, and he sang at a number of public gardens. By 1750 he was regularly to be seen at Vauxhall, and in August of that year he made his first appearance at Marylebone, with which he remained associated for twenty-five years. 
For five years, beginning in 1763, Lowe was lessee and manager of Marylebone Gardens, succeeding John Trusler. 'The orchestra', wrote J. T. Smith: 'before which I have listened with my grandmother to hear Tommy Lowe sing, stood upon the site of the house now (1828) No. 17 Devonshire Place, and... nearly opposite to the old church still standing in High Street. (J. T. Smith, 'Nollekens and his Times', 2 vols., 1829, 1.33)' The elder Stephen Storace and Dr Arnold supported the enterprise, and the first season was prosperous; but in spite of Miss Catley's singing, Miss Trusler's plum puddings, and the rousing choruses (by the audience) to Lowe's 'Fellowcraft' and other songs, Lowe was ruined in 1767, following an exceptionally wet summer. He assigned all receipts to his creditors in 1768, and sold the gardens in 1769. Thenceforward his efforts to gain a livelihood met with scanty success. After holding an engagement at Finch's Grotto Gardens and managing the wells at Ottersley Pool, near Watford (1770), where his wife died, he was engaged by Tom King, on his purchase of Sadler's Wells, to sing there from 20 April 1772. He retained this engagement until his death, on 1 March 1783, in his lodgings in Aldersgate Street. 
Lowe's voice was said by Dibdin to be more even and mellow than that of Beard, 'and in love songs, when little more than mere utterance was necessary, he might be said to have exceeded him.... Lowe lost himself beyond the namby-pamby poetry of Vauxhall; Beard was at home everywhere' (C. Dibdin, 'A Complete History of the English Stage', 5 vols., 1800, 5.364). 
Burney concurred that Lowe's talents suffered from his lack of education: 'he could never be safely trusted with any thing better than a ballad, which he constantly learned by ear' (Highfill, Burnim & Langhans, 'BDA', 9.374). However, he was popular with audiences, particularly as 'huntsmen, naval officers, rustics both realistic and classically pastoral' (ibid.). Portraits of Lowe were published with many songs, several engraved by George Bickham, and often showing him with his 'early horn' of the song. 
Lowe's son Halifax Lowe, who was said to resemble his father in voice and manner, made his first appearance as a singer at Sadler's Wells on 15 April 1784. He died in 1790. 


@@@@@


doc= 17090


Lower, Mark Antony (1813-1876), antiquary, was born on 14 July 1813 at Chiddingly, Sussex, the fourth of seven surviving children of Richard Lower (1782-1865), schoolmaster, and his wife, Mary Oxley ('b'. 1780), daughter of William Oxley of Heathfield, Sussex. He was educated by his father. In 1830 he briefly assisted his sister at her school at East Hoathly, before establishing a school for himself at Cade Street, Heathfield, and then a larger one at Alfriston, Sussex, in 1832. There, in conjunction with John Dudeney, he also founded a mechanics' institution. He moved to Lewes about 1835, and conducted his school there initially in an old chapel. On 8 January 1838 he married, at Bromley, Kent, his first wife, Mercy Holman (1813-1867), daughter of William Holman of Bentley in Framfield, Sussex; they had four sons and five daughters. After several moves within Lewes, the school settled at St Anne's House in the High Street about 1853 and was restricted to boarders. He served as one of the headboroughs of Lewes in 1860-61, but held no other significant public office. 
As early as 1831 Lower had printed 'Sussex', a guidebook, parish by parish, for which he found 250 subscribers. His next publication, 'English Surnames' (1842), went through four editions and, with 'Patronymica Britannica, a Dictionary of the Family Names of the United Kingdom' (1860), was the work by which he was most widely known. But the majority of his writing was related to Sussex. He was one of the prime movers in the foundation of the Sussex Archaeological Society in 1846 and conducted much of its routine business in the early years under the supervision of W. H. Blaauw (1793-1870), the first secretary. At an annual salary of $50 he served as the society's editor and corresponding secretary in 1865-70, but his overspending brought him into conflict with the committee. All but one of the first twenty-six volumes of the society's 'Collections' (1848-75) contain at least one article by him, and some as many as five, as well as short notes. His translation called 'The Chronicle of Battel Abbey' appeared in 1851. Two encyclopaedic works were 'The Worthies of Sussex' (1865), giving biographical sketches, and 'A Compendious History of Sussex' (2 vols., 1870), greatly enlarging his 1831 book. His evangelical, low-church beliefs and radical political opinions were reflected in his historical writings, for instance 'The Sussex Martyrs' (1851) -- which inaugurated a cult that survived well into the next century -- and his lectures to the mechanics' institute on the Bayeux tapestry. 
Lower was active in the British Archaeological Association from 1844. In 1852 he was elected a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries, for which he acted as local secretary. His honorary MA degree was awarded by a college in Connecticut, USA, about 1846. 
The large amount of time which Lower devoted to archaeology and literature interfered with his profession, and the loss of his wife on 31 May 1867, as well as his own failing health, precipitated his giving up the school in that year and moving to nearby Seaford, where he continued to take only a few French boys. A local subscription raised about $400 as a mark of appreciation for his services to the history of Sussex. On 4 May 1870 he married his second wife, Sarah ('bap'. 1813, died 1875), daughter of Henry Scrase and his wife, Sarah, and from 1871 he lived in Peckham, London. A trip to Denmark and Sweden in search of health in 1873 brought no benefit. After his wife's death in 1875, he lived with his youngest daughter at 4 Percival Villas, Sydney Road, Enfield, Middlesex, where he died on 22 March 1876. He was buried in St Anne's churchyard, Lewes. 
Lower was a large man with, in middle age, a full beard. In a small county town he cut a flamboyant figure, and his enthusiasms may have outrun his judgement. 


@@@@@


doc= 17091


Lower, Richard (1631-1691), physician and physiologist, was born at Tremeer House, near Bodmin, Cornwall, the son of Humphry or Humfry Lower ('bap'. 1597, died 1683) and Margery Billing (died 1686). He was baptized at St Tudy's, Cornwall, on 29 January 1632. A prominent and affluent Cornish family, the Lower clan included Sir William Lower, a poet and dramatist. Richard's younger brother, Thomas Lower, was also a physician, whose religious beliefs led to his imprisonment with George Fox, the Quaker leader. 
Lower's early education was at Westminster School under the tutelage of Richard Busby. In 1649 he received a studentship to Christ Church, Oxford, and matriculated on 27 February 1651. He graduated BA on 17 February 1653, proceeding MA in June 1655, and BM and MD on 28 June 1665. While at Oxford, Lower was praelector in Greek (1656-7) and censor in natural philosophy (1657-60), and by 1659 he had established an active medical practice there. During his Oxford years he secured his reputation as a skilled medical scientist, particularly through his work with Thomas Willis, Sedleian professor of natural philosophy. For much of his period at Oxford, Lower worked as research assistant to Willis, a collaboration that yielded numerous important neuroanatomical and physiological advances. Lower also studied chemistry under Peter Stahl. Following in the experimental traditions of William Harvey, Lower and Willis were part of an extraordinary scientific circle at Oxford that, during the 1650s and 1660s, included Robert Boyle, Christopher Wren, and John Mayow. From this background Lower emerged as one of the most talented and important medical researchers in the history of physiology and anatomy, a position derived from his insistence on careful experimentation and direct observation. Lower relied heavily on vivisection of animals to study physiological questions, and his publications were characterized by a terse, clear writing style. Lower continued his association with Oxford until 1666, when, following Willis, he relocated to London to establish a medical practice. On 17 November 1666 Richard married Elizabeth (died 1704), daughter of John Billing of Hengar, and widow of Samuel Trelawny. 
Lower maintained his research activities for several years after arriving in London, primarily through his involvement with the Royal Society, whose meetings he attended as early as 1666. In May 1667 Boyle formally introduced Lower to the society, and on 17 October of that year Lower was elected a fellow. In November 1667 the society offered him the position of curator, but he declined the appointment. Many of Lower's most important medical contributions were presented at the Royal Society, but in less than two years after becoming a member, his participation in the society declined notably. He ceased regular attendance by March 1669 and resigned his fellowship in 1678. As his research activities waned, Lower devoted himself increasingly to clinical medicine, where he soon established a prominent and lucrative practice in London. Lower lived initially at Hatton Garden, but as his practice thrived, he relocated to increasingly fashionable addresses, including Salisbury Court near Fleet Street, Bow Street, and finally to King Street near Covent Garden. On 22 December 1671 he was a candidate for the College of Physicians, where he became a fellow on 29 July 1675. His practice eventually involved royal appointments, and he became increasingly active in the political intrigues of the times. Following the death of Thomas Willis in 1675, Lower was appointed royal physician. At that time Anthony Wood noted that Lower was 'esteemed the most noted physician in Westminster and London, and no man's name was more cried up at court than his' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', new edn, 1813-20, 4.297). Eventually, however, Lower's strongly held political opinions adversely affected his medical career, as his protestant religious beliefs and close affiliation with the whig party led to his loss of court appointments and a considerable decline in his reputation and practice. Lower actively opposed the policies of James II, who once remarked that he 'did him more mischief than a troop of horse' (Gunther, p. xxv), although Lower seems to have spent much of his time in Cornwall while James was in power. Following the revolution of 1688, Lower was again involved with the court, providing advice to the crown regarding medical services for the navy. 
Lower's reputation in neuroanatomy derives principally from his collaborative research with Thomas Willis, whose 'Cerebri anatome' (1664) was a major landmark in descriptive anatomy of the central and the autonomic nervous systems. Willis and Lower had begun their research as early as 1658 and by January 1661 were actively involved in dissection studies with the intent of publishing a book summarizing their studies. Their research continued until summer 1663, with Christopher Wren providing the illustrations for the text. The 'Cerebri anatome' contained the first functional account of the cerebral blood circulation and provided a detailed description of the basal ganglia, medulla, cerebellum, and ten of the twelve cranial nerves, as well as an account of the vagus nerve and sympathetic nervous system. Although several of Lower's contemporaries claimed that he deserved more credit than Willis for the book, it appears that Willis was responsible for the organization and interpretation of their studies, while Lower performed most of the exacting dissections. In the preface to 'Cerebri anatome', Willis praised Lower as 'an anatomist of supreme skill' whose 'most skillful dissecting hand' and 'indefatigable Industry, and unwearied Labour' had provided Willis with the data needed to describe the 'structure and function of bodies, whose secrets were previously concealed'. The following year Lower published his first book, 'Diatribae Thomae Willissi de febribus vindicatio' (1665), which aggressively defended concepts earlier proposed by Willis in 'Diatribae duae medico-philosophicae' (1658-9). Although Lower subsequently changed the views he expressed in the 'Diatribae' concerning pulmonary circulation, the book indicates his interest in questions of cardiorespiratory function that would later be addressed in his 'Tractatus de corde'. The 'Tractatus' contained the results of Lower's extensive physiological research and a summary of his pioneering work in blood transfusion. 
Lower is generally credited with being the first to perform successful blood transfusions, despite some lingering uncertainty over priority. Lower's transfusion studies were a logical continuation of work at Oxford by Christopher Wren and Robert Boyle, who, as early as 1656, were using quills and special bladders to inject medications and other fluids into the bloodstream of dogs. By January 1661 Lower mentioned to Boyle an interest in trying to infuse broth into the veins of dogs; and by June 1664, Lower wrote to Boyle concerning plans to experiment on blood transfusion between dogs. Because blood coagulates rapidly after removal from the circulation, prior attempts to transfuse had met with questionable or no success. Lower decided to try direct transfusion from arterial to venous circulation in hopes that clotting could be avoided by minimizing the time that the blood was outside the vascular system. In late February 1665 at Oxford, Lower successfully performed the first direct blood transfusion, involving the transfer of blood from the carotid artery of one live dog into the jugular vein of another. The experiment demonstrated that blood transfusion was possible and that the technique was effective in reviving an animal that would otherwise have died from severe blood loss. A report of the event was conveyed to the Royal Society by September 1666, and Lower's work quickly became the subject of widespread interest and discussion. In November 1666 the dog transfusion experiments were repeated before the Royal Society at Gresham College, London. Accounts of Lower's transfusions were published in November and December of that year in the 'Philosophical Transactions' (vol. 1, pp. 252, 353-8). Meanwhile, Jean-Baptiste Denis, professor of philosophy and mathematics in Paris, had learned of Lower's work as early as 1665, transfused blood between calves and dogs, and published the results in the 'Journal des Scavans' in March and April 1667 (pp. 69-72, 96). Subsequently, in June 1667, Denis performed the first adequately documented blood transfusions involving human subjects, using sheep blood infused into two volunteers. Denis sent a letter to the Royal Society describing the experiments, which was printed in the 'Philosophical Transactions' (no. 27, 22 July 1667, pp. 489-504). Denis did not provide any details of the technical methods, and his claim of French priority for the concept of transfusion provoked Henry Oldenburg, secretary of the Royal Society, to suppress the volume and to replace it with his own version of number 27. In response to the experiments that Denis had reported from France, Lower and an associate, Dr Edmund King, successfully transfused sheep blood into a volunteer, Arthur Coga of Cambridge, on 23 November 1667. By the late 1670s, ensuing events in both countries resulted in a ban on transfusions, which effectively prevented clinical research on the subject until the early 1800s. 
Lower's investigations in cardiopulmonary physiology and blood transfusion were summarized in his major work, the 'Tractatus de corde', containing in its five chapters a succinct exposition of his most important discoveries. The first three chapters reviewed his work on the comparative anatomy and functional physiology of the heart, blood vessels, and lungs. Chapter four contained the results of his experiments in blood transfusion, and chapter five described his concepts on chyle and its transformation into blood. Lower intended to extend the work of William Harvey by addressing questions raised by Harvey that had not yet been resolved. While at Oxford in 1658, Lower and Willis attempted to discover the cause for the commonly recognized difference in colour between venous and arterial blood. Willis in his 'Diatribae duae medico-philosophicae' proposed that the vivid colour of arterial blood was due to its having become lighter as it 'effervesced' out of the left ventricle. At the time it was generally believed that movement of blood in the circulation was due to this spontaneous effervescence rather than to any mechanical pumping by the heart. Although Lower initially accepted this concept, his extensive comparative anatomy studies of the heart and a series of elegant experiments led him to conclusions that differed quite dramatically from traditional notions. In October 1667 Lower began collaborative work with Robert Hooke using vivisection studies on dogs, which demonstrated that the colour change in blood occurred during its passage through the lungs and that 'penetration of particles of air into the blood' were responsible for this alteration. Lower further concluded that the heart was a muscle, whose structure and function were designed to propel blood through the circulation by contractile and expulsive movements. His investigations in comparative anatomy delineated the muscular nature of the heart and its nerve supply in man and other vertebrates. Lower also measured the velocity of blood movements through the circulation and attempted to calculate cardiac output. 
The 'Tractatus' gained rapid acceptance as an important work in cardiopulmonary physiology. In his 'De sanguinis accensione' (1670) Willis subsequently abandoned his earlier concepts about the roles of the heart and lungs and embraced Lower's findings and conclusions, and John Mayow revealed his debt to the book in his own 'Tractatus quinque' (1674). The 'Tractatus de corde' was translated into English and French, and sixteen editions were published, continuing its recognition well into the mid-eighteenth century as an important scientific study. 
Subsequent works by Lower included 'Dissertatio de origine catarrhi' (1670), which summarized experiments he had conducted with Willis to demonstrate that nasal secretions were not due to the discharge of fluid from cerebral ventricles through the palate, a concept that had been widely held at the time. Other publications attributed to Lower include 'Bromographia' (1669) and 'Receipts, or Dr Lower's and Several other Eminent Physicians Receipts' (1700). 
Lower contracted a fever after attempting to extinguish a chimney fire at his home in King Street, and died, probably from pneumonia, on 17 January 1691. His body was returned to Cornwall and interred at the church of St Tudy on 3 February. He was survived by his wife and two daughters, Loveday and Philippa, neither of whom married. Lower remains best known for his seminal contributions to neuroanatomy, cardiopulmonary physiology, and blood transfusion. 


@@@@@


doc= 17092


Lower, Richard (1782-1865), poet, was born at Alfriston, Sussex, on 19 September 1782, the son of John Lower, bargeman, and his wife, Sarah. His father owned the barge the 'Good Intent', and was the first person to navigate the little River Cuckmere from the sea to Longbridge. Richard Lower was physically too weak to adopt his father's calling; having received a fair education, he opened a school about 1803 in the parish of Chiddingly, where he resided until within a few months of his death. He also carried on the business of land surveyor. 
From the time of his childhood Lower was addicted to rhyming, much to his mother's displeasure. His best-known production is 'Tom Cladpole's jurney to Lunnon, told by himself, and written in pure Sussex doggerel by his Uncle Tim', printed in 1830 as a sixpenny pamphlet and reprinted at least twice. Of this upwards of twenty thousand copies were sold, chiefly among the cottagers in east Sussex, who, however, resented Lower's sarcasms at their expense. It was followed in 1844 by 'Jan Cladpole's trip to Merricur, written all in rhyme by his father, Tim Cladpole', which expressed the author's anti-slavery sentiments. 
Lower married Mary Oxley ('b'. 1780) on 9 April 1803, and he died at the residence of their third son, Joseph Richard Lower, surveyor, at Swan Lane, Tonbridge, Kent, on 30 September 1865. His second son, Mark Antony Lower FSA (1813-1876), wrote several antiquarian works. His eldest daughter, Mrs Quaife, was well known as a nurse in America in the Federal army. 


@@@@@


doc= 17093


Lower, Thomas (bap. 1633, d. 1720), Quaker activist and physician, was baptized at St Tudy, Cornwall, on 11 August 1633. He was the son of Humfry Lower of Tremeer, St Tudy ('bap'. 1597, died 1683), and his wife, Margery Billing (died 1686). Thomas received a good education and was elected scholar of Winchester College in 1646. 
Lower was living with his aunt Loveday Hambly at Tregangreeves, St Austell, Cornwall, in 1656, at the time that George Fox was thrown in Launceston gaol. Lower visited him there and offered him money. This was declined, but when he was released on 13 September 1656 Fox held a meeting at Tregangreeves and Lower became a convert to Quakerism around this time. Although Lower qualified as a physician (like his elder brother the physiologist Richard Lower) and apparently practised in London, he seems to have spent most of his time in promoting the movement's growth. 
Lower's first wife was Elizabeth Trelawny ('bap'. 1617, died 'c'.1662), who died childless. On 26 October 1668 he married at Swarthmoor Hall, near Ulverston, Mary Fell (1643/4-1719), fifth daughter of Judge Thomas Fell and his wife, Margaret Fell, and stepdaughter of George Fox. They had ten children, nine daughters and one son, Richard (1682-1705), but it would appear that five of them died in infancy. Lower's wife and children lived at Swarthmoor Hall until 1676, when Lower purchased the estate of Marsh Grange in Furness from the Fells. There Fox sometimes came to stay with the family and dictated letters to his son-in-law. 
In 1673 Fox and Lower were arrested for holding meetings at Armscott, Worcestershire, and taken to Worcester gaol, where they remained for more than a year. A letter which would have secured Lower's release was obtained through the interest of his brother Richard, but as it did not mention Fox, Lower chose to stay in prison with Fox. In 1675, or perhaps earlier in 1674, Fox began dictating his autobiography to Lower. In 1683 Lower went into Cornwall to transact some private business, and after holding a religious meeting at Tregangreeves was arrested and sentenced to imprisonment. His name is first on a petition of Quakers from Launceston gaol dated 1 August 1683 which was presented to Sir Job Charlton, the assize judge, but despite occasional periods of liberty he remained a prisoner until released by royal proclamation in 1686. In 1687 he received Fox's instructions respecting the disposal disposition of his property. Under Fox's will Lower received legacies of books, dials, and other property, and it was added that he could assist in compiling an account of the travels and sufferings of the Friends. 
About 1693 Lower moved to London, probably living in Hammersmith, practised as a physician, and became involved in the activities of the Friends in the capital. In 1695, for example, he was a signatory to a petition of Quakers to parliament, the aim of which was to try and ease Friends' sufferings for refusing to swear oaths. He was also chosen, along with George Whitehead and Daniel Quare, to present an account of Quaker sufferings to William III on behalf of imprisoned Friends. Not a prolific writer, he wrote a few tracts around this time which were largely defences of Quakerism, for example, 'An Answer to Francis Bugg's Presumptious Impeachment... Against the Quakers' Yearly Meeting' (1695) and 'A Modest Vindication of the People called Quakers' [n.d., 1701?]. In 1696, perhaps in recognition of his work as a doctor, Lower was among those to whom Daniel Phillips dedicated his treatise on smallpox upon commencing as doctor of physic at Leiden. 
At an unknown date Lower provided the Quaker burial-ground at Tregangreeves, Cornwall, and in 1715 he purchased some of the American property which had belonged to Fox. In 1719 Mary Lower died, aged seventy-five. Thomas died on 5 May the following year, aged eighty-eight, and was buried at Bunhill Fields on 9 May 1720. 


@@@@@


doc= 17094


Lower, Sir William (c.1610-1662), playwright and translator, was born in Cornwall, the only son of John Lower of Tremere ('c'.1584-1645, the second of six sons of Thomas Lower of St Winnow) and his first wife, Jane (died before 1640). He was probably born about 1610; he may be the William Lower, son of John, baptized on 7 March 1609 at Constantine, Cornwall (about 20 miles south-west of St Winnow), but proof is lacking. There is no record of Lower at either Oxford or Cambridge, but his kinsman Dr Richard Lower told Anthony Wood that William 'spent some time in Oxon, in the condition of an Hospes for the sake of the public Library and Scholastic Company... but his Fancy being gay, he troubled himself not with the crabbed studies of Logic and Philosophy' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 2.272). 
The documentary silence is broken by the publication in 1639 of Lower's first play, 'The Phoenix in her Flames', dedicated to the author's cousin, Thomas Lower. This play is a competent but conventional tragic romance set in Arabia, involving a kidnapped princess who falls in love with a hero reduced from his rightful station, a battle in which the hero rebuffs an enemy army, and a tragic ending in which all the main characters die. It has no major source, but shows the influence of Greek romances and Marlowe's 'Tamburlaine'. The play displays considerable military knowledge, and in the dedication Lower implies that he had seen military service. In 1640 he was a lieutenant in the regiment of Sir Jacob Ashley in the army of the earl of Northumberland, and later that year, now a captain, he gave an account of his company's mutiny near Brackley. 
For the next four years there is no record of Lower's activities; the outbreak of the civil war presumably put his literary endeavours on hold. In June 1644, now a lieutenant-colonel in the king's army and lieutenant-governor of Wallingford, he was ordered by the crown to levy a weekly tax of $50 on the town of Reading for the garrison at Wallingford. When the town refused to pay, Lower kidnapped the mayor of Reading as a hostage. A series of letters ensued, in which the town's aldermen reiterated their inability to pay and Lower attempted without success to reach a compromise. Eventually the council of war at Oxford remitted part of the levy. On 27 March 1645 Lower was rewarded for his service by being knighted. Less than a year later, on 19 January 1646, he was captured by the parliamentary garrison of Abingdon and sent to London as a prisoner. He apparently remained there until 11 January 1647, when he was discharged and permitted to go overseas, as long as he promised not to act against the parliament. 
Lower's whereabouts over the next seven years are unclear. At some point after 1647 he married and had a daughter, Elizabeth, but it is impossible to say exactly when or where this daughter was born, and nothing is known of his wife, except that she died before 1661. Lower probably spent some time in the Low Countries, since his uncle Sir Nicholas Lower owned lands in Holland and Zeeland. Sir Nicholas died in 1653, leaving most of his estate to Sir William and his cousin Thomas, but they encountered difficulties gaining title to their inheritance because of the wars. Lower was in England in July 1654 petitioning for permission to go to the Low Countries to settle his uncle's estate, but he had to wait more than a year before receiving it. He was in The Hague in October 1655, bringing news of Cromwell's weakness back in England, and he apparently stayed there for the next six years, finally resolving the estate difficulties in 1660. 
During this time Lower began to publish translations of various French works. He translated three non-dramatic works of Rene de Ceriziers concerning religious martyrs: 'The Innocent Lady' (1654), 'The Innocent Lord' (1655), and 'The Triumphant Lady' (1656). He also translated two plays by Corneille ('Polyeuctes' in 1655 and 'Horatius' in 1656), two by Paul Scarron ('Don Japhet of Armenia', preserved as British Library Add. MS 28723, and 'The Three Dorothies', now lost), and two by Quinault ('The Noble Ingratitude' in 1659 and 'The Amorous Fantasme' in 1660). The latter two were dedicated, respectively, to the princess royal of Orange (for whom Lower published a funeral elegy in 1661) and to Elizabeth, queen of Bohemia, indicating Lower's close connection with the exiled royal family. In 1660 he translated a French description of Charles II's residence in Holland, publishing it in an elaborate engraved folio. In addition to his translations, Lower wrote a second original play, 'The Enchanted Lovers' (1658). This is a pastoral set on the island of Erithrea, with lovers disguised as shepherds, enchantments, and the goddess Diana appearing as a 'deus ex machina' at the end. The Folger copy of 'The Noble Ingratitude' and 'The Enchanted Lovers' (bound together, Folger L3314/Q218) is inscribed 'For Mris. Elizabeth Lower 1659' and 'Corrected by the Author's own hand', with about fifteen manuscript corrections, all in Lower's hand. Lower also wrote a manuscript set of paraphrases on the apostolic epistles, preserved as Harleian MS 4611. 
In 1661 Thomas Lower died and left most of his estate to his cousin Sir William, prompting the latter's return to England. Early the following year, however, Sir William himself died, and his will was proved on 7 May 1662. He left most of his estate to his daughter, Elizabeth, with trustees holding it until she turned twenty-one. Wood supposed that he was buried in St Clement Danes, Westminster (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 2.273), but there is no record of his burial there, nor in St Winnow, Cornwall. 


@@@@@


doc= 17095


Lowick, Robert (1655-1696), army officer and Jacobite conspirator, was a Yorkshireman, born at Stokesley in the North Riding, into its small Catholic community, on 12 March 1655, son of Robert Lowick ('b'. 1624, died after 1690) and, almost certainly, Mary Lowick (died 1693?). His family were perhaps related to the extinct petty-gentry recusant Lowickes of nearby Osmotherley, and his 1696 indictment ranked him 'gentleman'; but his father's house had only two hearths. The Benedictine monk Henry Benedict Lowick (died 1720), who became prior of St Leonard's, Dieulouard, Lorraine, was probably Robert's brother; he had at least two other brothers and one sister -- perhaps four. 
Under James II Lowick became ensign in the Catholic Sir Thomas Haggerston's independent company, commissioned on 26 June 1685 to garrison Berwick, afterwards incorporated into Sir William Clifton's regiment and by 1687 into the Royal Fusiliers. He was among the officers pardoned for Catholicism in November 1685. When the rich Catholic George Holman's new cavalry regiment was commissioned on 10 October 1688, Lowick was his cornet; but the regiment disbanded that December. 
In Ireland in 1689 Lowick became a lieutenant in the cavalry regiment freshly raised for King James by Colonel John Parker. Lowick displayed, besides professional abilities, his characteristic humanity, particularly in saving captured Williamite officers' lives after a skirmish in June 1690. Parker's regiment was largely destroyed fighting at the Boyne. Lowick, having afterwards risen to major, returned to England in 1691. 
From 1692 to 1694 Parker was organizing the Lancashire and northern Catholic gentry for a rising. He appointed Lowick major -- the professional officer's post -- in his own theoretical cavalry regiment. Since half its troops were scattered between Northumberland and southern Lancashire, and half in London, the post was burdensome, especially after Parker fled to France. Lowick lodged mainly in London. 
In the 1696 assassination plot, Lowick, who was closely involved with Robert Charnock and Father Henry Joseph Johnston over regimental matters, bought a periwig to disguise Sir George Barclay. Lowick was to join the force attacking William and his guards, bringing two other horsemen -- unsubsidized by Barclay, he remarked. Like Ambrose Rookwood, he expressed disgust at the plot among comrades, but resolved to obey Barclay's orders, assuming that he acted on James's. Afterwards, two proclamations offered $1000 for him among others, and he was arrested on 23 March in Golden Lane, London. Refusing inducements to confess, then or after condemnation, he was arraigned, with Rookwood and Charles Cranburne, in the court of king's bench on 14 April, and tried and convicted on 22 April. The main witnesses, the turncoat George Harris and Thomas Bertram, a relative from Stokesley whom he had often charitably assisted, showed uneasy consciences; but the government had reliable evidence of his complicity from an undercover spy. Lowick prepared a last paper in which, like earlier executed whigs and Jacobites, he used legal shortcomings in prosecution testimony to imply his moral innocence. However, when he, Rookwood, and Cranburne were executed at Tyburn on 29 April 1696, the sheriff's appeal to his piety, and guilt at having drawn others in, made him admit his knowledge and involvement. 
A proclamation's description of Lowick -- tall, lean, of sanguine complexion, with high cheekbones and hollow cheeks -- calls into question the etching of the conspirators. Unmarried, he used his limited means charitably and was generally loved. 


@@@@@


doc= 17096


Lowin, John (bap. 1576, d. 1653), actor, the son of Richard Lowin of London, was baptized on 9 December 1576 at St Giles Cripplegate. His father was a currier, or tanner of leather (not a carpenter, as early authorities state), and must have been a fairly well-to-do craftsman, for he apprenticed his son to a goldsmith: this was a desirable trade that could be entered only by boys whose fathers owned property. Lowin was bound to Nicholas Rudyard for eight years from Christmas 1593, and although he is not recorded achieving freedom of the trade, he probably completed his apprenticeship since notices of him as an actor begin only in 1602. Additional testimony comes from the City pageant by Anthony Munday (or Mundy) entitled 'Chruso-thriambos, or, The Triumphs of Gold' (October 1611), in which Lowin played the goldsmith Leofstane, supposedly the first mayor of London. This spectacular parade was mounted by the Goldsmiths' Company to celebrate the election of a goldsmith, Sir James Pemberton, as lord mayor, and a company document recording Lowin's agreement to perform calls him 'one of his Majesty's players and brother of this company' (Gordon and Robertson, 81). We can only speculate how he had migrated from Cheapside to the Bankside, but he was not the only goldsmith's apprentice to follow this route: the comedian Robert Armin, Lowin's colleague in the King's Men, was another prominent example. 
Lowin first appears as a player in the records of the Earl of Worcester's Men, during their time at the Rose playhouse in Southwark. Until recently a provincial company, Worcester's became established in London in 1601 after the appointment of their patron as Elizabeth's master of horse; in the next reign they acquired Queen Anne's patronage. Lowin appears in the books of the Rose's impresario, Philip Henslowe, during the winter of 1602-3, usually through business concerning the purchase of new plays. In March 1603 Henslowe lent him 5's'. 'when he went into the country with the company to play' ('Henslowe's Diary', 212). But later that year he moved into London's premier troupe, the King's Men. The playhouses were closed for twelve months from March 1603 because of Elizabeth's death and the plague, during which period the companies were reallocated to new royal patrons. Lowin does not appear in the official company lists of May 1603 or March 1604, but in Ben Jonson's 'Works' (1616) he is listed seventh among the performers of 'Sejanus', which play, it is believed, the King's Men premiered at court late in 1603. He remained with the King's Men until the end of his career, by which time he was their longest-serving player. 
Lowin had a high company profile from the first, since he was one of five actors featured in the induction added in 1604 by John Webster to John Marston's 'The Malcontent' for its performances at the Globe. Webster's amusing scene stages a 'real-life' conversation between audience and performers before the play begins. Two troublesome spectators (played by actors) try to sit on the stage as was the practice at the Blackfriars Theatre, and have to be persuaded to enter the boxes by three cast members, Richard Burbage, Henry Condell, and Lowin. As the most junior, Lowin's part is small, but it testifies to his standing with the company that he was singled out. Over the next forty years he played important roles in some of the best-known dramas of the time, including the Shakespeare, Jonson, Fletcher, and Massinger plays that formed the core of the King's Men's repertoire. He stands eleventh among the actors listed in the Shakespeare first folio (1623), and heads the signatories of the dedication to the 1647 Beaumont and Fletcher folio. 
Lowin was an imposing individual. His portrait in the Ashmolean Museum, painted when he was sixty-four, depicts him as bulky but dignified, possessed of both power and grace. These qualities are reflected in his roles. In the 1690s James Wright recollected seeing him as Falstaff ('with mighty applause'), as the bluff soldier Melantius in Beaumont and Fletcher's 'Maid's Tragedy', and in several Jonsonian parts: the title role in 'Volpone', the misanthrope Morose in 'Epicene', and the sensualist Epicure Mammon in 'The Alchemist' (Bentley, 2.505). Wright would have witnessed Lowin in the 1630s, so these were not all parts he had created; Volpone was one of Burbage's roles, and 'Epicene' was originally a boys' play. Lowin also took over Belleur, a gentleman 'of a stout blunt humour', in revivals of Fletcher's spirited comedy 'The Wild Goose Chase'. Of the roles he himself created, he had leading parts in some two dozen plays by Fletcher, but his greatest was the self-doubting criminal Bosola in Webster's 'Duchess of Malfi' (1613). He also played Massinger's despotic Romans Domitian in 'The Roman Actor' (1626) and Flaminius in 'Believe as you List' (1631), the wealthy citizen Undermine in John Clavell's 'The Soddered Citizen' (1630), and the title character, 'of great beard and bulk', in Arthur Wilson's 'The Swisser' (1631). A late tradition recorded by John Downes has him as Shakespeare's original Henry VIII (1611): Downes says he passed his interpretation to Sir William Davenant, having 'had his instructions from Mr Shakespeare himself' (Bentley, 2.502, 506). Evidently Lowin excelled in commanding and authoritative roles, but had considerable range in both tragedy and comedy. In the Caroline period he and Joseph Taylor, Burbage's successor as principal tragedian, were the King's Men's most senior actors and typically appeared in tandem, Taylor playing Mosca to Lowin's Volpone, Arbaces to his Melantius, Paris to his Domitian, and Ferdinand to his Bosola. 
In the prologue to Davenant's 'The Platonic Lovers' (1635), Lowin reminded his audience that he had: '
laboured here 

In buskins and in socks this thirty year 
(Bentley, 2.503)' His labours, though, were increasingly consumed by company administration. He became a company shareholder in the reorganization of 1627, with two out of seventeen shares, making him one of the six people with a controlling financial stake in the troupe. Then in 1630, after the death of John Heminges, Lowin and Taylor became the company's business representatives. For the next twelve years they acted as its day-to-day agents, and took over the responsibility for liaison between the King's Men and the authorities at court, an onerous and important job. Lowin's status with the company had already helped him to achieve a small court office, since at some point before the end of James's reign he acquired the post of porter, for which he paid $200. He also acquired a family. It is unclear whether he was the John Lowin who married Joan Hall, a widow, at St Botolph without Bishopgate in 1607, but in 1620 he certainly married Katherine Wooden at St Saviour's, Southwark, the parish he resided in for most of his working life. A son, John, was baptized there in 1639. By this time Lowin was sixty-two; the 1640 portrait depicts a man conscious of his prosperity and achievements. 
Lowin's career was abruptly interrupted in September 1642, when the theatres were closed by order of parliament, not to reopen officially in his lifetime. The activities of his final decade can only be tentatively reconstructed. The next five years are a blank, though he had capital to fall back on, since the King's Men sharers liquidated their stock when the theatres closed. Although the company was effectively dissolved, its network held together, for the 1647 Beaumont and Fletcher folio was published with a dedicatory letter from the actors, and in 1652 Fletcher's 'Wild Goose Chase' was separately published with a preface by Lowin and Taylor. And even though playing was banned, some surreptitious performances by unlicensed troupes continued, the peak period coming in 1648. In January of that year seven former King's Men, headed by Lowin, contracted to pay a debt due to the widow of an eighth, and it was possibly this group that illegally staged the King's Men's play 'Wit without Money' at the Red Bull in February. James Wright claimed that a troupe led by Lowin and Taylor were covertly performing at the Drury Lane Cockpit late in 1648, and that one afternoon, while playing Fletcher and Massinger's 'The Bloody Brother', they were arrested by soldiers, briefly imprisoned, and lost their costumes. Wright's notes date from 1699, so their details may not be reliable, but other sources show that at least three unlicensed companies had resurfaced, and were suppressed in similar circumstances as security measures before the king's execution. This arrest seems to have ended Lowin's acting career, and subsequent financial problems are signalled by the 1652 edition of Fletcher's 'Wild Goose Chase', which was printed to raise money for Lowin and Taylor. Wright says Lowin ended his days as innkeeper of the Three Pigeons at Brentford, 'and his poverty was as great as his age' (Bentley, 2.505). He was buried at St Clement Danes on 24 August 1653. 
The only serious puzzle around Lowin relates to the tract 'Conclusions upon Dances' (1607). This decidedly pious treatise, that censures most kinds of dancing on the grounds of profanity, was published with an epistle signed 'I. L., Roscio' -- that is 'player', after the Roman actor Roscius. Lowin is the only Jacobean player whose initials fit, and the attribution, originally made by John Payne Collier, has been generally accepted. It is not impossible to reconcile the pamphlet's opinions with the outlook of an actor who came from citizen stock, and who achieved such heights of social respectability. Yet if Lowin really was the author, his theology was so much in tension with his calling that it must have made his professional life a never-ending source of scruple. 


@@@@@


doc= 17097


Lowman, Moses (bap. 1679, d. 1752), nonconformist minister and writer, was baptized on 25 January 1679 at St Gabriel Fenchurch, London, the son of Moses and Anne Lowman. His father, who was educated at Merton and Magdalen colleges, Oxford, and proceeded MA on 21 June 1660, was ordained in the Church of England but left it for 'employment in the public revenues' ('Protestant Dissenter's Magazine', Dec 1794, 465). Nothing is known of Moses's early schooling, but it is unlikely to have taken place among the dissenters. Destined for a career in the law, he entered the Middle Temple in March 1698, but left a year later to study divinity at the universities of Leiden and Utrecht. It is also unclear how he became a dissenter or trained for the ministry, but in 1710 he became assistant minister at the Presbyterian chapel in Grafton Square, Clapham. From 1714 until his death he was chief minister to the congregation. 
Lowman's reputation rests on his scholarship, in particular his published works on the 'Bible', the various defences he made of protestant dissent, and theological controversy with members of the established church. His two works on Jewish history and worship 'contain many things in them not only curious but entirely new... He determined to follow and embrace the truth wherever he should find it' (Chandler, 41-2). His commentaries and paraphrases on books of the 'Bible' were widely read and appreciated by both churchmen and dissenters. His 'Paraphrase and Notes on the Revelation of St John' (1737), praised by Philip Doddridge, went to four editions, the last being as late as 1807. He was an active and public-spirited pastor, serving not only his own congregation but assisting other chapels in a poor financial position. However, more than one source states that he was a poor preacher. 'His discourses were obscure, the respect and esteem of his congregation must be due not on evidence for the acceptableness of his sermons [but] to the excellence and weight of his character, and of the candour of his hearers, who, possessed of high sentiments of the latter passed over the unpleasing defects of the former. ('Protestant Dissenter's Magazine', 1794, 465-7)' Lowman sat lightly in the denominational setting. He was recognized at various times as a Presbyterian and an Independent. Voting with the Presbyterian majority for non-subscription at Salters' Hall in 1719, he was also a founder member of the London Congregational board in 1727. His style appeared to match the religious sentiments of the time. 'His piety was rational, not superstitious; the effect of principle not enthusiasm; grave but not morose; and serious without being disfigured by sourness' ('Protestant Dissenter's Magazine', 1794, 469). 
Lowman was married to Martha (died 1771), daughter of John Travers, a wealthy London merchant; they had two sons and a daughter. He died at Clapham on 3 May 1752; according to Samuel Chandler, who preached his funeral sermon, 'he continued in his ministerial labours till accident and disorder put an end to his services' (Chandler, 39-40). 


@@@@@


doc= 17098


Lowndes, Thomas (bap. 1692, d. 1748), colonial official and benefactor, was baptized at Astbury, Cheshire, on 7 December 1692. He was the second son of William Lowndes of Overton, an estate at Astbury, and his wife and cousin Elizabeth, daughter of Ralph Lowndes of Lea Hall. Thomas spent his childhood at Lea Hall, and through family influence became a clerk to the Treasury. 
On 27 September 1725 Lowndes received from the lords proprietors of South Carolina the patent of provost marshal. He never visited the colony, entrusting his duties to a deputy, but he profited substantially from financial dues paid to him as holder of the position. In this capacity he urged the crown's purchase of the colony, arguing for the colony's fertile soil, ease of defence, disunion among its proprietors, and its potential to restrain French and Spanish expansion. He also advanced schemes promoting foreign emigration to the colony, the manufacture of potash, and the incorporation of North Carolina with Virginia. 
On 30 November 1730 George II renewed Lowndes's patent of provost marshal, which he had surrendered at the transference of the colony to the crown in 1727. However, its value was greatly reduced by an act declaring all process null and void unless served by the provost marshal or his deputy in person. Lowndes did his utmost to have the 'Summons Act', which in the days of the lords proprietors had screened the abuses of the provost marshals, restored. When the assembly rejected this proposal he accused -- possibly upon false information -- Governor Robert Johnson of purposely withholding the motion. Johnson, writing from Charles Town on 28 September 1732, warned the Board of Trade against listening to the insinuations of a man who 'by the neglect of the late lords proprietors had made the province his property to the extent of $4,000 or $5,000, by no other merit than a consummate assurance'. In 1733 Lowndes resigned his patent of provost marshal, and it was not again renewed. 
In the following decade Lowndes turned his attention to questions of domestic trade. In 1745 he published 'A Method to Prevent, without a Register, the Running of Wool from Ireland to France', in which he blamed the decay of the British woollen manufacture on the restrictions placed on Irish trade. Appealing to the example of the Netherlands, Lowndes proposed to allow Ireland to manufacture in the Isle of Man home-grown wool into cloth and from there import it into England duty-free. The proposal met with no success and his attempt to introduce the measure in parliament came to nothing. He had better fortune with a project to supply the navy with salt, much of which then took the form of poor-quality imports. He developed his own method of producing salt which he advocated in a pamphlet in 1746. His specimens were highly praised by the Royal College of Physicians (their report, dated 27 August 1745, was printed with the pamphlet), but the Admiralty refused his terms. Lowndes carried the scheme to the House of Commons, and in June 1746 the house petitioned the king to instruct the Admiralty to accept the terms. Additional statements on the merits of his proposal included 'A Seasonable Hint for our Pilchard and Coast Fishery' and a letter from Lowndes 'to the salt proprietors of Great Britain' (both 1748). However, he did not see his plan fully tested: he died, unmarried, on 12 May 1748, at Overton Manor. By his will he left the estate at Overton, bought from his elder brother's daughter, and all his other property in Cheshire to found a chair of astronomy in Cambridge University, the Lowndean professorship of astronomy and geometry. The first professor, Roger Long, was appointed in 1750. 


@@@@@


doc= 17099


Lowndes, William (1652-1724), Treasury official, was born at Winslow, Buckinghamshire, on 1 November 1652, the younger son of Robert Lowndes ('bap'. 1619, died 1683) and his wife, Elizabeth, the daughter of Peter Fitzwilliams. Lowndes was descended from an old Cheshire gentry family, a cadet branch of which had established itself at Winslow early in the sixteenth century. His father had avoided participation in the civil war by emigrating to the American colonies, but returned to Winslow after the execution of Charles I. The family were impoverished minor gentry, and young William's formal education advanced no further than his attendance at the free school at nearby Buckingham. In 1667 he went to live in London. Precisely when his lifelong connection with the Treasury began has not been ascertained, but the records reveal that he was established there as a clerk by 1675, which may suggest that his government career had begun in a minor capacity some years before. 
Lowndes quickly excelled as a versatile and promising government servant. At first under the tutelage of the lord treasurer, Danby, he impressed Charles II in 1676 with the thoroughness of an investigation he conducted into racketeering by the sub-farmers of the coffee duties, and was afterwards regularly on duty at Treasury board meetings at Windsor and Newmarket, depending on where the royal court was based. His varied responsibilities in these early years also brought him closely in touch with the House of Commons. Here, he acted as an essential channel of communication to Lord Danby, advising him in relation to the detail and progress of money bills through the house, and providing drafts of proposed clauses requiring the consideration of the various revenue departments. In March 1679 Danby procured for him a customs sinecure (surrendered in 1680) and the reversion to an office in the duchy of Cornwall, though Lowndes subsequently regarded these as inconsiderable rewards. 
Late in 1679 Henry Guy, a financier with strong connections at court, was appointed secretary to the Treasury and soon came to regard Lowndes as a rare talent in the running of the Treasury office. He chose Lowndes as his chief or senior clerk, though it is not known when this appointment was actually made. Initially, it may not have been a formal arrangement, but it is clear that Lowndes began deputizing for Guy in Treasury affairs as early as 1680. Their association endured with mutual benefit for many years. Lowndes operated alongside the small number of other senior clerks, including such long-serving men as Robert Squibb, William Shaw, and Samuel Langford. The 1680s saw a significant expansionist phase in the development of the Treasury, during which Guy was ably assisted by Lowndes's financial expertise and command of administrative detail. Lowndes became an expert on the complex and arcane workings of the exchequer, upon which he produced a handbook in 1684-5, and was highly skilled in drafting complex documentation. By the mid-1680s he was suggesting important improvements in procedure, and in 1685 Guy procured for him the additional post of agent for taxes, responsible for co-ordinating the work of the provincial receivers-general, with a salary of $200. 
Lowndes was less fortunate in his personal life. He married four times between 1679 and 1691, each of his first three wives dying young. His first wife was Elizabeth (died 1680), the daughter of Sir Roger Harsnett of Dulwich, Kent, whom he married on 26 October 1679, and with whom he had one son, Robert (died 1727). His second wife, whom he married on 25 November 1683, was Jane (died 1685), the daughter of Simon Hopper of Richmond, Surrey, with whom he had a daughter. On 12 July 1686 he married, third, Elizabeth (died 1689), the daughter of the Revd Dr Richard Martin, and added another son and daughter to his family. He married, fourth, on 29 November 1691, Rebecca (died 1742), the daughter of John Shales, a colleague of Lowndes in the exchequer, a relationship which endured fruitfully until Lowndes's death. Between 1692 and 1710 their marriage produced seven sons and seven daughters, though Lowndes was survived by only three of the sons -- one of whom, Charles ('b'. 1699) was himself briefly treasury secretary -- and by four of the daughters. 
Although for political reasons Guy was removed from the Treasury following the revolution of 1688 until being reinstated in 1691, Lowndes remained in his post unscathed. The turning point in his career came suddenly in February 1695 when Guy was sent to the Tower on charges of corruption. The Treasury lords immediately nominated Lowndes as acting secretary, a role he had briefly performed in 1691, but left open the question of Guy's successor. Guy's destruction at the hands of the junto Whigs had in fact been only partial since his patron, Lord Sunderland, retained the goodwill of William III who allowed Guy the liberty of naming his successor. Lowndes was a natural choice, not only on account of his mastery of Treasury business, but also because he lacked political experience and was without political connection. With Lowndes in charge of the Treasury secretariat, Guy could expect to exercise a continuing influence in Treasury business, which would serve both his own and Sunderland's purposes. In facilitating this arrangement, Lowndes agreed that Guy should continue to receive the profits of the secretary's office while restricting himself to a salary of $1000 (later increased to $1200), which in the mid-1690s was less than half the net value of the secretary's office. Even after Guy's career had faded by the end of the decade, the payments to him continued, possibly until his death in 1710, and were justified by Lowndes to the Treasury board in 1702 as 'an acknowledgement to a person he had been so beholden to' (TNA: PRO, T64/126, fols. 247-8, quoted in Baxter, 201). 
Lowndes kissed the king's hand for his new office on 24 April 1695. He had already become involved in the government's efforts to resolve the worsening coinage crisis. The practice of 'clipping' hammered silver coin had reached the point where it was seriously affecting the Treasury's ability to pay its way in the war with France, and in late 1694 confidence in the silver coinage weakened dramatically. A complete reminting of the coinage was now imperative, but the problem facing a House of Commons committee early in 1695 was whether there should be a temporary devaluation in order to stabilize the currency while the old money was reminted, a primary concern being to offset the inevitable loss in the value of tax receipts. Earlier generations of historians, focusing upon the publication of opposing views on the subject by Lowndes and the philosopher John Locke, have portrayed Lowndes as the main exponent of devaluation and refer to the public difference of opinion between the two men as 'the Locke-Lowndes controversy'. More recent investigation, however, casts doubt on whether the views published under Lowndes's name on the Treasury's behalf represented his personal views. In a written report to the Treasury board in January 1695 Lowndes actually ruled out any suggestion of devaluation. While modestly conceding a limited grasp of the complexities behind the issue, he envisaged an immediate loss of some $150,000 in revenue, which would have to be met by a 'public tax', and a worrying increase in the cost of England's military payments abroad. 
The recoinage proposals put forward by the House of Commons in April 1695 embodied a nominal rate of 9 per cent devaluation, but received little notice, largely because Locke had earlier published a pamphlet against devaluation. But as the situation grew more urgent, Lowndes was instructed by the Treasury board in August to prepare a detailed scheme for recoinage, and since majority opinion on the board favoured devaluation it would appear that Lowndes was instructed to follow the scheme already proposed by the Commons. By mid-September his 'book', 'A Report Containing an Essay for the Amendment of the Silver Coins', was in Treasury hands. It embodied the Commons committee's resolutions and was fleshed out with much historical detail, but owing to the rapid increase in the market price of silver a devaluation rate of 20 per cent would now be necessary. William III and his ministers acknowledged Lowndes's ingenuity and scholarship but, disagreeing with the Treasury board, saw greater virtue in Locke's arguments for a recoinage at the old standard. Thus it was largely to assist the ministry's own scheme for recoinage in parliament that Lowndes's 'Report' was subsequently published in November 1695, followed by Locke's 'Further Considerations Concerning Raising the Value of Money'. While paying tribute to Lowndes's erudition, Locke was quick to point out that some of his arguments tended in fact to condemn devaluation of any kind. Moreover, the encouragement which Lowndes gave to Locke and other critics to publish their rebuttals of his 'Report' would likewise suggest that Lowndes had never personally favoured devaluation. In January 1696 an act was passed for a recoinage at the existing standard. 
At the general election in November 1695 Lowndes entered parliament for the Cinque Port town of Seaford in Sussex, a seat procured for him by the Pelham family, one of whom was a former member of the Treasury board. Lowndes's work as Treasury secretary settled in to a complex routine that would dominate the rest of his life. His controlling hand in all major aspects of Treasury administration was soon apparent in his deep involvement in the 'recoinage' of 1696-7, and in his initiation in 1697 of a major overhaul of exchequer procedure. His house, situated in the Broad Sanctuary near the west door of Westminster Abbey, proved a convenient meeting place for the Treasury commissioners after fire destroyed most of Whitehall, including the Treasury chambers, on the night of 4-5 January 1698. He played an important part each year in planning the government's financial measures to be laid before the House of Commons. To this end he maintained close liaison with the various spending departments and revenue boards, and oversaw the collation of data for compiling the annual accounts of overall government income and expenditure. He was also involved in the finalization of borrowing arrangements with the monied companies and with individual financiers and bankers. In the Commons, Lowndes's special sphere of responsibility was the committee of ways and means; there he proposed and explained each year the agendas of financial measures which had originated under his scrutiny at the Treasury. Not infrequently, during the financial stress of war, the angry criticism of MPs placed heavy demands on his ingenuity, forcing him to find ways of modifying proposals, and on occasion he was forced to abandon them altogether. The task of managing major pieces of fiscal legislation through the house usually fell to others, but it was Lowndes who ensured that bills contained the correct level of detail needed to regulate the levy and collection of new duties. 
Lowndes's mastery in Treasury matters was unchallenged for nearly thirty years, and he is recognized as one of the key figures in the 'financial revolution'. During his early years as secretary, the Treasury began to consolidate its control over parliamentary finance, a process which saw much refinement under Lowndes's continued lead. The Treasury machinery itself underwent much rapid change during Queen Anne's reign under the pressure of an increasing wartime workload, and the expanded Treasury 'establishment' which had emerged by 1714 bore characteristics which were to endure well into the nineteenth century. When faced with administrative failure or neglect, however, as often tended to occur among exchequer officials in their auditing of departmental accounts, Lowndes's improving hand entailed no more than an insistence on the observation of 'ancient' rules. He was loyal to successive Treasury ministers regardless of their politics, and he became, in effect, a permanent secretary. His longest and closest working association, however, was with Lord Godolphin, who was lord treasurer during 1700-01 and from 1702 until 1710. His scrupulous avoidance of party intrigue, and the fixed support which he gave to each ministry, was an important factor in the unstinting professionalism with which Lowndes approached his duties. He defied attempts by political analysts to classify him in terms of whig or tory, and at various times either party label was attached to him. 
Portraits of Lowndes depict a man of stern countenance although he was said to be 'a sociable, good companion' and a devoted Anglican ('Portland MSS', 5.99). All too often, however, his colleagues saw a man whose almost constant engrossment in work was difficult to penetrate. His piety and rectitude were deeply ingrained features of his personality, and his long involvement in organizing the nation's finances was entirely without taint of peculation. Like most men in the higher echelons of government, Lowndes was nevertheless able to profit greatly from the perquisites of office. A shrewd manager of his own money, he bought up land in and around his native Winslow during the 1690s, purchasing the manor of Winslow itself in 1697 and rebuilding Winslow Hall over the next five years. He acquired other property: at Chesham, also in Buckinghamshire, at Berkhamsted in Hertfordshire, and in the fashionable metropolitan districts of St James's and Chelsea. It was appropriate, too, that he should use his position to secure salaried places at the Treasury and other government offices for several of his sons and sons-in-law, thus establishing a dynastic involvement in government administration which would continue for several generations. 
Lord Treasurer Oxford's appointment of a joint secretary to the Treasury in June 1711 was primarily for political purposes, and Lowndes's hold over financial administration remained largely untouched. There was likewise never any doubt of his being retained at the Treasury after the Hanoverian succession. At the general election of 1715 he lost control of the seat he had held for many years at Seaford, but transferred to the Cornish pocket borough of St Mawes. A major Treasury priority during the early years of whig rule was to find ways of controlling the escalating national debt. In May 1717 he thus gave full support to the scheme for a 'sinking fund', designed ostensibly to reorganize the debt in such a way as would ensure its liquidation in the foreseeable future. The scheme had been devised by Robert Walpole but, amid the opening stages of the 'whig schism', was unveiled in the Commons by Walpole's opponent, the Treasury's new first lord, James Stanhope. In 1720 Lowndes had a large share in drafting the 'South Sea Act' which gave authorization to the company's disastrous scheme for dealing with unfunded national debt, and which resulted in the South Sea Bubble and its bursting later in the year. He subsequently assisted Walpole, following the latter's return to the Treasury in April 1721, with the task of framing the 'Act to Restore the Public Credit' which restructured the company's finances and its government obligations. It was duly introduced to the house by Lowndes on 2 August. 
Renouncing his Cornish seat at the election of 1722, Lowndes stood for the populous London constituency of Westminster, but was defeated after a fierce contest. An alternative seat was found for him in October that year when he was brought in at a by-election for another Cornish borough, East Looe. Lowndes's death occurred on 20 January 1724, just four days after a routine appearance at the house; he was buried on 3 February in the family vault at Winslow constructed in 1700 when the church was handsomely refurbished at his expense. Walpole told MPs that they 'had lost a very useful Member, and the public as able and honest a servant as ever the crown had' ('JHC', 20.242). According to Lord Chesterfield, writing in 1747, Lowndes was the originator of the maxim, 'take care of the pence for the pounds will take care of themselves' (Chesterfield, 'Letters to his Son', 6 Nov 1747). 


@@@@@


doc= 17100


Lowndes, William Thomas (bap. 1793, d. 1843), bibliographer, was baptized at St Luke's, Chelsea, on 8 December 1793, the son of William Lowndes (1753?-1823), bookseller at 77 Fleet Street and Bedford Street, Covent Garden, and his wife, Mary Ann. He came from a well-known bookselling family, originally from Cheshire, of which several members were liverymen of the Stationers' Company. His grandfather Thomas Lowndes and his father were noted dramatic publishers; his cousin Henry Lowndes recovered from bankruptcy to become a prosperous bookseller and Stationers' Company court assistant. W. T. Lowndes was apprenticed to his father at Stationers' Hall on 7 July 1807 and freed on 8 September 1814, but not admitted to the livery. On 11 October 1828 he married Susan Cooper at St Paul's, Covent Garden. They had two children, one of whom, a daughter, was born in 1830. Lowndes may well have scratched a living as a freelance cataloguer but little is known of his life up to its last few years. In January 1841 he wrote applying for relief to the Royal Literary Fund. It was a charity that at that time insisted on its pensioners possessing moral probity as well as literary merit, and Lowndes hoped to conceal from its committee his 'one great offence committed many years ago' which had been 'within the knowledge of everybody connected with literary affairs in the metropolis' (P. Hall, letter of apology, Royal Literary Fund). In 1833 Lowndes had 'sold $300 worth of books from the collection of Richard Heber, which had been placed in his hands to be catalogued' ('N&Q', 10th ser., 12, 1909, 228). He apparently asked his three sponsors, who included the well-known booksellers Thomas Rodd and Henry Stevens, to speak only of his penury and the worth of 'The Bibliographers' Manual' but the book theft came to the ears of the committee and the appeal was rejected as 'unworthy of consideration' (Royal Literary Fund). Lowndes removed his letter of application and the biographical information it would have contained. There is no other evidence of shiftiness, yet it is strange that a young man of twenty-seven, in 1820, should have had the leisure to embark on a bibliography designed to supplement 'in relation to 'British' literature' (Lowndes, 1834, i) Brunet's 'Manuel du libraire'. He was known within the trade for his 'bibliographical drudgery', encouraged by booksellers and collectors alike, and was, perhaps, accounted so brilliant a cataloguer that booksellers would be prepared to risk losing a few books by employing him. Bibliophiles such as Richard Heber and Thomas Grenville offered him the use of their libraries. Thomas Rodd 'especially gave constant advice and useful suggestions' (Lowndes, 1834, xii) and put the first and no longer extant edition of 'The Bibliographer's Manual' in fifteen parts (1828-32) on his 1832 catalogue. After publication of the 'Manual' Lowndes 'designed to supplement' his 'defective treatment of theology' by compiling 'The British Librarian' (1839-42). He was 'confident', he told the Royal Literary Fund, 'that when completed its sale would sufficiently remunerate' (Royal Literary Fund) him, but he was by then 'so dogged by ill health, mental instability and failing eyesight' (ibid.) that the work was published in an incomplete form. At the end of his life Lowndes lodged at 4 Calthorpe Place, Gray's Inn Road. He spent his last years working for Bohn as a cataloguer, but in his employer's words: 'his long course of bibliographical drudgery had reduced him, both in body and mind, to a mere wreck of his former self... and in his own history he realised a fact, of which he was always conscious, that Bibliography has no recognised status in England. (Bohn, appx V)' He died in London on 31 July 1843. 
Lowndes's posthumous fame rests on 'The Bibliographer's Manual' (1834), the first systematic work of its kind. At the close of the twentieth century this was still a standard bibliographical reference tool, particularly useful to librarians and bibliophiles for its details of provenance. It was an attempt to produce a bibliographical manual for the whole of English literature on the pattern of Watt's 'Bibliotheca Britannica'. After Lowndes's death Bohn expanded it to 6 volumes (1858-68). In an eminently respectable book trade family, he appears to have been the black sheep. 


@@@@@


doc= 17101


Lowry, John (1769-1850), mathematician, was born in Cumberland, and was for some time an excise officer at Solihull, near Birmingham. Little is known of his background and personal life. In 1804 he was appointed teacher of arithmetic in the new military college at Marlow. He held this post until 30 June 1840, when failing sight compelled him to resign on a pension. About 1846 he became totally blind. He died at Pimlico, London, on 3 January 1850. Lowry was one of the earliest and most frequent contributors to Thomas Leybourn's 'Mathematical Repository' (1799 to 1819). He was the author of a section on spherical trigonometry included in the second volume of Dalby's 'Course of Mathematics', the textbook in use at Sandhurst during the early nineteenth century. The writer of Lowry's obituary in the 'Gentleman's Magazine' claims that he wrote the sections on arithmetic and algebra also. 


@@@@@


doc= 17102


Joseph Wilson Lowry (1803-1879), who was born on 7 October 1803 and baptized in March 1804 at St Marylebone, Middlesex. Lowry died at his home, 57 Great Titchfield Street, London, on 23 June 1824 after a two-year illness. He had by this time lost his wealth and was reliant on the Artists' Annuity Fund. His daughter Anne married the Greek scholar Hugh Stuart Boyd. His daughter Matilda married Mr Heming, an Oxford astronomer, and became a successful portrait painter, exhibiting four works at the Royal Academy in 1808 and 1809. In 1822 his daughter Delvalle wrote and illustrated 'Conversations on Mineralogy' and in 1825 she married as his second wife John Varley, the painter, with whom the family had been friends since 1802. In 1846 she wrote the 'Engineer's Manual of Mineralogy and Geology', followed by 'Rudimentary Geology' in 1848. Lowry's son, Joseph Wilson Lowry, also worked as an engraver. He collaborated with his father on the 'Encyclopaedia metropolitana', and later specialized in topographical and geological subjects, exhibiting two works at the Royal Academy in 1829 and 1830. He died, unmarried, on 15 June 1879 at Robert Street, Hampstead Road, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 17103


Lowry, Wilson (bap. 1760, d. 1824), engraver, was baptized at St James's, Whitehaven, Cumberland, on 30 April 1760, the son of Strickland Lowry (1737-1780x85), portrait and landscape painter, and his wife, Sarah, 'nee' Watson. It is thought that he was named after the Belfast-born painter Joseph Wilson, with whom his father worked in Ireland. Lowry's childhood saw the family living for a time in Staffordshire, Shropshire, and Ireland. His first job was as a house-painter on the exterior of Warwick Castle. This was followed by a period in London and Arundel, Sussex. At about seventeen he was working for an engraver named Mr Ross in Worcester, where his family had finally settled. 
Lowry's first plate was a trade card for a local fishmonger, for which he received as payment a large quantity of red herrings. In 1779 he produced illustrations for 'The History and Antiquities of Shrewsbury' by Thomas Phillips, a resident of the town. At about eighteen he returned to London, took lodgings in Vauxhall, and began working for the prominent printer John Boydell. His works for Boydell included engravings after landscapes by Gaspar Poussin, Salvator Rosa, and George Robertson. Boydell introduced Lowry to William Blizard, surgeon at the London Hospital, for whom he made a drawing of the hot-air balloon flown by the pioneering aviator Vincenzo Lunardi in 1784. Blizard encouraged Lowry to practise surgery, but after four years spent training he abandoned this plan and instead returned to engraving. Though he never formally enrolled as a student, it is said he took drawing lessons in the Royal Academy Schools and was taught perspective by Thomas Malton the elder. 
Lowry found work with John Browne, James Heath, and William Sharp, preparing the plates for works such as Sharp's version of Sir Joshua Reynolds's portrait of John Hunter, physician to George III. He also assisted William Byrne in etching the 'Antiquities of Great Britain' drawn by Thomas Hearne, and published several portrait prints under his own name. But it was as an engraver of architecture and mechanism that Lowry earned distinction. Early examples include his illustrations for James Murphy's 'Description of the Church of Batalha in Portugal' and 'Travels in Portugal' of 1795; architectural prints for the 1796 edition of Lord Macartney's 'Embassy to China'; and illustrations to Alexander Tilloch's 'Philosophical Magazine', first published in 1798, and the 'Journal of the Society of Arts'. In 1800 Lowry began work on plates for Dr Abraham Rees's 'Cyclopaedia', which was to become the most successful reference book of its day. This was a mammoth task not only because the publication ran for the next twenty years, but also because each design had to be engraved twice over in order to print the 6000 copies required. Where no artist is given, the original drawing was made by Lowry or one of his daughters. The volumes contain some of Lowry's finest representations of machinery. 
While working on the 'Cyclopaedia' Lowry also contributed many of the illustrations to 'The Antiquities of Magna Graecia', written in 1807 by William Wilkins, future professor of architecture at the Royal Academy, and also the same author's translation of Vitruvius (1812). In 1809 he engraved twelve plates for Jane Marcet's 'Conversations on Chemistry' and also several for Jeremiah Joyce's 'Scientific Dialogues'. He contributed the plates to works by the builder and mathematician Peter Nicholson, including 'The Principles of Architecture' (1795-8); 'A Treatise on Practical Perspective' (1815); an 'Architectural Dictionary' (1819); and 'The Rudiments of Practical Perspective' (1822). In 1820 his engravings were used in Thomas Squire's 'A Popular Grammar of the Elements of Astronomy' and Frederick Nash's 'Picturesque Views of the City of Paris'. Lowry's last works appear to be illustrations for George Crabb's 'Universal Technological Dictionary' (1823) and Samuel Taylor Coleridge's 'Encyclopaedia metropolitana', published from 1817 onwards. 
To ensure his engravings achieved an accuracy worthy of their scientific subjects, in 1798 Lowry became the first engraver to use diamond points for ruling. About 1790 he designed a ruling machine, which he first employed upon a plate in James Stuart's 'Antiquities of Athens'; in 1801 he invented an instrument for striking elliptical curves, and in 1806 another for making perspective drawings. These were described and highly praised by John Landseer in his lectures on engraving at the Royal Institution. Though none of the above were patented, Lowry sold the formula of his prized etching fluid to Jacob Perkins, the American inventor, and Charles Heath, the engraver. 
Lowry was a founder member of the Geological Society and in 1812 he was elected a fellow of the Royal Society. He kept his own collection of geological specimens and, in a letter published in the 'Imperial Magazine' in January 1820, contended that the formation of the earth had taken at least a million years with only the alluvial soils deposited by the biblical flood. He wrote many of the minor articles in Rees's 'Cyclopaedia'. Undoubtedly it was Lowry's genuine interest in science and mechanics that enabled him to design and engrave his plates with such clarity. 
Lowry was married twice, first to Miss Porter of Birmingham, with whom he had two daughters, Anne and Matilda. After she died he married Rebekah Eliza Delvalle (1761-1848), a mineralogist of Spanish descent. The wedding took place on 16 June 1796 in the parish of St Marylebone, Middlesex. They had a daughter, Delvalle, and a son, 
A portrait of Wilson Lowry, drawn by John Linnell and engraved by Linnell and William Blake, was published soon after his death. There are also two known portraits of Lowry drawn by his daughter Matilda. One is a watercolour dating from about 1810 which is now in the collection of the National Portrait Gallery. The second was engraved by James Thomson for the 'European Magazine' (August 1824), and by Henry Meyer for the 'Imperial Magazine' (February 1825). Examples of Lowry's work can be found in the British Museum, the National Portrait Gallery, and the Victoria and Albert Museum. 


@@@@@


doc= 17104


Lowth, Robert (1710-1787), biblical critic and bishop of London, was born in his father's house in the cathedral close at Winchester on 27 November 1710. He was the second son of William Lowth (1661-1732), prebendary of Winchester, and his wife, Margaret ('fl'. 1675-1735), daughter of Robert Pitt of Blandford, Dorset. He attended Winchester College, as a scholar, from November 1721 until September 1729. He matriculated as a commoner at St John's College, Oxford, on 26 March 1729 but was admitted as a scholar at New College in January 1730. He graduated BA in October 1733 and MA in June 1737, and became a fellow of New College. 
Lowth made a name for himself as a very young man through his composition of verses in both English and Latin. To the pious stanzas that he wrote in his bed at the age of fourteen, 'On a Thunder Storm by Night', he soon added a poem (printed in 1729) on the genealogy of Christ as displayed in the east window of Winchester College chapel, and another, written as a school exercise, 'Katherine-Hill, Near Winchester', in which he turned a consideration of the place where he played as a schoolboy into an elegy on the fate of Charles I and of Winchester during the civil war. Lowth's career as a poet developed at Oxford, where he published Latin verses in several collections of poetry from the university, as well as in the 'Gentleman's Magazine'. His poem 'The Judgment of Hercules' was printed in 1743. Conservative in tone and essentially predictable in style, Lowth's poetry nevertheless commanded the attention of Christopher Pitt and Joseph Spence; it was frequently anthologized later in his life. Yet it was Lowth's skill as a critic, not a writer, of verse that would win him genuine and widespread fame. 
In June 1741 Lowth was elected professor of poetry at Oxford, a chair that Spence had held. Re-elected in 1746, he served for a total of ten years, in the course of which he delivered the thirty-four 'Praelectiones de sacra poesi Hebraeorum' that were to make his name. Published in 1753, together with a short confutation of Bishop Francis Hare's system of metre, Lowth's lectures established a new method for reading and understanding those passages of the Hebrew 'Bible', such as the 'Psalms' and many of the writings of the prophets, that were traditionally considered as verse, as well as a means to expand and define the canon of biblical poetry. Building on the work of contemporary Oxford scholars, notably Thomas Hunt, Lowth urged the importance of setting biblical poetry in the context of oriental rather than classical style and the impossibility of ever determining the ancient vocalization of the Hebrew 'Bible' with sufficient accuracy to identify its true metrical structure. In place of metre Lowth argued that the structure of Hebrew verse could be identified by its often parabolic or figurative mode of expression, and in particular by the parallelisms, or repetitions of similar words or phrases, sometimes in a regular order, sometimes not, that gave rhythm to Hebrew poetry and song, and served almost as an alternative to metre. Using these critical tools Lowth also tried to identify a sublime, and divinely inspired, quality in Hebrew verse. 
In December 1741, shortly after his election as professor of poetry, Lowth was ordained deacon by Bishop Thomas Secker; he became a priest in December 1742. In July 1744 Bishop Benjamin Hoadly collated him to the rectory of Ovington, Hampshire, and in August 1750 promoted him archdeacon of Winchester, adding the rectory of East Woodhay to his preferments in June 1753. The University of Oxford created him DD by diploma on 18 July 1754. In March 1748 Lowth travelled with the embassy of Henry Bilson-Legge to Berlin, where he took the opportunity to instruct Frederick the Great, king of Prussia, about the principal English poets. He returned in February 1749 but was soon travelling again with lords George and Frederick Cavendish, sons of William Cavendish, third duke of Devonshire. They journeyed together through France and Italy, visiting Herculaneum in the spring of 1750. Lowth thus established firm connections with prominent whig noblemen and with influential figures in the ministry. He also cemented his own place in the life of his native county. On 26 December 1752 he married Mary (died 1803), daughter and heir of Laurence Jackson of Christchurch, Hampshire, in the process securing substantial property and a considerable fortune. Despite the careful financial arrangements that preceded it this seems also to have been a loving marriage, and Lowth evidently took pleasure in the family that resulted. Two sons and five daughters were born between December 1753 and June 1765, but Lowth's later life was increasingly tinged by sadness as a result of the premature deaths of some of his children, of whom only Martha (1760-1812) and Robert (1762-1822), later vicar of Halstead, in Essex, and prebendary of St Paul's, survived their father. In 1768 Lowth composed a moving epitaph on the death of his eldest daughter, Mary, whom he had celebrated as 'a little brown Beauty' after her birth in 1755 (Bodl. Oxf., MS Eng. lett. c. 572, fols. 66-7). 
In spite of his personal success Lowth complained in March 1755 that 'my affairs seem to be at a dead stand' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Eng. lett. c. 572, fol. 9'r'). As a result he felt bound to accept appointment as chaplain to William Cavendish, then marquess of Hartington, who was appointed lord lieutenant of Ireland in 1755. He extracted a promise that Hartington would intercede with Thomas Pelham-Holles, duke of Newcastle, then prime minister, to exchange any Irish preferment that Lowth might obtain for a suitable position at home. Lowth sailed for Dublin in May 1755, by which time Hartington was pursuing another scheme that would allow Lowth to change places with someone who would have liked an Irish bishopric '& had the wherewithal to pay well for it' (ibid., fols. 15-16). Lowth was granted the freedom of Limerick in June 1755 and soon afterwards Hartington's plans began to bear fruit. Protracted negotiations involving Joseph Butler, bishop of Durham, and Benjamin Hoadly, bishop of Winchester, as well as the duke of Newcastle eventually resulted in the appointment of James Leslie as bishop of Limerick, an office that Lowth had declined, and the transfer to Lowth of a prebendal stall at Durham. In place of Leslie's other preferments Lowth was granted the valuable living of Sedgefield. He took up his new positions and moved to co. Durham in October 1755, purchasing a post-chaise to facilitate communication with his family in Hampshire. Through Hartington, who had become duke of Devonshire, he was appointed a royal chaplain on 18 August 1757. Lowth was now free to pursue literary and theological controversy, and although further preferment took some time he was also set on a significant career within the Church of England. He was considered a candidate to be warden of Winchester College in 1764. In 1765 he became a fellow of both the Royal Society of London and that of Gottingen. On 15 June 1766, as one of the final beneficiaries of Newcastle's ecclesiastical patronage, he was consecrated bishop of St David's. On 16 October, however, he was translated to the see of Oxford, and on 12 April 1777 he was nominated bishop of London. He was made dean of the Chapel Royal, was sworn of the privy council, and from 1786 was a member of the committee for trade and plantations. He was also a governor of the Charterhouse and a trustee of the British Museum. On the death of Frederick Cornwallis, archbishop of Canterbury, in 1783, he declined the offer of the primacy. 
Although Lowth had been astute in the pursuit of worldly success, and of the patronage necessary to achieve it, he was nevertheless a dedicated and effective churchman and administrator. He preached regularly, and although his conclusions were often predictable the subjects that he tackled were sometimes controversial ones, such as the importance of instructing African slaves in Christian religion or the need to overcome the weakening of the constitution by 'a general national depravity' ('Sermons, and other Remains, of Robert Lowth', 194). Richard Price attacked Lowth's Ash Wednesday sermon in 1779, arguing that he had abandoned the concern with freedom and the constitution that had been expressed in some of his earlier sermons, but others praised his love of liberty. More significant than Lowth's preaching, however, was his concern for the godly administration of the church. He was an efficient archdeacon, and as bishop of London conducted a campaign in the early 1780s against the practice of some lay patrons in forcing clergymen to accept bonds of resignation before instituting them to their livings. After legal battles lasting two and a half years the House of Lords finally ruled in Lowth's favour, upholding the principle that the beneficed clergy should be able to act as freeholders, without obligation to their patrons. Like Secker he was amenable to the revision of the 'Thirty-Nine Articles' and showed some sympathy for those who felt unable to subscribe to their current form. More significantly Secker drew on Lowth's learning for support in his efforts to promote a revision of the Authorized Version of the 'Bible', a project that Lowth continued to encourage after his own consecration as bishop. His reputation for scholarship and good sense ensured that individuals as different from one another as John Wesley and Alexander Geddes could enjoy his company and regard him as sympathetic and encouraging to some of their ideas. He was a prominent supporter of Benjamin Kennicott's collation of Hebrew manuscripts of the 'Bible' and, later, of Robert Holmes's work on the text of the 'Septuagint'. 
To other eyes, however, Lowth's career was marred by his tenacity in controversy. 'The Life of William of Wykeham', which first appeared in 1758 and was based on considerable research in the Winchester archives, contained a dedication to Lowth's patron, Bishop Hoadly, that reignited debate over Hoadly's role in the election of Christopher Golding as warden of Winchester College and led to a sharp exchange of pamphlets. Lowth's care in revising subsequent editions of this biography, in 1759 and 1777, did not extend to any softening of his support for Hoadly. His Hebrew scholarship won him many admirers, especially among his contemporaries at Oxford and at the University of Gottingen, where J. D. Michaelis in particular championed his interpretation. Michaelis added his own notes to an edition of Lowth's 'Praelectiones' (1758-61), which were included in the translation by George Gregory, published in 1787. But the regard for Lowth's work in Germany and, following its translation in 1812, in France did not lessen the offence that it gave to some English critics. His attack on Bishop Hare generated a hostile reception, notably from Thomas Edwards, to which he characteristically responded by amplifying his criticisms in 'A Larger Confutation of Bishop Hare's System of Hebrew Metre' (1766). 
More heat and less light were produced by the quarrel that ensued with William Warburton and his followers as a result of Lowth's remarks in the 'Praelectiones' about the punishment of idolatry by the civil power among the ancient Hebrews. Lowth's arguments called into question some of the conclusions of Warburton's 'Divine Legation of Moses'. A long correspondence developed in 1756, into which Warburton's criticisms of the work of Lowth's father were drawn. The dispute eventually appeared to have been settled but it was reignited by Warburton's comments on 'Job' in the appendix to the sixth book of the 'Divine Legation'. As part of his reply Lowth printed the correspondence from 1756, angering Warburton, who objected to the publication of private letters, and generating a torrent of pamphlets from his friends. By the summer of 1766 Secker was concerned about the open and petty quarrel between two of his most prominent churchmen and struggled to bring about a rapprochement that recognized 'the Relation, in which you are soon to stand, as Bishops in the same Church, obliged frequently to meet & act together' (BL, Add. MS 42560, fols. 147-8). Nevertheless Warburton's followers continued to worry at the sore that had been created, and as late as 1796 were still trying to retaliate for the injury inflicted on their champion. 
In 1762 Lowth published 'A Short Introduction to English Grammar', in which he extolled the simplicity of the form and construction of the English language while remarking that it could still not rival the most ancient of languages, Hebrew, in this respect. Lowth intended his work to provide a succinct guide to grammar and to overcome imperfect or imprecise usage, even when found in the Authorized Version of the English 'Bible'. It proved immensely popular in both Britain and America and was republished dozens of times during the eighteenth century alone; more than 34,000 copies had been printed by 1781. A German translation with critical notes by Christian Heinrich Reichel appeared in 1790. The most substantial of Lowth's publications was his new translation, with notes, of the book of 'Isaiah'. This came out in 1778, with a second edition in the following year. It enabled Lowth to work out his interpretations of the form and structure of Hebrew poetry, as well as to set out his conjectures about the original text and his opinions about its translation. It was the first and most successful example of a short-lived genre of biblical criticism and commentary that was emulated by several Oxford scholars and that owed much to Secker's desire that there should be progress towards a new English translation of the 'Bible'. A German translation by Johann Benjamin Koppe, a professor of theology at Gottingen, appeared between 1779 and 1781. As usual, however, Lowth's work proved controversial; David Kocher in particular attacked Lowth's doubts about the value of vowel points for an understanding of the Hebrew text. When selections from Lowth's 'Isaiah' were published in parts by the Society for Promoting the Knowledge of the Scriptures in the mid-1780s they were criticized by Michael Dodson. 
In his old age Lowth was hampered by fits of bladder and gall stones, and he became incapable of travel. He died at Fulham Palace, London, between 2 p.m. and 3 p.m. on 3 November 1787, probably following a stroke, and was buried at Fulham church on 12 November. He had already given the copyright in his lectures on Hebrew poetry to the University of Oxford, and that in his life of William of Wykeham to New College, Oxford. His will honoured the terms of the trust set up when he married. 


@@@@@


doc= 17105


Lowth, Simon (bap. 1636, d. 1720), nonjuring Church of England clergyman and writer, was baptized at Dingley, Northamptonshire, on 30 October 1636, where his father, Simon Lowth (1600-1679) was the rector. His mother was Elinor Paddon, of whom little is known. Lowth was the third son of four sons and two daughters baptized at Dingley between 1633 and 1641: the eldest, William, was the father of the theologian William Lowth and grandfather of Robert Lowth, bishop of London. Lowth's father suffered sequestration in 1655 for reading the 'Book of Common Prayer', bowing at the name of Jesus, preaching only once on Sundays, and general insufficiency, but in 1658 became rector of Tilehurst, Berkshire. Lowth senior may have been the author of 'Catechetical questions' (1673), and he was buried at Tilehurst on 21 June 1679. 
Lowth was admitted to Clare College, Cambridge, on 29 June 1653; he graduated BA in 1657 and proceeded MA in 1660. He served as vicar of St Dunstan's, Canterbury (1665-89), rector of St Michael's, Harbledown, Kent (1670-90), and vicar of St Cosmus, Blean, Kent (1679-89). On 8 November 1679 he was licensed to marry Jane Austin ('b'. 1654/5, died in or after 1720) of Canterbury. 
Lowth appears to have found a patron in Samuel Parker, archdeacon of Canterbury, and in 1685 he published 'Of the Subject of Church Power', which upheld the role of the bishops in the governance of the church, and was an attack on the Erastian leanings of Edward Stillingfleet, John Tillotson, and Gilbert Burnet. He published several other pamphlets on this theme before the revolution of 1688, mainly contesting the claims of Burnet. He was probably the Mr Lowth who preached the sermon at the consecration of bishops Samuel Parker (his old patron), Thomas Cartwright, and William Lloyd on 17 October 1686. He seems to have been in royal favour because James II presented him to the deanery of Rochester on 6 November 1688, and Bishop Thomas Sprat instituted him on 12 November. However, Sprat then discovered that Lowth's degree of MA was insufficient for the post and he wrote to the chapter on the 14th advising them not to install Lowth. The chapter duly refused installation on 27 November. By the time Lowth proceeded BD and DD at Cambridge (delayed because there was no vice-chancellor) on 18 January 1689, and again claimed installation on 19 March 1689, William III had presented Henry Ullock in his place, and installation was again refused. This disappointment may have coloured Lowth's subsequent reaction to the new regime, because the register of St Cosmus, Blean, indicates that Lowth prayed in public for the new regime until the deanery was disposed of elsewhere. 
Lowth's refusal to take the oaths of allegiance led to his suspension from his Kentish parishes in August 1689, and to his deprivation in February 1690. Lowth was an important contributor to the controversy following the deprivation of the nonjuring bishops in 1691; in particular in his 'Historical Collections Concerning Church Affairs' (1696), he refuted the arguments of Humphrey Hody, who used medieval documents to provide precedents of the practice from the early church. Hody in response referred to Lowth as a 'foul mouthed collector', whose work was a 'long wild rage of impertinences' (Champion, 49). Other historically based tracts followed, such as 'Ekalogai, or, Excerpts from the Ecclesiastical History' (1704), and 'Historical Collections Concerning District Successions and Deprivations' (1713), both of which upheld the power of episcopacy against that of the state in spiritual matters. 
Lowth was living in London in the parish of St Andrew's, Holborn, when he made his will on 27 April 1713. The amounts he bequeathed were small, and most of his estate was left to his wife. He republished his will in a memorandum of 22 June 1717. He died on 3 July 1720, and was buried in the new cemetery of the parish of St George the Martyr, Queen Square. He was survived by his wife, whose date of death is unknown, and by at least two children, Simon and Anne. 


@@@@@


doc= 17106


Lowth, William (1661-1732), theologian, was born in the parish of St Martin Ludgate, London, at 4 p.m. on 11 September 1661 and baptized there at 5 p.m. on 1 October, the son of William Lowth, apothecary, and his wife, Mary Short. His father, who was the brother of Simon Lowth (bap. 1636, d. 1720), was 'burnt out with great loss at the fire of London' ('GM', 1st ser., 57/2, 1787, 1028). At the time of the great fire, Lowth was receiving a preparatory education under his grandfather Simon Lowth (1600-1679), rector of Tilehurst, Berkshire. He was admitted to Merchant Taylors' School on 11 September 1672 and was elected scholar of St John's College, Oxford, on 11 June 1675. He became a fellow and graduated BA in 1679, proceeding MA (1683) and BD (1688). On 25 May 1684 he was ordained deacon at Christ Church, Oxford; he was made a priest on 20 September 1685, subsequently becoming vicar of St Nicholas, Rochester, and rector of Overton, Hampshire. 
In 1692 Lowth published 'A vindication of the divine authority and inspiration of the writings of the Old and New Testament', in which he attacked Hobbes, Spinoza, and other critics of the integrity and inspiration of scripture and answered many of the points raised by Jean Le Clerc's 'Five Letters' (1690). Lowth defended the Oratorian Richard Simon from some of Le Clerc's remarks and from the misrepresentation of his ideas given in the poem 'Religio laici' by John Dryden. This work found favour with Peter Mew, bishop of Winchester, who made him his chaplain, gave him a prebendal stall at Winchester on 8 October 1696, and presented him to the benefice of Buriton with Petersfield, Hampshire, in May 1699, which he held until his death. In 1697 he was an unsuccessful candidate for the presidency of St John's College, Oxford. A second edition of the 'Vindication', with a new preface in which Lowth defended the authority of the Pauline epistles against some remarks of John Locke, appeared in 1699. On 15 November 1700 he married, at St Bride's, Fleet Street, London, Margaret, daughter of Robert Pitt of Blandford Forum, Dorset. 
In 1708 Lowth printed 'Directions for the Profitable Reading of the Holy Scriptures'; six editions of this book had been published by 1799. It aimed to serve as a practical guide for lay readers to safe and profitable texts in the 'Bible'. His skill as an expositor, whose work appealed to lay people as well as divines, was confirmed by the success of a series of commentaries on the prophetic books of the 'Old Testament' that he published between 1714 and 1726. These were frequently reprinted later in the century as a companion to the commentaries of Simon Patrick on the historical books of the 'Old Testament'. Lowth effectively summarized the most advanced orthodox ideas of post-Restoration churchmen in his commentaries, which treated Israelite prophecy as foreshadowing the teaching of Christ and the history of the church. A dedicated advocate of the established church, Lowth preached against separation in June 1722 following the opening of a dissenting meeting-house at Petersfield. In his sermon, and in the ensuing pamphlet controversy with John Norman, Lowth defended the apostolical institution of episcopacy and the record of the Church of England in promoting knowledge of the 'Bible'. He was, however, a somewhat reluctant controversialist and he withdrew from lengthy engagement with Norman, sending his adversary manuscript responses that he refused to allow to be printed. He was highly regarded as a critic by his contemporaries and assisted John Potter in an edition of Clement of Alexandria and John Hudson with his work on Josephus. He also contributed to William Reading's edition of early ecclesiastical historians and advised Edward Chandler in his controversy with Anthony Collins. Lowth died at Buriton on 17 May 1732 and was buried in the churchyard there. He was survived by his wife, two sons, and three daughters. 


@@@@@


doc= 17107


Sir Gerard Lowther (d. 1624) was a younger son of Sir Richard Lowther (1532-1608) of Lowther, Westmorland, and his wife, Frances, daughter of John Middleton of Middleton, Westmorland. He entered the Inner Temple in 1580 and was called to the bar in 1590. Appointed a justice of common pleas in Ireland by patent dated 12 October 1610, he was recorded the following year as 'like to do good service' in a court whose judges were characterized by age and infirmity (Bewley, 3). A friend of Richard Boyle, earl of Cork, he was returned MP for Tallow, a borough in the earl's sway, in 1613. In 1616 he served as treasurer of King's Inns and in 1618 was knighted by the lord deputy. By then he had acquired land in co. Fermanagh and co. Tyrone under the Ulster plantation and he was granted market and fair privileges for Lowtherstown in co. Fermanagh. He married, first, Grace (1557/8-1594), daughter of Alan Bellingham of Levens, Westmorland, and widow of Edmund Cliburn, and second, Anne Welbury ('nee' Bulmer), daughter and coheir of Sir Ralph Bulmer of Wilton, Durham. There were no children by either marriage and at his death, on 14 October 1624, he bequeathed the bulk of his property to his nephew Richard Lowther and his godson the younger Gerard Lowther. He was buried on 16 October in Christ Church, Dublin. 


@@@@@


doc= 17108


Lowther, Sir Gerard (c.1590-1660), judge, was according to Sir William Betham the illegitimate son of Sir Christopher Lowther (died 1617) of Penrith, Cumberland. Raised within the family circle, he is probably the Gerard Lowther who entered Queen's College, Oxford, in 1605. After call to the bar by Gray's Inn in 1614, he elected to pursue his fortunes in Ireland where two of his uncles, one of whom was also called Gerard, were to attain judicial office in the 1610s. The elder 
Admitted to King's Inns, Dublin, in 1619, the younger Gerard Lowther was named attorney-general of Munster three years later at the salary of 20 marks a year. Through the influence of Richard Boyle, earl of Cork, he was made a baron of the Irish exchequer in 1628, where, for some years, he served on the same bench with his other uncle, Lancelot Lowther. With the removal from office of Dominick Sarsfield, the chief justice of the Irish common pleas, in 1633, the younger man, who had been knighted two years earlier, was destined to secure an even higher prize. Boyle pressed for the promotion of the new Sir Gerard to fill the vacancy, greasing the palm of Sir Thomas Wentworth, recently installed as Irish lord deputy, with the promise of $1000 if he carried out his side of the bargain. The new chief justice, not for the last time, then altered his allegiance, attaching himself to Wentworth and helping to oversee the legal and administrative reforms that the latter was to implement. The fall from favour of Wentworth (now earl of Strafford) in late 1640 threatened Lowther's career with an abrupt termination. In February 1641 impeachment proceedings were commenced in the Irish parliament against four of Wentworth's most prominent Irish associates, including Lowther. The proceedings dragged on, but those directed against Lowther and Lord Chancellor Bolton were eventually dropped in June 1642. 
Prominent in the business of the Irish privy council in the mid-1640s, Lowther emerged as a member of the faction opposed to accommodation with the Catholics of the confederation of Kilkenny. The impending collapse of the royalist cause in Ireland led to his changing sides yet again, surviving the change of regime after the trial and execution of the king to be confirmed in judicial office in 1651. He is best glimpsed in this final phase of his career as the author of the harangue delivered by him at the inauguration the following year of the special non-jury high court of justice set up to try assorted rebels, traitors, and malefactors, later printed in Edmund Borlase's 'History of the Execrable Irish Rebellion' (1680). Though one of the commissioners of the great seal of Ireland in 1655-6, Lowther's chameleon past earned him no special favours, and he was a conspicuous absentee from the Irish council on which he had previously served under Wentworth and Ormond. Throughout his career, as the Dublin statute staple records make clear, Lowther loaned substantial sums of money: $ 15,000 between 1628 and 1659. He married, first, in 1621, Ann (died 'c'.1634), the daughter of Sir Laurence Parsons, whom he succeeded on the exchequer in 1628, and, second, Margaret (died 1658), daughter of Sir John King, the muster-master general of Ireland. Lowther died in Dublin on 3 April 1660 on the eve of the Restoration, and was buried at St Michan's Church, Dublin. He left no children. 


@@@@@


doc= 17109


Henry Lowther, third Viscount Lonsdale (1694-1751), court official and gambler, distinguished himself in the defence of Cumberland and Westmorland during the 1715 Jacobite rising. In 1717 he was appointed a lord of the bedchamber, accepting the position without enthusiasm because he was 'afraid that a Court employment will require more attendance than I (who am at present very fond of the country) can have inclination to give' (Lonsdale to Lowther, 21 July 1717, Lonsdale papers). He nevertheless retained the position for ten years. In 1726 he was appointed a governor of the Tower of London, but resigned in 1731 according to Sir James Lowther of Whitehaven, because 'he is desirous to live more in the country than he thinks is fit for one of that place' (Lowther to Spedding, 6 May 1731, Lonsdale papers). He was briefly lord privy seal (1733-5). On the death of Lord Carlisle in 1738 he was appointed lord lieutenant of Cumberland and Westmorland, and was responsible for the defence of the two counties during the 1745 Jacobite rising. He remained at his sister Elizabeth's home at Byram, near Pontefract in Yorkshire, passing much of his responsibility to Sir George Fleming, the octogenarian bishop of Carlisle. 


@@@@@


doc= 17110


Lowther, James, earl of Lonsdale (1736-1802), politician and landowner, was born on 5 August 1736 at Maulds Meaburn, Westmorland, the fourth child and eldest surviving son of Robert Lowther (1681-1745), landowner, of Maulds Meaburn and Katherine Pennington (1712-1764), only daughter of Sir Joseph Pennington, second baronet, of Muncaster, Cumberland. His father, sometime governor of Barbados, came from a junior branch of the Lowthers of Lowther, who were the most powerful aristocratic proprietors in Cumberland. The Maulds Meaburn family properties lay in a compact area south of Appleby. In addition to the manor of Maulds Meaburn they included property in Crosby Ravensworth and Asby Grange. Part of the property was already encumbered when Robert Lowther succeeded his father in 1703, and financial considerations seem to have dictated his marriage the following year to an elderly widow whose inheritance included an estate in Barbados. As a result of this windfall Lowther was gradually able to turn his fortunes around. His wife died in 1722 and in 1731 he married Katherine Pennington; they had five children. James Lowther was just nine when his father died in 1745. 
Lowther was educated at schools in London and Hertfordshire, and in 1752 at Peterhouse, Cambridge. By 1757, when he came of age, he was one of the wealthiest men in northern England, largely because several senior branches of his family were childless. On 6 March 1751 he inherited estates worth more than $6000 annually from the third Viscount Lonsdale of Lowther Hall. The title lapsed, but he succeeded to Lonsdale's baronetcy. Four years later, on the death of Sir James Lowther of Whitehaven, he inherited estates in Westmorland and Middlesex with an annual rental value of $1200. On 15 April 1756 Sir William Lowther of Holker Hall died aged only twenty-nine, and Lowther inherited by the terms of Sir James Lowther's will extensive land and colliery interests in west Cumberland. As a result of these various inheritances the young man now had an income of about $45,000 per annum. Horace Walpole claimed that 'though not of age [he] becomes master of one or two and forty thousand pounds a year' (Walpole, 'Corr.', 9.185). The duke of Newcastle told George II that he was 'perhaps the richest subject that His Majesty has' (Owen, 283). 
Lowther was not frightened of spending this fortune, notably in the pursuit of electoral success. While still a teenager, in 1754 he contested with the earl of Thanet the right to control the parliamentary borough of Appleby. When subsequently his candidates were defeated in the borough, he challenged the result in the Commons and backed down only after the king had suggested a compromise with Thanet. As a result, the original election was declared void and at the by-election in 1756 Thanet and Lowther duly returned one member each. In 1756 Lowther spent $58,000 buying up the burgage borough of Cockermouth, and in April 1757, still a few months short of his twenty-first birthday, he was returned on the whig interest for Cumberland at a by-election. These activities did not make him popular. Joseph Waugh, dean of Worcester, wrote of him in 1759: 'I should think from what I hear in the country this young gentleman carries matters so imperiously, without any pretence but having money, that at the general election he will meet with some stand against the career he at present runs. (HoP, 'Commons, 1754-90', 3.56)' Waugh predicted correctly, because, although in 1761 Lowther secured the return of eight MPs -- two each for Cumberland, Westmorland, and Cockermouth, and one each for Appleby and Carlisle -- he was unsuccessful in the second seat at Carlisle. One of his nominees was forced to withdraw when it was clear that there was to be a revolt against 'the all-grasping and monopolizing spirit of the baronet' (ibid.). 
In 1755 Henry Fox had tried unsuccessfully to negotiate for Lowther a marriage with the duke of Marlborough's daughter -- she turned him down -- but potentially Lowther made an even better match when on 7 September 1761 he married Lady Mary Stuart (1740-1824), daughter of George III's prime minister John Stuart, third earl of Bute, and Mary Wortley Montagu. Bute subsequently agreed that Lowther should nominate to all Treasury appointments in Cumberland and Westmorland, and Sir James was annoyed when this arrangement was not automatically continued on George Grenville's appointment as prime minister in 1763. By then Lowther had extended his demands to include military and ecclesiastical appointments in Cumberland, and when he fell out with Grenville over the deanery of Carlisle, Bute refused to intervene on the grounds that he by now expected his son-in-law to make unreasonable claims. With the death of Lord Egremont in August 1763 Lowther recommended himself unsuccessfully for a position at the Board of Trade, despite both his lack of empathy with Grenville and his apparent lack of interest in the business of parliament. Subsequently, in 1765, on hearing that George III had offered the Treasury to Rockingham, Lowther threatened to break his political connection with Bute on the grounds that he had been neglected by the ministry, and to align himself with the opposition. 
In 1765 the third duke of Portland, partly out of enmity towards Bute, and partly because of his political rivalry with Lowther in Cumberland, filed bills in chancery against Lowther and Carlisle corporation alleging that he was the owner of a fishery in the River Eden which had been rendered valueless by the mode of fishing adopted by the defendants. Lowther had been elected mayor of Carlisle, where he instituted a rigorous examination of the corporation's accounts, and subsequently endeavoured to swamp the constituency by creating honorary freemen. In response to Portland, Lowther's legal advisers subsequently found that in William III's original grant to the first earl of Portland of the honour of Penrith, the forest of Inglewood, and the socage manor of Carlisle had been expressly omitted. This put Portland's case in a new light since it was under the general wording of the grant that he claimed the socage manor of Carlisle, but since these places had been in the undisturbed possession of the Portland family for sixty years their title could be impeached only by the crown. On 9 July 1767 Lowther petitioned the Treasury for a grant of the crown interest in these two properties 'for three lives, on such terms as to their lordships should seem meet'. Portland protested, but the grant was made to Lowther on 18 December 1767. 
The decision in this case was used by Portland and his friends to claim that no possessions were safe if the legal maxim 'nullum tempus occurrit regi' was to be enforced. On 17 February 1768 Sir George Savile sought leave to introduce into the Commons a 'Nullum Tempus Bill', designed to abrogate the legal maxim and thereby deprive Lowther of his rights under the crown leases, but his motion was defeated by 134 votes to 114. The following year a compromise was found and Savile's bill passed with a provision excluding grants of the crown made prior to 1 January 1769 from the operation of the legislation as long as grantees prosecuted their claims within the year. Lowther immediately filed a bill against Portland, and served around 300 ejectments on his tenants. In February 1771 Sir William Meredith attempted to carry a bill in the Commons to repeal the clause. Subsequently the court of exchequer found against Lowther on the technical grounds that the original grant was unacceptable under the 'Civil List Act' of 1702 because the rent reserved to the crown was insufficient. As a result, the question of Portland's title to the forest of Inglewood and the socage manor of Carlisle was never tested in the courts, and he sold the property in 1787 to the duke of Devonshire. 
At the 1768 general election Lowther encountered unexpectedly firm opposition. He nominated two Scots at Carlisle, neither of whom had any connection with the borough and both of whom were defeated. In Cumberland the duke of Portland won one seat, and although Lowther was returned for the other he was unseated on petition and Portland's second nominee was declared duly elected. He did not stand in Westmorland where he lost one seat to a weak candidate who declared only a few days before the poll. Thus in Cumberland, Westmorland, and Carlisle, where he had secured five seats in 1761, he returned only one in 1768 and that was in Westmorland where his candidate, John Robinson, had a considerable interest of his own. 
For three months Lowther was out of the house, and Grafton turned down his application for a peerage. He was returned as MP for Cockermouth in March 1769, but his position at Westminster was temporarily damaged and Grafton refused him the exclusive right to nominate to government places in Cumberland. Such was his annoyance that he briefly contemplated joining the opposition. 
In 1773 Lowther reluctantly agreed with Thanet to continue the Appleby arrangement and divide the borough for their joint lives. The following year he negotiated a compromise with Portland whereby they were to divide Cumberland and Carlisle to avoid an expensive repetition of the events of 1768. At the 1774 general election Lowther won back the second Westmorland seat and returned a total of seven members. He himself was elected for both Cumberland and Westmorland and opted to sit for Cumberland. By the later 1770s he had joined the opposition to North's ministry, and in 1781-2 he opposed further prosecution of the war in America. After the change of administration Shelburne refused to promote with the king his claim to a peerage. During 1783 he was courted by both government and opposition, but he did not stand at the 1784 general election because he had by then been promised a peerage. On 24 May 1784 he was created Baron Lowther of Lowther, baron of the baronies of Kendal and Burgh, viscount of Lonsdale and of Lowther, and earl of Lonsdale. This was little short of a thank-offering by William Pitt the younger to a boroughmonger who had provided him with his first parliamentary seat at Appleby in 1781 and who had subsequently placed at the disposal of the prime minister the seats under his control. Lowther took his seat in the Lords on 2 June 1784, and normally thereafter supported Pitt's administration, although in 1792 he was said to be considering transferring his support to the opposition because the prime minister had refused him a dukedom. 
Although the 1774 compromise had apparently blunted his strength in Cumberland and Westmorland, Lowther set out to restore his position by buying the estates of the duke of Portland and the earl of Egremont. He acquired neither, even though he offered Egremont $5000 above the price to be fixed by an independent referee, and the borough of Haslemere (which he had bought in 1780). Even so, at the 1784 election Lowther was at the height of his boroughmongering powers, returning both members for Cockermouth, Westmorland, and Haslemere, and single MPs for Cumberland, Carlisle, and Appleby -- Sir James's Ninepins, as they were colloquially known. At a by-election in Carlisle in 1784 he sought to dominate the second seat through the creation of honorary freemen, a move which led to post-election petitioning. In both 1786 and 1790 he also tried expensively and unsuccessfully to return a member for Lancaster. Throughout his life Lowther lavished money on elections, including $15,000 at Appleby in 1754, at least $20,000 for Cumberland and Carlisle in 1768, and over $25,000 at Lancaster in 1786. In all he must have spent well in excess of $100,000 on contests. 
Lowther chose the candidates himself, sometimes following the recommendations of friends, and once elected he expected them to follow his own political line. He even forced his brother in 1763 to resign his seat for Westmorland when he voted against Grenville's administration. In 1781 he told his cousin William Lowther, MP for Carlisle, that: 'it will affect me very much that a person so nearly connected with me should not be present the first day of the meeting of Parliament. It has not happened to me before, and if you cannot give your attendance 'constantly' in Parliament, which I must expect, you had better resign your seat that a person who will attend the duty may be chose to succeed to you. (HoP, 'Commons, 1754-90', 3.59)' In January 1782 he wrote that his members were 'not accountable to any person but myself' (ibid.). However, many of the MPs returned on his influence by the 1780s were men of no political standing, entirely dependent on him for patronage, and they seldom if ever spoke in the house. In 1788 he ordered all his 'people' in the Commons to oppose Pitt's regency resolutions, but his political voice was never as loud as his electoral control might have implied. 
Lowther inherited a vast estate, but he extended it through land purchases, notably in coal-bearing west Cumberland where he spent $55,000 acquiring the Workington estate of Charles Pelham in 1758 as well as substantial sums on the manors of Millom, Whicham, Greysouthen, and Clifton. He was active in promoting his colliery interests, and annual profits were about $10,000 in the 1770s, doubling by the time of his death. Despite his wealth Lowther often failed to pay bills. As a landlord he had a reputation for meanness and ruthlessness, extracting every penny he could from tenants while maltreating his Whitehaven steward John Wordsworth whose fees he refused to pay. At the same time he built a 'planned village' at Lowther in Westmorland for his estate employees, and for a number of years provided additional employment in a carpet factory in the village. He spent little on his main seat, Lowther Hall, which had been rebuilt in 1718 following a fire, but he turned his Whitehaven residence, Flatt Hall, into Whitehaven Castle. By repute the plans, by Robert Adam, were never paid for. 
Lowther held many other positions including 'custos rotulorum' (3 August 1758) and lord lieutenant (14 August 1758) of Westmorland; lord lieutenant (13 December 1759) and 'custos rotulorum' (18 October 1759) of Cumberland; brigadier-general of the Cumberland and Westmorland militia (25 June 1761), vice-admiral of Cumberland and Westmorland (15 April 1765), steward and bailiff of Inglewood forest (18 December 1767), steward of Lonsdale (23 November 1793), and colonel in the army during service (14 March 1794). 
Lowther was a man of mixed reputation, acquiring epithets such as the Bad Earl and 'Jimmy, Grasp-all, earl of Toadstool' (GEC, 'Peerage'). According to Nathaniel Wraxall he was 'tyrannical, overbearing, violent, and frequently under no restraint of temper or of reason' (Wraxall, 378). Horace Walpole considered him to be 'equally unamiable in public and private' (Walpole, 'Memoirs', 3.195). Edward Knubley told James Boswell that Lowther 'had a most tyrannical temper and not a spark of gratitude' (HoP, 'Commons, 1754-90', 3.60). Boswell, who hoped Lowther would bring him into parliament, was grossly insulted by 'this brutal fellow' during 'a most shocking conversation' in June 1790 ('Letters of James Boswell Addressed to the Rev. W. J. Temple', ed. P. Francis, 1857, 323-5). Richard Penn complained of Lowther's 'shocking ferocity and undignified manner of living', and according to Sir Edward Blackett he was 'one of the most worthless men in his Majesty's dominions... you never hear him spoken of but with the greatest abhorrence' (HoP, 'Commons, 1754-90', 3.60). To the Revd Alexander Carlyle he was 'more detested than any man alive as a shameless political sharper, a domestic bashaw, and an intolerant tyrant over his tenants and dependents'. In Carlyle's view he was 'truly a madman, though too rich to be confined' ('Autobiography of the Rev Dr Alexander Carlyle', ed. J. H. Burton, 3rd edn, 1861, 418-19). Occasionally, Lowther's sense of humour made a better impression. When staying at Whitehaven, Boswell was pleased to discover that 'when he choses to pay a compliment nobody can do it more gracefully', and Walter Spencer-Stanhope believed him to possess the ability and mind 'that would have enabled him to have played a distinguished part on the theatre of the World' (Owen, 297, 301). 
Lowther's marriage was not particularly happy. There were no children, and after about fifteen years he and his wife lived apart. He is known subsequently to have had a number of mistresses. With no son to whom he could pass the property, he obtained on 26 October 1797 the barony and viscountcy of Lowther of Whitehaven, with special remainder to the male heirs of his cousin the Revd Sir William Lowther, second baronet, of Swillington, Yorkshire. Lowther died at Lowther Hall on 24 May 1802 and was buried at Lowther on 9 June. He had been ill for some time and the cause of death was a 'mortification of the bowels'. His widow died at Broom House, Fulham, on 5 April 1824, aged eighty-four. 


@@@@@


doc= 17111


Lowther, John, first Viscount Lonsdale (1655-1700), landowner and politician, was born on 25 April 1655 at Hackthorpe Hall, Westmorland, the third of the four children of Colonel John Lowther of Hackthorpe (1628-1668), politician, and his first wife, Elizabeth (died 1662), daughter and coheir of Sir Henry Bellingham. 
The dominant influence on John Lowther's early life was his grandfather. His mother died when he was six. His father then remarried against the will of his own father, Sir John Lowther of Lowther, first baronet (1606-1675), who promptly disinherited him. Sir John sent his grandson to Kendal grammar school, but withdrew him after a year. Subsequently he was educated at Lowther Hall, Westmorland, under the supervision of Sir John's butler 'whose cruelty and blows did no good to my tender years', as he later recalled in his memoirs (Lonsdale papers). He went next to Sedbergh School, and then on 12 July 1670 entered Queen's College, Oxford. He left after eighteen months without taking a degree, and subsequently spent a year at an academy in Paris. Returning to England after a further six months in France, he attended lectures at the Inner Temple, from whence he was subsequently called to the bar in 1677. 
As early as 1671, when Lowther was just sixteen, his grandfather was anxious to see him settled. He resisted until 1674 when, on 3 December, he married Katherine Thynne ['see 'Lowther, Katherine (1653-1713)], daughter of Sir Henry Frederick Thynne, in Henry VII's chapel in Westminster Abbey. John Lowther was nineteen and his bride twenty-one. When his grandfather died on 30 November 1675 Lowther inherited both the family estate and -- his own father having died in 1668 -- the baronetcy. Having reached the age of twenty-one, in March 1677 he was returned to parliament for Westmorland. Apart from the brief session of October 1680-January 1681 he was re-elected to every parliament until his elevation to the House of Lords in 1696. 
Lowther made his maiden speech in the Commons on 19 December 1678 during a debate on the Popish Plot, but undertook little further political involvement until 1685, when he opposed James II in parliament. He came to political prominence in 1688 when he took the lead in securing Cumberland and Westmorland for William of Orange, in the face of opposition from Sir Christopher Musgrave and Sir George Fletcher. On 9 December he and his tenants secured a ship at Workington harbour bound for Ireland with arms, and several days later they were largely responsible for the fall of the Carlisle garrison. Lowther was hailed as a hero for securing the border region for William. He was made vice-chamberlain in the new king's household, a privy councillor, and lord lieutenant of Cumberland and Westmorland. On 18 March 1690 he was appointed first lord of the Treasury and leader of the House of Commons. He was subsequently one of the nine members of the council appointed in June 1690 to advise Queen Mary during her husband's campaign in Ireland. She later described Lowther as 'a very honest but weak man' (Owen, 205). 
Lowther was not considered a success as first lord of the Treasury, and he was replaced by Sidney, Lord Godolphin, on 15 November 1690. A contemporary squib derided 'the dull, insipid stream of his set speeches, made up of whipt cream', and dismissed him as 'an empty piece of misplaced eloquence' ('Poems on Affairs of State: Augustan Satirical Verse, 1660-1714', ed. G. de F. Lord and others, 7 vols., 1963-75, 2.211). The king refused to allow him to retire altogether, and Lowther remained on the Treasury board as second commissioner. He also stayed on Queen Mary's council, suggesting that he retained the king's confidence, and he continued as leader of the Commons. As one of only two commoners on the council, he had to defend the government's policies in the Commons, often against accusations levelled from the leader of the opposition, his fellow Cumbrian and arch political rival, the tory Sir Christopher Musgrave. He was frequently criticized in the house as a former country politician who now held two lucrative places, in the Treasury and (as vice-chamberlain) the royal household, and the situation did not improve when he received a gift from the king of 2000 guineas. With some relief Lowther left the Treasury board in March 1692. Among recommendations in a later letter to his son Lowther warned him to avoid government office and the Treasury in particular. 
Lowther continued as vice-chamberlain until January 1693 and government spokesman in the Commons until February 1694. He resigned the lord lieutenancy to the earl of Carlisle in June 1694, but despite claiming he wished to live quietly in the country he took his wife and family to Bath and London and he was re-elected for Westmorland in October 1695. The election was 'a great expense', and he decided to 'begg an honour of the King' because 'securitie and eas are to be had no other way' ('Correspondence', 241). On 28 May 1696 he was created Baron Lowther of Lowther and Viscount Lonsdale in the county of Westmorland. He was introduced in the House of Lords on 13 January 1697. Shortly after taking his seat, Lonsdale suffered a serious illness. On recovery he told Sir Daniel Fleming of Rydal that 'it hath not pleased God so to dispose off me yett' (Owen, 211). For a while Lonsdale stayed out of politics, but in March 1699 he was summoned by the king to London and made lord privy seal. Subsequently he was appointed one of the nine lords justices to govern the country as regents in the king's absence on the continent. In December 1699 he was elected a fellow of the Royal Society. 
Lowther inherited from his grandfather the family estates in Westmorland, which included the chief seat at Lowther and a second family home at Hackthorpe Hall, and lands in Cumberland, Yorkshire, and co. Durham. He made no fewer than eighty-one separate purchases of property in Cumberland and Westmorland, at a cost of $33,731, and he spent a further $10,000 on property in Yorkshire, again designed to consolidate the existing estates. His landed income was $6387 in 1694-5, and in 1696 he wrote to his son that 'I would not if I might wish have the estate of my family swell above $10,000 a year, and even now when it is but little more than six, in my opinion it is great enough' ('Letter to his son', Lonsdale papers). He maintained a garden at Lowther to help supply the family with food, and a flourishing stud. In 1696 an Irish correspondent claimed to have heard 'so much of your lordship's breed of horses that I am ambitious to have one of them' (Lonsdale papers). He advised his son to adopt improved methods of husbandry, although he did not necessarily take his own advice. 
Lonsdale built a new house at Lowther. Between 1681 and 1684 he bought various properties and rehoused those displaced in what is now called Lowther Newtown. This cost him $1300. Lonsdale then built his new hall at cost of $6460, new stables ($1500), and new offices ($1200). He employed William Talman of the king's office of works, and deputy to Wren, to prepare a design based 'principally on my own thought' ('Letter to his son', Lonsdale papers). The building costs included $195 for marble from London, and $430 paid to the Italian artist Antonio Verrio (1639-1707), who spent nine months painting the hallway. Celia Fiennes described how it 'looks very nobly, with severall rows of trees which leads to large iron gates' ('The Journey of Celia Fiennes', ed. C. Morris, 1947, 199). It is known today only from the painting by Matthias Read. At the same time, Lonsdale laid out gardens and a park. He also almost completely rebuilt the Norman church at a cost of $300. The building was described by the bishop in 1703 as 'in the fairest condition of any parish church in the diocese' (Owen, 209). He had 'hoped to establish some manufacture for the benefit of the poor, to which purpose I had built a house convenient for it' ('Letter to his son', Lonsdale papers). This cost $600 but the attempt to promote textile manufacturing failed, and the building was converted into a school 'for none but gentlemen's sons' (ibid.). Two masters were appointed, the boys were boarded in the village, and Lonsdale endowed the school in his will. 
By early 1700 Lonsdale's health was giving cause for concern. During April he was visibly ill while leading the opposition to the resumption bill sent from the Commons, which the king wanted to see defeated but which the earl of Marlborough was supporting. The king eventually gave way, but Lonsdale was by now in the hands of Dr John Ratcliffe, the king's own doctor. On 23 May William agreed that he should return to Westmorland. He went via Bath, where the waters apparently brought him no relief. Although on 30 June he was again appointed a lord justice on the council of regency, he died on 10 July at Lowther. James Brydges, later duke of Chandos, wrote that Lonsdale was 'a man very eminent for many great qualities which, joined with the opinion the world had of his integrity, could not fail to add very great strength to the side he was of' (Owen, 215). Lonsdale was buried at Lowther church on 15 July 1700. A magnificent memorial by William Stanton was erected above his tomb. Katherine, his widow, died aged fifty-nine in January 1713 and was buried at Lowther on the 28th; her name was added to her husband's memorial in the church. The couple had had five sons and nine daughters, and at Lonsdale's death the three surviving sons were all under age: Richard, the eldest, inherited the title, but died only months after he came of age, on 1 December 1713; the title and estate passed to his brother Henry. 


Lonsdale spent little time at Lowther Hall. In March 1718 it was badly damaged by fire. The main central building and most of the inner east, or chapel, wing were gutted. Pictures, furniture, and Verrio's great hall paintings were all lost. Subsequently Lonsdale lived in a converted office wing on his infrequent visits, and he attributed his absence in 1745 to 'some alterations in my house which are now in hand... [and] make it impossible for me to be there' ('The Jacobite Risings of 1715 and 1745', ed. R. C. Jarvis, 1954, 94). He closed the school at Lowther in 1739 and converted the building for textile manufacture. He was a compulsive gambler, both on horses and in the City. He lost heavily during the South Sea Bubble crisis and as a result had to sell estates valued at more than $26,000. He may have lost more than $30,000. Although he left a depleted estate, his acquisition of burgages in Appleby helped to secure the borough for the Lowthers. Horace Walpole thought him 'no great genius' (H. Walpole, 'Memoirs of King George II', ed. J. Brooke, 3 vols., 1985). 
Lonsdale died unmarried at Byram on 7 March 1751 and was buried at Lowther on 18 March. The peerage became extinct, although the baronetcy and estates passed to James Lowther, later earl of Lonsdale. 


@@@@@


doc= 17112


Lowther, Sir Richard (1532-1608), landowner and soldier, was born on 14 February 1532 in Hartsop Hall, Westmorland, the eldest of the six children of Hugh Lowther ('c'.1510-1555) and Dorothy Clifford (died 1562). She was the daughter of Henry Clifford, tenth Baron Clifford (1454-1523), the Shepherd Lord, and his second wife, Florence. Lowther's ancestors had lived in Lowther, Westmorland, certainly since the twelfth century, and since 1305 at least eight of his direct ancestors had represented Westmorland or Cumberland in parliament, three Lowthers fought at Agincourt, and his grandfather Sir John led his tenantry into battle at Solway Moss and was captain of Carlisle Castle from 1544 until his death in 1553. Lowther was also legitimately descended from William Strickland (d. 1419), bishop of Carlisle, whose wife died giving birth to a daughter before he took orders. 
Nothing is known of Lowther's early years or education; he may have studied law at Lincoln's Inn, but he is not recorded as entering the inn until 1560. When aged twenty he took over the family estates on his grandfather's death, his ne'er-do-well father having been disinherited for his 'great unthriftiness' (Cumbria AS, Carlisle, D/Lons/L3/1/7). In 1553 he married Frances Middleton (died 1597) of Middleton Hall in south Westmorland; they had eight sons and seven daughters, of whom three sons and five daughters died young. All but the first were born in Lowther Hall. 
In 1566 Lowther was pricked sheriff of Cumberland and in the same year Lord Scrope, lord warden of the west march and captain of Carlisle Castle, appointed him his deputy in both posts. On 16 May 1568, Mary, queen of Scots, landed on the Cumberland coast on her escape from Scotland, and she was greeted at Cockermouth the next day by Lowther with a force of 400 horsemen to conduct her to Carlisle. Here she was lodged in the castle 'with such entertainment as I well can or am able upon such sudden' (TNA: PRO, SP 53/1/2). Four days later the Catholic earl of Northumberland tried to take custody of Mary which, despite the earl's anger, Lowther refused to allow without orders from London. On 27 May Sir Francis Knollys (to whom Queen Elizabeth entrusted Mary's security) and Lord Warden Scrope arrived from London. When Northumberland complained of the treatment he received from Lowther, regarding him as 'too mean a man to have such a charge', he was told that Lowther 'did dutifully and wisely and he [Northumberland] had overshot himself very much to the discontentation of Queen Elizabeth' (TNA: PRO, SP 59/15; Sharp, 341). Mary for her part thanked Elizabeth 'for the good reception I have had in your country, and principally from Mister Lowther who received me with all courtesy' (BL, Cotton MS Caligula C. i, fol. 106'v', 28 May). The story in the 'Dictionary of National Biography' and elsewhere that Lowther injudiciously permitted the duke of Norfolk to meet Mary and was heavily fined in Star Chamber has no truth in it. Norfolk was in London throughout. 
On 13 July 1568 Mary was removed from Carlisle, which was considered too dangerously close to the Scottish border, and taken to Bolton Castle. Knollys chose Lowther Hall for her first night as it 'standeth farther from the rescue of the Scots than any other house we could have chosen' (BL, Cotton MS Caligula C. i, fol. 163, 14 July). Lowther family tradition recalled that Mary was deeply touched by the affectionate reverence she received from Lowther and his family and, as Sir William Lowther wrote in 1765, she 'knelt down upon the floor and prayed earnestly a blessing on him and his family' (Cumbria AS, Carlisle, D/Lons/L3/5/155). 
In 1569 Lowther, by now receiver of the duke of Norfolk's rents in Cumberland and Westmorland and therefore beholden to him, together with his younger brother Gerard, became involved in the plot (led by the earls of Northumberland and Westmorland and not discouraged by the duke) to depose Elizabeth and supplant her by Mary. Gerard Lowther escaped to Scotland, as did the earls, but Richard was incarcerated in the Tower of London from January to August 1570 with Norfolk and twenty-three other prisoners. In October 1571 he was again in the Tower following the Ridolfi plot, which had the same aims. Norfolk was executed in June 1572 and Lowther was not released until the following January. Apart from the mental anxiety that it induced, his imprisonment appears from his own account to have been relatively comfortable. On both occasions his release from the Tower was suitably celebrated by the arrival of a son about ten months later. 
Lowther next came to prominence in 1588 when he was pricked sheriff of Cumberland on the recommendation of the agent of Sir Francis Walsingham -- he: 'had disgrace by the cause of the late Duke of Norfolk, which is a thing common when the master gets a fall... Yet quit himself very worshipfully of that action... There is no man in the West Marches so sufficient for Border causes. (BL, Cotton MS Caligula D.i, fol. 315)' In 1590 Scrope again appointed him deputy warden of the march. On 4 June 1592, only four days after Scrope's death, Lowther was appointed by the queen to succeed him as lord warden and to assume responsibility for keeping 'the country in good order and the laws of the borders towards Scotland duly observed' (TNA: PRO, SP 15/32/34). He was known to be well respected by the Scots and had experience of conducting difficult business with them. He was the first commoner lord warden since 1327; nevertheless he was a stopgap until the new Lord Scrope was appointed the following year. From 1597 to 1601 he was again deputy warden. 
In September 1597 Lowther's wife died. He subsequently married Margaret Eden, widow of John Threlkeld, who outlived him. On 17 April 1603 he was knighted at York by James I on his journey south to his new capital, the ninth member of his family to receive the honour, and in the following year he served for the third time as a commissioner for border affairs to negotiate a treaty with the Scots. Of the gentry who played a part in the government of the west march and the counties of Cumberland and Westmorland in Elizabeth's reign, Lowther was probably the most active. 
Sir Richard died at Lowther Hall a great-grandfather aged seventy-five on 21 January 1608, and was buried four days later in Lowther church, where there is a monument to him with a full-length effigy. To his grandson, Sir John Lowther (1582-1637), he was 'my memorable grandfather -- I have ever given great regard to his sayings' (Cumbria AS, Carlisle, D/Lons/L3/1/1). Of Sir Richard's five surviving sons, Christopher (1557-1617) commanded Scrope's escort when he greeted King James at Newcastle in 1603 and was knighted by the king; Sir Gerard Lowther (d. 1624) ['see under 'Lowther, Sir Gerard (c.1590-1660)] was a judge of the common pleas in Ireland; and Sir Lancelot (1571-1638) was solicitor-general to James I's queen, Anne of Denmark, and later a baron of the court of exchequer in Ireland. Sir Richard's descendants are still seated at Lowther. 


@@@@@


doc= 17113


Lowther, William, first earl of Lonsdale (1757-1844), landowner and literary patron, was born on 29 December 1757 at Little Preston Hall, near Leeds, the elder son of the Revd Sir William Lowther, baronet (1707-1788), rector of Swillington, and Anne Zouch (1723-1759), daughter of the Revd Charles Zouch, vicar of Sandal near Wakefield. He was educated at Felsted School, Essex (1769-71), Westminster School (1771-2), by private tutor (1773-5), and at Trinity College, Cambridge (1776-8) where he became a friend of Pitt. 
In 1780 Lowther was elected MP for Carlisle under the patronage of his godfather and third cousin once removed, the tyrannical Sir James Lowther (later earl of Lonsdale), and a year later, on 12 July 1781, married Lady Augusta Fane (1761-1838), daughter of John Fane, ninth earl of Westmorland ['see under 'Fane, John, seventh earl of Westmorland]. They had two sons, including William Lowther, and five daughters. In the 1784 election Lowther was returned for Cumberland but in 1790 was dropped by Lonsdale 'without any reason... and without Lonsdale even signifying any offence' ('Journal of Boswell', 80). In 1788 he had succeeded his father as second baronet, of Swillington, and inherited the family's large Yorkshire estate with its collieries. In 1796 he re-entered parliament as member for Rutland, where he now lived, and was free from the tight political reins of his godfather; but he was a reluctant speaker in the house. 
In 1797 the childless earl of Lonsdale received the additional titles of Viscount and Baron Lowther of Whitehaven with special remainder to Sir William, his nearest male Lowther relative. The distant cousins were back on speaking terms. On Lonsdale's death on 24 May 1802 Sir William became Viscount Lowther and inherited the family's vast estates in Cumberland and Westmorland including the lucrative collieries and flourishing harbour of Whitehaven. By a previous arrangement the family's Yorkshire estates then passed to Sir William's brother. 
William Lowther became overnight one of the wealthiest men in the kingdom (his annual income was estimated to be nearly $100,000), the controller of eight (later nine) seats in parliament, the patron of thirty-two parishes, and lord lieutenant of Cumberland and Westmorland (appointed 16 June 1802). His newly acquired wealth brought him great influence which, in contrast to his predecessor, he used generously and with sympathy. Immediately on inheriting, he arranged a compromise with the duke of Norfolk over the filling of the two seats for Carlisle to avoid an expensive and unseemly campaign at the forthcoming election. Soon afterwards he repaid, with full interest, the earl's twenty-year-old debt of $5000 to William and Dorothy Wordsworth, a debt which arose from legal and political fees owing to the poet's father, who had been Lonsdale's law agent and land steward in Cockermouth for twenty-three years until his death in 1783. Throughout the succeeding years Lonsdale had resisted a series of lawsuits brought by the guardians of the Wordsworth children for payment of the debt. Repayment of $8500 was made by William Lowther within eighteen months of his inheritance. 
In 1806 Lowther was selected by the earl of Chatham to be one of the six assistant mourners at Pitt's funeral 'as one of the nearest of his friends' (Chatham to Lowther, 17 Feb 1806, 'Lonsdale MSS', 166). In the following year he was created earl of Lonsdale and received the Order of the Garter for his part in negotiating the duke of Portland's new administration after the resignation of Grenville, but he declined a seat in the cabinet. 
On inheriting Lowther Hall, the family seat in Westmorland, Lowther found it in a deplorable state and commissioned Robert Smirke, the future architect of the British Museum, to build Lowther Castle. It was the young architect's first major commission, described by Wordsworth as 'a baronial castle' of 'majestic pile' ('Poetical Works', 477). The artist Jacob Thompson was another whom Lonsdale set on the road to fame. 
William Wordsworth and Lonsdale became firm friends and mutual admirers, and in 1818 Lonsdale was able again to ease the poet's financial position by arranging his appointment as distributor of stamps for Westmorland. For their part Wordsworth and his sister worked tirelessly in the Lowther interest during the general election campaigns of 1818 and 1820. In 1828 Lonsdale presented Wordsworth's clergyman son to the first of three livings in his gift. 
For many years Wordsworth paid an annual visit of a week or more to Lowther Castle and sometimes stayed also at Whitehaven Castle. Occasionally he even sent his verse to Lonsdale for comment and accepted the earl's suggestions for changes. 'He was to myself and my children the best benefactor', Wordsworth wrote to Lady Frederick Bentinck on 31 March 1844 (De Selincourt, 7.539). 
Lonsdale died on 19 March 1844 at York House, Twickenham, aged eighty-six, and was buried on 1 April in Lowther church beside his wife (died 1838). 'How much is there to be thankful for in every part of Lord Lonsdale's life to its close', wrote Wordsworth (De Selincourt, 7.539). 


@@@@@


doc= 17114


Lowther, William, second earl of Lonsdale (1787-1872), politician, was the eldest son of Sir William Lowther (1757-1844), subsequently Viscount Lowther and first earl of Lonsdale, and Lady Augusta (1761-1838), daughter of John Fane, ninth earl of Westmorland ['see under 'Fane, John, seventh earl of Westmorland]. He was born at Uffington, near Stamford, Lincolnshire, on 30 July 1787, and educated at Harrow School and Trinity College, Cambridge, whence he graduated MA in 1808. Thanks to the strength of the Lowther interest in Westmorland, he was returned as MP for Cockermouth in 1808-13, and for Westmorland in 1813-31 and 1832-41. The crumbling of the Lowther interest in 1831 over their resolute stance against reform forced him to seek a seat elsewhere, and he represented the pocket borough of Dunwich for the 1832 sessions. 
Lowther first took office under Perceval, succeeding Palmerston as junior lord of the Admiralty in 1809; from 1813 to 1826, with a short interval, he was on the Treasury board, and was made first commissioner of woods and forests by the duke of Wellington in 1828. He was president of the Board of Trade in 1834-5, and postmaster-general with a seat in the cabinet in 1841. He was summoned to the House of Lords in his father's barony on 6 September 1841 and succeeded to the earldom in 1844. He was president of council in 1852 in Derby's administration. Although a good business man, Lonsdale was no orator, and took no real initiative in politics. His great wealth, however, and the influence of his family gave him importance in his party, and extra-parliamentary meetings of the tories were frequently held at his house in Carlton House Terrace. 
Lonsdale invested greatly in his estates, especially in drainage; he had been in his earlier days a patron of Macadam, the road-maker, and was at his death chairman of the metropolitan roads commission. He was something of a sportsman (his horse Spaniel won the Derby in 1831), paid large subsidies for the maintenance of Italian opera in London, and was an enthusiastic collector of porcelain. He was the distant original of Lord Eskdale in Disraeli's 'Tancred', 'a man with every ability, except the ability to make his powers useful to mankind'. Unmarried, he acknowledged three children, whose mothers were believed to be opera singers. Marie Caroline was born in Paris in 1818, the daughter of Caroline Saintfal; nothing further is known of her. Frances (died 1890) married Henry Broadwood MP, in 1840, and was left a substantial sum in her father's will, as was Francis William (1841-1908), the son of Emilia Creosotti. 
Lonsdale died at his London house, 14 Carlton House Terrace, on 4 March 1872, and was buried in the mausoleum which he had built at Lowther Castle. He was succeeded by his nephew, Henry Lowther (1818-1876). 


@@@@@


doc= 17115


Loyd, Samuel Jones, Baron Overstone (1796-1883), banker, was born on 25 September 1796 at 43 Lothbury, in the City of London, the only child of the Revd Lewis Loyd (died 1858), a nonconformist clergyman and banker, and his wife, Sarah (died 1821), the daughter of John Jones, a Manchester banker and manufacturer. Lewis Loyd came from a Carmarthenshire family and it was probably he who was responsible for the change in the family name from Lloyd to Loyd. Having given up his ministry, Lewis Loyd was employed at the Manchester bank owned by Jones, and in 1793 married his daughter. 
Lewis Loyd proved to be a brilliant banker and, together with his brothers-in-law, Samuel and William Jones, was one of the founders of Jones, Loyd & Co. Loyd moved to London to establish a branch office there, and went on to transform a small country bank into one of the leading private banks in the country. After the death of Sarah, he married again, and increased his already large fortune considerably. He retired from business and bought Overstone Park, and an estate of 15,000 acres, near Northampton; in 1854 he also acquired the manor of East Lockinge in Berkshire. Lewis Loyd died in 1858 at the age of ninety-one, leaving an estate of several million pounds. 
Samuel Jones Loyd was born over the bank's premises in the heart of London. His birth was registered with the Unitarians at Dr Williams's Library, but he was brought up a member of the Church of England. He was educated privately before going to Eton College ('c'.1808- 'c'.1813). He then spent some time as a private pupil with C. J. Blomfield, later bishop of London, before going on to Trinity College, Cambridge. He graduated in 1818, but had already become a partner in his father's bank, being admitted on 26 December 1816. His father retired in 1844 and the Manchester and London businesses were formally divided in 1848. In 1819 Loyd was elected liberal member of parliament for Hythe, by a majority of sixty-seven, remaining member until 1826, when he did not offer himself for re-election. In December 1832 he stood for Manchester, but was defeated, coming third in the poll. He never again stood for parliament. 
In 1829 Loyd married Harriet (died 1864), daughter of Ichabod Wright, a Nottingham banker. They had two children, a son who died aged only three months, and a daughter, Harriet Sarah ('b'. 1837), who married Robert Lindsay in 1858 ['see 'Lindsay, Harriet Sarah Loyd-]; at their marriage the Lockinge estate was settled on the couple. Samuel Loyd's wife died in November 1864, and it is clear from his surviving correspondence that he was overwhelmed with grief. 
Samuel Loyd exhibited great skill as a banker, and the continued profitability and development of the bank's business was largely due to him. It has been estimated that between 1817 and 1848 the bank returned profits of $2.2 million, 'of which Overstone collected $563,000 or an average of $18,161 per annum as his share' (Michie, 60). Nevertheless, as a practising banker he was always very cautious, carefully weighing risk, especially on loans, with the result that during the years of his association with his bank it never made a loss. At the same time, however, it slowly stagnated, as he refused to countenance the changes in banking practice which were taking place in the 1840s, his real interests lying in currency theory. Thus he always remained opposed to the joint-stock principle, believing it would reduce the personal element in banking and that joint-stock banks did not keep stable reserve ratios. He also remained committed to unlimited liability, thinking this would induce a proper caution in a banker's activities. 
In 1831 Loyd was elected a member of the Political Economy Club, remaining a member until 1872, when he was chosen as an honorary member. Also in 1831 he was appointed an exchequer bill commissioner and in 1832 he appeared before the select committee on the renewal of the charter of the Bank of England. In 1837 he published his first pamphlet, 'Reflections suggested by a perusal of Mr. J. Horsley Palmer's pamphlet on the causes and consequences of the pressure on the money markets', which recognized the importance of psychological factors on the trade cycle. The pamphlet was very well received and marked Loyd's debut as an influential figure in banking and financial circles. Between 1837 and 1840 he was a member of the commission on hand-loom weavers, and in 1838 he appeared before the select committee on postage. Further pamphlets on currency matters appeared in 1840, including 'Remarks on the Management of the Currency', in which he strongly defended convertibility. 
In 1844 Loyd's 'Thoughts on the Separation of the Departments of the Bank of England' appeared. This work had been privately printed in 1840, and was particularly influential. It made Loyd the chief spokesman of the currency school of monetary theorists. In it he advocated a single bank of issue of paper money, as well as the separation of the banking and issue departments of the Bank of England. The proper function of the Bank of England was, in his opinion, to regulate the amount and secure the solidity of the paper issues, and to afford a safe place of deposit for government and public money. Loyd undoubtedly influenced the content of Sir Robert Peel's 'Bank Charter Act' of 1844, for his views were closely reflected in the terms of the act. He had appeared before the select committee on banks of issue in 1840, and was able to put his views before Sir Robert Peel, who attended meetings regularly. The act provided for the division of the Bank of England into an issue department and a banking department, as Loyd had proposed, and prohibited the issue of bank notes by anyone who was not already an issuer. Loyd came to feel an almost personal responsibility for the act and its workings, so that the suspension of the act during the financial crisis of 1857 disturbed him greatly. 
Loyd now commanded wide public respect, but consistently refused all invitations to stand again for parliament. His advice was widely sought, for example by Lord John Russell, and by Sir Charles Wood, later first Viscount Halifax, who consulted him for thirty years and, on becoming chancellor of the exchequer in 1846, openly acknowledged his debt to him. In 1846 he became chairman of the British Association for the Relief of the Extreme Distress in Ireland and Scotland, making his own considerable personal contributions to the funds of the association. 
In October 1849 he was offered a peerage by Lord John Russell, for whom he had considerable respect. He was both surprised and dismayed at this offer, and took a fortnight to decide to accept; it was March 1850 before he took his seat in the House of Lords. He rarely spoke in the house, but served on a number of select committees, including that on the Turner and Vernon bequests. In 1850 he became a trustee of the National Gallery, and he was one of the commissioners for the Great Exhibition of 1851. His interest in art was genuine, and he formed his own collection of paintings, which included works by Ruysdael, Hobbema, Rembrandt, Lorrain, Murillo, Cuyp, Crome, and Stanfield. 
A member of the British Association for the Advancement of Science, in June of 1864 Loyd was created honorary DCL by the University of Oxford. He was a member of the commission appointed to consider decimal coinage, to which he was always strongly opposed. He became a member of the council of the University of London in 1828, serving until 1844. He was a member of the senate of the university from 1850 until 1877, when he resigned in opposition to proposals to award degrees to women. 
Loyd gave up direct involvement in banking upon his elevation to the peerage. When the other partners wished to retire the two branches of his bank were taken over by joint-stock companies, the Manchester branch in 1863 by the Manchester and Liverpool District Bank and the London branch by the London and Westminster Bank in 1864. As his interests in banking and currency matters receded, so he became increasingly interested in the management of his estates. Loyd bought 5000 acres at Wing, in north Buckinghamshire, and rebuilt the house at Overstone, employing the architect William Milford Teulon. He also spent much money on improving the dwellings of the agricultural labourers on his estates. 
In his last years Loyd became increasingly conservative and withdrew more and more from public life. His eyesight began to fail, and for at least the last two years of his life he seems to have been confined to a wheelchair. His religious beliefs became steadily more austere, and he became more and more lonely and dependent upon his daughter, spending much of his time with her at Lockinge. Nevertheless, he retained a strong sense of humour. He died peacefully on 17 November 1883 at his London home, 2 Carlton Gardens, a house which he had bought from the widow of William Huskisson, shortly after that MP's death. He was buried at Lockinge beside his wife. The prince of Wales sent a letter of condolence to his daughter, and Queen Victoria was represented at his funeral. He left securities valued at $2,118,084 and landed property worth $3,114,262, making him one of the wealthiest men in the country at that time. 
The important role that Loyd played in banking reform was well described in a 'Times' obituary, which also mentioned that he was 'one of those men who in a measure outlive their reputation as they survive their contemporaries. He did his country most valuable service in his time but the time was long ago... and it is nearly a quarter of a century since his name has come prominently before the public.' The obituary continued, however: 'in the fulness of his practical knowledge he submitted the whole of our banking system with its subsidiary monetary questions to a severely scientific analysis, bringing theories and ideas to the test of experience, drawing logical deductions from closely sifted premisses, and marshalling deliberate conclusions in his mind with a wonderful lucidity of method. ('The Times', 19 Nov 1883)' 



