@@@@@


doc= 17116


Luard, Henry Richards (1825-1891), Church of England clergyman and university administrator, eldest son of Henry Luard (1792-1860), London banker, and his wife, Jane Richards, was born in London on 17 August 1825. His uncle was John Luard. He was educated at Cheam School under Charles Mayo, and between 1841 and 1843 at King's College, London. He took up residence at Trinity College, Cambridge, in October 1843. In 1846 he obtained a college scholarship, and in 1847 graduated BA. He was fourteenth in the first class of the mathematical tripos, lower than expected, but he was later said to have been in bad health at the time of the examination. In 1849 he was elected to a fellowship at Trinity College. He proceeded MA in 1850, BD in 1875, and DD in 1878. He was for a short time mathematical lecturer in Trinity College, and was junior bursar from 1853 to 1862. In 1855 he was ordained deacon and priest, and from 1860 to 1887 he was vicar of Great St Mary's, Cambridge. In January 1862 he was elected registrary of the university, in succession to Joseph Romilly, and on 19 June in the same year he married Louisa Calthorpe, youngest daughter of George Hodson, archdeacon of Stafford and canon of Lichfield; they had one son, who died in June 1891. In 1875 he was elected honorary fellow of King's College, London. 
Luard was a pre-Tractarian high-churchman opposed to ritualism, but tolerant of those who differed from him. He was an energetic parish clergyman, an active parish visitor and an eloquent preacher. During his incumbency much of Great St Mary's was restored. He found the church still encumbered by the eastern gallery, nicknamed Golgotha, in which the vice-chancellor and heads of colleges sat; but he persuaded the senate to accept a plan which included the removal of both eastern and western galleries, and the reseating of the nave and chancel. These works were carried out in 1863, and the church was reopened for services on 2 February 1864. 
Although he took his degree in mathematics, Luard was a good classical scholar, with a particular interest in the English critics of the eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries. Among these his hero was Richard Porson, whose work he began to collect and edit even as an undergraduate. He contributed a 'Life of Porson' to the 'Cambridge Essays' (1857), and to the ninth edition of the 'Encyclopaedia Britannica', and he bequeathed his extensive collection of Porsoniana to the library of Trinity College. It had been anticipated that he would collaborate with W. G. Clark in editing the 'Cambridge Shakespeare' (1863-6), but his appointment as university registrary prevented more than a preliminary edition of Act I of 'Richard II' (1860). As registrary of the university he was accurate and industrious. With the help of his clerk he rearranged the documents under his charge, binding each group in a volume, with a separate index. These indices were afterwards united so as to form a comprehensive guide to the whole body of records. In 1870 he published 'A chronological list of the graces, documents, and other papers in the university registry which concern the university library'. He took a close interest in the university library, sharing in the printed catalogues of manuscripts (1856-67) and of adversaria (1864). Luard was by temperament and conviction a conservative, and he was opposed to most of the changes during his lifetime in the university and in Trinity College: he wrote several flysheets and short pamphlets on the subject. 
In addition to his university duties and influenced by S. R. Maitland, Luard edited for the 'Master of the Rolls' series a long list of works, upon which his reputation as a historian chiefly rests. He approached his task with scrupulous care, and compiled the indices with precision, but at the same time the introductions are distinguished by wide historical knowledge. The first of these, 'Lives of Edward the Confessor', was published in 1858, when Luard, still a novice, was much helped by J. E. B. Mayor. The principal piece in the volume is a metrical life of the saint in old French (Cambridge UL, MS Ee.3.59), to which Luard appended a translation and glossary. Sixteen years afterwards Robert Atkinson of Dublin published 'Strictures on Mr. Luard's edition of a French poem on the life of Edward the Confessor' in 'Hermathena' (1, 1-81). Undoubtedly Luard had made mistakes but the attack was ill-tempered and tardy, especially in view of Luard's fine record as a 'Rolls Series' editor: his 'Annales monastici' (1864-9) is still the standard and unchallenged edition of this text. Luard made no reply to Atkinson but it was well known that the attack affected him greatly, and probably contributed to the illness which he suffered between 1877 and 1880. During those years he was obliged to go abroad and to ask the university to appoint a deputy registrary. Returning in better health, he continued to work for the 'Rolls Series' on Matthew Paris's 'Chronica majora' (1872-83), one of the best editions in the series. He also contributed articles to the 'Dictionary of National Biography'. His recovery was, however, followed in 1889 by the death of his wife, to whom he was much attached; other symptoms appeared, and he died, after a long period of weakness and suffering, on 1 May 1891 at his home, 4 St Peter's Terrace, Cambridge. He is buried with his wife in St Giles's cemetery, Cambridge. 


@@@@@


doc= 17117


Luard, John (1790-1875), army officer, author, and artist, was the fourth son of Captain Peter John Luard (died 23 May 1830) of the 4th light dragoons and of Blyborough, Kirton in Lindsey, Lincolnshire, and his wife, Louisa, daughter of Charles Dalbiac of Hungerford Park, Berkshire. He was born on 5 May 1790, served in the Royal Navy 1802-7, and on 25 May 1809 obtained a cornetcy without purchase in his father's former regiment, with which he served through the Peninsular campaigns of 1810-14. Afterwards he served with the 16th light dragoons (later lancers) as lieutenant at Waterloo and as captain at Bharatpur in 1825. In India he instructed his regiment in the use of the lance and was reportedly the first to use it in the British army, at Bharatpur. He exchanged to the 30th regiment in 1832, retired as major in 1834, and obtained a brevet lieutenant-colonelcy in 1838. In retirement he was a director of the London and South-Western railway. He had married in 1826 Elizabeth, daughter of Colonel William Scott of the East India Company; they had two daughters and four sons including Lieutenant-General Richard Luard and Major-General Frederick Luard. 
Like others of his family, Luard had much artistic talent. He published 'Views in India, St Helena, and Car Nicobar' (1835), illustrated by himself, and 'History of the Dress of the British Soldier' (1852), which includes original sketches of military characters and costume from the Peninsular War. Luard died on 24 October 1875 at his home, The Cedars, Farnham, Surrey. 
His second son, 


@@@@@


doc= 17118


John Dalbiac Luard (1830-1860), army officer and artist, born at Blyborough on 31 October 1830, was educated at the Royal Military College, Sandhurst. He was appointed ensign without purchase in the 63rd in 1848, and transferred to the 82nd regiment. After obtaining his lieutenancy in 1853, he left the service to devote himself to art, and studied for a time under John Phillip RA. He exhibited his first picture at the Royal Academy in 1855, 'A Church Door'. He spent the winter of 1855-6 in the Crimea with his brother, Major Luard, then on the headquarters staff at Sevastopol. In 1857 he exhibited a Crimean subject, 'The Welcome Arrival' (National Army Museum), which, engraved, had some popularity, and two others in 1858. He was a friend of Millais, with whom he shared lodgings for a time. His health failed, and he died at Winterslow, near Salisbury, on 9 August 1860. 


@@@@@


doc= 17119


Lubbock, Sir John William, third baronet (1803-1865), astronomer and banker, was born on 26 March 1803 in Duke Street, Westminster, London. He was the only child of Sir John William Lubbock, second baronet (1773-1840) and Mary Entwistle (died 1845) of Manchester. The elder Lubbock, the eldest of six children of William Lubbock (1746-1823), inherited his baronetcy from his childless uncle Sir John Lubbock (1744-1816) who helped establish the banking firm of Sir William Lemon, Buller, Edward Forster, John Lubbock & Co. in 1772. This partnership, which Sir John Lubbock and Forster mainly ran after 1800, would later pass down to the younger J. W. Lubbock through his father. 
Lubbock received his early education at Eton College and privately from William Maltby, and in 1821 convinced his father, who had intended to send him to Oxford, to enrol him instead at Trinity College, Cambridge. He spent more time studying astronomy and algebra with William Whewell and other younger Trinity fellows than he did cramming for the mathematical tripos, and graduated first senior optime in 1825. While an undergraduate he vacationed in Milan and Paris, where he steeped himself in the scientific and mathematical work of Laplace and Lagrange. 
In 1827 Lubbock entered his father's banking firm at 15 Lombard Street, London, then known as Sir John William Lubbock, Forster & Co. In 1833 he married Harriet Hotham (1810-1873), daughter of a York military officer. This marriage produced eight sons (all of whom attended Eton) and three daughters, between 1834 and 1849. From 1827 to 1834 Lubbock's London address was 23 St James's Place, across from the Royal Society; between 1834 and 1840 he lived at 29 Eaton Place, London, and Mitcham Grove, Surrey. Upon succeeding to the baronetcy at his father's death on 22 October 1840, he moved his country home to High Elms, Farnborough, Kent. For the next twenty years he divided his weeks between working as senior partner of his bank in London and presiding over his estate in High Elms. Besides supervising the primary education of his own sons and establishing three village schools he spent his leisure time in Kent breeding sheep and cattle, planting conifers, and conversing with his neighbour Charles Darwin. 
Most of Lubbock's published work in science and mathematics appeared in the 1830s when he was still only a junior partner at the bank. In addition to original research on planetary motion, lunar theory, and tide tables, he played an important role in introducing British men of science to the work of Europeans, including the Frenchmen Augustin-Louis Cauchy, Phillippe de Pontecoulant, and Francois Pambour; the Italian astronomer Giovanni Plana; and the Norwegian mathematician Niels Abel. In his original scientific work Lubbock was consistently drawn to topics which allowed him to relate mathematical theories with observations that had been collected by practical men with little formal scientific training. 
Lubbock contributed to a uniquely eclectic array of scientific societies. On the one hand he put in long hours at the Society for the Diffusion of Useful Knowledge (SDUK), Henry Brougham's project for making science intelligible to mechanics. On the other he was elected to the Royal Society in 1829, regularly read papers there in the 1830s, and served as its treasurer and vice-president from 1830 to 1835 and from 1838 to 1847 -- a time when the society's aristocratic bent was under constant fire from reformers like Charles Babbage. He also regularly contributed to the Royal Astronomical Society (RAS), which he joined in 1829, and belonged to the Geological Society of London (to which he contributed only one paper, on the climatic effects of the earth's rotation). And, while he was much less active in the British Association for the Advancement of Science (BAAS) than most of his friends, Lubbock did serve occasionally as vice-president of section A (astronomy), and he gladly accepted a BAAS grant in 1834 for his tidal research, although he published the findings in the Royal Society's 'Philosophical Transactions' rather than the annual BAAS 'Report'. Less formally Lubbock maintained a lengthy correspondence with several important men of science including Babbage, Whewell, John Herschel, and Augustus De Morgan, some of whom failed to agree about very much apart from their friendship with Lubbock. 
One of the founders of the SDUK's 'British Almanac' in 1827, Lubbock contributed an article on tides to its 'Companion' in 1830, which he continued to update for the rest of the decade and revised as 'An Elementary Treatise on the Tides' in 1839. In 1830 he also published for the SDUK with J. E. Drinkwater (later Lord Bethune) the essay entitled 'On Probability', which expounded Laplace's probability theory with examples from horse-racing, juries, and life assurance; this was a popular version of a highly abstract pair of papers on probability theory which Lubbock had delivered to the Cambridge Philosophical Society in 1828-9. A final SDUK project which Lubbock supervised in 1830 was the publication of a set of six star maps on the 'gnomonic projection', which displayed the constellations, in Lubbock's words, 'as they would be... by a Camera Lucida' (Lubbock, 'The Stars', preface). He also published articles in the 'Philosophical Magazine' during the 1830s on cask-gauging and achromatic lenses, which combined esoteric forays into pure mathematics with respectful nods to the 'experience' of barrel makers and lens grinders. 
In most of his work on the practical applications of science Lubbock urged scientists to band together with artisans in order to dethrone what were, in his view, the inept and corrupt practices of untrained placemen who held official scientific jobs. In the 1830s he joined with John Herschel and Francis Baily to try to reform the Admiralty office and its nautical almanac, after failing in his attempt to win the post of superintendent of the almanac in 1831. And he sided with commercial actuaries against the census official John Rickman, whose overly optimistic population figures had failed to square with life assurance companies' tables of mortality. Lubbock also served, alongside Herschel and George Biddell Airy, on two royal commissions on weights and measures (1838-41 and 1843-54), which among other things recommended in 1853 that Britain switch to a decimal coinage. At the heart of his lifelong interest in the practical side of science was a sincere belief that skilled labourers, with suitable direction from their social superiors, could turn their practical knowledge into social and political progress. This belief also motivated him to stand, unsuccessfully, as a radical MP for Cambridge in 1832, to serve as the first vice-chancellor of London University (1837-42), and to act as a treasurer of the Great Exhibition in 1851. 
Yet, at the same time that he was working so diligently on behalf of populist causes in the 1830s, Lubbock was displaying similar levels of administrative and intellectual toil at the openly elitist Royal Society of London. Between 1831 and 1837 he published six papers in the society's 'Philosophical Transactions' (including the Bakerian lecture of 1836) that extended the work on tides he had commenced at the 'British Almanac'. Together with William Whewell's concurrent work at the Royal Society and the BAAS, these papers did much to refine the methods of Daniel Bernoulli and Laplace for relating the moon's transit with observed tidal fluctuations. Lubbock's share of the labour consisted in tabulating large data series which had been privately collected by dock employees in London and Liverpool, then comparing their regularities with each other and with Bernoulli's predictions. He left to Whewell the more ambitious (and, for the time being, fruitless) task of co-ordinating a standardized set of tidal observations around the world in order to produce an accurate map of co-tidal lines for use in navigation. In addition to his tidal research, for which the Royal Society awarded him a medal in 1834, Lubbock published an important set of papers in 'Philosophical Transactions' on physical astronomy. These investigations, which were also published in serial form by Charles Knight, supplemented Laplace's theories of planetary and lunar motion with a series of constants which made better allowance for disturbing forces. 
As Royal Society treasurer, Lubbock worked closely with its librarian, James Hudson, at building up its collection of books and journals; besides charging Hudson with keeping the shelves full, he supervised as the librarian took round-the-clock meteorological measurements from the society's rooms in 1832. Lubbock's library work also led him to publish a short work 'On the Classification of Different Branches of Human Knowledge' (1838), which originated in part from a dispute with the British Museum librarian Antonio Panizzi over the proper method of classifying books. Although his last published memoir in 'Philosophical Transactions' appeared in 1840, he continued to provide the society with referee reports (typically of a forbidding nature) into the 1850s. 
The Royal Astronomical Society was the only group to which Lubbock continued to send papers into the 1860s. Most of his efforts followed on from his earliest interests in tightening the fit between existing physical laws and available observations. In a set of papers delivered to the RAS between 1829 and 1833 Lubbock derived cometary orbits from his new laws of planetary motion in order to predict more precisely where to look for Halley's comet upon its predicted return in 1835. His RAS paper on 'The theory of astronomical refractions' (1855) summed up earlier findings he had published in the 'Philosophical Magazine' in 1840, in which he applied to astronomical observations Gay Lussac's law concerning the expansion of gases. Starting with this law and a set of observed pressures at different altitudes, he interpolated constants that could be used to correct for the distorting effect of atmospheric pressure, and thereby provide astronomers with more accurate angles of refraction. (In 1840, challenged by Sir James Ivory about the accuracy of these constants, Lubbock tried unsuccessfully to raise $1500 for a ballooning expedition in order to confirm them.) 
Lubbock's final RAS paper, 'On the lunar theory', restated the conclusions of his earlier Royal Society papers on the moon in order to claim priority for his own theoretical innovations, along with the empirical contributions of Plana and Pontecoulant, against recent claims made by the American astronomers M. F. Longstreth and Benjamin Peirce. In this paper he credited himself and his two European colleagues with 'bringing to perfection the solution of the problem of finding the longitude at sea by means of lunar observations' (Lubbock, 'Lunar theory', 12). For his work on lunar and planetary astronomy Lubbock was one of twelve astronomers who received a testimonial from the RAS in 1849 as part of a compromise stemming from the society's inability to decide which of the co-discoverers of Neptune (J. C. Adams or U. J. J. le Verrier) should receive its annual medal. 
Lubbock's scientific avocations, both in outlook and in their successful results, owed much to his equally successful vocation as a private banker in the City of London. He was one of London's leading financiers, both at the family bank and as a director of the Royal Exchange Assurance company. Lubbock's bank was a relatively small but very influential concern, which provided him with a prominent seat in the London Bankers' Clearing House and with easy access to polite society. He inherited his position on the court of directors at the Royal Exchange, like his senior partnership at the bank, upon the death of his father, who had been the insurance company's governor from 1838 to 1840. Lubbock became close friends with the firm's actuary, J. A. Higham, who abetted his lifelong interest in probability theory, and with the economist Thomas Tooke, its governor from 1840 to 1852. 
Lubbock's day-to-day experience in the City served him well in his interactions with men of science. He frequently passed along to Babbage and Whewell information on commercial matters like prices and exchange rates, which were readily accessible in his capacity as a private banker but which were next to impossible for a gentleman of science to discover on his own. Lubbock also periodically sought jobs for relatives of his scientific friends, as when he lobbied the Royal Exchange in 1861 to hire John Herschel's son as a successor to Higham. Men of science were often quick to return the favour: Whewell, Babbage, and David Ricardo all offered their support when Lubbock stood for parliament in 1832. More generally he used his social connections in the City to gain access to much of the practical information (typically held in private hands) which he was forever squaring with scientific theory. Among other contacts Lubbock relied heavily in his scientific work on such men as Sir John Hall, secretary of the St Katherine's Dock Company, who relayed to Lubbock the practical wisdom of his dock master and harbour master; Isaac Solly, chairman of the London Dock Company, who handed over twenty-six years of private tidal data to Lubbock; Captain Eastfield of the East India Company, who superintended a year's worth of careful observations at Lubbock's behest; and M. J. F. Dessiou of the Admiralty office, who constructed many of the tables that Lubbock analysed. 
Lubbock's scientific pursuits, however, did not always serve him so well at his desk in the City. He frequently complained that fellow financiers thought the less of him for his achievements in astronomy, and on the few occasions when he tried to apply scientific methods to financial questions the results were mixed at best. In his pamphlet entitled 'On Currency' (1840), he used the latest algebraic techniques to determine that no firm predictions about the effects of competing monetary schemes could be reached without far more evidence -- a conclusion few financiers were interested in hearing in the midst of a heated currency debate. And in 1860 he presented a paper to the Institute of Actuaries which appealed to probability theory as a means of convincing London's leading banks to move their cash reserves from the Bank of England to a collectively held mutual fund -- a suggestion which none of his fellow bankers, who revered the bank as a symbol of financial stability, would take seriously for decades to come. 
Lubbock's scientific and financial activities alike came to an abrupt end in 1860 when he was stricken by gout. That year Lubbock arranged for a merger between his bank and the London firm of Robarts, Curtis & Co., a comparably influential Lombard Street concern which had been founded in 1791. Shortly after closing the deal, which created the new firm of Robarts, Lubbock & Co., Lubbock passed along his senior partnership in the bank to his eldest son, John Lubbock, who was already well on the way to inheriting his father's scientific laurels as well: the younger Lubbock, later Lord Avebury, would go on to a brilliant career as a banker, anthropologist, politician, and popularizer of science. In 1861 J. W. Lubbock resigned his directorship of the Royal Exchange, a post which was later taken up in 1865 by his third son, Neville Lubbock, who remained on the court until his death in 1914. Sir John William Lubbock spent the last five years of his life mainly at High Elms, where he died of heart disease on 20 June 1865. 


@@@@@


doc= 17120


Luby, Thomas (1800-1870), mathematician, was born at Clonmel, co. Tipperary, the son of John Luby and Eleanor Fogarty. His father was descended from a Huguenot family that had settled in Canterbury, and his mother came from the old Irish family of Castle Fogarty. Luby entered Trinity College, Dublin, as a sizar in 1817, obtained a scholarship in 1819, graduated BA in 1821, and was awarded an MA in 1825 and DD in 1840. He was elected to a junior fellowship in 1831 and was co-opted as senior fellow in 1847. Among the various college offices filled by him were those of university preacher, censor, junior dean, bursar, and senior dean; he was also senior lecturer, Donegal lecturer, and mathematical examiner in the school of civil engineering. He married, first Mary Anne Wetherall, niece of General Sir Frederick Wetherall, and second Jane Rathborne of Dunsina; he was the father of six sons and four daughters. His popularity as a college tutor was unrivalled. He was a member of the Royal Irish Academy and he wrote two textbooks for college use: 'An Introductory Treatise on Physical Astronomy' (1828), and 'The Elements of Plane Trigonometry' (1825; 3rd edn, 1852). He also edited John Brinkley's 'Elements of Astronomy' (1836). 
Luby was a friend and colleague of Sir William Rowan Hamilton, with whom he discussed difficult mathematical questions. In his capacity as a university administrator he helped ensure that Hamilton was given the research time and financial support needed for the publication of his seminal works. Luby died at his home, 43 Lower Leeson Street, Dublin, on 12 June 1870. 


@@@@@


doc= 17121


Lucar, Cyprian (1544-1611?), author, was born in London, the eldest of several sons and a daughter of Emanuel Lucar (1494-1574) and his second wife, Joan, daughter of Thomas Turnbull. Emanuel Lucar's forebears had their roots in the west country but he and his family lived in the parish of St Botolph, Billingsgate, in the city of London. He was an active and generous member of the Merchant Taylors' Company and its master in 1560-61, the year in which Merchant Taylors' School was founded. He was one of the merchants who by Protector Somerset's order accompanied the lord mayor to Greenwich in support of a plot to place Lady Jane Grey on the throne, but suffered no punishment under Queen Mary for this act. He was a juryman at the trial of Sir Nicholas Throckmorton for complicity in the insurrection led by Sir Thomas Wyatt the younger in 1554, which sought to prevent the marriage of Mary with Philip of Spain. Throckmorton was found not guilty and in consequence the jurymen were summoned to the Star Chamber and committed to prison, Emanuel Lucar to the Tower of London, to be released on payment of $1000 fine, his fellow jurymen to the Fleet. 
Cyprian Lucar was admitted scholar of Winchester College in 1555 and was at New College, Oxford, in 1561-3. In 1568 he entered Lincoln's Inn. He was still living with his widowed mother, brothers, and sisters in St Botolph's Lane at the time when he and Richard Madox paid a visit to Robert Norman, about 1581, to see his new magnetic dipping needle. The date of his marriage to Joan is unknown. She survived him, as did their son Anthony, who entered the Middle Temple, and his brother Mark, who succeeded to family property in Somerset. 
In 1588 Lucar published 'Three Bookes of Colloquies concerning the Arte of Shooting in Great and Small Peeces of Artillerie', a translation of the first systematic treatise on ballistics written by Niccolo Tartaglia in 1537. Lucar himself contributed an appendix, somewhat longer than the original Italian text, containing allied material from some twenty continental and five English authors. In fact Lucar had been anticipated by William Bourne, whose 'Arte of Shooting in Great Ordnaunce' (1587) was based on Tartaglia. Lucar also produced 'A Treatise Named Lucarsolace', a small volume on current surveying practice, illustrating the instruments and methods used, and including aspects of estate management. It was dedicated to William Roe, alderman of London, who had married Lucar's sister. 
Lucar's death probably occurred in 1611; his will, proved that year, described him as 'of Isleworth in Middlesex' (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/118). In it he requested that he be buried in St Botolph, Billingsgate, alongside his parents. 


@@@@@


doc= 17122


Lucas, Anthony (1633-1693), Jesuit and experimental philosopher, was born on 18 October 1633 in co. Durham. From about 1650 he studied at the Jesuit school at St Omer in Flanders, and he entered the Society of Jesus in May 1662. The next year he joined the English Jesuit college at Liege, and in 1672 became professor of theology there. Liege professors boasted expertise in mathematical and experimental subjects they judged fashionable in England, especially at the Royal Society. In the 1670s Lucas maintained contacts with the society's secretary, Henry Oldenburg, via the ex-Jesuit controversialist and St Omer graduate Robert Pugh, and through the virtuoso John Aubrey, who also proposed to his friend Lucas the making of French translations of English scholarly texts. 
Lucas became involved with the Royal Society after Isaac Newton's doctrine of colours was attacked in September 1674 by the elderly Francis Line, mathematics professor at Liege. Newton passed sunlight from a small window-hole into a darkened room then transversely and symmetrically through a prism near the hole, making an oblong spectrum on a distant wall. He claimed that the spectrum's shape showed that rays had intrinsically different refrangibilities. Line reckoned such a shape could only be obtained were the sky cloudy and the prism far from the hole and parallel to the light. After Line's death in November 1675 his student John Gascoines insisted Line had successfully performed many trials before witnesses at the college. In January 1676 Oldenburg sent to Liege Newton's instructions on orienting the prism and darkening the room, and in April organized a Royal Society demonstration of the prism trial. 
In May 1676 Lucas joined the fight, interpreting the Royal Society's demonstration as a confirmation of Line's reports. He reproduced a slightly less lengthy oblong spectrum, but his views of spectral colours, coloured silks, and paper discs through lenses and prisms suggested coloured rays did not intrinsically experience different refractions. Lucas's letter on the subject was published in the society's 'Transactions' in September 1676. Newton worried about the difference in spectral length but ignored Lucas's other trials, which concerned phenomena Newton had treated in writings of the early 1670s. He wanted Lucas to check prism angles and concave sides, measure spectral lengths, and attend to Newton's crucial experiment, in which well-separated rays were subjected to a second refraction to show each ray's constant refrangibility. In October, Lucas made further trials to challenge intrinsic differences in refrangibility, denied the logical force of the crucial experiment, and appealed to the precedent of Robert Boyle, preferring accumulation of relevant experiments to a single decisive trial. Newton reacted with fury, again demanding that Lucas report on prism size and quality. In early 1677 Lucas conceded that the difference in spectral length, a matter he judged trivial, was perhaps due to his prism's concave sides, glass quality, and the time of day, but repeated that extrinsic factors could explain colours' different refractions. 
At the end of 1677 Newton, Aubrey, and Robert Hooke, the Royal Society's new secretary, discussed publication of the optical debate, as Lucas also wanted. In early 1678 Lucas sent copies of his previous letters via Pugh and Hooke, adding that his prism angles were slightly smaller than Newton used and that he had difficulty getting good glass. In Newton's final response to Lucas, sent via Aubrey and Pugh in March 1678, he explained away all Lucas's trials of 1676. Lucas's prism had too small an angle, he had confused mixed with simple colours, and he believed that microscope glasses behaved like fine lenses, ignored differences in angles of incidence, and assumed the crucial experiment was supposed to show that different colours had different refrangibilities, whereas, Newton now claimed, the experiment had nothing to do with colour. Lucas sent Aubrey further letters in the summer of 1678, but Newton withdrew from debate and publication, charging Lucas with conspiracy to embroil him and save Jesuit honour. Lucas, responsible for redirecting Newton's optical project and for some of Newton's anguish about public controversies, has occasionally been treated sympathetically, notably in Johann von Goethe's late eighteenth-century history of optics. 
After the end of the debate with Newton, Lucas's English connections were disrupted. In the winter of 1678-9 Jesuits at St Omer were implicated in the Popish Plot, and Pugh, Lucas's contact, died in a London gaol. In 1684 Lucas took part in debates at Ghent about a Jesuit history of the plot. Between 1680 and 1685 he was rector of the Jesuit school for novices at Watten, near St Omer. In 1686 Liege seminarians established a pilgrimage chapel in honour of the Virgin Mary, and it has been suggested that Lucas composed a manuscript account of her life and death. He achieved promotion as James II's regime began encouraging English Jesuits during 1687 and Flemish colleges grew. In March 1687 Lucas became rector of the Liege College, and in October rector of the English College at Rome. In August 1693 he was made provincial superior of the English Jesuits, but he died of fever at the age of fifty-nine, at Watten, on 3 October 1693. 


@@@@@


doc= 17123


Lucas, Sir Charles (1612/13-1648), royalist army officer, was the youngest of three sons of Thomas Lucas (died 1625), a barrister of St John's, Colchester, and his wife, Elizabeth Leighton (died 1647), a London heiress. His eldest brother, Sir Thomas Lucas, like Charles a professional soldier, was to serve the king in Ireland, while the royalism of the middle brother, Sir John Lucas, was to make him the prime target of Colchester rioters in the uneasy weeks which preceded the outbreak of war in 1642. Charles Lucas's youngest sister was Margaret Cavendish, duchess of Newcastle upon Tyne. The Lucas family had been prominent in Colchester and Essex affairs since the fourteenth century, and these strong local connections played a part in Lucas's later career. Sir Charles Lucas was a brave and capable cavalry commander, but he owes his measure of fame to the manner of his death. He was executed after the surrender of Colchester in 1648 and became, after Charles I, the pre-eminent royalist martyr of the civil wars. The justice of his fate was hotly debated at the time and continued to divide latterday 'royalists' and 'parliamentarians'. 
Lucas was educated by a private tutor in Colchester before entering Christ's College, Cambridge, on 7 June 1628 as a fellow commoner, aged fifteen. In May 1637 he went as a cornet in his brother Sir Thomas's troop of horse to serve in the Netherlands, but though he gained useful experience his stay was brief. With the advent of the Scottish wars the Lucas brothers were high on the list of officers with experience abroad who were now 'elected' to serve the king (NL Wales, MS Chirk F 7042). Charles was knighted by the king at Berwick on 27 July 1639. In July 1640 he commanded a troop of horse in Sir Thomas's regiment in Yorkshire, and by September he was in command of the garrison at Richmond. By 1641 he had established himself as an able and responsible officer. 
Lucas was active in the king's service from the beginning of the civil wars. Between September 1642 and 1644 his actions at Powick Bridge, Edgehill, Cirencester, Nottingham, Doncaster, and elsewhere earned him a reputation for acting ''resolutely and bravely'' ('Mercurius Aulicus', 1642 [1644], 342). On Prince Rupert's recommendation he became the earl of Newcastle's lieutenant-general of horse. At Marston Moor on 2 July 1644 his brigade, on the royalist left wing, routed Sir Thomas Fairfax's horse, but in a later charge Lucas's horse was killed and he was taken prisoner. After the battle he was taken around the field to identify the eminent royalist dead so that they might be reserved for honourable burial. He is said to have wept at their numbers. 
Lucas was finally freed by exchange in the winter of 1644-1645 and soon afterwards was appointed governor of Berkeley Castle. Consequently he was not present at Naseby in June 1645. At Berkeley, Lucas's position was weakened by disaffected troops, local hostility, and unreliable officers. His subsequent surrender, after parliamentarian troops under Colonel Rainsborough stormed the outer works and undertook a heavy bombardment, did not tarnish his character as 'a souldier of reputation and valour' (I. Sprigge, 'Anglia rediviva: Englands Recovery', 1647, 125), for Berkeley had been 'well defended' (E. Walker, 'Historical Discourses', 1705, 142). 
Lucas next joined Prince Maurice and Prince Rupert but he cannot have accompanied them into exile, for late in 1645 he was appointed lieutenant-general of horse to Sir Jacob Astley's force. On 21 March 1646 they were defeated at Stow on the Wold in the last major engagement of the first civil war and Lucas was captured. This appears to have been the occasion on which Fairfax released him on parole. 
Lucas's property had been sequestered, but by April 1646 he was petitioning for relief. On 28 February 1648 he compounded for his delinquency in arms and took the requisite oaths, and on 16 March his fine was set at $508 10's'. 0died He paid half, but on 28 July the suspension of penalties against him was revoked on the ground of failure to pay the remainder. By this time, however, non-payment was the least of his sins. 
Lucas claimed that he was forced to fly from London when the Derby House committee put a price on his head (probably in fact a reward for information against royalists illegally remaining in London). Commissioned by the prince of Wales to command in Essex, he joined the earl of Norwich and his royalist forces at Chelmsford after they crossed the Thames from Kent early in June 1648. Closely pursued by Fairfax, they marched to Colchester, reaching it on 10 June. In both towns Lucas's exploitation of his local connections was crucial in winning support. On 13 June he was one of a small band of gentlemen who, by a heroic stand at one of the town gates, thwarted Fairfax's attempt to take Colchester by storm. In the long siege of attrition that followed, Lucas, Lord Capel, and Lord Loughborough managed royalist military organization and logistics, and Lucas led several daring raids outside the walls. In negotiations between besiegers and besieged Fairfax refused to deal directly with him: 'for that he,... being his prisoner upon his Parole of Honour, and having appear'd in Arms contrary to the Rules of War, had forfeited his Honour and faith, and was not capable of command or trust in Martial affairs.' Lucas, stung by this attack on his honour and his professionalism, sent back what even a royalist reporter significantly described as 'his excuse for his breech of his Parole' ('Buckinghamshire MSS', 284). 
The bitter siege was marked by hunger, fire, and sickness. Lucas shared the blame for conducting a defence that had no care for civilian suffering, and he was accused of individual acts that breached the rules of war and humanity. At last on 17 August, hunger, mutiny, desertion, civilian protests, and the impossibility of relief drove the royalist leaders to seek a treaty, but their demands were unrealistic and Fairfax was in no mood to be generous. Finally on 27 August they agreed to his terms. On 28 August, at about two in the afternoon, Fairfax entered Colchester. 
The provisions were harsh. Junior officers and lower ranks were granted quarter, but senior officers were forced to accept a surrender to mercy. Both terms had specific and well-known military meanings. Quarter preserved the prisoner's life; mercy left it at the discretion of the victorious commander. Surrender to mercy came, in Fairfax's words, 'without certain Assurance of Quarter; so as the Lord General may be free to put some immediately to the Sword, if he see cause' (Rushworth, 7.1247). 
Those selected for 'cause' were the most active royalist leaders in Colchester, with the addition of a turncoat, Colonel Farr, who eluded capture. Capel and Norwich were reserved for the judgment of parliament. The immediate victims were Lucas, Sir George Lisle, and Sir Bernard Gascoigne, speedily condemned in absentia by a council of war. They were taken to the castle, and Colonel Henry Ireton, the commissary-general, told them to prepare to die. An extraordinary debate between Lucas and Ireton followed, which ranged over questions of the authority by which they were condemned; the proper jurisdiction, whether civil or military, that covered their case; and ultimately the site of sovereignty and whether it lay in king or parliament (Firth, 'Clarke Papers', 2.35-8). Ireton insisted that the army acted by authority of parliament; Lucas argued that their case should fall under civilian law while denying the charge of treason that this would entail, for service to the king could not be treason. At the same time, however, he appealed to military precedent. At last he desisted. He prayed again with his two friends, asked God to forgive his executioners, and to be laid down decently when he fell and buried with his ancestors. He was shot by six dragoons. Lisle kissed him, and was shot in his turn. Gascoigne, an Italian, was reprieved. 
Lucas and Lisle became instant royalist martyrs. A flood of extravagant panegyrics followed. They were noble, heroic, and loyal, and Fairfax and his colleagues were excoriated as unsoldierly murderers and barbarians who had killed in cold blood. Fairfax felt himself on the defensive, though he had acted with perfect legality according to the laws of war that, though unwritten, governed the conduct of the armies of both sides. He was correct in arguing that 'by delivering upon mercy is to be understood, that some are to suffer, and the rest to go free' (Fairfax, Bodl. Oxf., MS Fairfax, 36, fol. 6). Furthermore military law in practice was both discretionary and exemplary; though rules were clear, the rigour with which they were enforced varied according to circumstances. At Colchester, Lucas and Lisle were the 'Persons pitched upon for this Example' (Rushworth, 7.1243). Yet if Fairfax was legally correct he had none the less moved into new territory. Soldiers had surrendered to mercy before in the civil war but their lives had not been forfeited. If he had not breached the laws of war he had breached conventions of practice. The executions were 'new, and without Example', said Clarendon (Clarendon, 3.138). 
The reasons offered for the new severity were varied. Royalists attributed it to Fairfax's spleen and pique and his desire for revenge for Lucas's routing of his horse at Marston Moor, and to Ireton's 'unmerciful and bloody Nature' (Clarendon, 3.138). Fairfax's own justification for the selection of Lucas and Lisle was patently disingenuous: they were 'mere soldiers of fortune' and, unlike Capel and Norwich, not 'considerable for estates and family' (Fairfax, Bodl. Oxf., MS Fairfax, 36, fol. 6). Lucas's breach of parole and of the oaths at his composition not to take arms against parliament, both potentially capital charges, and accusations of himself killing in cold blood, were also adduced. In fact Lucas and Lisle, as leading officers, were selected as exemplary victims and by the rules of surrender to mercy no specific charges were needed. More broadly, the need to engage in draconian justice can be explained by the shock and fear the second civil war produced among the victors of the first, by anger at extensive breach of royalist oaths not to take arms again, and by the frustration of a long, bitter, and increasingly pointless siege. 
Lucas's character remains elusive. Clarendon found him rough, proud, uncultivated, 'morose', and, off the battlefield, intolerable (Clarendon, 3.138). Yet though Lucas professed himself no 'rhetorician' and others granted that 'persuasion was not his talent' (Firth, 'Clarke Papers', 2.32; 'Beaufort MSS', 21), he successfully swayed the unruly crowds at Chelmsford in 1648, and in debate with Ireton he was agile and resourceful. His lost 'Treatise of the arts in war', largely in cipher, suggests an intellectual as well as a practical approach to war, while a letter to Prince Rupert in 1644 reveals a talent for the conventional arts of clientage and flattery (Warburton, 2.370-71). At Colchester he took some steps to mitigate the sufferings of the inhabitants of his home town, but he allowed them no weight in military calculations. The evidence suggests a tough soldier in the mould of the professionals of his age, whose severities were thrown into harsher relief by the 'softness' and 'kindness' of his fellow victim Lisle. Even Clarendon granted that his ability and courage inspired men to follow him (Clarendon, 3.138). 
Ultimately the victims triumphed. After their execution Lucas and Lisle were privately buried in St Giles's Church with Lucas's family, but on 7 June 1661, the anniversary of their entry into the king's service, a great funeral was magnificently solemnized in Colchester after a procession through the town of soldiers, gentlemen, and civic dignitaries. The black marble stone placed over their vault recorded that they were 'by the command of Sir Thomas Fairfax, the General of the Parliament army, in cold blood barbarously murdered' (Morant, 1.68). Tradition held that grass would not grow on the spot where they fell. 


@@@@@


doc= 17124


Lucas, Charles (1713-1771), politician and physician, was born on 16 September 1713 in co. Clare, a younger son of Benjamin Lucas (died 'c'.1727), a gentleman farmer of Ballingaddy, and Mary Blood. His great-grandfather, Lieutenant-Colonel Benjamin Lucas, was a Cromwellian officer who had been granted lands in co. Clare after service in the wars of the 1640s. Little is known about Lucas's early years, but the assertion that his father had squandered his estate ('DNB') is belied by the fact that he left effects worth in excess of $900 to his wife and their large family, the sum of $80 being apportioned to Charles. 
After his father's death about 1727, Lucas was apprenticed as an apothecary in Dublin city and set up shop there in the 1730s. He married his first wife, Anne Blundell, in 1734. Undeterred by the fact that he was a newcomer to the apothecary's trade, he wrote against frauds and abuses in the preparation and sale of drugs. His campaign was instrumental in securing legislation in 1736 which authorized the Royal College of Physicians of Ireland to inspect apothecaries' shops. His stance also provoked the enduring enmity of many of his colleagues, and may have contributed to an initial failure in business which necessitated a temporary retreat to London about 1737. 
Lucas's political involvement began with his appointment in 1741 as a representative of the Barber-Surgeons' Guild on the common council of Dublin corporation, where he soon demonstrated that attachment to radicalism which would mark his later career. The council of Dublin corporation was bicameral, the upper house consisting of the lord mayor and 24 aldermen, the lower house of a maximum 48 sheriff's peers, 96 representatives of the city's guilds, and 2 sheriffs who presided jointly. The corporation's constitution was based partly on royal charters and established usage, but principally on 'New Rules' passed in 1672 during the viceroyalty of the earl of Essex. These rules were designed to strengthen the role of the lord mayor and aldermen by vesting in them power to appoint higher city officers and to vet guild representatives on the council. Though regarded by whigs and radicals on the council as a product of Stuart despotism, the New Rules survived into the Hanoverian period. An attempt was made by William Howard to have the rules repealed following his election as MP for Dublin in 1727, and a corporation committee considered municipal reforms in the 1730s. 
In alliance with James Digges La Touche, a Merchants' Guild representative and a member of the wealthy Huguenot merchant and banking family, Lucas commenced a new campaign for municipal reform in 1742. They sought to limit the oligarchic powers of the upper house and to increase the influence of the lower house. The reformers represented the protestant freemen or enfranchised citizens of Dublin only, whose entitlement to participate in municipal and parliamentary elections depended on their membership of the city's exclusive trade guilds. Under the penal laws Catholics were denied participation in politics even at the municipal and guild level. Lucas issued a series of pamphlets in support of the campaign for municipal reform, the most notable being 'A Remonstrance Against Certain Infringements' (1743) and 'Divelina libera' (1744). The campaign culminated in a lawsuit in the court of king's bench in 1744, when Lucas and La Touche unsuccessfully challenged the aldermen's power of self-election, and shortly thereafter the two lost their seats on the city council. 
In January 1747 an outbreak of rioting occurred in Smock Alley Theatre as a result of attempts by the manager, Thomas Sheridan, to curb rowdy excesses by 'gentlemen' members of the audience. Lucas entered the fray as a champion of Sheridan and produced several pamphlets in letter form in February and March 1747, in which, untypically, he concealed his identity behind a pseudonym, 'A Freeman, Barber and Citizen'. Noting that the most prominent rioter, one Kelly, was a Catholic from the province of Connaught, Lucas warned of a relapse into the slavery and barbarism that had characterized the ancient Irish. He claimed that there was more to the riots than a mere theatrical dispute, and that they were the work of a group of 'professed Papists' and 'mercenary converts' preparing for 'a foreign invasion, a western insurrection or an universal massacre' (C. Lucas, 'A [First] Letter', 1747, 2; C. Lucas, 'A Second Letter', 1747, 10). Taken by themselves, these letters are undoubtedly unpleasant and seem to confirm that Lucas was a bigot, and the memory of them would live on to become the principal basis for Lucas's reputation as an ultra-protestant zealot. Yet the obsessive anti-Catholicism of his 'Barber' persona was in fact uncharacteristic of Lucas, and in later years he would become less preoccupied with the dangers of popery and more favourably disposed towards Catholics and ancient Ireland. 
Lucas's next opportunity for political action came during the Dublin by-election of 1748-9, when the city's two parliamentary seats fell vacant due to the deaths of the aldermanic incumbents. He declared himself a candidate and, in uneasy alliance with La Touche, sought to end the virtual monopoly of Dublin city's parliamentary representation by aldermen of Dublin corporation. As well as making fiery speeches in the guild halls, Lucas bombarded the voters with pamphlet addresses and letters designed as much to educate them in correct political principles as to advance his own candidacy. He reprinted these tracts in a collected edition in 1751, under the title 'The Political Constitutions of Great Britain and Ireland'. This publication may be one of the more important but neglected Irish political texts of the eighteenth century, as well as being Lucas's most coherent work. Though Lucas was a somewhat quixotic personality, and his style not infrequently emotive and pedantic, the 'Political Constitutions' is quite readable, as well as being fairly systematically laid out and containing much matter of interest. 
The 'Political Constitutions' is composed of lengthy prefatory material, twenty election addresses, and six letters to the citizens of Dublin, all written by Lucas, together with selected reprints from Lucas's election newspaper, 'The Censor', many of the latter articles being written by other authors. Lucas's election campaign was not confined merely to municipal matters, as has sometimes been implied, but encompassed much larger political issues. It was in his attempt to demonstrate that the British constitution was also the birthright of the Irish that Lucas was to be most controversial, and indeed original, making a distinct but still not adequately recognized contribution to the development of Irish nationalist thought. In his tenth address, of 13 January 1749, Lucas paraphrased the ideas of the constitutionalist William Molyneux, to the effect that Ireland was not a conquered colony dependent on Great Britain. He then went on to make a radical statement which eventually would land him in serious trouble with the authorities: 'It must now be confessed that there was no general rebellion in Ireland, since the first British invasion, that was not raised or fomented by the oppression, instigation, evil influence or connivance of the English' (C. Lucas, 'Political Constitutions', 1751, 123). In his eleventh address, of 31 January 1749, Lucas went even further in his critique of English misgovernment, claiming that although the native Irish in medieval times had shown their willingness to submit to English law, they had been treated as badly 'as the Spaniards used the Mexicans, or as inhumanly as the English now treat their slaves in America' (ibid., 134). He concluded with an attack on the 'Declaratory Act' of 1720, which he saw as evidence of the increase of the 'destructive excrescence of English power' (ibid., 143), thereby signalling clearly that his words had a contemporary as well as a historical import. 
Lucas did not pursue his ideas concerning the treatment of the native Irish, and indeed it is remarkable that he advanced them at all given his protestant prejudices. Yet he more than hinted at the existence of an inclusive Irish nation that transcended the anglican and dissenter sections of the population and had a common interest in resisting English domination, even if he was not prepared to concede that all sections of society should possess a complete equality of civil rights. 
A tract dated 18 August 1749, reprinted in the 'Political Constitutions', in the form of a letter to the citizens of Dublin, is evidence that Lucas's views on the Catholic question had also softened. Lucas claimed that he pitied rather than condemned the religious errors of the 'Papists or Romanists', and had the popes not claimed temporal power, he would 'know no difference between the civil rights of a Papist and a Protestant' (Lucas, 'Political Constitutions', 443). Hence he believed that Catholics should be free to worship according to their consciences, and should be compelled only to pay 'due allegiance to the established civil constitution' (ibid., 443). Lucas concluded his religious reflections by stating that all subjects, 'whether Papist or Protestant, Jew or Gentile', should have 'the full protection and benefit of the law' and the liberty to dispose of their persons and property as they chose, subject to the just laws of God and man (ibid., 443-4). Lucas's comments in this letter show that he had undoubtedly modified his position since 1747, and while not committing himself to a call for their repeal, he displayed none of the enthusiastic support for the penal laws which might be expected from a bigot. 
It is also significant that Charles O'Conor of Belanagare, the leading Catholic spokesman and writer against the penal laws, was sufficiently interested in the Dublin election controversy to issue a pamphlet in Lucas's defence in 1749, entitled 'A Counter-Appeal to the People of Ireland'. Unfortunately this has tended to be overshadowed or negated by a letter hostile to Lucas which was fabricated by O'Conor's grandson and biographer, the Revd Dr Charles O'Conor. This forgery coloured the hostile attitude towards Lucas shown by nineteenth-century historians such as Plowden and Lecky, and remains to influence the unwary today due to its inclusion in the 1988 edition of O'Conor's correspondence. A further indication that those with pro-Catholic sympathies were inclined to support Lucas in 1749 exists in the form of five articles in 'The Censor', which may have been the work of the young Edmund Burke. The articles, some of which were signed with the letter 'B', a signature used by Burke in his own journal, 'The Reformer', exhibit a lofty tone and support Lucas in a relatively cautious and moderate way, but include a specific recommendation that 'penal laws' should now be relaxed. 
As the election paper war raged in the summer and autumn of 1749, the controversy surrounding Lucas's candidacy came to a head. Following pointed comments by the lord lieutenant, the earl of Harrington, in his opening speech to the Irish parliament on 10 October 1749, the House of Commons mounted an investigation into Lucas's election writings and summoned him for questioning. Even as the house deliberated on his case, in 'The Censor' of 14 October a defiant Lucas courageously but unwisely quoted from a work by James Anderson DD, which claimed that Ireland was a distinct kingdom, that Catholics had believed they were taking arms in their own defence during the rising of 1641, and that both sides in the conflict had been guilty of atrocities. Belief in Catholic guilt in 1641 was almost an article of faith among moderate as well as extreme protestants, and Lucas's stance on 1641 and Irish risings must surely call into question his reputation as an extreme anti-Catholic bigot. 
On 16 October 1749 the House of Commons voted that certain of Lucas's election publications were seditious and promoted insurrection, that he had justified past rebellions and reflected scandalously on the lord lieutenant and parliament, and that he was an enemy to his country and should be imprisoned in Newgate. Fearing that his angry followers would attempt a violent uprising and that his health would not withstand imprisonment, Lucas yielded to the pleas of friends and fled by boat to the Isle of Man. He was by this stage a widower, and was obliged to leave his children behind him. 
The removal of Lucas from the scene was probably a satisfactory outcome so far as the government and his enemies were concerned, and polling commenced in his absence on 24 October. Although Lucas's running mate La Touche won one of the two parliamentary seats, he was later to be unseated by the House of Commons on the grounds of alleged electoral irregularities, and the representation of Dublin city therefore remained safely in the hands of the aldermanic party for the time being. 
Lucas made his way from the Isle of Man to London, where he issued some pseudonymous pamphlets and endeavoured to interest the corporation of London in his case. He then 'threw aside the political pen' and travelled to the continent to study medicine (Lucas, 'An Appeal to the Commons and Citizens of London', 1756, p. 1). Having studied at the University of Paris, he graduated MD at the University of Rheims in 1751, and secured a further MD from the University of Leiden in 1752. The title of his Leiden thesis was 'De gangrena et spacelo'. 
Lucas returned to England in 1753, and while he maintained an interest in matters political, most of his energies in the years following seem to have been devoted to building up his medical practice, and publishing the results of his research on European spas, his principal work in this area being 'An Essay on Waters' (1756). Samuel Johnson reviewed this work, and while expressing scepticism concerning the curative effects of cold bathing, he took a surprisingly sympathetic view of Lucas's political misfortunes, observing that he had been 'driven into exile for having been the friend of his country' (Boswell, 'Life', 1.311). Lucas brought his genius for controversy to his medical activities also, becoming involved in acrimonious debate with the medical faculty at Bath in the late 1750s, on the subject of the professional methods of its members. 
The more relaxed political conditions immediately following the accession of George III in 1760 encouraged Lucas to return to Ireland in order to contest the subsequent general election. In May 1761 he won one of Dublin's two parliamentary seats by a narrow margin, having established in a court action that the legal proceedings initiated against him in 1749 were no longer pending. Lucas threw himself with enthusiasm into his new role as a parliamentarian, his most important legislative achievement being the 'Octennial Act' of 1768, which provided for regular general elections; he also secured additional legislation controlling the sale of drugs. Having been derided earlier for being a mere tradesman, Lucas was now subject to the charge that he was a corporation politician out of his depth in parliament, but his legislative record shows that his transition from municipal to parliamentary politics was perhaps not quite so unsuccessful as claimed. 
While there is no evidence that Lucas exerted himself in support of the developing Catholic campaign for relief from the penal laws in the 1760s, neither is there any evidence that he wrote systematically in a bigoted fashion against Catholics, as was alleged by Madden for example. Lucas was closely associated with the radical newspaper, the 'Freeman's Journal', which although it published letters hostile to Catholics, also gave space to some pro-Catholic correspondence, indicating an attitude of growing tolerance if not sympathy among protestant radicals. Yet Lucas did support 'quarterage', an unjust exaction which Catholics had to pay to the protestant-controlled trade guilds, despite not being allowed to become full members. 
Lucas had remarried on 27 March 1760 at St James's, Westminster, his bride being Penelope (died 'c'.1765), daughter of Colonel Robert Catherwood. Following Penelope's death Lucas married again in 1768, his third wife being Elizabeth Hely, who survived him. All three of Lucas's wives bore children; of these only the eldest son, Henry Lucas (c.1740-1802), rose to prominence, achieving some minor fame as a court poet. 
Lucas's final years were marked by even more intense conflict with the administration, particularly over the issue of augmenting the army in Ireland, and he continued to assert the Irish right to autonomy, never moderating his criticisms of English misgovernment. His relations with the lord lieutenant, Viscount Townshend, were particularly poor, and the latter wrote of him in 1768: 'Here is a Dr Lucas, the Wilkes of Ireland, who has been playing the devil here and poisoning all the soldiery with his harangues and writings' ('Rutland MSS', 2.303). In the wake of Townshend's prorogation of parliament in December 1769 in response to its refusal to pass a money bill, Lucas issued a strongly worded denunciation entitled 'The Rights and Privileges of Parliament Asserted' (1770). The parallels between events in Ireland and those in the increasingly restive American colonies were clear to Irish patriots, and following the Boston massacre in 1770 the townsmen sent Lucas an account of the incident. 
So disabled by gout that he frequently had to be carried to and from the House of Commons, Lucas died aged fifty-eight on 4 November 1771 at his home in Henry Street, Dublin. He was buried on 7 November in Dublin's St Michan's churchyard (where his gravestone may still be seen). As well as his son Henry and other relatives, the large funeral procession included members of Dublin corporation and the city guilds, over 200 scholars of Trinity College, and friends and colleagues such as the earl of Charlemont and Henry Flood. 
Lacking independent means, Lucas's participation in unremunerative politics meant that he was not infrequently financially embarrassed, and his widow Elizabeth was obliged to apply for a municipal pension after his death. There are several portraits of Lucas, by Reynolds and Hickey among others, but the physical frailty and nervous energy of the man are perhaps best captured in the statue by Edward Smyth in Dublin's City Hall in Dame Street. This remarkably realistic piece of work shows Lucas in full oratorical flight, and also portrays an injured eye which he had sustained in a laboratory accident in his younger days. 
Townshend's 'the Wilkes of Ireland' is the best remembered description of Lucas, although it obscures the fact that his campaigns antedated those of the English radical. The relative obscurity into which Lucas fell after his death may be due first to the fact that his period has been overshadowed by the more dramatic events of the late eighteenth century, and second to the absence of a substantial body of surviving personal papers or a near-contemporary published memoir or biography. The lack of personal papers is compensated for significantly by Lucas's copious published writings, and it may be that the unfounded belief that they are uniformly tedious and unimportant has discouraged historians from paying them due attention. Lucas's medical career was also significant, and his efforts to control the manufacture and sale of drugs are actually somewhat better remembered today than his political campaigns. Lucas's personality could be difficult and his habits were certainly independent, yet his reputation for anti-Catholicism has been greatly exaggerated, and his significant contribution to the evolution of Irish nationalism has not received the recognition it deserves. 


@@@@@


doc= 17125


Lucas, Charles (1769-1854), writer and Church of England clergyman, was the son of William Lucas of Daventry. He was educated first at the school in the close of Salisbury, then at Harrow School. He was admitted a student of Oriel College, Oxford, on 15 July 1786, and he styled himself 'A. M.' on the title-pages of his books, but the university register does not recognize him as a graduate. In 1791 he became curate of Avebury, Wiltshire, where he devoted himself to writing novels and religious poems. Among these are: 'A Descriptive Account in Blank Verse of the Old Serpentine Temple of the Druids at Avebury' (1795; 2nd edn with notes, 1801), 'The Castle of St Donat's, or, The History of Jack Smith' (1798), and 'The Infernal Quixote: a Tale of the Day' (1801). On 5 January 1803 he married Sarah Ann Williams, sister of the Revd H. Williams; they had a large family. Lucas continued to write, producing a novel entitled 'The Abissinian Reformer, or, The Bible and the Sabre' (1808) and 'Joseph' (1810), a religious poem in two volumes. Lucas left Avebury in 1816 and settled at Devizes, where he died in 1854. 


@@@@@


doc= 17126


Lucas, Charles (1808-1869), composer, cellist, and conductor, was born at Salisbury, Wiltshire, on 28 July 1808, the son of a music-seller. He was a chorister at Salisbury Cathedral for eight years under Arthur Thomas Corfe. In 1823 he was admitted to the Royal Academy of Music, where he studied the cello with Robert Lindley and composition with William Crotch. He was made a sub-professor of composition in 1824, and won several prizes. In 1830 he joined Queen Adelaide's private band, and about the same time became music tutor to Prince George (later duke) of Cambridge and the princes of Saxe-Weimar. In 1832 he succeeded Cipriani Potter as conductor at the Royal Academy, and in 1839 became organist of Hanover Chapel, Regent Street. He was for some time conductor of the Choral Harmonists' Society, and from 1840 to 1843 occasionally conducted at the Ancient Concerts. From 1859 to 1866 he was principal of the Royal Academy, and from 1856 to 1865 a member of the music-publishing house of Addison, Hollier and Lucas. He was in much demand as a cellist and succeeded Robert Lindley as principal cellist of the Italian Opera and the Philharmonic Society. His compositions included an opera, 'The Regicide', three symphonies, string quartets, anthems, songs, and a cello concertino, and he edited 'Esther' (1851) for the Handel Society. Several of his works were performed at concerts of the Philharmonic Society. 
Lucas married Helen Taylor (died 1866), a soprano. A Charles Lucas married Frances Short at St Thomas, Salisbury, on 15 March 1832, and may be our subject; Zoe Wilson ('b'. 1840), who married Walter Hawken Tregellas, was described as the third daughter of Lucas and his wife Frances. He died on 23 March 1869 at his home, 9 Louvaine Road, Wandsworth, London, and was buried at Woking. The Royal Academy of Music set up a gold medal for composition in his memory. His executors were his two sons, Stanley and Radnor. 


@@@@@


doc= 17127


Lucas, Frederick (1812-1855), journalist and politician, born in Westminster, London, on 30 March 1812, was the son of Samuel Hayhurst Lucas (died in or after 1840), a corn merchant in the City of London, and a member of the Religious Society of Friends. Samuel Lucas (1811-1865) was his elder brother. After spending eight years in a Quaker school at Darlington, he became, in his seventeenth year, a student at the London University, then recently established. He took a leading part in almost every discussion in the college debating club, or Literary and Philosophical Society. At this period the Roman Catholic claims were the principal topic of discussion, and he eagerly espoused the cause of emancipation, and devoted much attention to Irish politics. When he left the university, which had not then the power to confer degrees, he took up the study of the law, first in the chambers of Revell Phillips, and afterwards in those of Duval. He was called to the bar at the Middle Temple in 1835. 
In 1838 Lucas delivered two lectures on education in the Literary and Scientific Institution at Staines. In these lectures, which excited some attention at the time, and were afterwards published, he bestowed his warmest sympathies on the feudal and Catholic spirit of medieval Christendom. Early in 1839, in the course of some conversations with Thomas Chisholm Anstey, he was led seriously to examine the doctrines of Roman Catholicism, and in less than a week he was reconciled to the Roman church by Father Lythgoe SJ. He forthwith published a pamphlet entitled 'Reasons for Becoming a Roman Catholic, Addressed to the Society of Friends' (1839). This offended many of his former acquaintances, but later his wife and two of his brothers followed him into the Roman communion, and he maintained an intimacy with many persons of opposite and irreconcilable views and principles. The most conspicuous of these, outside the Catholic body, were John Stuart Mill and Thomas Carlyle. On 5 August 1840 he married Elizabeth Skidmore, daughter of William Ashby of Staines, Middlesex; they had two sons. 
About this time Lucas wrote for the 'Dublin Review', and acquired a literary reputation which made his co-religionists desirous that he should be permanently engaged in the support of their cause. With the aid of some wealthy Catholics he was enabled to start 'The Tablet', a weekly London newspaper, the first number of which appeared on 16 May 1840. In conducting this journal he advocated the most advanced ultramontane and pro-Irish opinions with such zeal and occasional asperity of language that he soon found himself in opposition to powerful sections of his own religious community. An attempt to force his removal as editor in 1842 led him to start a rival journal, the 'True Tablet', which won the support of other English Catholics and of Daniel O'Connell and triumphed over its opponent, resuming the name of 'The Tablet' in 1843. He identified himself with the Irish national movement and supported O'Connell in his demand for repeal of the Union. Towards the end of 1849 he moved the publishing offices of 'The Tablet' to Dublin. 
Lucas became an Irish political figure, leading in the foundation of the tenant-right agitation in 1850 and of the Independent Irish Party in 1851. In 1852 he was returned to parliament as one of the members for the county of Meath. He soon became a prominent debater in the House of Commons, and by his ability and evident sincerity, even when urging unpopular opinions, he gained the respect of many of his opponents. In 1853, when dissensions arose among the tenant-right party, Dr Cullen, archbishop of Dublin, and some other bishops prohibited the priests in their dioceses from interfering in political affairs. Lucas denounced in 'The Tablet' this action of the archbishop, and determined to appeal from the episcopal decision to the Holy See. In the autumn of 1854 he started on a mission to Rome. He had two interviews with Pope Pius IX, at whose suggestion he began to write a full 'Statement' of the condition of affairs in Ireland and of the questions at issue between himself and Dr Cullen. 
In May 1855, his health having broken down, Lucas returned to England, so altered in appearance that when he presented himself at the House of Commons the doorkeepers did not know him. He stayed with friends and relatives, and finally moved to the house of his brother-in-law at Staines, where he died of heart disease on 22 October 1855. He was buried in Brompton cemetery on 27 October. 
Lucas's 'Statement' was not quite completed at the time of his death. This document occupies more than 300 pages in the second volume of Lucas's 'Life' by his brother Edward. About six months after his death the 'Statement' was presented to the pope. It failed to achieve its object. 


@@@@@


doc= 17128


Lucas, Henry (bap. 1587, d. 1663), founder of the Lucasian professorship of mathematics at Cambridge University, the son of Edward Lucas ('bap'. 1566, died 1601) of Thriplow, Cambridgeshire, and his wife, Mary Covert, daughter of Sir Nicholas Heron, was baptized at St Giles Cripplegate, London, on 11 November 1587. Lucas was educated at the village school at Thriplow, and according to his will 'receaved... part of my education' at St John's College, Cambridge, although there is no evidence that he matriculated (Clark, 165). Lucas also states in his will that his patrimony 'was snatched from him by unhappy suits in law during his childhood'. Following the death in 1588 of John Flowerdew, his sister's son, Edward Lucas acquired an executorship in respect of the interests of Flowerdew's son Edward. It was alleged that Edward Lucas abused his trust and after his death legal proceedings resulted in an act of parliament in December 1601 rendering Edward Lucas's estate liable for John Flowerdew's legacies as well as his own debts. Henry Lucas was compelled to seek his own fortune, although he and his mother retained some of the Cambridgeshire property. 
Lucas was admitted to the Middle Temple on 6 February 1606 but was not called to the bar until 12 May 1648. His first recorded employment was in 1617, when he acted for the earl and countess of Bedford in matters regarding a lease; in 1618, as one of four agents of Lucy, countess of Bedford, he was responsible for the collection of tolls on coal shipped from the Tyne. In May 1629 Lucas was appointed secretary to Dudley Carleton, Viscount Dorchester and secretary of state. This post resulted in Lucas's meeting Henry Butts, vice-chancellor of Cambridge University. Following the death of Dorchester in 1632, Lucas became secretary to Henry Rich, first earl of Holland, chancellor of Cambridge University. As Holland's secretary Lucas was placed in the profitable position of being able to benefit from receiving favours granted from above and petitions presented from below. In his inaugural lecture as the first holder of the Lucasian professorship, Isaac Barrow claimed that 'while he [Lucas] managed the affairs of his patron so well,... he did not look badly to his own; but stored up some fruit into his own barn, from so plentiful a harvest'. 
Lucas was admitted MA of St John's College on 4 February 1636. It was also as a result of being Holland's nominee that he was elected one of the university's representatives in parliament on 24 October 1640. As an MP, Lucas was an influential protector of the university's interests. Holland's support wavered between the Commons and the king until 1648 when he rose in arms for Charles I. Holland was defeated at Nonsuch on 7 July and taken prisoner three days later. In the aftermath of the fiasco, twenty-nine of the earl's attendants including one Henry Lucas surrendered to the Hertfordshire militia and were sent to Peterhouse prison. However, this Lucas appears to have been a different person, as other evidence points to Henry Lucas being busy in the Commons at this time: in August he was named to a committee to adjudge scandalous offences under the terms of the ordinance for the form of church government, and in September he was named to committees considering army pay arrears and the preservation of books and manuscripts. In December he was secluded from parliament at Pride's Purge, and until 1652 was engaged in paying Holland's debts. 
According to his will, Lucas concentrated during the 1650s on developing a library of 'Bookes of diverse subjects'. Lucas frequently inscribed the books with his name, the year of purchase, and the cost, and in some of the more expensive texts he provided elevated comment in Latin. Following the restoration of Charles II in 1660 he was again identified as responsible for Holland's estate. 
Lucas died at his residence in Chancery Lane, London, in July 1663 and was buried in the Temple Church on the 21st of that month. 
Lucas's most significant legacy was the establishment of the Lucasian professorship of mathematics at Cambridge University. He instructed his executors to 'purchase lands to the value of one hundred pounds by the yeare to be imployed and setled as a yearely stipend and sallerie for a professor and reader of the mathematicall sciences' (Clark, 165). The professorship was founded in 1663 and was endowed with an estate in Bedfordshire; Isaac Barrow was elected the first professor on 20 February 1664. 
Lucas also bequeathed to the university library his collection of '812 bookes in folio, 326 books in Quarto, Octavo, and other small volumes and 29 bundles of several pamphletters' (draft in CUL archives, graced 12 Sept 1664, Grace book H, 335). His gift of books is comparable with the benefactions provided by the better-documented donations of Richard Holdsworth and John Hacket, bishop of Lichfield. The remainder of Lucas's estate, amounting to about $7000, he bequeathed for the establishment of a hospital in Berkshire or Surrey. The foundation, consisting of a chaplain or master, was intended to assist as many poor people as could be looked after; they were to be selected from the poorest inhabitants of the forest division in Berkshire and the bailiwick of Surrey. The hospital was built in 1665 on Luckley Green, Wokingham, Berkshire, with lands in Bedfordshire being purchased for its endowment. In 1666 Lucas's executors established 15 July as the commemoration day of the Lucas Hospital, suggesting that 15 July may have been the date of his death. 


@@@@@


doc= 17129


Lucas, Henry (c.1740-1802), writer and lawyer, was born in Dublin, the son of Charles Lucas (1713-1771), the radical Irish politician, and his first wife, Anne, 'nee' Blundell. His father had to flee Ireland in 1749 after his election campaign for the Dublin city seat in the Irish House of Commons resulted in a charge of seditious libel. It is not clear if Henry remained with his mother and family in Dublin while his father subsequently studied medicine in Europe. However, the family was with Charles while he practised medicine in London and Bath in the 1750s. Henry returned to a scholarship at Trinity College, Dublin, in 1757. There he was taught by Thomas Leland, a supporter of his father's. He tactfully subscribed to Leland's 'The History of the Life and Reign of Philip, King of Macedon' in 1758. He graduated BA in 1759, the year his father returned from exile, and obtained his MA in 1762. He was admitted to the Middle Temple the following year (as had been his father during a brief spell in London after his flight from Ireland and before taking up his medical studies). He seems to have made the law his occupation and was called to the bar in 1790. 
In his later twenties Henry rode on the coat-tails of his father in Dublin. Indeed, his father may have been grooming him for a political career, for Dr Lucas's stalwart supporters the Dublin Guild of Barber Surgeons admitted Henry as a freeman in 1767. In 1770, the year before his father's death, Lucas was involved in a fracas at a meeting of the Constitutional Free Debating Society. After drawing with Richard Brinsley Sheridan for a medal, with a group of 'ignorant, giddy, young men' he attacked the chair and attempted to take it ('Freeman's Journal', 30 May-1 June 1770, 471). His expulsion from the society is the last record of his Irish involvements, and after his father's death in 1771 he appears to have transferred his attentions to London and to writing. 
Lucas shared his father's interest in the theatre, and his first attributed work was an opera in 1776. He attempted to obtain patronage from the duke of Northumberland with a 'pastoral elegy' on the death of the duchess in 1777. Northumberland had been Irish viceroy from 1763 to 1765, and Lucas was possibly acquainted with him thus. Samuel Johnson was a connection of Lucas's father from the time of his exile, and Lucas asked him for advice on his historical play 'The Earl of Somerset' in 1777. The subject of the play was the fall of Robert Cauvs the earl of Somerset following his unjust treatment of Sir Thomas Overbury. Johnson said that it was 'but a poor performance', but which given it might 'put money into his [Lucas's] pockets [and] contains nothing immoral or indecent... we may very well wish success' ('Letters of Samuel Johnson', 3.21). (The remark of Johnson, 'I never did the man an injury', has been wrongly attributed to this episode and actually refers to Joseph Reed.) However, Johnson was annoyed two years later when Lucas used his name in association with attempts to get the work staged. The play received mixed notices the best of which, in the 'London Review', said it contained 'more beauties than defects' ('London Review', 11 Feb 1780, 143). When Lucas published the play by subscription in 1779, describing himself on the title-page as a 'student of the Middle Temple', he complained about the difficulties of getting work staged, and was still making similar complaints twenty years later with the publication of his last work, shortly before his death in 1802. 
Lucas's other published works are either poetical or dramatic, and in subject and tone highlight Lucas's pressing need to attract remunerative patronage. Examples include: 'A Visit from the Shades, or, Earl Chatham's Adieu to his Friend Lord Cambden' (1778); 'Poems to her Majesty' (beginning with the unfortunately titled 'Ejaculation Occasioned by Seeing the Royal Children', published together with 'The Earl of Somerset' in 1779); and 'The cypress-wreath, or, Meed of honour: an elegio-heroic poem, to the memory of Lord Robert Manners' (1782). 
Neither Lucas's legal nor his literary career seem to have been much of a success, and in 1818, sixteen years after his death, his stepmother and sister were in such financial straits that a public subscription had to be launched in Dublin for their support. Like his father's political pamphlets, his poetry and dramatic works stress the theme of personal virtue. 


@@@@@


doc= 17130


Lucas, Horatio Joseph (1839-1873), etcher, was born in London on 27 May 1839, the fourth son of William Jeremiah Lucas, a West India merchant, and his wife, Esther Louis. He belonged to an old Jewish family. He was educated at Brighton and at University College, London, and studied painting under Francis Stephen Cary. He married Isabel Olga, the daughter of Count d'Avigdor and the niece of Sir Francis Goldsmid, bt, with whom he had four children. He was a member of the Langham Sketching Club, and between 1870 and 1873 he exhibited architectural views, landscapes, and an interior at the Royal Academy and at the Salon in Paris. Lucas was a proficient etcher and contributed to the various black and white exhibitions; a selection from his etchings is in the print room at the British Museum. One drawing, 'The Sangreal', was published in 'Good Words' in 1863. In 1862 Lucas joined his father's business, so that he was able to devote only his leisure time to art. He was an accomplished musician and an active and useful member of the Jewish community in London. He died at his home, 5 Westbourne Terrace, Hyde Park, on 18 December 1873. 


@@@@@


doc= 17131


Lucas, James (1813-1874), eccentric, was born on 21 December 1813 in Hackney, Middlesex, the second (but first surviving) son and fourth child of James Lucas, a wealthy West India merchant and partner in the Liverpool-based firm of Chauncey, Lucas, and Lang, and his wife, whose maiden name was Beesly. He was educated at a private school in Clapham, from which he ran away at the age of fourteen, and then at a school in Richmond for a short time. Proving to be an awkward youth, he was sent to a medical man at Whitwell, a Mr Hicks, with a view to moral restraint and discipline, but quickly ran away back to his home, Elm Wood House, at Redcoat's Green, Great Wymondley, near Hitchin, which his father had purchased. An attempt to place him with a clergyman for his moral education met with no greater success. When thwarted he would shut himself in his bedroom for days on end. 'His meals were taken to him and left at his door, which he did not object to eat, but resolutely refused to return the plates. At length the plates and dishes became scarce in other parts of the household, as his bedroom contained nearly the whole supply in the way of crockery' (Tuke, 363). His father's death in 1830 gave encouragement to this promising start on a life of eccentricity, for his mother humoured all his many whims and saw nothing odd about his going hunting in a nankeen suit or with his shirt outside his breeches, his riding in a carriage with his hair in curl papers, or his unsuccessful courting of a local lady with a pair of doves in a cage, although medical opinion was later to regard these as undoubted symptoms of incipient madness. But it was his mother's death in 1849 which removed all restraints on oddity and launched him on the life of a hermit. 
Mrs Lucas died on 24 October 1849, but Lucas refused to part with her corpse until the following January, when his younger brother (who was their mother's executor) intervened and enforced her interment. This caused James to barricade himself into the kitchen of Elm Wood House, which was to be his abode for the next twenty-five years. He rarely left the one room, let alone the house. Window panes were broken by stones thrown at the time of the 'papal aggression' in 1850, as he was thought to have Catholic tendencies, and were replaced by iron bars through which he could be viewed, if permitted by the guards he employed to protect him from harassment. Particularly after Charles Dickens visited him and wrote him up in the Christmas 1861 number of 'All the Year Round', thinly disguised as Mr Mopes, he became an object of fashionable curiosity; he was visited by Lord Lytton, Sir Arthur Helps, John Forster, and others, and became known as the Hertfordshire Hermit. Dickens thought he was a fraud, 'an abominably dirty thing', an intolerably conceited sluggard, 'a slothful, unsavoury, nasty reversal of the laws of human nature' who ought to be put on a treadmill (Tuke, 370). Others, although inarticulate, probably took a more generous view. He was fond of children and tramps. On Good Fridays he doled out sweets, coppers, and gin and water to upwards of 200 children; he was visited by swarms of tramps, giving them gin and pennies, always more to Catholics than protestants. A rich man -- he left some $120,000 at his death -- he lived on a simple but ample diet of bread, cheese, red herrings, eggs, milk, and gin. Always suspicious that people were trying to poison him, he rejected many of his supplies; after his death a whole cartload of hard, untouched loaves, suspected of being poisoned, was taken away by a farmer, and after soaking in water they were fed to his chickens. He was also infested with rats, and kept his victuals in baskets hanging from the ceiling as a precaution. Once thought to be a good-looking man, 5 feet 6 inches tall, rather muscular, and with dark hair and eyes, he lived in filth and squalor, unwashed, clothed only in an old blanket, and sleeping simply on the ashes that built up to a depth of several feet (fourteen cartloads were removed after his death). But his conversation remained lucid and well informed, his memory was good, his conviction of the illegitimacy of the queen and his refusal therefore to execute any document requiring a stamp was consistently maintained, and he managed his bank account and his cheque book competently. 
Lucas's manner of life being so bizarre and irrational, medical opinion puzzled over how to classify him, and in the end the best view was that this was 'a case of moral insanity, madness of action rather than language' (Tuke, 371). He died of apoplexy on 19 April 1874, at Titmore Cottage, near Elm Wood House, and was buried beside his mother in Hackney churchyard on 21 April. Moral insanity or no, the sensational and curio trades had no doubt of his value, and within weeks of his death 10,000 copies of a biographical sketch had been sold, and a brisk trade was going on in a range of mugs and tea services carrying pictures of the hermit and his strange dwelling. 


@@@@@


doc= 17132


Lucas, John (1807-1874), portrait painter, was born in London on 4 July 1807, the son of William Lucas ('bap'. 1775, died 1819), whose family came from King's Lynn in Norfolk, and a Miss Calcott. His father began his career in the Royal Navy, but later styled himself a literary man, publishing poems such as 'The Fate of Bertha' (1800) and acting as editor of 'The Sun' newspaper. Lucas was apprenticed to Samuel William Reynolds, the mezzotint engraver, at the same time as Samuel Cousins. During this time he also studied and practised oil painting. When his tenure with Reynolds ended in the late 1820s, Lucas established his practice as a painter while continuing as a member of the Clipstone Street Academy, working with William Etty and other artists. 
Lucas exhibited his first portrait at the Royal Academy in 1828 and thereafter gained fame as a fashionable society portraitist. He painted the likeness of Queen Adelaide, the prince consort (four times), the princess royal, the duke of Wellington (eight times), Lord and Lady Palmerston, and William Ewart Gladstone, among others. His portrait of Mary Russell Mitford was purchased by the National Portrait Gallery after his death. The National Portrait Gallery also has Lucas's 'Conference of Engineers, Britannia Bridge', which features portraits of Robert Stevenson and Isambard Kingdom Brunel. This work was later engraved by J. Scott, as were other portraits by Lucas. Lucas himself employed his training as an engraver, producing engravings after Sir Thomas Lawrence. 
In 1836 Lucas married Milborough Morgan, a woman of Welsh descent, with whom he had three sons and two daughters. He often exhibited his works publicly, showing ninety-six portraits at the Royal Academy from 1828 to the time of his death on 30 April 1874 at his home, 22 St John's Wood Road, London. He was buried on 5 May 1874 at Kensal Green cemetery, London. Christies auctioned the contents of his studio on 25 February 1875. Lucas's artistic legacy lived on in the work of his sons: William Lucas became a watercolour painter and Arthur Lucas became an art publisher. His nephew John Seymour Lucas RA was his pupil. His eldest son, 


@@@@@


doc= 17133


John Templeton Lucas (1836-1880), perhaps achieved the most renown. Born in London, he concentrated on landscape painting, exhibiting seven landscapes at the Royal Academy between 1859 and 1876. Like his grandfather, he turned to literature, publishing a farce entitled 'Browne the Martyr' and a book of fairy tales, 'Prince Ubbely Bubble's New Story Book', in 1871. He died at Bagdale, Whitby, in Yorkshire, on 13 September 1880. 


@@@@@


doc= 17134


Lucas, Louis Arthur (1851-1876), merchant and traveller in Africa, was born on 22 September 1851 at Temple House, Cheetham, Manchester, the only surviving son of Philip Lucas and his wife, Juliana. 
Louis Lucas was educated at University College School, London, and at University College, where he showed a preference for scientific subjects. After a trip to Switzerland in 1870, he visited the United States in 1872, reaching as far west as Nebraska. At the end of 1873 he set out for Egypt hoping to improve his health, but contracted typhoid fever and spent some months convalescing. In July 1875 he announced his intention of exploring Africa, beginning in the Congo, despite his poor health. He organized an expedition independent of the Royal Geographical Society, of which he was an associate. He left London on 2 September 1875 and spent some weeks in Cairo learning Arabic and engaging servants. He travelled via Suez, Suakin, and Berber to arrive in Khartoum in January 1876. After making preparations there for an absence of several years, he left in April and sailed up the White Nile in a steamboat lent by Colonel Charles George Gordon to Lado, where he met Gordon. Together they travelled to the Albert Nyanza (Lake Albert) and Lucas was the first to sail on its northern waters in a steamship. Gordon persuaded Lucas to return to Suez, go thence to Zanzibar, reorganize his expedition, and make a fresh start for the interior; but at Khartoum, Lucas was delayed two months by fever and dysentery. He reached Suakin on 18 November and embarked for Suez but died on board the steamship 'Massowah' in the Red Sea on 20 November 1876. He was buried at Jiddah. He compiled a Bishareen vocabulary which was published in the Anthropological Institute's 'Journal'. Lucas's fortune was valued for probate record at under $60,000: he was described in his probate record as a merchant. 


@@@@@


doc= 17135


Lucas, Margaret Bright (1818-1890), temperance activist and suffragist, was born on 14 July 1818 at Rochdale, Lancashire, the youngest daughter of Jacob Bright (1775-1851), cotton mill proprietor, and his second wife, Martha, 'nee' Wood (died 1830). Several of her ten siblings, notably John Bright and Jacob Bright, became prominent in politics and reform. Educated 'in the institutions of the Society of Friends', she recalled: 'I developed slowly for we were strictly brought up and told that 'children should be seen and not heard'' (M. Parker). On 6 September 1839 Margaret married Samuel Lucas (1811-1865), a London corn exchange merchant and a fellow Quaker. The pair moved to Manchester in 1845, when Samuel took up a cotton mill partnership, but the family settled permanently in London in 1850. Margaret became politicized during the anti-cornlaw agitation, when, in 1845, she aided her husband in organizing meetings and raising money. Until her husband's death in 1865, however, her main burdens remained within the family, including the rearing of her two children, Samuel Bright Lucas, a deaf mute, and Katharine. By 1870 both children had married, Katharine to John Pennington Thomasson (later MP for Bolton). 
Relieved from the cares of immediate family, Lucas now sought a clear plan to fit her Quaker moral purpose. Suffering from bronchial trouble, and seeking a change of climate, she went to North America to stay with a cousin, Esther Blakey, in Halifax in 1870. Lucas easily mixed in the trans-Atlantic reform network that included strong Quaker participation. Woman suffragists and temperance reformers in the north-eastern United States warmly welcomed her as 'John Bright's sister'. She would reciprocate the hospitality when American reformers came to Britain. 
The American visit was a turning point in Lucas's public temperance career. There she witnessed 'the advanced views and institutions of a less trammelled social system', influences she found 'congenial' ('Memoir', 14-28). She had signed the temperance pledge at the age of sixteen, but joined the American-devised Independent Order of Good Templars in 1872, and became a grand worthy vice-templar in 1874. The Good Templars organized the British tour of 'Mother' (Eliza) Stewart, whose social protest against saloons in the Woman's Crusade had stimulated the creation of the Woman's Christian Temperance Union (WCTU) in 1874. Lucas and Stewart spoke at a Newcastle upon Tyne meeting in 1876 which led to the founding of the British Women's Temperance Association (BWTA). Elected BWTA president in 1878, Lucas also supported peace and anti-prostitution work, and served on the executives of the National Society for Women's Suffrage and the Ladies' National Association. Yet temperance took her chief labours, and she remained BWTA president until her death. In 1885 American WCTU leader Frances Willard selected Lucas as first World's WCTU president, in order to emphasize the organization's global commitment. As a consequence, Lucas crossed the ocean again in 1886 to attend an American WCTU convention in Minneapolis, at which she was feted. 
Lucas represented the phase of women's temperance that located the movement's power primarily in the home and in the superiority of women's moral virtues. In her fourth annual report she stated: 'I believe in the household women have a greater power over men, than men have over women, in inducing abstinence from intoxicating drinks' ('Memoir', 32). She also made, in the 1870s, more conservative assessments of the possibility of social protest than Americans did. British women would not, Lucas believed, emulate the American crusade marches. 'It is hardly likely we can go through the streets and kneel at the doors of the gin palaces' ('Crusader', 51), she argued, but temperance women could in Britain hold processions and assemblies. They could also petition, and in 1879 she took the first women's petition in favour of Sunday closing to the House of Commons. 
By 1883-4 the general failure to convert men to temperance led to a more radical conclusion: 'The conviction grows upon me that while Petitions educate the workers and the people something more is needed to make them effectual'. Had not 'the time come', she asked, 'when it becomes a duty to claim the right to vote on the side of Temperance?' ('Memoir', 32). Nevertheless the BWTA remained only one of several women's temperance organizations, and it did not embark on its major period of expansion until after her death from tuberculosis on 4 February 1890 at her London home, 7 Charlotte Street, Bloomsbury. She was buried in Highgate cemetery. 
Colleagues described Lucas variously as a 'homely British matron' (C. E. Parker, 36), and yet 'well-preserved, erect and vigorous' (Willard, 120), an earnest speaker, 'tall and stately' (M. Parker) with an impressive shock of silvery hair when in her sixties. The BWTA achieved greater heights under her successor, Lady Henry Somerset, but Lucas was an important link in the Anglo-American women's reform networks and a pioneer in British women's temperance. 


@@@@@


doc= 17136


Lucas, Richard (1648/9-1715), Church of England clergyman, was born at Presteigne, Radnorshire, the son of Richard Lucas. He matriculated at Jesus College, Oxford, on 3 March 1665, aged sixteen, graduating BA in 1668 and proceeding MA in 1672 (incorporated at Cambridge in 1677). He appears to have travelled around France for a while with his friend William Powell, later rector of Llanwenarth, Monmouthshire. For some time Lucas worked as the master of the free school at Abergavenny, Monmouthshire. In 1677 Lucas published his 'Practical Christianity', which offered discourses and accompanying prayers on Christian living. In this work Lucas stressed the importance of shared beliefs in the fundamentals of the Christian faith as overriding doubts and scruples over liturgy and ceremonies. He also emphasized that the active life was more Christian than the contemplative life as it presented greater challenges to faith and more opportunities for the exercise of Christian charity. 
It was probably the popularity of this work and his reputation as a preacher that gained Lucas the rectory of St Stephen, Coleman Street, London, in 1678. In October 1683 he was made lecturer of St Olave, Southwark. Some time around 1683 his eyesight, which had always been weak, completely failed him. Rather than impair his work as a preacher and devotional writer his disability spurred him on to write the most famous of his works, his 'Enquiry after Happiness'. First published in 1685 the work was divided into three parts, the first showing the possibility of obtaining happiness, the second the true notion of life, and the third treating religious perfection. These works are dominated by the notion that happiness is attainable on earth via the exercise of right reason and, as in his 'Practical Christianity', there is an emphasis on the importance of an active life. Lucas stated that the whole work was inspired by his friend Dr Thomas Lamb's dictum that 'the life of man is to be estimated by its usefulness in the World'. The work was very popular and went through a number of editions. John Wesley, who had had the book recommended to him by his mother, remained an unshakeable admirer of Lucas's writing. 
Aside from the 'Enquiry', Lucas published many other devotional works, including 'The Duty of Servants' (1685), which contained guidance and prayers for those entering domestic service. He was also a regular preacher before the mayor and court of aldermen and he preached before the queen on 31 July 1692. These sermons, like his other works, are dominated by the theme of Christian charity. Lucas also revised and corrected a translation of de Castiniza's 'The Spiritual Combat' (1698). He conformed at the revolution and in his sermons urged that the oaths of allegiance to William and Mary should not be interpreted to 'weaken and subvert' but only 'strengthen and preserve' the constitution (R. Lucas, 'A Sermon Preached at the Assizes', 1691, 18). He insisted that it was necessary to pay higher taxes to defend England against French tyranny. He was created BD and DD in 1691. In 1697 he was appointed to a prebend at Westminster and in 1701 became president of Sion College. (His election as president was, however, completely unconstitutional as he had never served in any office on the court of governors.) Lucas had a high reputation for piety and was one of the clerics who visited the godly household of Lady Elizabeth Hastings at Ledsham in Yorkshire. 
Lucas died at Westminster on 29 June 1715 and was buried in Westminster Abbey on 5 July. He was survived by his widow, Anne (1658/9-1727), and three sons, of whom the two younger also went on to become clergymen. Richard Lucas (1692/3-1747) was ordained deacon at Ely in 1717 and later became rector of Foots Cray, Kent, a living he held until his death. William (1702/3-1753) was a fellow of Corpus Christi College, Cambridge, from 1723 to 1733 and rector of Benington, Hertfordshire, from 1736 to 1753. 


@@@@@


doc= 17137


Lucas, Richard Cockle (1800-1883), sculptor, was born on 24 October 1800 in Salisbury, Wiltshire, the son of Richard Lucas and his wife, Martha Sutton (died 1801). At the age of twelve he was apprenticed to an uncle, a cutler at Winchester. Becoming proficient at carving knife-handles, he decided to become a sculptor. In 1828 he entered the Royal Academy Schools, when his age was incorrectly given in the register as twenty-five, and from that year he was a regular contributor to the Royal Academy, receiving a silver medal for an architectural drawing in 1828 and 1829. Over the next thirty years he exhibited over a hundred works at the academy, the British Institution, and the Suffolk Street Gallery of the Society of British Artists, including busts, medallions, and classical subjects, such as those of Dr Johnson at Lichfield, Dr Watts at Southampton, and Richard Colt Hoare at Salisbury Cathedral. His marble, wax, and ivory medallion portraits, many of which were displayed at the Great Exhibition, were more successful, however, and have subsequently been purchased by the Bethnal Green Museum and the National Portrait Gallery, London, which holds his wax medallion of Sir Anthony Panizzi (1850). Two self-portraits, an etching dated on the plate 1858, and a plaster cast of a bust, incised and dated 1868, are also in the National Portrait Gallery collection. Lucas's popular wax relief 'Leda and the Swan' was subsequently purchased by the Victoria and Albert Museum. Lucas made a study of the Parthenon marbles, of which he made two large wax models, the first showing the Parthenon as it appeared after bombardment by the Venetians in 1687; the second was made according to a plan of reconstruction according to his own theories as to the original arrangement of the sculptures. The latter was the subject of much public interest when exhibited at the British Museum, where it stood in the Elgin room. In 1845 he published his 'Remarks on the Parthenon', illustrated with fifteen etchings. A decade later he designed and built himself a house which he called Tower of the Winds at Chilworth, near Romsey, Hampshire, an account of which he entitled 'The artist's dream realised, being a residence designed and built by R. C. Lucas, sculptor, 1854; etched and described 1856 with seventeen plates'. Lucas produced many popular etchings depicting his own sculptural works, biblical stories, and scenes from eighteenth-century poetry, including that of Thomas Gray, Oliver Goldsmith, and Robert Burns. A nearly complete series of these, mounted in an album bound by Lucas himself, and including a frontispiece portrait of the artist, is in the print room of the British Museum. Lucas also frequently contributed to the periodical presses where there was some debate as to whether his 'Flora', purchased by the Kaiser Friedrich Museum, Berlin, was by Leonardo da Vinci. 
Towards the end of his life, Lucas's conversational prowess ensured that he was a frequent guest at Broadlands, the seat of Lord Palmerston, who obtained for him a civil-list pension in June 1865. Lucas made three wax portraits of Palmerston, and a statuette which formed his last exhibit at the Royal Academy in 1859. In 1870 he published 'An Essay on Art'. Lucas died of paralysis at Tower of the Winds, Chilworth, on 18 May 1883, leaving a widow, Eliza (1805/6-1893), and a son, Albert Durer Lucas (1828-1918), a flower painter who exhibited at the British Institution and with the Society of Artists between 1859 and 1874. Grant noted that although Lucas was 'somewhat forgotten today', he was 'one of the leading sculptors of his time', whose sculptural portraits of women were particularly sensitive (Grant, 153). Gunnis described Lucas as an artist of 'great originality' whose works were characterized by their use of contrasting perspective (Gunnis, 245). 


@@@@@


doc= 17138


Lucas, Robert (1747/8-1812), Church of England clergyman and poet, was born in Northampton and was educated at the free grammar school there. He was admitted to Trinity College, Cambridge, in December 1776 and graduated BD as a ten-year man in 1787. In 1793 he graduated DD. In 1772 he may have been acting as curate of Brixworth, and in 1778 he was curate of Hardingstone, Northamptonshire, but on 8 March 1782 he was instituted to the vicarage of Pattishall in the same county. Lucas married a daughter of Thomas Hurd, the younger brother of Bishop Richard Hurd. They had a son, Richard Hurd Lucas ('b'. 1789), and a daughter, Harriet Charlotte. The marriage probably took place before 1787, in which year, on 20 March, Lucas was collated by Bishop Hurd to the rectory of Ripple, Worcestershire, which he held with his vicarage. 
Lucas produced two volumes of poetry: 'Hymn to Ceres' (1781), a translation into English heroic verse of the Homeric hymn, and 'Poems' (1810), which included a reprint of his translation. His relationship to Hurd prompted a further publication, 'A Letter to the Reverend Doctor Parr' (1789), defending the reputation of his patron, and he may also have written the memoir of Hurd in the 'Ecclesiastical and University Annual Register' for 1809. As a clergyman Lucas was an enthusiastic proponent of the Sunday school movement and published a number of sermons in its support. These were reprinted with other predominantly charity sermons in 'Occasional Sermons' (2 vols., 1809). He died at Ripple on 1 March 1812. 


@@@@@


doc= 17139


Lucas, Samuel (1811-1865), journalist and educational reformer, was the eldest son of Samuel Hayhurst Lucas, a Quaker corn merchant of Wandsworth, Surrey. His younger brother was Frederick Lucas, who converted to Roman Catholicism and founded 'The Tablet'; Samuel, by contrast, remained a Quaker all his life, and opposition to the established church was a steady theme throughout his career. His childhood and early adult years were spent in Surrey and in London. On 6 September 1839 he married Margaret Bright (1818-1890) ['see 'Lucas, Margaret Bright], daughter of Jacob Bright and sister of John Bright, of the Anti-Corn Law League. In 1845 they moved to Manchester, where Lucas became a partner in a cotton mill. He was involved in the later campaigns of the Anti-Corn Law League, having been active from 1844 in the Anti-State Church Association (from 1853 the Society for the Liberation of Religion from State Patronage and Control). 
In August 1847 Lucas became one of the six veterans of the anti-cornlaw campaign who founded the Lancashire Public Schools Association (LPSA), which was organized along similar lines to the league, and used petitioning and pamphleteering as its chief campaign tools. Lucas chaired the LPSA committee, in which capacity, according to his colleague J. Alfred Steinthal, he demonstrated his 'sweet temper' and 'rare tact and judgement', most notably in smoothing differences arising from divergences in religious outlook (Jones, 38). Lucas's 'Plan for the Establishment of a General System of Secular Education in the County of Lancaster' (1847), written on behalf of the LPSA, advocated a decentralized scheme of public schools' administration similar to that which operated in Massachusetts. From June 1849 he edited a journal, the 'Education Register', which ran until early the following year. In August 1849 he returned to London, where he set up in business as a corn merchant. 
Late in 1849 the LPSA changed its name to the National Public Schools Association (NPSA), having recruited Richard Cobden as a powerful advocate. Lucas continued to be active in the cause: in 1850 he edited a collection of essays entitled 'National Education not Necessarily Governmental, Sectarian or Irreligious'. His anxiety to keep the NPSA firmly to a secularist path led him to oppose compromise with religious bodies and occasionally placed him at odds with Cobden. He was frustrated by the indifference or hostility that met NPSA proposals in the House of Commons, and, dissatisfied at coverage in the mainstream press, in August 1853 he started the 'Advocate for National Instruction', which ran for four issues. More significantly, from the summer of 1857 until his death Lucas served as editor of the 'Morning Star', the radical newspaper started by Cobden and Bright in March 1856. As an 'active managing partner', with a financial stake in the paper (Koss, 126), he was successful at bringing in Justin McCarthy and Edmund Yates as contributors, and was involved in the takeover of the 'People's Charter' and 'The Dial'. Lucas was active in the Association for the Repeal of Taxes on Knowledge, particularly at the time of the House of Lords' rejection of Gladstone's attempt to repeal the paper duty in 1860. During the American Civil War he was a prominent supporter of the North, helping to found the Emancipation Society, which opposed slavery, in 1862. 
Lucas died from a bronchial illness at 4 Gordon Street, Gordon Square, London, on 16 April 1865, and was buried in Highgate cemetery in north London. Many of the proposals contained in his 1847 'Plan' subsequently found their way onto the statute book in the 'Education Act' of 1870. 


@@@@@


doc= 17140


Lucas, Samuel (1818-1868), journalist and author, eldest son of Thomas Lucas, a Bristol merchant, initially trained to enter his father's business. When his literary tastes became apparent, he was sent to Queen's College, Oxford, as preparation for a legal career. He matriculated in 1838, graduating BA in 1842 and MA in 1846. At Oxford he won the Newdigate prize for English verse in 1841 and the chancellor's prize for the English essay in 1845. 
In 1846 Lucas was called to the bar at the Inner Temple, and became a barrister on the western circuit. He abandoned his legal practice after seven years to become a journalist. On 8 May 1853, with the backing of Disraeli and other leading Conservatives, he founded 'The Press', a tory weekly, which he edited until May 1854. It was to some extent a baptism of fire for the inexperienced editor, as the contributors were mainly public men with little grasp of journalistic practices. Lucas was replaced by David Coulton (1810-1857) and in 1855 began reviewing for 'The Times'. 
Lucas worked for 'The Times' for ten years, despite differences with the editor, J. T. Delane, which seem to have led him to offer his resignation on one occasion. As a man of wide reading and urbane manner, Lucas was a successful, witty, and largely generous reviewer. He seems to have dealt mainly with non-fiction, reviewing Thomas Carlyle's 'Frederick the Great', Macaulay's 'History of England', Sir Robert Peel's 'Memoirs', and (with much expository clarity) Buckle's 'History of Civilization'. He was an early appreciator of George Eliot, praising her 'Scenes of Clerical Life' for their combination of pathos and humour, and he wrote a strikingly perceptive and unusually favourable review of George Meredith's 'Richard Feverel' (1859). 
Lucas published several volumes of his collected journalism and other minor works, including 'History as a Condition of National Progress' (1853) and 'Illustrations of the History of Bristol and its Neighbourhood' (1853). He also edited the poems of Thomas Hood (2 vols., 1867). In 1858 Lucas was appointed stamp distributor for Derby. He edited 'Once a Week' from 1859 until 1865; his final journalistic venture was to launch the 'Shilling Magazine', which lasted only a few months. In 1866 his health began to fail, and he left London. He died at Molesey House, Eastbourne, Sussex, on 27 November 1868, leaving a widow, Jane. 


@@@@@


doc= 17141


Lucas, Samuel (1805-1870), painter, was born at Hitchin in Hertfordshire, the son of William Lucas, a brewer. He was educated at Hitchin and at a Quaker school in Bristol, and wanted to be an artist, but his Quaker religion at that time forbade an artistic education. He was apprenticed to a shipowner at Shoreham in Sussex, but managed to practise painting as an amateur. After his marriage in Norfolk to Matilda, daughter of John Holmes, a farmer, on 7 September 1837 he settled at Hitchin, where he resided for the remainder of his life. Though he carried on his father's business, Lucas continued to devote himself to his favourite art; his wife, son, daughters, and granddaughters also painted. 
In 1830 Lucas sent to the Royal Academy 'The Ship 'Broxbournbury' off the Islands of Amsterdam'. He also exhibited at the British Institution and Society of British Artists in Suffolk Street, but such public displays were rare. His subjects were mainly landscapes, carefully studied from nature, and he painted both in oil and in watercolours. He was an excellent ornithologist, and also painted birds, animals, and flowers. Some of his drawings of flowers were engraved in 'The Florist'. His pictures were much admired, and he enjoyed the friendship of many leading artists. Good examples of his drawings are in the British Museum, and there is a picture by him, 'The Old Hitchin Market', in the Corn Exchange at Hitchin. Lucas was struck with paralysis in 1865 and died in Tilehouse Street, Hitchin, on 29 March 1870. His wife survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 17142


Lucas, Theophilus (fl. 1714), writer on gambling, inherited, according to his own assertion, an estate of $2000 a year, which he lost at the gaming tables. To deter his son, who was the 'very next heir to $1,500 per annum by the death of an uncle' (Lucas, vi), from following his example, or, at best, to put him on his guard against the tricks of card-sharpers, he wrote an entertaining and, in places, scandalous, book, 'Memoirs of the lives, intrigues and comical adventures of the most famous gamesters and celebrated sharpers in the reigns of Charles II, James II, William III and Queen Anne' (1714). In addition to the biographical information, Lucas provided a history of gaming which exposed the method of cheating in various card games. A third edition, with additions, was published without the author's name in 1744. The accuracy of this book, which does not draw on earlier studies such as Charles Cotton's 'Compleat Gamester' (1674), remains questionable. Indeed with so few known details it is also debatable whether Lucas was a real-life author, a pseudonym for a similarly reformed gamester, or a fictitious character -- the story of financial loss being intended to give validity to the work. 


@@@@@


doc= 17143


Lucas, Sir Thomas (1597/8-1648/9), royalist army officer, was the eldest and illegitimate son of Thomas Lucas (died 1625) of Colchester and Elizabeth Leighton (died 1647). His parents' failure to marry before his birth may be explained by his father's exile from England in Queen Elizabeth's later years for participation in a fatal duel. Despite his illegitimacy Thomas was fully integrated into his family and his father provided carefully for him, buying him the manor and estate of Lexden, close to Colchester, about 1612, and on his death in 1625 dividing his own estate between his wife, Elizabeth, and his sons Thomas Lucas, John Lucas, and Charles Lucas. Thomas's brother John secured the reversion of his barony (1645) first to his legitimate brother Charles but after him to Thomas and his heirs. The career of the younger Thomas exemplifies the way in which many pre-civil war Englishmen pursued military careers on the continent and later formed a professional nucleus in the armies of both sides in the civil war. 
Lucas matriculated at Pembroke College, Cambridge, at Easter 1615. He was probably in the Low Countries as early as 1625; in 1637 he commanded a troop of horse there. He was knighted on 14 April 1628 at Whitehall and on 27 January 1629 married Anne Byron ('b'. 1612/13, died in or after July 1653), the daughter of Sir John Byron; he was thirty-one and she was sixteen. In the 1630s he was involved in a dispute with the undertakers engaged in piping water to Colchester, claiming that the disorderly patrons of the alehouse at the waterworks damaged his warren. In 1639 the privy council decided in his favour, but relations between the Lucases and the town corporation remained uneasy, and the dispute may partly account for the plundering of Sir Thomas's records in the popular violence that erupted in Colchester in August 1642. With the approach of the Scottish war he was, with his brother Charles, among those 'elected' to serve the king (NL Wales, MS Chirk, fol. 7442). In December 1638 Lord Deputy Wentworth recommended that he be given command of a troop to march in Ireland, with the intention of gaining him to the king's service, an indication that his support was held to be worth winning. 
Early in 1640 Lucas was trying to extricate himself from his command of a troop in the Low Countries and was also, in London and the Netherlands, engaged in inspecting and procuring equipment for war in Scotland. In February he was appointed commissary-general of horse in Ireland at a fee of 20's'. per day, with an additional 10's'. per day if employed in the king's wars. He commanded a regiment in Yorkshire in July 1640, but the main theatre of his service to the king was in Ireland. He was present at the battle of Kilrush on 15 April 1642 and was badly wounded at Ross on 18 March 1643. He was a member of the Irish privy council, and participated in negotiations for the cessation of 1643 and the treaty of 1646. He had returned to England by October 1646 with members of the committee of both kingdoms, to whom he had personally applied for consideration. In February 1647 he compounded for delinquency. In March his fine was set, at one-tenth, at $1194; in May 1648, after he demonstrated that he had only a life interest in his estate, he was assessed at $800, and finally in September 1648 his fine was set at $637. The date of the last reduction suggests that he was not implicated in the second civil war. However, the sequestration of his estate imposed in May 1647 was not discharged until 19 October 1649, after Sir Thomas's death. His sister, Margaret, duchess of Newcastle, believed that his life had been shortened by a severe head wound which he had suffered in Ireland. 


@@@@@


doc= 17144


Lucas, Simon (fl. c.1766-1799), explorer and diplomat, was the son of a London wine merchant. He was wrongly identified in the 'Dictionary of National Biography' as William Lucas. While still a boy he was sent to Cadiz to be trained as a merchant, but was captured on his return voyage by a Sale rover and pressed into slavery in the imperial court of Morocco. After three years' captivity he was freed and went to Gibraltar and was thence sent back to Morocco as vice-consul and 'charge d'affaires' by General Edward Cornwallis, governor of Gibraltar from 1762 to 1773. He remained in Morocco for sixteen years. 
In 1785 Lucas returned to England and was appointed oriental interpreter to the British court. Soon afterwards he volunteered to undertake a journey in Africa in the service of the newly formed Association for Promoting the Discovery of the Interior Parts of Africa, commonly known as the African Association. This was founded in 1788 to undertake geographical exploration, not least with the aim of opening the continent to British trade and influence. Lucas volunteered his services to the society, suggesting that his knowledge of Arabic and of north African lands would be useful. He stipulated that he must receive his salary of $80 per annum in his absence from his post as interpreter. The African Association accepted his offer, secured his paid leave from his position, and furnished him with presents and other equipment to the value of $250, subscribed personally by the association's committee members. 
Lucas left England in August 1788 with instructions to cross the desert from Tripoli to Fezzan collecting information from the local people and traders about the interior of Africa and returning home via the Gambia or the Guinea coast. He landed at Tripoli on 25 October and was well received by the pasha, whom he told that his mission was to investigate antiquities and medicinal plants. He secured leave to travel to Fezzan, but his departure was delayed by the revolt of the Arab peoples who occupied the territory through which he was intending to pass. This made it impossible for him to proceed alone as planned, but the arrival in Tripoli of two sherifs, both claiming descent from Muhammad and one, Imhammed, being the son-in-law of the king of Fezzan, offered a way out. Their positions allowed them to take responsibility for his safe conduct, and Lucas set out in their company on 1 February 1789. They had, however, travelled only a short distance when it became obvious that the disturbed conditions would make it impossible for the party to reach Fezzan before the winter, and the caravan determined to break up. But before the party dispersed, Lucas used his time to gain from Sherif Imhammed much geographical information about Fezzan, Bornou, and Nigritia. Lucas left Memoon on 20 March 1789 and reached Tripoli on 6 April and England on 26 July of that year. 
Lucas's account of his voyage in Africa was published in the 'Proceedings' of the African Association (vol. 1, 1790) but it was clear that the association felt it had got little for its money. Joseph Banks, its president, commented: 'Mr Lucas and Major Houghton [Daniel Houghton, the next explorer sent out by the association] do not appear to have been well chosen; the inexperience of Your Committee in the selection of proper persons must plead their excuse' (Hallett, 168). Frederick Hornemann, also sent out by the association to Africa, met Lucas in Tripoli in 1799 and commented: 'I don't know if the Committee believes his excuses for his returning to England, or if they give them so little credit as I do myself' (ibid., 189). Indeed the consul for Morocco remarked of Lucas in a letter to Banks that he 'has got such a determined habit of lying that he is quite a proverb not only over all Barbary but at this place [Gibraltar]' (ibid., 155n.). 
If the information which Lucas brought back was not wrong, neither was it particularly original, and memories of his journey for the association were rapidly eclipsed by those of other explorers sent out by the association. In 1793 he was appointed consul at Tripoli, a result perhaps due in part to his attempts to discredit Mr Tully, the previous consul. He was last heard of in October 1799 by the report of Hornemann. 


@@@@@


doc= 17145


Lucius (supp. fl. 185), supposed king in Britain, was the fruit of simple unpremeditated error, which then gave rise to a story of considerable historical importance. The 'Liber pontificalis', in its biography of Pope Eleuther ('fl'. 'c'.180), has the following brief sentence: 'He received a letter from Lucius, a British king, who wanted to become a Christian on his authority' ('The Book of Pontiffs', 6). The names of the consuls imply a date of 185. It is very probable, as shown by Harnack, that this is the outcome of a confusion between Birtha (the castle of Edessa) and Britain; the ruler of Edessa, Abgar IX (Lucius Aelius Septimius Megas Abgarus), was thus transformed into a British king. It is highly unlikely that there was any propagandist intent behind the error, since the sixth-century author of the early part of the 'Liber pontificalis' showed no interest in papal sponsorship of missions: the role of Celestine in authorizing the sending, as his representative, of Palladius as first bishop of the Irish is passed over. 
The 'Liber pontificalis', however, was one of the most important historical texts of the early middle ages. The story thus passed to Bede, where it was repeated in his 'Historia ecclesiastica': for Bede, this papal mission to the Britons was rapidly successful and Christianity then remained 'unharmed and undiminished in serene peace up to the time of the emperor Diocletian' (Bede, 'Hist. eccl.', 1.4). Bede associated the end of this golden age of the British church -- a happy period before heresy, first Arianism and then Pelagianism, poisoned the island -- with the persecution of Diocletian; the persecution then accounted for the martyrdom of St Alban. The unstated implication, for Bede, appears to be that the Britons, many of whom currently refused to accept the Roman Easter and tonsure, should remember their papal origins and conform. 
The 'Historia Brittonum' (829-30) also included the story: the embassy, however, was no longer from Lucius to the pope, but from the Roman emperors and the pope (named 'Eucharistus') to the Britons. The role of Lucius is also significantly glossed: he is still 'the British king' but his baptism is followed by those of 'all the under-kings of the British people' ('Historia Brittonum', chap. 22). The author has made Lucius part of a Britain ruled by British kings, but subject to Roman emperors; the role of the papacy has become secondary. The conversion, however, was seen to be just as complete as it was by Bede. 
By the ninth century, therefore, the early papal origins of British Christianity were authoritatively established both among the Britons themselves and among the English. Although the story might later be overshadowed by mistier and more exciting tales of Joseph of Arimathea, it remained standard until, in modern times, ancient historians observed that there could hardly have been a second-century British king at all south of Hadrian's Wall, let alone one in a position to send an embassy to the pope. 


@@@@@


doc= 17146


Luckombe, Philip (bap. 1730, d. 1803), printer and writer, was born in Exeter and baptized in the church of St Lawrence, Exeter, on 8 November 1730, son of John Luckombe, tailor. His brother John was baptized on 17 November 1728 in the same church. Philip, a printer by trade, was made a freeman of Exeter by succession in 1776, probably in order to vote in the general election of 1776. A report that he entered one of the Oxford colleges (Nichols, 'Illustrations') seems highly doubtful and is not corroborated by any university register. Luckombe did leave Exeter but settled in London, from where he did much miscellaneous literary work; in 1803 he was resident in the parish of St Dunstan-in-the-West in the City. Besides editing several dictionaries and encyclopaedias, he wrote books on printing and made a special study of conchology. His collection of shells was large, and his learning brought him into contact with Thomas Percy, bishop of Dromore and author of the famous collection of ballads 'Reliques of Ancient English Poetry'. 
Of Luckombe's several works, perhaps the liveliest was 'A Tour through Ireland in Several Entertaining Letters' (1748), which he co-wrote with William Rufus Chetwood. Chetwood knew Ireland well through his links with the Smock Alley Theatre in Dublin. The letters are addressed to 'Ned', that is 'E. H. esq', in his chambers in the Middle Temple. There are several lively incidents, from the party's being surrounded by straw plaiters and having to buy a woman's hat to make their escape, to stories of grizzly murders, and hanged men brought back to life, all recalled with relish and showing Chetwood's sense of the dramatic. This 'Tour' seems to have relied at least in part on firsthand information, though antiquarian details are culled from elsewhere. Luckombe's 'Tour through Ireland' of 1780 is more extensively plagiarized from others, including Richard Twiss, though Luckombe was in Ireland in 1779. Luckombe also wrote guides to England and Wales. 
Luckombe published anonymously in 1770 'A Concise History of the Origin and Progress of Printing' and the following year published a second edition under the title 'The History and Art of Printing' (2 parts) which went out over his name. The work was based on his own firsthand experience of the printing trade, and the technical information it provides led to its being reprinted in 1965. 
Luckombe died in September 1803. He seems to have been unmarried, as his will (January 1803) mentions only male friends and his brother, John Luckombe of Exeter, his executor and the main beneficiary of his will. 


@@@@@


doc= 17147


Lucy, Charles (1814-1873), history painter, was born at Hereford. His parentage is unknown; and the information concerning his first thirty years is, at times, puzzling. He reputedly was apprenticed to his uncle, a chemist in Hereford; he preferred to embark on a career in art, left Hereford for Paris, and studied at the Ecole des Beaux-Arts under Paul Delaroche. After returning to England, he entered the Royal Academy Schools in London. Subsequently, according to the 'Art Journal' (July 1873), he executed commissions as a copyist in Paris and The Hague, returned briefly to London, and then took up residence in France at Barbizon, near Fontainebleau, for 'nearly sixteen years'; dates are not given. Samuel Redgrave's 'Dictionary of Artists of the English School' (1874) mentions no protracted sojourn in France. In 1838, 'then living at Hereford', according to Redgrave, Lucy exhibited a portrait at the Royal Academy. In 1840 he exhibited 'The Interview between Milton and Galileo'; in 1844, 'The Good Samaritan' and 'Burns and his Mary'. 
By 1844 or 1845 Lucy was probably married (he had at least one child, a son, Charles Hampden Lucy) and certainly in London, where he shared a studio with Ford Madox Brown. For the Fine Arts Commission's second competition (1844) he painted 'The Roman empress Agrippina interceding with the emperor Claudius on behalf of the family of Caractacus'; he won a premium of $100, but not appointment to prepare a design for one of six arched compartments in the House of Lords. When the commission reopened the competition in 1845, he submitted an unsuccessful cartoon of 'Religion Supported by Faith, Hope, and Charity'. For the final competition (1847) he made a sketch, 'The Burial of Charles I', which was rejected, and a painting, 'The departure of the 'primitive puritans', or 'Pilgrim Fathers', to the coast of America, AD' 1620, for which he received a premium of $200. These subjects, two of the eight planned for the Peers' Corridor, were entrusted in 1853 to the history painter Charles West Cope; but seventeenth-century history continued to hold Lucy's interest. 
Many of Lucy's paintings were engraved; few gained lasting notice. 'Nelson Meditating in the Cabin of the 'Victory' Previously to the Battle of Trafalgar' (exhibited in the Royal Academy in 1854), bought at auction in 1855 by Sir Robert Peel, reappeared in the sale of Peel heirlooms in 1900. 'Cromwell and his Family Listening to Milton Playing the Organ at Hampton Court', signed 1863, was presented in 1870 by William Graham, the Liberal MP, to the Glasgow Art Gallery and Museum. Eight portraits commissioned by the Liberal politician Sir Joshua Walmsley, completed in 1869, are now in the Victoria and Albert Museum, London. The subjects are Oliver Cromwell, Horatio Nelson, Joseph Hume, Richard Cobden, John Bright, Gladstone, Disraeli, and Giuseppe Garibaldi. 
For some years, with health failing, Lucy taught at a drawing-school in Camden Town, London. He died on 19 May 1873 at 13 Ladbroke Crescent, Notting Hill, where he lived with his son. William Michael Rossetti ('Some Reminiscences', 1906) remembered him as a friend of Madox Brown: 'He was a short man, of very ordinary appearance and address, more like a country estate-agent than an artist. He was married, friendly and accommodating in disposition'. 


@@@@@


doc= 17148


Lucy, Godfrey de (d. 1204), bishop of Winchester, was the second son of Richard de Lucy (the Loyal) (d. 1179), chief justiciar of England. Attached to the court from youth, he became a favoured member of the royal household, and between the early 1170s and Henry II's death in 1189 witnessed thirty royal charters, nine of them in France. He attended schools in London, studying under Master Henry of Northampton; and he also studied abroad, earning the title 'magister'. Then, having taken holy orders, he became a royal clerk, and received a long series of ecclesiastical preferments, being appointed dean of St Martin's-le-Grand in 1171, canon of Lincoln, St Paul's, London, and Exeter, and of the collegiate church of Bampton, Oxfordshire; he was archdeacon of Derby 'c'.1174, and he was also archdeacon of Richmond (1181-4) and parson of the church of Wye. While his elder brother, Geoffrey de Lucy (died 1170x73), was heir to their father's holdings, Godfrey inherited a portion of them; and he was custodian of his two nephews' honour of Ongar, Essex, from 'c'.1181 until their deaths some time before 1194, when they left two sisters as their heirs. This set off a series of lawsuits over the Lucy inheritance lasting into Henry III's reign. 
On the resignation of the justiciarship by his father and the subsequent division of England into four circuits at the Council of Windsor in 1179, Godfrey de Lucy was appointed leader of the itinerant justices for the northern eyre. He participated in the remaining judicial eyres of Henry II's reign, also serving as a justice at Westminster, where he continued to sit throughout Richard I's reign as well as acting as a justice on eyre. In 1184 he was dispatched by Henry II to Normandy, together with the bishops of Lincoln (Walter de Coutances) and Norwich (John of Oxford), to arrange terms between Philip Augustus and the count of Flanders. In 1186 he was elected by the chapter of Lincoln to fill the vacant see, but was rejected by Henry, who was resolved on the appointment of Hugh of Avalon (died 1200). From 1184 to 1186 he was royal custodian of the abbey of St Mary's, York. 
Godfrey de Lucy was in 1186 elected to the see of Exeter, which he declined on the ground of the insufficiency of the income to meet the expenses of the office. On the accession of Richard I in 1189 he took a prominent part in the coronation ceremony, and bore the king's linen cap. When Geoffrey Plantagenet (died 1212) was elected to the archbishopric of York in August 1189, Lucy was absent, but as canon and archdeacon he signified his consent by letter. That same year he reached the episcopate, being one of the five bishops -- 'all, with one exception, faithful servants of his father, as lawyers or ministers' ('Works of Gervase of Canterbury', 1.458) -- nominated by Richard I at the great Council of Pipewell on 15 September. His see was Winchester, to which he was consecrated by Archbishop Baldwin in St Katherine's Chapel, Westminster Abbey on 22 October 1189. One of the earliest acts of his episcopate was to reclaim the manors of Meon and Wargrave, of which the see had been deprived. He proceeded 'ordine judiciario', but according to the chronicler Richard of Devizes took care to secure a favourable verdict by a secret gift to Richard of $3000 in silver, obtaining at the same time the post of sheriff of Hampshire, the confirmation of his own paternal inheritance, together with indemnity for the treasure of his church, and the constableship of the castles of Portchester and Winchester, for which he had to pay another 1000 marks. Not having the means to pay so large a sum, he was unwillingly compelled to borrow it from the treasury of his cathedral, binding himself and his successors to its repayment; the larger part was restored by himself on 28 January 1192. 
In November 1189 Lucy was one of the arbitrators appointed by the king to compromise the long-standing dispute between Archbishop Baldwin and the monks of Canterbury over the proposed collegiate church of Hackington. When Richard left early in 1190 for the crusade, Lucy accompanied him as far as Tours (25 June). But he opposed the domination of the government in 1190-91 by William de Longchamp (died 1197), chancellor and bishop of Ely, as chief justiciar, for he had close ties to the co-justiciar in the north, Hugh du Puiset (died 1195), bishop of Durham. One of the earliest of Longchamp's high-handed acts was to deprive Lucy, who was detained by sickness in Normandy, of his post as sheriff of Hampshire, custody of his castles, and his paternal inheritance. On his return to England, Lucy lost no time in confronting Longchamp, whom he found at Gloucester besieging the castle. Longchamp received him warmly, followed his advice in giving up the siege, and restored his patrimony, retaining, however, the shrievalty and the castles. At the council held by Longchamp as papal legate at Westminster in October 1190 Lucy sat at his left hand, the bishop of London to his right. The management of the arbitration between Longchamp and Count John, the king's brother, at Winchester on 25 April 1191 was entrusted to him, in conjunction with the bishops of London and Bath. 
Further trouble arose in the following September, when Geoffrey Plantagenet, the new archbishop of York, on his landing at Dover was dragged from the church in which he had taken refuge and thrown into prison by the orders of Longchamp. The chancellor's attempt to explain and justify his conduct called forth from Lucy a letter addressed to the prior and convent of Canterbury expressing his grief and indignation, but declining to give them any advice until he had taken counsel with his brother prelates. In the struggle that then ensued between Longchamp and Count John, Lucy took a leading part against the justiciar, attending the meetings of the barons and ecclesiastics summoned at Marlborough, Loddon Bridge, and finally on 8 October 1191, at St Paul's. He was one of the four bishops deputed by the assembly to communicate to Longchamp, who had taken refuge in the Tower of London, their resolution that he must resign; and on Longchamp's deposition, Lucy was reinstated in the custody of the castles of which Longchamp had deprived him. In the crossfire of anathemas that followed he was excommunicated by the pope, in company with John and the chief enemies of Longchamp. One of those commissioned by Richard I on 8 June 1193 to assist the queen mother in securing Hubert Walter's election as archbishop of Canterbury, Lucy joined with the new primate, Hugh of Lincoln, and other prelates in February 1194 in pronouncing excommunication on Count John. 
Immediately after Richard's arrival at Winchester on his return from captivity on 15 April 1194, Lucy was once more deprived of the custody of the castles, the shrievalty, and the manors that he had bought of the king five years before, although the bishop repurchased them in 1199, offering a fine of $1000. When Richard I solemnly wore his crown in Winchester Cathedral, Lucy's name is absent from the long list of prelates who took part in the ceremony. But the bishop was in Normandy for several months in 1198, probably summoned by the king in the vain hope that his mediation could effect a reconciliation between Archbishop Geoffrey and the York chapter. 
Lucy took part in John's coronation on 27 May 1199, and witnessed a number of royal charters in 1200. Sickness prevented his presence at the great council held by Archbishop Hubert Walter at Westminster on 19 September 1200, but he took part in the obsequies of Bishop Hugh in Lincoln Cathedral on 23 November. The close of Lucy's episcopate was signalled by large additions to the fabric of his cathedral. In 1199 a tower, not now identifiable, had been begun and finished. In 1202 he instituted a confraternity for the repair of the church, to last for five years, by which a spacious retrochoir was created for St Swithun's shrine and a lady chapel was erected with two flanking chapels. The lady chapel is among the earliest examples of the Gothic style in England. 
Lucy died at Winchester on 11 or 12 September 1204, and was buried outside the lady chapel he had caused to be built. He had apparently had a long-lasting relationship, possibly a clandestine marriage, with Agatha, a wet-nurse employed by Eleanor of Aquitaine who later married William of Gaddesden, a royal falconer. Evidence exists for three illegitimate sons of Godfrey de Lucy: Geoffrey (died 1241), archdeacon of London, dean of St Paul's, and chancellor of Oxford University; John, to whom his father gave houses in the Strand, London; and Philip, a clerk of the chamber until 1207. 
That Lucy's character for practical wisdom stood high with his sovereigns is shown by the various delicate missions with which he was entrusted. Henry II, a good judge of character, formed a high opinion of him. Lucy was the first English bishop systematically to date his letters, inspired by his experience in royal government. The editor of 'Glanvill' suggests his authorship of the pioneer law book as 'an intriguing possibility'. Lucy was described by Bishop William Stubbs, the great nineteenth-century scholar, as 'a good average bishop' (Stubbs, xxxi). The claim that he had a canal dug connecting Alresford to Winchester is now discredited, but in 1199 he established a market at Alresford and in 1202 a three-day fair; he also reconstructed the town centre to create a large market square. He augmented the revenues of Lessness Abbey (or Westwood), founded by his father the justiciar on his retirement from public life, and where he had died a canon in 1179. Apparently the bishop planned that Lessness should be the Lucy family mausoleum. 


@@@@@


doc= 17149


Lucy, Richard de (d. 1179), soldier and administrator, was born early in the twelfth century, of a family with lands in both Normandy and England. His mother, Aveline, is mentioned in association with the young Richard in several records; his father's name is unknown. The family originated in Normandy, at Luce, near Domfront; Richard's brother Walter, later abbot of Battle in Sussex, was at first a monk at Lonlay-l'Abbaye, near Luce. Other brothers were Robert and possibly Herbert. Richard married a woman named Roysia, whose origins are unknown, and they had sons named Geoffrey and Godfrey, and daughters Matilda, Aveline, and Alice who married Odinel de Umfraville (d. 1182) ['see under 'Umfraville family (per. c.1100-1245)]. 
Lucy may have begun his career of royal service under Henry I, from whom he was later said to have received a grant of royal land in Suffolk. By 1136 he was in the service of King Stephen, for whom he daringly and successfully defended the castle of Falaise against Geoffrey of Anjou in October 1138. After this he returned to England, where he remained in almost constant attendance upon the embattled king. Although his only official title in Stephen's reign was apparently that of local justice in Middlesex, London, and Essex from 'c'.1143 onwards, he gradually became one of Stephen's closest associates and right-hand men, steadfast in his service to the king even in the most troubled periods of the anarchy. He served as an intermediary between the king and Archbishop Theobald of Canterbury in 1148, while in the summer of 1153, when support for Stephen was waning among the barons, Richard de Lucy helped lead a raid up the Thames valley into the territory held by Henry of Anjou, who would soon force Stephen into negotiations over the throne. The treaty of Westminster, later the same year, demonstrated the esteem in which both sides held Richard de Lucy, naming him guardian of the Tower of London and Windsor Castle, which he was to hand over to Henry upon Stephen's death; Richard's son was to be a hostage for his father's good faith. 
During Stephen's reign Lucy had begun to collect the estates that would eventually form his barony of Ongar. His English inheritance, worth some seven knights' fees, included lands at Diss and Stowe in East Anglia and Newington in Kent; in the latter county he was a tenant of the archbishop of Canterbury. From Stephen he received generous grants from the king's honour of Boulogne, including Chipping Ongar in Essex; here Lucy built a castle and promoted the growth of the town. Concentrated in eastern England, his territorial interests coincided with those of the royal family, and royal grants strengthened the connection. 
When Stephen died in 1154 and was succeeded by Henry II, Richard de Lucy moved easily into the new royal administration, and was almost immediately named co-justiciar with Robert, earl of Leicester. Both his familiarity with English government and his unblemished record of loyalty, albeit to Henry's rival, doubtless commended him to the new king, as did his continuing competent service. For the first few years of this reign he served as sheriff of Essex and Hertfordshire and was in charge of several royal manors as well. Then he turned more exclusively to the concerns of central government. In 1166 he was one of those sent on the first of the revived judicial eyres. He also continued to carry out occasional military tasks, in 1167 repelling an attempted landing by Matthew, count of Boulogne, claimant to the English honour of Boulogne. As justiciar Lucy often filled a viceregal role while the king was overseas, and he himself was sent on frequent foreign missions. 
On the king's orders Lucy played an important role in securing the election of his colleague Thomas Becket as archbishop of Canterbury in 1162; he also helped to draw up the constitutions of Clarendon, which led in 1164 to Becket's quarrel with Henry II. Later that year, when overseas on royal business and possibly returning from a pilgrimage to Santiago de Compostela, he met with the exiled archbishop to urge a reconciliation between him and the king. Instead the two argued bitterly, and Lucy renounced his homage. In 1166 Becket excommunicated him at Vezelay for his role in drafting the constitutions and for his support of the king. Soon after this Lucy was said to have taken a crusader's vow, but if he did he never fulfilled it. Instead he was absolved by the bishop of St Asaph in 1167, and excommunicated by Becket once again in 1169. 
As a servant of Henry II, Lucy continued to increase his lands and wealth. From the king himself he received large 'gifts' from the royal revenues, confirmation of Stephen's grants, and ('c'.1174) a new grant of Ongar hundred. In addition Richard de Lucy became the ally and tenant of various intimates of the new king. Already in 1155 he and his brother Walter enjoyed a 'treaty of friendship' with the king's uncle, Reginald, earl of Cornwall, and the royal constable Richard du Hommet, as well as less formal alliances with other 'familiares' of the king. By 1166 he was holding ten knights' fees from Reginald; nine fees from Reginald's tenant Adam Malherbe; and one fee from the honour of Clare in Suffolk. A few years later he was enfeoffed by the king's cousin William, earl of Gloucester, with ten knights' fees at Greenstead in Essex. 
Richard de Lucy was left sole justiciar upon the earl of Leicester's death in 1168. It was in the next decade that he reached the pinnacle of his career, being called the king's 'familiarissimus' and 'the most powerful man in the kingdom' ('Gesta... Benedicti', 1.124; 'Works of Gervase of Canterbury', 1.241). During the rebellion of 1173-4 he was the leader of the king's forces in England. With Reginald of Cornwall he besieged and captured the town of Leicester, then he and Humphrey (III) de Bohun led a force into northern England and Scotland against the Scottish king, William, who had invaded Northumberland. But, hearing of the landing of the rebellious earl of Leicester in the south, Lucy arranged a truce with William and returned to the midlands, where he laid siege to Huntingdon Castle, which belonged to the Scottish king's brother David. Lucy's prudence, energy, and success during this lengthy crisis permanently increased not only his own reputation but also the power and prestige of the justiciarship itself. Henry was said to call him 'de Lucy the loyal' ('Gesta... Benedicti', 1.124), and it was a surprise to contemporaries when Ongar Castle was among those confiscated by the king in the post-rebellion repossessions of 1176. Lucy was sure enough of his standing with the king to reprimand him for later ignoring the forest privileges he had granted to his servants during the rebellion. 
Lucy's eldest son, Geoffrey, predeceased his father, leaving his young son Richard as the justiciar's heir. For his second son, Godfrey de Lucy, the elder Richard arranged a church career, which culminated in his election to the see of Winchester in 1189. For his daughters Lucy achieved marriages into some of the leading families of Essex: Matilda married Walter fitz Robert de Clare, and Aveline married Gilbert de Montfichet. Alice married Odinel de Umfraville. Richard de Lucy was a benefactor of Holy Trinity Priory in London, where his wife was buried, and a champion of Battle Abbey, where his brother was abbot. His interest in religion increased in the later years of his life. In 1178 he founded a house of Augustinian canons on his land at Lessness, or Westwood, in Kent, not far from Ongar. The foundation was dedicated to the Virgin and St Thomas of Canterbury -- the latter an unexpected dedication, in the light of Lucy's difficult relations with the archbishop. He retired from the justiciarship in 1178 or 1179, and entered this house as a canon. He died at Lessness on 14 July 1179, and was buried in the abbey there. He was succeeded by two young grandsons in turn, and eventually by his daughters and granddaughters. 


@@@@@


doc= 17150


Lucy, Sir Richard, first baronet (1592-1667), politician, was the second of six sons of Sir Thomas Lucy (1551-1605) of Charlecote, Warwickshire, and his second wife, Constance Kingsmill. He matriculated at Magdalen College, Oxford, in 1607, and graduated BA from Exeter College in 1611; he was a student of Lincoln's Inn in 1608. Sir Thomas Lucy (1583x6-1640) and William Lucy, bishop of St David's, were among his brothers. About 1617 Lucy married the twice-widowed Elizabeth, Lady Oxenbridge ('b'. before 1600, died 1645), daughter and coheir of the chairman of the Hertfordshire bench, Sir Henry Cocke, thus becoming life owner of the Broxbournebury estate. At the time of his first marriage he was described as having 'tossed back red hair & a long pointed chin', 'all ease and confidence' and 'as if he took his puritanism lightly' (Fairfax-Lucy, 127-8). Between 1645 and 1647 he married Jane, daughter and coheir of Thomas Chapman of Wormley, Hertfordshire, a draper of London. She predeceased him. Their only son, Kingsmill, failed to become MP for Brecon in 1661, but was returned for Andover in 1673. 
Lucy inherited land in Hampshire, leased the parsonage of Broxbourne from the bishop of London, and accumulated property in four Hertfordshire parishes. He gained a knighthood and a baronetcy in 1618 and between 1630 and 1658 was chairman of the Hertfordshire bench on fifty-three occasions. He was noted for his temperate nature and ability to find compromises, as in a confrontation at Ware in 1639 over Lord Carr's seizure of post horses when Lucy prevented a duel; Lucy, 'a more temperate man, would rather use his authority than his courage' ('CSP dom.', '1638', 137-9). He was instrumental in implementing Charles I's 'Book of Orders' in the 1630s and in encouraging parishes to subsidize bread for the poor. He was particularly concerned about young children falling idle and finding 'such small work as is most meet for them according to the tenderness of their age, that idleness may not fasten in them' (Lucy to the council, TNA: PRO SP 16/189/79). He established the referral of business to divisional monthly meetings of JPs, a practice revived by him in the 1650s, but led the local opposition to purveyance, suggesting that the court of the verge should be abolished and defending county against court interests. He established the principle of no double rating for ship money and as deputy lieutenant opposed increased exactions over the militia, the payment of the muster-master, and coat and conduct money. In 1642 he was placed on both the parliamentary assessment commission and the king's commission of array, and signed the county accommodation petition. He was in France from March 1643 to mid-1644 and on his return was placed on most of parliament's local assessment and other military committees, having given up his neutrality. 
In 1647 Lucy was returned to the Long Parliament for the earl of Salisbury's seat of Old Sarum, one of the recruiter MPs elected to fill vacancies in the Commons. He dealt largely with financial and religious matters and acted as a teller against both the 'presbyterian' Holles and the 'Independent' Hesilrige. He was not secluded at Pride's Purge in December 1648 but protested at the army's action and withdrew from the house. He returned to take his seat in the Rump in the following July and served on committees to consider the maintenance of the ministry, seditious writings, plundered ministers, and the corporation of the poor in London. He specialized in financial, religious, and poor-law legislation, notably that for reducing the price of corn and setting the poor on work. He opposed Hesilrige over raising militia horses for the Scottish expedition, Thomas Scott over the sale of traitors' lands, and Sir Henry Vane over the discharge of the sheriff of Nottingham. More conservative than most, he protected Salisbury's interests in the Commons and was part of his Hertfordshire syndicate in the protectorate parliaments, representing the county. In the 1656-7 session he was teller against the motion for including the title lord protector in 'The humble petition and advice', for amendments to the catechism allowing non-compulsion, and against high assessments for the army. With the return of the Rump in 1659 he again took his seat for Old Sarum. He died on 6 April 1667, probably at Broxbourne, and left a bequest to establish a free school there, to teach the poor to read and write, as well as extensive legacies and pensions to his own servants. He was buried at Broxbourne on 12 April. 


@@@@@


doc= 17151


Lucy, Sir Thomas (b. in or before 1532, d. 1600), gentleman, of Charlecote, in Warwickshire, was the eldest son of William Lucy (died 1551) and his wife, Ann (died 1550), daughter of Richard Fermor of Easton Neston in Northamptonshire. The family could trace its tenure of Charlecote back at least to the end of the twelfth century, when the village was recorded in the possession of Walter, son of Thurstan of Charlecote. Walter's son and heir, William, assumed the surname Lucy, possibly that of the family of his mother, Cecilia. Over the next three hundred years the family estate descended from father to son, augmented from time to time by advantageous marriages, particularly that of Thomas Lucy (died 1415) to Alice Hugford, heir to extensive estates in Bedfordshire and Shropshire. 
Thomas Lucy was educated at home, at one time by John Fawkener, an Oxford graduate, and then, for a year or so between the summer of 1545 and early in 1547, by John Foxe, the martyrologist. During this period Thomas, still only fourteen or so, was betrothed to Joyce (1532-1596), the twelve-year-old only child and heir of Thomas Acton of Sutton Park, in Worcestershire. Their marriage settlement is dated 1 August 1546, the marriage itself presumably taking place shortly afterwards. Five months later, in January 1547, Acton died, and his extensive estates, subject only to his wife's dowry, were thus inherited by his daughter. In 1551 Thomas Lucy inherited Charlecote itself on the death of his father, William, and, in 1553, having reached the age of twenty-one, was granted admission to his estates. Within a few years he began rebuilding the family home at Charlecote, which was completed, according to William Dugdale's 'Antiquities of Warwickshire', in 1559/60. It was an imposing brick building, half-H in plan, with a detached gatehouse. Despite major renovation and improvement during the first half of the nineteenth century, the building still retains these original features. At the same time Lucy was building up his Warwickshire estates. In 1553 he acquired from the crown the nearby manor of Sherbourne by exchanging for it land in Bedfordshire, and four years later was granted by Queen Mary the reversion of the adjacent manor of Hampton Lucy. For the next ten years or so there is further evidence of his selling off his more distant estates, especially those in Bedfordshire that had formed part of his wife's inheritance. This policy was facilitated by the death, in 1564, of his mother-in-law, which had freed the estates from dower. 
From 1559 Lucy entered on the life of public service to be expected of a man in his position. He sat as a member of parliament for Warwickshire in 1559, 1571, and 1584, was sheriff of Warwickshire and Leicestershire in 1559/60, of Warwickshire in 1578/9, and of Worcestershire in 1585/6, and served as a justice of the peace in Warwickshire from 'c'.1559 and in Worcestershire from 'c'.1582. He was knighted in 1565, and entertained Elizabeth I at his house at Charlecote during her visit to nearby Kenilworth in August 1572. In 1590 he was appointed a member of the council in the marches of Wales. 
In his religious views Lucy was clearly a vigorous protestant. This is best illustrated in the contributions he made to parliamentary business, particularly in the parliaments of 1571 and 1584. In the former he was appointed to a committee concerned with defects in the prayer book, and was involved in legislation against the practice of Catholic priests' disguising themselves in serving-men's apparel, and to enforce church attendance and the taking of communion. In the 1584 parliament he introduced one of the petitions concerning godly preachers, and took a leading role in pressing for more stringent punishment for the Welsh lawyer William Parry, who had spoken out against anti-Catholic legislation. Locally he was concerned with the prosecution of recusants, and in 1583 was closely involved in the arrest of Edward Arden and other Catholic families after the uncovering of the so-called Somerville conspiracy. However, it would be unwise to argue from this that Lucy was a representative of the puritan interest. His record differed little from that of other local gentry entrusted with the implementation of government policy in their areas of influence. 
Thomas Lucy might not now be so well known had his name not come to be associated with one of the earliest examples of Shakespeare folklore. Nicholas Rowe was the first to publish this, in 1709 and in some detail, but similar stories can be found in three other autonomous sources of late seventeenth-century date, all ultimately derived, no doubt, from local Stratford gossip. Rowe's account records that the young William Shakespeare, having got into bad company, had more than once stolen deer from Thomas Lucy's park at Charlecote, that he had been caught and rather too severely punished, and that in revenge had composed a ballad satirizing Lucy, which got him into such trouble that he had to leave Stratford for London. Another version of the story introduces the concept that Shakespeare's revenge included a caricature of Lucy in the person of Justice Shallow. Further embellished, this has proved to be one of the most popular and enduring Shakespeare legends, and has provoked much debate as to its authenticity. Some writers have drawn attention to inconsistencies (there was, for example, no formal park at Charlecote at this date), and few claim that the story can be true throughout. Nevertheless, during Shakespeare's youth Thomas Lucy was certainly well known in Stratford. He was regularly entertained by the corporation when visiting the town on official business, is recorded as an arbitrator in a Stratford dispute in 1571, and attended a wedding in the town in 1575. A case can also be made that the account in the opening scene of 'The Merry Wives of Windsor' of Justice Shallow's coat of arms, with its twelve white luces, or pikes, may be an oblique reference to that of the Lucy family itself, with its three silver luces. That the dialogue caricatures Shallow as an ignorant country justice, and includes a disrespectful pun ('louses' for 'luces') and a reference to deer-killing has then been used to argue that Shakespeare, in this scene, was paying off old scores arising out of his youthful crimes recorded in the later stories. If Shakespeare did have Thomas Lucy in mind when, about 1598, he wrote these lines, then clearly he must have had scant regard for this local Stratford figure. However, it need have meant nothing more than that. Furthermore, whether or not deliberate caricature was intended, it is not difficult to see how this passage, when it later became more generally known in Stratford circles, could have been interpreted as hostile to the Lucy interest, and, with its reference to deer-stealing, then turned into the folk-tale which surfaces in the written record at the end of the seventeenth century. We may also note that a payment in 1584 by Coventry corporation to 'Sir Thomas Lucies players' does not make Lucy an obvious target for a playwright's satire, and that Shakespeare in '1 Henry VI' introduces in a far more flattering light another member of the Lucy family, William, thought to be William Lucy of Charlecote, who died in 1466. 
Sir Thomas's wife, Joyce, died on 10 February 1596, and was buried in the parish church at Charlecote on 10 March. She is commemorated in a fine alabaster tomb, with a full-length effigy and a charming inscription composed and 'set down by him that best did know what hath been written to be true: Thomas Lucy'. He continued in the execution of his local duties: as late as February 1600 he received a letter from the privy council acknowledging that it had 'good cause to note your diligence and endeavour'. He died on 7 July of that year, and was buried alongside his wife on 7 August. Her tomb appears to have been modified to accommodate his full-length effigy. Three heralds attended the funeral, William Camden, as Clarenceux, superintending the ceremonies. 
Sir Thomas and Joyce had only two children, Anne and Thomas. Anne married Edward Aston of Tixhall, in Staffordshire, in 1580. The marriage was not a happy one, and led to bitter family feuding. In a letter to his cousin Richard Bagot, Aston paints a dramatic picture of these disagreements, and casts his mother-in-law, in particular, in a light very different from the epitaph on her tomb. Anne died in 1596 and four of her children came to live at Charlecote. This led to a scandalous liaison between one of the daughters, Elizabeth, and a manservant, John Sambach, which clouded Sir Thomas's final days. The couple were married two weeks after his death. 
Thomas's son, also Thomas (1551-1605), who survived him by only five years, married twice. His first wife, whom he married on 27 January 1574, was Dorothea, only daughter of Roland Arnold of Highnam in Gloucestershire. She died in 1580, a month after giving birth to a son who did not survive her long. His second wife was Constance, daughter of Sir Richard Kingsmill of Highclere in Hampshire; they had fourteen children. Their eldest son, Thomas (1585-1640), succeeded to the family estates on his father's death in July 1605. 


@@@@@


doc= 17152


Lucy, Sir Thomas (1583x6-1640), magistrate and politician, was the eldest surviving son of Sir Thomas Lucy (1551-1605), of Charlecote, Warwickshire, and his second wife, Constance, daughter and heir of Richard Kingsmill of Highclere, Hampshire. He matriculated at Magdalen College, Oxford, on 8 May 1601, was admitted as a student at Lincoln's Inn on 13 May 1602, and was knighted in 1603. 
As a young man Lucy was drawn into the intellectual and literary life of London. He made the acquaintance of John Donne at the London house of his fellow Warwickshire landowner, Sir Henry Goodere, who was also patron to Ben Jonson, he was eulogized by a minor poet, John Davis, as a 'Bright spark of wit and courage' (Fairfax-Lucy, 114n.), and he developed a close friendship with the unconventional polymath Lord Herbert of Cherbury. Lucy spent much of his time in the household maintained by Herbert's mother and the two men had their portraits painted in classical attire by William Larkin. In 1608 Lucy joined Herbert in Paris, where he shared his study of music and also became involved in two abortive duels. On their return to Dover in February 1609 the two men nearly perished in a shipwreck. 
With his wife, Alice Lucy (d. 1648), daughter of Thomas Spencer of Claverdon, Warwickshire, whom he married about 1610, Sir Thomas appears to have settled down to living at his ancestral home at Charlecote Park, where they had six sons and four daughters. He did not abandon his literary interests but continued to correspond with Donne and Herbert, maintained his acquaintance with Goodere and built up a large library at Charlecote which was later illustrated on his funeral monument. He also developed an interest in antiquarianism which brought him into contact with William Dugdale. He was said to be 'so rare and proficient' in either 'sacred or secular learning' that 'he was accounted a living library' (Dugard, postscript). 
Sir Thomas, however, made his principal mark in local affairs. His family had been a significant presence in Warwickshire since at least the thirteenth century and the marriages of his father and grandfather brought extensive additional estates which made him one of the wealthiest landowners in the shire, with an annual income of over $3500. From the 1610s through to the end of the 1630s he served in the principal county offices of justice of the peace and deputy lieutenant and established a reputation as a conscientious and diligent administrator. He regularly attended quarter sessions, took responsibility for the military affairs of the shire, acted as the arbiter of disputes involving his neighbours and became a principal benefactor of the boroughs of Stratford upon Avon and Warwick. For much of this period he was the most influential landowner in the southern half of the shire and his status was acknowledged in his apparently uncontested election to parliament as knight of the shire in 1614, 1621, 1624, 1625, 1626, 1628, and the Short Parliament of 1640. He was also returned as MP for Warwick borough to the Long Parliament, but it is doubtful that he ever took his seat as he was already ill in the spring of 1640. 
In national politics Lucy was a much less significant figure. He is not recorded as having made any major speech in parliament, and his most significant contribution was, perhaps, to present Warwickshire's complaints against patentees in 1621. However, he does provide a good example of the growing disillusionment among county gentry with the political and religious policies of the Caroline regime. He kept himself informed about national politics as part of a network of local gentry corresponding with the London newsletter writer John Pory and he was on good terms with lord keeper Coventry and secretary of state Sir John Coke who shared his moderate views. While in most respects he served the regime loyally, he was also involved in opposition to some of its more contentious policies. There were rumours that he was opposed to the forced loan and when the levy was being collected in Warwickshire in 1627 he was conspicuous by his absence, preferring to pay in London. During the 1630s he was closely associated with the opposition peer Lord Brooke and at dinner parties at Warwick Castle he met with other leading critics of the crown, such as John Pym, Lord Saye and Sele, and his brother-in-law, Richard Knightley. Finally in February 1640, a few months before his death, he was removed from the commission of the peace, probably because he was seen as obstructing the collection of ship money in south Warwickshire. 
Lucy's service in local office and his readiness to challenge the crown on sensitive issues helped to establish a reputation as the archetypal 'patriot' or 'public man', devoted to the service of the common weal. He was also a moderate puritan and patron of godly ministers, such as Robert Harris of Hanwell, and he was acclaimed for his hospitality towards the poor and for generosity to his tenants. Lucy died at Charlecote Park on 8 December 1640 following a fall from a horse, and was buried, as he requested, among his ancestors in the chancel of the parish church at Charlecote. The tribute paid to him by Harris at his funeral was a classic description of the role to which he had aspired: '
A noble lady hath lost not an husband (as she saith) but a father. 

Many children have lost not a father, but a counsellor. 

An houseful of servants have lost not a master but a physician who made (as I am informed) their sickness his, and his physic and cost theirs. 

Townes full of tenants have lost a landlord that could both protect and direct them in their own way. 

The whole neighbourhood have lost a light. 

The countie a leader. 

The countrey a patriot, to whom he was not wanting till he was wanting to himself in his former vigour and health. 
(Harris, 25-6)' 



@@@@@


doc= 17153


Lucy, William (1594-1677), bishop of St David's, was born at Hurstbourne, Hampshire, the fourth son of Sir Thomas Lucy (1551-1605) of Charlecote, Warwickshire, and his second wife, Constance, daughter and heir of Richard Kingsmill (c.1528-1600) of Highclere, Hampshire; Sir Thomas Lucy (1583x6-1640) and Sir Richard Lucy (1592-1667) were his elder brothers. In 1610 he was admitted to Trinity College, Oxford, where he graduated BA on 18 November 1613. He was admitted to Lincoln's Inn on 25 May 1614 but 'upon second thoughts, and perhaps a desire of a sedate and academical life' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 3.1127) he entered Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge, as a fellow-commoner on 12 June 1615. He proceeded MA the following year and was ordained deacon at London on 21 December 1617. In 1619 Lucy became rector of Burghclere, Hampshire. Several years later he was appointed chaplain to the duke of Buckingham, on the recommendation of James I. Appointed as a university preacher at Cambridge in 1620 Lucy gained notoriety for delivering on commencement Sunday 1622, before the largely Calvinist university, an anti-Calvinist sermon which Joseph Meade described as being 'totally for Arminanisme, wonderfully bold and peremptorily, styling some passages to the contrary by names of blasphemie etc.' (BL, Harley MS 389, fol. 213). The scandal over the sermon led to calls for Lucy to be denied higher degrees, but he escaped censure and in 1623 proceeded BD and DD with the support of the king against what appears to have been heavy opposition. Three years later he was appointed rector of Highclere, Hampshire. On 12 February 1629 at St Bride's, Fleet Street, London, Lucy married Martha (1608-1674), daughter of William Angel. They had two daughters and five sons, including Spencer Lucy (1643/4-1691). 
Lucy lived at Burghclere until the outbreak of the civil war, when, as a staunch royalist, he was 'both active and passive to his ability in the great cause' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Tanner 146, fol. 133). His house was searched and his extensive library seized. An informer suggested that he was raising money for the duke of York. In April 1651 the committee for compounding ordered his estates in Hampshire to be seized. After being sent a copy of Thomas Hobbes's 'Leviathan' (1651), and noting its popularity with local gentlemen, Lucy composed 'Examinations, Censures and Confutations of Divers Errours in the Two First Chapters of Mr Hobbes his Leviathan' (1657), published under the pseudonym William Pike (a play on his name). He followed this with 'Observations, Censures and Confutations of Divers Errors in the 12, 13 and 14 Chap. Of Mr Hobs his Leviathan' (1658), dedicated to William Seymour, marquess of Hertford. These two works were extended and republished as 'Notorious Errours in Mr Hobbes his Leviathan' (1663), dedicated to the earl of Clarendon. Lucy completed his critique of 'Leviathan' with his 'Second Part of Observations, Censures and Confutations' (1673); this work included a postscript censuring Hobbes's Latin edition of 'Leviathan' (1668). Lucy's often obtuse animadversions of Hobbes's ideas rarely achieve great originality and largely rely upon the restatement of traditional scholastic ideas which were fast moving out of fashion. For this reason his critique did not find much favour among contemporaries. Henry Stubbe commented that many of the things that Lucy objected to in Hobbes were 'admitted generally, by those who had learned to search into nature, & not to acquiesce in ye traditions of others' ('Correspondence of Thomas Hobbes', 1.440). In addition to his work against Hobbes, Lucy also composed in the 1650s 'A Treatise of the Nature of a Minister', a defence of episcopal authority in the apostolic church against the New England congregationalist Thomas Hooker's 'A Survey of the Summe of Church-Discipline' (1648). Lucy eventually published his book in 1670. 
At the Restoration, Lucy's loyalty was rewarded when, on 11 October 1660, he was elected bishop of St David's, his confirmation and consecration taking place on 17 and 18 November 1660. He is recorded as being present at the Savoy conference, but he took no part in the debates. Lucy faced a difficult task at St David's. Episcopal administration of the diocese, one of the largest and poorest in Britain, had effectively ceased in 1640. The cathedral at St David's, the collegiate church at Brecon, and the bishop's houses at Brecon and Abergwili were practically in ruins, the decay exacerbated by plundering during the interregnum. Lucy's effectiveness as an administrator is a subject of some debate. He was posthumously charged with having 'lived in a woeful and culpable omission of many of the direct and important as well sacred as other duties of his office' (Ferguson, 21-2). He is said to have neglected to hold confirmations in his diocese and to have connived at the exaction of exorbitant fees, as well as filling the cathedral with non-residents and preferring royalists and his own family exclusively to benefices in the diocese. Some of these charges were justified: his son Spencer, for instance, became in 1669 vicar of Penbryn, Cardiganshire, and canon and treasurer of St David's. However, Lucy's transgressions went hand in hand with his attempts to combat religious dissent and revive the fortunes of the church in his diocese. He does appear to have made considerable efforts to improve the condition of the diocese. Large sums were spent in the restoration of the collegiate church and the bishop's and prebendary's houses at Brecon as well as sums in augmentation of poor vicarages. Bishop Thomas Burgess, Lucy's nineteenth-century successor and champion, considered that Lucy could be considered 'the second founder of the College at Brecknock' (Burgess, 25-6). 
Lucy also fought tenaciously to preserve his authority as bishop in the see. William Nicholson, bishop of Gloucester, had been allowed to retain his archdeaconry of Brecon 'in commendam'. In 1663 he claimed the right of holding visitations and correcting faults in the clergy of Lucy's diocese. Lucy denied Nicholson's claims, although the extent of the archdeacon's jurisdiction was far from clear. The controversy led to the suspension of archidiaconal visitations and the controversy had to be referred to the bishops of London and St Asaph who in 1665 finally ruled in favour of Lucy. One result of the quarrel was that the right of holding visitations in the diocese of St David's remained in abeyance until the nineteenth century. However, 'Articles of Visitation and Enquiry' were published not only in 1662 but also in 1671, revealing Lucy to be an early exponent, among Restoration bishops, of railing in the altar at the east end of the chancel. 
Lucy's final years at St David's were marked by his progressive physical deterioration, which prevented him from travelling. In a letter to Archbishop Gilbert Sheldon in 1675 he describes himself as a 'poor old man, who hath not beene 2 miles from his house this 3 last yeares' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Tanner 42, fol. 142). However, when he drew up his will, on 3 September 1677, he pronounced himself in perfect health, apart from a little lameness, stemming from gout. This scourge of sectaries and dissenters declared himself convinced of the validity of the Church of England as by law established, but conceded 'some things may be amended in it as whatsoever is ordered by humane Reason will have deficiency in it (although such reason doth take scripture for its guidance)'. However, 'I feare he who shall undertake to amend it may probably doe harme then good by that adventure' (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/355, sig. 99). He died on 4 October 1677 and was buried in the collegiate church of Brecon. 


@@@@@


doc= 17154


Luders, Alexander (d. 1819), legal writer, was the second son of Theodore Luders of Lyncombe and Widcombe, Somerset. He was probably of German extraction, and when admitted a member of the Inner Temple on 10 July 1770 was described in the books of the inn as 'Sacri Romani Imperii nobilis Eques'. He was called to the bar on 6 February 1778, and became a bencher of his inn on 10 May 1811. He was probably the father of Alexander Luders, who matriculated at Brasenose College, Oxford, in 1806, aged seventeen, and died in 1851 as rector of Woolstone, Gloucestershire. 
Luders wrote widely on legal and constitutional history. His most important scholarly achievement was his contribution to the record commission's 'Statutes of the Realm', which began to appear in 1810 -- Luders had been the first named among the sub-commissioners appointed to work on the edition in 1800. He also edited three volumes of a Commons committee dealing with 'controverted elections' (1785-90); and in 1807 his essay on the use of French in ancient laws and acts of state appeared. A clutch of other writings dealt with aspects of the law of treason, on the right of succession to the crown in the reign of Elizabeth I, and also on the constitution of parliament in the reign of Henry VIII. His final works included an essay on Henry V (1813), a study of the monarch's title of 'defender of the faith', and a monograph on the constitution of parliament in the reign of Edward I (1818). 
These writings made a valuable contribution to legal history and were cited by Henry Hallam in his constitutional histories. Luders died on 25 November 1819. Some of his books were bequeathed to the Inner Temple Library. 


@@@@@


doc= 17155


Ludford, Simon (d. 1575), physician, was a native of Bedfordshire, and entered the Franciscan order. After the dissolution of the monasteries he became an apothecary in London. He supplicated for the degree of BM from the University of Oxford on 6 November 1553, and despite claims that he was 'a man utterley unlearned' (Lewis, 232), he was admitted to the degree and to practice on 27 November 1554. However, the College of Physicians objected. On hearing of Ludford's admission as a bachelor, John Caius, president of the college, sent a letter reprimanding the university, and stating that Ludford had been examined by the College of Physicians on 12 February 1553, and had been found ignorant, not only of medicine but of philosophy and letters, and that he was completely uneducated. In January 1556 an angry letter from Caius and the college was read out in convocation two months after John Lawton, another candidate rejected by the college, had been admitted bachelor of physic. The matter ended inconclusively. Ludford then studied at Cambridge, but was eventually admitted DM at Oxford on 26 June 1560. He was elected a fellow of the College of Physicians on 7 April 1563, and was chosen a censor in 1564, 1569, and 1572. 
Ludford's only extant composition is a manuscript copy of verses written on a blank space at the end of the preface of Charles Estienne's 'De dissectione partium corporis humani libri tres' (1545). Ludford had paid 8's'. for the book, and he states that he was in want of money at the time. Ludford, who was married to Jane (died 1597), with whom he had a son, William (died 1578), died in 1575 and was buried at St Stephen Walbrook on 21 August. He left some books to the library of the College of Physicians, including his copy of the works of Avicena and Estienne's 'De dissectione'. 


@@@@@


doc= 17156


Ludlam, Henry (1824-1880), mineralogist, was born on 14 October 1824, probably in London. He was the youngest of the fifteen children of James Ludlam, a tradesman, and his wife, Sarah Barton. He studied architecture, but became instead a land surveyor, and subsequently a hosier. However, his passion was mineralogy and he amassed one of the finest private collections of minerals in the country. It incorporated those made by Charles Hampden Turner (which in turn included earlier collections by Jacob Forster and Henry Heuland) and William Nevill (which included the collection of the diplomat William Garrow Lettsom). A wealthy man, Ludlam bought extravagantly at mineral auctions and was one of the best customers of Cornish dealer Richard Talling (1820-1883). In 1876 Talling discovered a new iron phosphate mineral; it was named ludlamite in Ludlam's honour by Frederick Field in 1877. 
Ludlam died, unmarried, on 23 June 1880 at his home, 174 Piccadilly, London, leaving his collection to the Museum of Practical Geology, London. His own descriptive catalogue of the 18,000 specimens was unfinished at his death. At the museum the collection formed the backbone of what was described by F. W. Rudler in 1905 as the finest topographical display of British minerals ever seen in this country. Ludlam was a fellow of the Geological Society of London and a member of the Mineralogical Society. 


@@@@@


doc= 17157


Ludlam, Isaac (d. 1817), rebel, is of unknown origins and upbringing. He earned his living as a quarryman and owned 'considerable property' at South Wingfield, Derbyshire (Thompson, 667). He was a Methodist who actively engaged in preaching. 
In June 1817 Ludlam took a prominent part in the 'Derbyshire insurrection' or 'Pentrich rising' promoted by Jeremiah Brandreth, which saw an assembly of stockingers, quarrymen, and ironworkers march to Nottingham from a handful of villages in the Derby Peak. Before the outbreak Ludlam occupied himself in the manufacture of pikes, which were stored in a quarry near his house. On 8 June he went with another of the rebels, William Turner, to the White Horse inn at Pentrich. Here a meeting presided over by Brandreth took place, at which Ludlam read out a list of those persons in the neighbourhood from whom it was proposed to rob firearms. On the night of Monday, 9 June, Ludlam, accompanied by his three sons, joined the rebels under Brandreth at Topham Close, and the party of 200-300 men set out towards Nottingham. Ludlam, who acted as a rear-guard, was active in demanding arms from houses on the road, and compelled several persons to join in the movement against their will. When the party went into an inn at Codnor, Ludlam was stationed outside as sentinel to prevent waverers from escaping. In the course of the march Ludlam frequently stated that the object of the party was to join another body of men in Nottingham Forest, and then proceed to the town itself to guard an insurrectionary parliament which had been assembled there. 
Ludlam escaped capture by the dragoons, who dispersed the rebel band on 10 June, but was subsequently arrested, and tried for high treason by the special commission at Derby. His counsel attempted to show that he was only Brandreth's dupe, which seems to have been true, and that his offence amounted to riot only. But he was found guilty, and executed with Brandreth and William Turner in front of the county gaol at Derby on 7 November. His corpse was then beheaded in line with the punishment for high treason. Ludlam's body was later that day buried, without a service, at St Werburgh's Church, Derby. His sons, despite pleading guilty at the trial, were discharged. 


@@@@@


doc= 17158


Thomas Ludlam (c.1775-1810), colonial governor, was the elder of William Ludlam's two surviving children. In early life he was apprenticed to a printer, and later joined the Sierra Leone Company. After going out to Africa he became a member of the colony's council and later served as its governor. He retired his governorship when the company's rights were ceded to the British government, and was commissioned to explore the neighbouring coast of Africa. He died on the frigate 'Crocodile' at Sierra Leone on 25 July 1810. 


@@@@@


doc= 17159


Ludlam, Thomas (1727-1811), theologian and essayist, born in Leicester and baptized at St Mary's on 3 March 1727, was the youngest son of Richard Ludlam (1680-1728), physician, and brother of William Ludlam (bap. 1717, d. 1788), mathematician and writer on theology. After being educated at Mr Andrew's school in Leicester he was admitted to St John's College, Cambridge, as a pensioner on 9 May 1745; he graduated BA in 1749 and proceeded MA in 1752. Following his ordination as deacon by the bishop of Ely in 1750 he spent some time as chaplain in the navy, and on 31 May 1750 he was appointed chaplain to the 'Prince Henry'. He was ordained priest by the bishop of Lincoln in 1753 and, with the help of John Jackson, was appointed confrater of Wigston's Hospital, Leicester, in 1760 and rector of Foston, Leicestershire, in 1791. 
At a time when the importance of religious experience was being urged by those influenced by the evangelical revival Ludlam remained committed to the widespread eighteenth-century belief in the basic consonance between Christianity and reason, and suspicion of 'enthusiasm'. In particular, as a devoted disciple of Locke, he argued that religious experience, like all forms of experience, should be subject to the tests of demonstration and analysis, a view he argued at length in his tellingly entitled 'Four essays, on the ordinary and extraordinary operations of the Holy Spirit; on the application of experience to religion; and on enthusiasm and fanaticism' (1797). He conceded that infallible knowledge might be received from God but claims to such knowledge had to be closely scrutinized since 'the knowledge men receive by the use of their various faculties is very imperfect' ('Four Essays', 67). As he made plain, such a critique was directed particularly at those like the Methodists who mistake 'the confidence of expectation for the certainty of experience, the positiveness of opinion for the convictions of reason' (ibid., 44). His writings in the same vein in the 'Orthodox Churchman's Review' earned him a reputation as 'one of the most formidable opponents of the Calvinistic writers' ('GM', 81/2, 492). Predictably such views led to tension with such prominent evangelicals as his former friend, Isaac Milner, who, in his edition of the sermons of his brother, Joseph Milner, characterized Ludlam's work as being written 'with an unexampled self-sufficiency, arrogance, and contempt of others' (Milner, 1.102). A more charitable view of his forthright style was that of his obituarist in the 'Gentleman's Magazine' who claimed that 'he was in temper, independent, frank, and friendly, not unobservant of human follies, nor unwilling to expose them' ('GM', 81/2, 492). Ludlam died on 13 November 1811 in Leicester. 


@@@@@


doc= 17160


Ludlam, William (bap. 1717, d. 1788), mathematician and writer on theology, was baptized at St Mary's, Leicester, on 8 April 1717, the son of Richard Ludlam (1680-1728), physician, and his wife, Anne, daughter of William Drury of Nottingham. His father graduated MB at St John's College, Cambridge, in 1702, and practised medicine at Leicester. His uncle Sir George Ludlam (died 1726) was chamberlain of the City of London. Thomas Ludlam, the theologian, was his younger brother, and one of his sisters became the stepmother of the writer, Joseph Cradock, and another the mother of Gerrard Andrewes (1750-1825), dean of Canterbury. 
After attending Leicester grammar school Ludlam became a scholar at St John's College, Cambridge, where he matriculated in 1734. There he graduated BA in 1738, MA in 1742, and was elected to a fellowship in 1744. He was rector of Peckleton, Leicestershire, 1743-9, having been ordained deacon in Lincoln in 1741 and priest in the following year. In 1749 he gained his BD and in the same year became vicar of Norton by Galby in Leicestershire, on the nomination of Bernard Whalley. From 1754 to 1757 he was junior dean of his college, and from 1767 to 1769 he was Linacre lecturer in physic. He was, however, unsuccessful in his bid for the Lucasian chair of mathematics in 1760, losing the contest to Edward Waring despite powerful support from William Samuel Powell, then principal tutor of St John's. 
Ludlam enjoyed a considerable reputation at the time for his skill in practical mechanics and astronomy, as well as for his mathematical lectures. In 1765 he was a member of the committee of outside experts appointed by the board of longitude to examine John Harrison's fourth chronometer. His report, published in the 'Gentleman's Magazine' (1st ser., 35, 1765, 412), was cautiously favourable. In 1768 he accepted from his college the rectory of Cockfield in Suffolk, thereby vacating his fellowship, and moved to Leicester where he spent the remaining twenty years of his life, at first living with his brother Thomas in Wigston's Hospital. In 1772 he married: his wife's name is not known. Two of their children survived him. 
While Ludlam appears to have contributed in early life to the 'Monthly Review', most of his writings were produced during his Leicester years. His 'Rudiments of Mathematics' (1785) became a standard Cambridge textbook, passed through several editions, and was still being used in 1815. His 'Essay on Newton's second law of motion' was, however, rejected by the Royal Society. He wrote extensively on issues relating to astronomy, mechanics, and mathematical instruments, his main publications in these fields appearing between 1761 and 1771. Later works included 'An Introduction to and Notes on Mr Bird's Method of Dividing Astronomical Instruments' (1786) and some mathematical essays. He also contributed to the 'Gentleman's Magazine' 'A short account of church organs' (1st ser. 42, 1772, 562), and various papers relating to mechanical inventions and to astronomical observations which appeared in 'Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society'. 
In 1788 Ludlam published 'Two Essays on the Justification and Influence of the Holy Spirit'; this followed some earlier theological essays published in 1785. Together with some others, written by himself and by his brother Thomas Ludlam, these essays were republished posthumously under the title 'Essays, Scriptural, Moral, and Logical' (1807). The essays on the Holy Spirit which came out in 1788 brought a sharp response from the evangelical academic Isaac Milner (1750-1820), whose brother, the historian and Christian apologist Joseph Milner (1744-1797), Ludlam had forcefully criticized. Such plain speaking was typical of Ludlam's life and writings and was one of the traits for which he was best remembered. Thomas Vaughan, a Leicester contemporary, presented him as a man of independent character, sound judgement, and pungent wit. 
Ludlam died at Leicester on 16 March 1788; he is commemorated in a tablet on the south wall of St Mary's, Leicester, where he was buried. His instruments and models (said to have been very valuable) were sold by auction on 6 May 1788. 




@@@@@


doc= 17161


Ludlow, Edmund (1616/17-1692), army officer and regicide, was born in Maiden Bradley, Wiltshire, the son of Sir Henry Ludlow (1592?-1643) of Maiden Bradley and his wife, Elizabeth (died 1660), daughter of Richard Phelips of Montacute, Somerset. 
Ludlow (who used the spelling Ludlowe) matriculated at Trinity College, Oxford, on 10 September 1634, aged seventeen. He graduated BA on 14 November 1636, and in 1638 was admitted to the Inner Temple. Sir Henry Ludlow represented Wiltshire in the Long Parliament, and was one of the most extreme critics of the crown. On 7 May 1642 he was rebuked by the speaker for saying that the king was not worthy to be king of England. Edmund Ludlow, moved by his father's persuasion, enlisted at the beginning of the civil war among the hundred gentlemen who formed the bodyguard of the earl of Essex. He was present at the skirmish at Worcester (23 September 1642), where the guard ran away, and at Edgehill (23 October 1642), where it distinguished itself in a more honourable manner. At the close of the first campaign he returned to his native county and became captain of a troop of horse for Sir Edward Hungerford's regiment (10 April 1643). When Hungerford took Wardour Castle, Wiltshire (8 May 1643), he appointed Ludlow its governor. Ludlow made himself famous by the tenacity with which he endured a three months' siege. His answer to the summons sent him by Sir Francis Dodington was published by the newspapers of both parties -- by 'Mercurius Aulicus' to show his obstinacy, by 'Mercurius Britannicus' to show his fidelity. 
After a short imprisonment at Oxford, Ludlow was exchanged early in the summer of 1644 and became major of Sir Arthur Hesilrige's regiment of horse in the army under Sir William Waller (10 May 1644). On 30 July 1644, however, Waller gave him a colonel's commission and sent him into Wiltshire to raise a regiment of horse. Parliament about the same time made Ludlow sheriff of his native county, and for the rest of the war he was engaged in endeavouring to reduce it to obedience. He took part, however, in the second battle of Newbury (27 October 1644), in the siege of Basing House (November 1644), and in an expedition for the relief of Taunton (December 1644). At the beginning of January 1645 his regiment was surprised by Sir Marmaduke Langdale at Salisbury, and Ludlow himself escaped with great difficulty. On the formation of the New Model the committee for the selection of officers, ardently backed by Sir Arthur Hesilrige, recommended Ludlow for the command of a regiment, but the Wiltshire committee professed that they could not spare him. Ludlow was elected as member for Wiltshire on 12 May 1646. To him the parliamentary cause was God's cause, to be understood in providentialist and apocalyptic terms. He believed in the almost total separation of church and state. He was a Baptist and worked closely with other Baptists. In theology he was a firm Calvinist predestinarian. His religious intensity did not impede his co-operation with men of other priorities. In parliament he allied with Henry Marten and the most radical critics of the monarchy. He sympathized with the Levellers and was trusted by them. 
As a parliamentary speaker Ludlow did not distinguish himself, and his later political importance was due to his influence outside the Commons rather than within it. He took the part of the army in their quarrel with parliament in the summer of 1647, and signed the engagement of 4 August. But the negotiations of the army leaders with the king, and their suppression of the army Levellers, roused his suspicions. He opposed the vote of thanks given to Cromwell for his conduct at the Ware rendezvous, and was still further alienated from him by his avowed preference for monarchy. Nevertheless in the summer of 1648, when Major Huntington accused Cromwell, Ludlow wrote to encourage the latter and to promise him support. Convinced of the danger of a treaty with the king he urged Ireton and Fairfax to put an end to the proposed negotiation by force, and was one of the chief promoters of Pride's Purge in December 1648. He was appointed one of the king's judges, was present at eleven meetings of the court, and his name is the fortieth in the list of those who signed the king's death warrant ['see also 'Regicides]. Charles's execution was to Ludlow a righteous use of the sword, demanded by biblical injunction, to punish tyranny and bloodguilt. 
On 7 February 1649 Ludlow was ordered to draw up instructions for the proposed council of state. He was himself elected a member of that body on 14 February, and was also a member of the second council elected in February 1650. He married, about 1649, Elizabeth (1629/30-1702), daughter of William Thomas of Wenvoe, Glamorgan, and his wife, Jane, daughter of Sir John Stradling of St Donatus in the same county. 
When Cromwell returned from Ireland in June 1650 he thought it necessary to appoint a second in command to Ireton who would replace him in case of death or illness. For this post he selected Ludlow, to whom he privately vindicated his former conduct, and professed his desire to effect that reformation of the clergy and the law on which Ludlow had set his heart. Ludlow hesitated to accept, pleading the condition of his estate, but was nominated by the council of state on 27 June and approved by parliament on 2 July following. He received a commission from Cromwell as lieutenant-general of the horse in Ireland, and from parliament as one of the commissioners for the civil government of that country. In the latter capacity he was paid a salary of $1000 a year. Ludlow, however, complained that during the four years he served in Ireland he expended $4500 out of his own estate over and above his pay. He landed in Ireland in January 1651, passed the Shannon with Ireton in June, and took part in the siege of Limerick. On the death of Ireton (26 November 1651) the commissioners of the parliament issued a circular letter ordering the army to give obedience to Ludlow, but on 9 July 1652 parliament voted Fleetwood commander-in-chief. 
Fleetwood did not land until October 1652, so that Ludlow held the chief command for nearly a year. Galway, the only important place in the possession of the Irish at Ireton's death, surrendered in April 1652, and the rest of the war consisted of skirmishes and capitulations. Ludlow narrated at length the hardships of campaigning in Ireland, and the severe measures which he used to force the Irish to submit. The royalist lord deputy, the earl of Clanricarde, proposed to Ludlow (March 1652) a treaty for the settlement of the country, which the latter refused, saying that the settlement of the nation belonged to the English parliament. On 22 June 1652 Ludlow concluded an agreement with Lord Muskerry for the surrender of his forces, and on 28 June the earl of Clanricarde also capitulated. Ireland was practically conquered before Fleetwood landed. 
In the settlement of Ireland the confiscated estate of Walter Cheevers of Monkstown, near Dublin, was granted to Ludlow as satisfaction for his pay. Of the policy of the transplantation, and of the principles on which the settlement was based, he thoroughly approved, and he took part in the preliminary measures. The news that Cromwell had expelled the Long Parliament (20 April 1653) did not prevent Ludlow continuing to act both in his civil and military capacity. He broke with Cromwell in December, when Barebone's Parliament was dissolved and Cromwell became protector. Detestation of that 'usurpation', which Ludlow regarded as a fatal sacrifice of God's cause to the 'lust' of Cromwell's 'carnal' ambition, would stay with Ludlow all his days. On hearing of the coup he rallied opposition among the Baptists in Ireland. He obstructed for several weeks the proclamation of Cromwell as protector, and refused to sign it himself (30 January 1654). After it took place he refused to act further as civil commissioner, lest he should seem to acknowledge Cromwell's authority as lawful, but he resolved to keep his commission as lieutenant-general until it should be forced from him. Cromwell's son Henry, who had been sent to Ireland to assess the state of feeling among the officers, attributed Ludlow's stance to the fact that the military office was the more profitable. After failing to convince Ludlow of the lawfulness of the government, Henry recommended his removal. But the protector was reluctant to proceed to extremities, and Ludlow was allowed to continue in his anomalous position until January 1655, when it was found that he was circulating pamphlets hostile to the government. Fleetwood then demanded the surrender of his commission. To avoid this Ludlow engaged to appear before Cromwell within a couple of months in order to answer the charge, and meantime to act nothing against his government (30 January 1655). But Cromwell's council preferred to keep Ludlow in Ireland, and forbade him to come to England. On receiving a second and still more definite engagement (29 August), Fleetwood gave him leave to go, but the Irish council was against it and had him arrested as soon as he landed in England (October 1655). 
After remaining six weeks a prisoner at Beaumaris, Ludlow was allowed to proceed. He had an interview with Cromwell at Whitehall on 12 December 1655. Throughout he persistently refused to engage not to act against the government. He asserted that the present government was unlawful and, while denying that he was privy to any plot against it, refused to pledge loyalty lest providence should lead him into opposition. On 1 August 1656 Ludlow was again summoned before the council and ordered to give security to the amount of $5000 for his peaceable behaviour. Though threatened with imprisonment for his refusal to give security he was allowed to retire with his relations to Essex, where he spent the rest of the summer. His whereabouts in the remainder of Cromwell's lifetime are uncertain. The government was anxious to keep him out of his own county for fear he should obstruct the election of its partisans to the ensuing parliament. Both in 1654 and in 1656 a numerous party in Wiltshire wished to elect Ludlow as one of their members, but in each case the opposition of the presbyterian clergy and the influence of the government prevented it. After Cromwell's death, however, Ludlow was returned to the parliament of January 1659 to represent Hindon. At first he would not take his seat, as he objected to the oath by which members were required to oblige themselves not to act or contrive anything against the protector. Then he slipped in quietly, and, though attention was called to the fact that he had not taken the oath, was allowed to continue sitting. 
Before the parliament met, Ludlow and the other leaders of the opposition had arranged their plan of campaign. He spoke often, though apparently not at length. He opposed the bill for the recognition of Richard Cromwell as protector, and sought to set limits to the protector's power over the military forces. 'I honour his highness', he declared, 'as much as any man that sits here. I would have things settled for his honour and safety, but if we take the people's liberties from them, they will scratch them back again'. He denied also the right of the members for Ireland and Scotland to sit in the house, and attacked the new upper house with special vehemence. 'The men who sat there', he protested, 'had been guilty of all the breaches upon the liberty of the people' ('Diary of Thomas Burton', 3.145, 282; 4.173). Before and after the dissolution of the parliament he negotiated with the army leaders for the overthrow of Richard Cromwell and the recall of the Long Parliament. 
The recall of the Long Parliament (7 May 1659) and the re-establishment of the Commonwealth made Ludlow a man of great importance. The parliament at once appointed him a member of the committee of safety (7 May), one of the council of state (14 May), and one of the seven commissioners for the nomination of the officers of the army (4 June). He obtained the command of a regiment in the English army (9 June), but was next month chosen commander-in-chief of the Irish army with the rank of lieutenant-general and the command of a regiment of horse and another of foot (4 July). At the end of July he landed in Ireland. There he reorganized the army, changed many of the officers, and put in their places men of his own principles. He also dispatched a brigade to England to aid in the suppression of Sir George Booth's rising. When his work was finished he appointed Colonel John Jones to command in his absence, and returned to England. 
Ludlow landed at Beaumaris in October 1659 and was met by the news that Lambert and the army had again expelled the Long Parliament. After hastening to London he used all his efforts to reconcile the army and the parliament, and in conferences with the leaders of the two parties strove to moderate their animosities and make them sensible of the danger of their quarrels to the republic. The army endeavoured to win him by appointing him one of their committee of safety (26 October) and one of the committee for the consideration of the form of government (1 November). He refused to act with them, but complied so far that his parliamentary friends suspected him. He opposed the calling of a new parliament which the army announced, and objected to their scheme for the establishment of a select senate. His own plan was to summon a representative army council and to recall the expelled parliament. The essentials or fundamentals of the republican cause were to be clearly stated and declared inviolable, and twenty-one 'conservators of liberty' were to be appointed to watch over them and decide any difference between parliament and army ('Memoirs', 2.749, 756, 759, 766). 
During these discussions Ludlow learned first that Jones and the Irish army had declared for the army, and next that Sir Hardress Waller and other dissentient officers had seized Dublin Castle (13 December), arrested Jones and the other commissioners, and declared for the restoration of the Long Parliament. Accordingly he set out to restore order, and arrived off Dublin on 31 December 1659. Waller and the officers at Dublin not only refused obedience but prepared to arrest him if he landed. A few officers, however, still adhered to Ludlow, and the governor of Duncannon received him into the fort there (5 January). The Dublin officers openly charged him with neglecting his duty in Ireland and in parliament and with encouraging the usurpation of the army, accusations which he indignantly refuted in a correspondence with Waller. 
Sir Charles Coote drew up articles of treason against Ludlow and the three commissioners for the civil government of Ireland, which were presented to the now restored parliament on 19 January 1660 by Colonel Bridges. The news of this impeachment met Ludlow on his return to England, and he hastened to demand a hearing. But before he could be heard Monck arrived in London. Both in his speech to the parliament on 6 February and in his letter of 11 February Monck supported Ludlow's accusers. Privately, however, he told Ludlow that he had nothing to object against him but his favour to the sectaries in Ireland, and protested his own faithfulness to the republic. Ludlow nevertheless urged his friends, in vain, to adjourn parliament to the Tower and collect their scattered forces for armed resistance. Nor was he more successful in getting parliament to set a day to justify his own conduct. 
The readmission of the secluded members (21 February) put an end to all hope of maintaining the Commonwealth by parliamentary means, and Ludlow plotted a rising of the republican regiments. Obliged to leave London for fear of arrest he succeeded in getting the electors of Hindon to return him to the Convention (4 April 1660), though he dared not appear personally at the election. He was preparing to join Lambert in his abortive insurrection when he received the news of Lambert's recapture. Thereupon he went to London. He took his seat in parliament on 5 May, and distinguished himself at once by refusing to take any part in nominating the commissioners sent to Charles II at Breda. On 14 May the House of Commons ordered that all persons who had sat in judgment on the late king should be forthwith secured, and on the 18th Ludlow's election was voted void. As he lay concealed in a house near Holborn, he saw the crowds returning from welcoming Charles II to London. 
Ludlow did not long remain in hiding. Though he was not one of the seven regicides capitally excepted by the Commons from the 'Act of Indemnity', he was included among the fifty-two persons excepted for penalties less than death. At the request of the Commons the king issued a proclamation (6 June) summoning all the judges of Charles I to surrender on pain of entire exemption from pardon. Relying on the implied promise contained in this proclamation Ludlow surrendered himself to the speaker on 20 June, hoping to escape with a fine and to gain time to settle his estate. The speaker committed him to the custody of the serjeant-at-arms, who allowed him his liberty, accepting sureties for his appearance when wanted. Ludlow provided four men of straw, and waited to see what the king and the lords would do. Before long he discovered that his life was in imminent danger, and at the end of August 1660 made his way to Lewes, and escaped to Dieppe. 
The government, ignorant of Ludlow's movements, thought he was still in England and offered a reward of $300 for his arrest (1 September 1660). Twice during the autumn his capture was actually announced. In October 1661 he was said to be lurking in Cripplegate. Spies reported that 40,000 old soldiers were pledged to rise in arms, and sectaries asserted that a few days would see Ludlow the greatest man in England. In reality, although Ludlow remained closely in touch with the nonconformists in England, he advised them against precipitate action, warning them that 'the Lord's tyme is not yet come' (Ludlow, 'Voyce', 1978, 11). No rumour about him was too absurd to find credit. In July 1662 he was to head a rising in the west of England. In November he had been seen at Canterbury, disguised as a sailor, and soldiers scoured Kent and Sussex to find him. It was believed that Ludlow had bound himself by an oath never to make his peace with the king, to refuse pardon and favour if they were offered to him, and to wage perpetual war with all tyrants. 
Meanwhile Ludlow quietly travelled through France and established himself at Geneva. On arrival he learned of the executions of ten of his fellow regicides in England. He interpreted that measure, and the executions of four more roundheads in 1662, as barbarous acts of revenge which were certain to provoke divine vengeance. Not finding himself sufficiently assured of safety in Geneva, he moved in April 1662 to Lausanne, and in the following autumn to Vevey. On 16 April 1662 the government of Bern granted to Ludlow and his fellow fugitives, Lisle and Cawley, an act of protection by which they were permitted to reside in any of the territories of that canton. Ludlow paid a personal visit to Bern to thank the magistrates, who received him with great kindness and honour. 
As soon as the English court discovered that Ludlow had found refuge at Vevey plots against his life began. Irishmen, Savoyards, and Frenchmen were successively engaged in these designs. John Lisle was assassinated at Lausanne on 11 August 1664, but the vigilance of the authorities of Vevey and his own caution frustrated all attempts against Ludlow. 
The war between England and the Netherlands (1664-7) seemed to many of the exiled republicans an opportunity for re-establishing by Dutch aid the English republic. Ludlow was urged to come to the Netherlands, and was promised high command in the Dutch service and armed support in this enterprise. D'Estrades, the French ambassador there, sent him a passport to guarantee his safe passage through France. Ludlow resisted these offers. He distrusted the sincerity of the Dutch. He also regarded their decision to hand over to the English government, in 1661, three fugitive regicides, John Barkstead, Miles Corbet, and John Okey, who were executed the following year, as an act of treachery and bloodguilt, of which the Dutch must repent before God's servants could join with them. His friends were disgusted by his caution, and Colonel Blood, who was sent over to persuade Ludlow to head a rising in England, described him as very unsuited to such an employment. 
In exile Ludlow watched with great keenness the course of events in England. For more security he adopted a variant of his mother's name, and signed the letters Edmund Phillips. His wife had joined him in 1663, and remained with him for the rest of his exile. One by one he lost the companionship of his fellow regicides. Cawley died in 1666, Nicholas Love in 1682, and Andrew Broughton in 1687. In April 1684 some of the exiled whigs endeavoured to persuade Ludlow to head a rising in the west of England. Their agent found him 'no ways disposed to the thing, saying he had done his work, he thought, in the world, and was resolved to leave it to others' ('Confession of Nathaniel Wade', BL, Harley MS 6845, fol. 269). The revolution of 1688 seemed to open to him the prospect of a return to England. The preface to the first edition of his memoirs states that he was sent for as a fit person to be employed in the reconquest of Ireland. On 25 July 1689 he took a solemn farewell of the magistrates of Vevey, telling them that the Lord had called him home to strengthen the hands of the English Gideon. He went to London, where his house became the rendezvous of the survivors of the godly and republican party. On 6 November 1689 Sir Joseph Tredenham called the attention of the House of Commons to his presence in England, and they resolved to ask the king to issue a proclamation for apprehending Ludlow, who still stood attainted of high treason. An address to this purpose was presented to the king by Sir Edward Seymour on 7 November. William III answered that the desire of the Commons was reasonable and just, and published a proclamation offering $200 reward for Ludlow's arrest. Ludlow escaped to the Netherlands, according to tories with the connivance of the king, and returned in safety to Switzerland. His death, probably in Vevey, is mentioned in Narcissus Luttrell's diary under 26 November 1692. 
Ludlow was buried in St Martin's Church, Vevey, and the monument erected there by his widow in 1693 states that he died in the seventy-third year of his age. The epitaph is printed in Joseph Addison's 'Travels through Italy and Swisserland' (1745, 264) and in the preface to the 1751 edition of Ludlow's 'Memoirs'. Over the door of his house at Vevey Ludlow placed a board with the inscription 'Omne solum forti patria quia patris', a Christianized version of a line of Ovid ('to the brave man every land is a fatherland because God his father made it'). The authorities of Vevey set up during the nineteenth century an inscription marking the site of the house in which Ludlow lived. But in one view the inscription is wrongly placed, and should be on the house at 49 rue du Lac. 
Ludlow left no children. His widow married, in 1694, Sir John Thomas, bt, and died on 8 February 1702, aged seventy-two. The best portrait of Ludlow is that prefixed to the 'Memoirs'. According to a note by Thomas Holles in the copy of the 1751 edition which he gave to the public library at Bern, it is 'a bad print from a very good drawing on vellum by R. White, taken from the life when the general was in England in the reign of King William' (A. Stern, 'Briefe Englischer Fluchtlinge in der Schweiz', 1874, xi). 
In exile Ludlow composed a huge autobiographical work, 'A voyce from the watch tower'. By the later 1660s his narrative had reached recent times, and thereafter the story, which he took up to 1685, was a record of more or less contemporary events. After Ludlow's death his manuscript came into the hands of Slingsby Bethel, who had earlier visited him in Switzerland. Although most of it is lost a substantial portion of it, covering the years 1660-77, was recovered in 1970 and is in the Bodleian Library in Oxford. A heavily rewritten and heavily abbreviated version of 'A voyce' appeared as the 'Memoirs of Edmund Ludlow' in 1698-9 in three volumes, nominally published at Vevey but in reality printed by John Darby of Bartholomew Close, London. The editor was probably the deist and republican John Toland. The 'Memoirs' belonged to a cluster of late seventeenth-century publications printed by Darby which included the 'Discourses' of Algernon Sidney and the works of John Milton and James Harrington. They took advantage of the standing army controversy that followed the treaty of Ryswick in 1697 to promote the cause of the radical and country whigs. Ludlow's puritanism was eliminated, and his views overhauled so as to make him a republican of secular outlook and country party sympathies. Although most of the autobiographical material in the 'Memoirs' has a basis in Ludlow's own words, his style is transformed and there are passages of pure invention. Some doubts were expressed at the time, and again at various moments in the eighteenth century, about the authenticity of the 'Memoirs' but until the 1970s they were generally accepted as authentic. 
Ludlow was a prominent figure of the puritan revolution, but it is the 'Memoirs' that have constituted his principal claim on posterity's attention. They have generally been at their most influential at those points where his manuscript was most extensively revised, but Ludlow's editor treated his facts less unfaithfully than his character and views, and the work, which supplies vivid accounts of Ludlow's military and political career, can still be profitably consulted. Ludlow and the 'Memoirs' were admired by eighteenth-century Commonwealthsmen and radical whigs, though by the nineteenth century judgements of both the man and the work had become more critical. There were editions in 1720-22, 1751, and 1771, but that by C. H. Firth (2 vols., Oxford, 1894) supersedes earlier versions. It has extensive supplementary material. The portion of 'A voyce from the watch tower' that covers the years 1660-62 was published in the 'Camden' series of the Royal Historical Society in 1978. 
In 1691-3 four pamphlets were published, ostensibly at Amsterdam, in Ludlow's name, but really by another person or persons. Attacking the tyranny of Charles I and praising the Long Parliament they, like the 'Memoirs' after them, were contributions to the radical whig cause. Comtemporaries variously attributed them to Slingsby Bethel, John Phillips (Milton's nephew), Thomas Percival, and John Toland. An ode to Ludlow is in Thomas Manley's 'Veni, vidi, vici', 1652. 


@@@@@


doc= 17162


George Ludlow (bap. 1596, d. 1655) was baptized at Dinton on 15 September 1596. He accompanied his brother to the Massachusetts Bay Colony on the 'Mary and John' in 1630, and became a freeman of Massachusetts later that year. In 1631 he returned to England, but by 1638 had established himself in Virginia, where the land registry records that he was granted 17,000 acres of land. He served for many years as the lieutenant of York County, bearing the title of colonel, and served as a member of Virginia's council from 1642 to 1655. He died about 23 October 1655, having had no children with his wife, Elizabeth. 


@@@@@


doc= 17163


Ludlow, George James, third Earl Ludlow (1758-1842), army officer, was born on 12 December 1758, the second son of Peter, first Earl Ludlow (1730-1803), comptroller of the household to George III, and his wife, Lady Frances Lumley-Saunderson (died 1796), the eldest daughter of Thomas, third earl of Scarbrough. On 17 May 1778 he was appointed ensign in the 1st foot guards, in which he rose to the rank of regimental major on 9 May 1800. He was appointed brevet colonel (1795), major-general (1798), lieutenant-general (1805), and general (1814). 
Ludlow embarked for America in the spring of 1781, and was with Lord Cornwallis at the surrender of Yorktown on 17 October 1781 when he was taken prisoner and narrowly escaped execution. George Washington sent him to New York with dispatches relating to Captain Charles Asgill, who was then being held captive by revolutionary forces. After his return from America Ludlow served in Flanders in 1793-4 and lost his left arm in the affair near Roubaix on 17 May 1794. In 1800 he went to Ireland with the 2nd brigade of guards (consisting of the 1st battalions of Coldstream and 3rd foot guards), which he commanded in the Vigo expedition and in the Egyptian campaign of 1801, including the battles before Alexandria and the city's blockade. Following the breakup of the army in Egypt he held major-general's commands in the eastern counties and in Kent during the invasion alarms of 1803-4, and commanded a division in the Hanover expedition of 1805 and in the Copenhagen expedition of 1807. 
Ludlow was made KB on 26 September 1804 and GCB on the reconstitution of the order in 1815. He succeeded his brother Augustus, second Earl Ludlow, as third Earl Ludlow, Viscount Preston, and Baron Ludlow, all in the peerage of Ireland, in 1811. He was created Baron Ludlow in the United Kingdom peerage on 10 September 1831. He was equerry to the prince of Wales (1784-95), a deputy governor of Berwick upon Tweed, a member of the consolidated board of general officers, a colonel in succession of the old 96th, of the 38th foot (from 1808 to 1836), and of the Scots Fusilier Guards, to which he was appointed on 30 May 1836. He died, unmarried, at his residence, Cople Hall, near Bedford, on 16 April 1842, when the titles became extinct and the Irish estates passed to the duke of Bedford. 


@@@@@


doc= 17164


Ludlow, Roger (bap. 1590, d. after 1664?), colonial governor and jurist, was baptized on 7 March 1590 at Dinton, Wiltshire, the second son of Thomas Ludlow (1550-1607), landowner, and his wife, Jane (1561-1648), the daughter of Thomas Pyle of Bapton, Wiltshire. He was admitted to Balliol College, Oxford, on 16 June 1610, then entered the Inner Temple in November 1612, but was not called to the bar. He married Mary Endecott, whose parentage is unknown but who was the sister of John Endecott, later governor of Massachusetts Bay. His first wife having died, he is said to have married Mary (1604-1664?), daughter of Philobert Cogan, in 1624. Ludlow's legal training, in combination with his devout commitment to Congregationalism, probably influenced his election as an assistant by the Massachusetts Bay Company in February 1630, during the company's final meeting in England. As an assistant and a lay leader, Ludlow, accompanied by his younger brother George ['see below'] and approximately 140 others, sailed to New England on the 'Mary and John', one of the ships that made up John Winthrop's fleet, and arrived in Massachusetts Bay in May 1630. There, they created a settlement which they named Dorchester. 
Ludlow held a position of prominence in the fledgeling Massachusetts Bay Colony, becoming one of its leading citizens and a major landowner. He served for four years as an assistant to the company in Boston, and in 1634 he became deputy governor of the colony, but he was not elected to office in 1635, either because of his opposition to increasing democracy in the election of magistrates, or because he may already have had plans to leave the colony. In the same year he led a migration of Dorchester residents to Connecticut, where they settled at Windsor. In Connecticut Ludlow served as the chief officer of the commission set up by the Massachusetts government to govern the new colony, as well as holding the office of deputy governor in alternate years. His responsibilities included signing a treaty with the Pequot nation after the brief but bloody war between the settlers and the Indians in 1637-8, and serving as a delegate to the Cambridge synod of 1637, which met in order to formulate a response to the challenge presented by Anne Hutchinson and the Antinomians. By 1639 he had moved to the south-west of the colony and helped to found Fairfield. 
Although Ludlow was 'stern, passionate, and demanding' and possessed a 'quick temper and a sharp tongue' (Jones, 74), he was greatly respected for his commitment to the young colony and especially for his extensive knowledge of the law. In 1639 he was involved in putting together the 'fundamental orders' which provided the basis for Connecticut's constitutional arrangements; setting out the authority of the government and methods of election. In 1646 the general court of Connecticut commissioned him to codify the laws of the colony. The resulting Code of 1650 contained some twenty original provisions, the other fifty-eight being derived substantially from Massachusetts laws, particularly the Massachusetts Bay laws and liberties of 1648. It was 'a sweeping corpus of law that described the duties and powers of every colony and town official' (Daniels, 66), and it gave Ludlow a posthumous reputation as the 'Father of Connecticut Jurisprudence'. 
Ludlow had helped to set up the united colonies of New England in 1643, the first federation of the American colonies, and in 1648, 1651, and 1653 was Connecticut's commissioner to the federation. In 1653 the colonies were bitterly divided on the issue of whether to go to war with the Dutch, and Connecticut, frustrated at the delays, appointed Ludlow as their commander in preparation for an attack on the Dutch. Events went no further before the First Anglo-Dutch War ceased in 1654, by which time Ludlow had sold his Connecticut lands and sailed for Dublin, where on 3 November 1654 he was appointed commissioner for forfeited lands (perhaps on the recommendation of his relation Edmund Ludlow, lieutenant-general of Ireland), and later the same year JP for Dublin and Cork. In February 1660 he filed a suit in chancery in England against his nephew Thomas, in which he described himself as of Dublin, and he may have been still alive in 1664 when a Mary Ludlow, wife of Roger Ludlow, was buried on 3 June at St Michan's parish church, Dublin. 
Ludlow's younger brother 


@@@@@


doc= 17165


Lugaid mac Loegairi (d. 507), high-king of Ireland, was one of twelve sons attributed to Loegaire mac Neill; his mother was said to have been Angas ingen Ailella Tassaig. He became high-king of Ireland at some point after 482, when Ailill Molt, his predecessor, was killed. Some chronicle accounts say that Lugaid was part of an alliance which defeated Ailill Molt, but the main hand of the annals of Ulster -- in general the most reliable of the chronicles -- ignores him utterly, save in a brief notice of his death (in 507, repeated in 508). During his reign battles were regularly undertaken by other descendants of Niall Noigiallach, such as Coirpre and Muirchertach Mac Erccae, but Lugaid himself appears wholly inactive, which is somewhat unusual for a high-king of Ireland. It has even been suggested that he was never high-king at all, but was inserted into the regnal scheme in order to fill a gap caused by a backdating of the mission of St Patrick. However, his reign is attested in the earliest king-list, 'Baile Chuinn', and indeed in all subsequent lists. 
Lugaid had at least two sons, one called Guaire, and is said to have been married to Niam, daughter of the king of the Ulstermen. His progeny, Clann Lugdach, was a lowly Ui Neill dynasty and no high-kings of Ireland came from it. The tripartite life of Patrick, with the benefit of hindsight, tells how Lugaid's father, Loegaire, was converted by the saint while Lugaid was in his mother's womb. Patrick cursed Loegaire on account of earlier disobedience, saying that only one king, Lugaid, would come of his offspring (that concession was granted on account of the mother's petition). Patrick said of the unborn child, 'Till he opposes me, I will not curse him' (Stokes, 1.61). However, after Lugaid became king he uttered a mocking remark about the curse on his father's descendants and in consequence was struck dead by a thunderbolt in 507, at 'Achad Forcha'. He was one of at least three fifth-century high-kings of Ireland to die by the elements and so it is possible that the story of Patrick's malediction has overlain an earlier legend of Lugaid's death by lightning. 


@@@@@


doc= 17166


Mo Lua moccu Oche (554-609), the founder and abbot of Clonfertmulloe (Cluain Ferta Mo Lua) in Osraige and of Druim Snechta (Drumsnat) in the Ulster kingdom of Fernmag was a saint of national significance. He is commemorated on 4 August in the martyrology of Tallaght. The genealogies name his father as Carthach of the Corco Oche, and his mother as Sochla from Osraige. This pattern, of an Osraige saint affiliated with an ancient Munster people, is familiar from the hagiography of Ciaran of Saigir. Mo Lua's affiliation is also highlighted in the West Munster synod where he is given authority over Corco Oche. The tradition preserved in the notes of 'Felire Oengusso' that his father was Carthach the Elder, Ciaran of Saigir's pupil and Mo Chutu's fosterer, is clearly late. 


@@@@@


doc= 17167


Luke, Sir Samuel (bap. 1603, d. 1670), parliamentarian army officer, was baptized at Southill, Bedfordshire, on 27 March 1603, the eldest son of Sir Oliver Luke ('b'. 1574, died in or after 1650) of Woodend in Cople, Bedfordshire, and his first wife, Elizabeth (died 1607), daughter of Sir Valentine Knightley of Fawsley, Northamptonshire. Samuel was born into one of the great political networks of the early seventeenth century, which encompassed not only his mother's immediate family but also the Fleetwoods, Lyttons, and Barringtons. 
Luke attended Eton College between 1617 and 1619. He and a younger brother travelled in Europe in 1623. On 2 February 1624 he married Elizabeth, daughter of William Freeman, a London merchant and member of the Haberdashers' Company. Together they had six sons and four daughters. Luke was knighted later that year, on 20 July. His name appears in 1625 listed in the burgess rolls of Bedford, which lay 3 miles from the family seat; by 1636 he was a member of the Bedfordshire commission of sewers and by 1640 a JP for the borough of Bedford. 
In both the Short Parliament of April 1640 and the Long Parliament Luke was elected for Bedford, evidently on an anti-court ticket, while his father was one of the members for the county. Sir Samuel's election to both parliaments was a matter of dispute: four days before the Short Parliament ended he still had not been allowed to sit, and he did not begin his work in the Long Parliament until August 1641. When war broke out in England both father and son took the side of parliament. In July 1642 Samuel was wounded in endeavouring to arrest Sir Lewis Dyve. He was present at the battle of Edgehill as captain of a troop of horse, and on 4 January 1643 was commissioned by the earl of Essex to raise a regiment of dragoons in Bedfordshire. His newly raised regiment was surprised by Prince Rupert at Chinnor, Oxfordshire, on 18 June 1643; 50 were killed and 120 taken prisoner. Luke himself was absent, but fought by John Hampden's side in the defeat at Chalgrove Field, Oxfordshire, on the same day, where he greatly distinguished himself by his courage. 'Great-spirited little Sir Samuel Luke', says a parliamentarian paper, 'so guarded himself with his short sword, that he escaped without hurt, though thrice taken prisoner, yet rescued, and those to whom he was prisoner slain' (J. Forster, 'John Pym, 1584-1643 -- John Hampden, 1594-1643', 1837, 371). On 5 July 1643 and again on 28 September Luke was thanked by parliament for his services. He became scoutmaster-general of Essex's army, assisted in the recovery of Newport Pagnell, Bedfordshire, on 29 October 1643, and became its governor when it was made a permanent garrison. 
Luke co-operated with Oliver Cromwell in the capture of Hillesdon House, Buckinghamshire, of which he sent a detailed account to the speaker. On 26 May 1644 Luke surprised Fortescue's regiment of royalist horse at Islip, Oxfordshire. As both governor and scoutmaster Luke was extremely energetic and efficient. 'This noble commander', 'Mercurius Britanicus' declared, 'watches the enemy so industriously that they eat, sleep, drink not, whisper not, but he can give us an account of their darkest proceedings' ('Mercurius Britanicus', 218; quoted in 'GM'): a claim confirmed by the journal that he maintained of his scouts' reports, covering the period 9 February 1643 to 29 March 1644. The fall of Leicester to the royalists seemed to endanger Newport, and Luke complained that he had only 600 men at his disposal to defend works requiring 2000 men to man them. 'We want all provisions,' he wrote, 'and if we escape storm we cannot hold out long' (Rushworth, 6.38). But the victory of Naseby saved Newport from attack, and on 26 June 1645 the operation of the self-denying ordinance put a term to Luke's command. On 11 January 1647 parliament ordered him to be paid $4482 13's'. 6died for arrears of pay. 
Luke was a strong presbyterian, and his time at Newport Pagnell was marked not only by his problems with an ill-paid and discontented garrison, but by his anxiety over the social and religious threat posed by sectaries. He suppressed conventicles and dismissed an officer 'for disaffection to the service and perverseness to all religious exercises' (Hill, 49). He complained that it was 'far easier to breed people up to wickedness than to godliness, especially when under profession of the latter they may with allowance practice the former', and edgily reported tales of sexual disorder. Unless he could rid the town of sectaries Luke feared that Newport Pagnell would go the way of Sodom and Gomorrah. He attempted to counter the threat with a roster of divines, regular sermons three times a week, and prayers and 'Bible' reading every morning at the changing of the guard. Matters came to a head on 15 June 1645, the day after Naseby, when Luke ordered a service of thanksgiving for the victory. Passing through the town were two New Model Army captains, the Particular Baptist preacher Paul Hobson and Richard Beaumont -- 'tailor Hobson' and 'druggist Beaumont', as Luke, who firmly believed that officers should be gentlemen, dismissed them: 'Anabaptists, who cannot consent with magistracy or government' (Hill, 50). When Hobson chose to ignore the official church parade and instead himself preached openly Luke had the two men arrested for transgressing the orders of parliament against unlicensed preaching. He thus became involved in a quarrel with their commanders, Charles Fleetwood and Sir Thomas Fairfax, and continued to pursue the matter even after he had ceded the governorship, having Hobson rearrested and sent before a parliamentary committee; his efforts succeeded only in incurring the hatred of the Independent party in the army. 
On 1 August 1647 Luke was seized by a party of soldiers on suspicion that he was raising the forces of Bedfordshire to assist the city against the army, but he was speedily released by Fairfax. On the occasion of Pride's Purge (6 December 1648) Luke was again arrested, having been readily identified as a keen supporter of the treaty of Newport, but he was set at liberty on 20 December, and no charge was brought against him. Luke took no part in public affairs during the Commonwealth and protectorate. He literally cultivated his own garden, swapping plants and cuttings with his neighbour Dorothy Osborne who described him as 'a nice florist' ('Letters of Dorothy Osborne', 46). As the Restoration approached in early 1660 he received a militia command. He was returned to the Convention parliament as MP for Bedford, but was defeated in the election the following year. In his later years he was perhaps in some financial difficulty, alienating one of his main estates, at Hawnes, Bedfordshire, to Sir George Carteret. Luke died in 1670, and was buried at Cople on 30 August. 
Luke was a very little man, and his size made him a butt for royalist satire. His reputation has suffered from the supposition that he was the original of Samuel Butler's Sir Hudibras. The key to 'Hudibras' attributed to Sir Roger L'Estrange explained that Sir Hudibras was 'Sir Samuel Luke of Bedfordshire, a self-conceited commander under Oliver Cromwell' (Butler, vol. 1). However, Butler himself said that his model was a west-country knight, and a more plausible candidate is Sir Henry Rosewell of Ford Abbey, Devon. Claims that Butler had been Luke's servant seem to rest on the original misattribution. The estimate which Luke's own party formed of his character is shown by the posts with which parliament entrusted him, and by the panegyrics of parliamentarian writers such as Josiah Ricraft, to whom 'the valiant victorious Sir Samuel Luke' was 'a true-hearted publike ingaged Covenant keeping and vertuous true-hearted English Knight' (J. Ricraft, 'A Survey of Englands Champions and Truths Faithfull Patriots', 1647, 78). Both Luke's journal and his letter-books have been published (as has his diary of the siege of Reading in 1643) and prove him a vigilant and energetic officer, and a man of sense and courage. His correspondence offers clues as to his personality: a mainstream puritan gentleman concerned with the maintenance of the social order, but also fond of fine clothes, good cheer, and good claret, who showed 'fatherly concern for the education of his son in Italy and in the Netherlands armies, and an interest in falconry which he shared with his powerful kinsman, Lord Saye and Sele' (Keeler, 'Long Parliament', 262). 


@@@@@


doc= 17168


Luke, Stephen (bap. 1763, d. 1829), physician, was born at Penzance, Cornwall, and baptized at Madron on 4 June 1763, the second son of Stephen Luke ('b'. 1727/8), of Madron, and his wife, Margaret Trewarvas. He was educated at the school of the Revd James Parker, before being apprenticed to Richard Moyle, apothecary, of Marazion, near Penzance, and he subsequently studied medicine in London and Paris for three years and became a member of the Company of Surgeons in London. While in Paris he became the pupil of the celebrated surgeon Pierre-Joseph Desault, whom he never ceased to hold in the highest esteem. 
After a short period of practice in London, Luke returned to Cornwall. He practised at Helston, where he entered into partnership with Zachary John, a surgeon apothecary, and afterwards with Isaac Heard. He married Harriet Vyvyan ('bap'. 1758?), daughter of Philip Puron Vyvyan of South Petherwin, Cornwall, probably in 1792, and in the same year he obtained the degree of MD from the University of Aberdeen. He then settled as a physician at Falmouth, where he was elected mayor in 1797. Luke was captain of the Pendennis volunteer cavalry in the same year and he was the original promoter of the Pendennis artillery volunteers. 
Luke remained at Falmouth for seventeen years, and was said to have attained a large practice and the highest reputation in the county of Cornwall. According to Munk his health had never been very robust and in 1808 he decided to leave Falmouth to enter Jesus College, Cambridge; he then moved to Edinburgh for the session 1808-9. He practised at Exeter from 1811, and about 1815 returned to Cambridge where it was said that he was instrumental in saving the life of Dr Pearce, the master of his college, who had suffered from an apoplectic attack. Having been an extra-licentiate of the Royal College of Physicians since 23 July 1806, he was admitted a licentiate of the college on 26 June 1815, and took a house in Cavendish Square, London. He graduated MB at Cambridge later in 1815 and MD in 1821. In 1828 he was made physician-extraordinary to George IV. 
Luke was said to be remarkable for his prompt and accurate perception of the seat and cause of disease, imparting a boldness and decisiveness of action that was generally successful. He was well known for his gentlemanly manners and his tenderness and solicitude in the sick room. He also contributed an essay on nitrous acid in dropsy to Thomas Beddoes's 'Contributions to Physical and Medical Knowledge' (1799), detailing a single case of cirrhosis of the liver in which, after tapping, nitrous acid was of use as a diuretic; and he added 'Observations on the diseases of Cornwall' to Richard Polwhele's 'History of Cornwall' (1806). 
Luke died at his house in Cavendish Square, London, on 30 March 1829. 


@@@@@


doc= 17169


Lukin, Henry (1628-1719), clergyman and ejected minister, was born on 1 January 1628 in Great Baddow, Essex. He was the younger son of Henry Lukin and his second wife, Hannah. After studying at Mansfield School (under Halliwell) he went to Christ's College, Cambridge (8 July 1645), where he joined his elder brother William (admitted 1641). He was ordained and adopted puritanism, then became rector of Chipping Ongar, Essex, on 23 March 1659. Soon afterwards he resigned and perhaps was associated with Lindsell, a parish 3 miles from Great Dunmow, but without benefice or cure. At the Restoration he was in France, probably as tutor for about three years with Sir William Masham, second baronet, of High Laver, Essex. He was still abroad at the passing of the 'Act of Uniformity' (1662) and, according to Calamy, was 'silenced... tho' not ejected'. In 1663, after Masham died, Lukin returned to England and lived for many years with Mrs Masham (apparently Sir William's mother, Elizabeth) of Matching Hall, near which he preached regularly. Under Charles II's declaration of indulgence Lukin was licensed a Congregationalist on 11 April 1672. Calamy described him as a 'man of great note and eminence... a judicious and learned divine' ('Nonconformist's Memorial', 1.529-30). 
Most of Lukin's written works were learned but practical devotional guides or instructional manuals for his friends and hearers. 'The Practice of Godliness' (1658; 3rd edn, 1690), dedicated to Mrs Masham, gave brief rules directing Christians how to keep their hearts holy and how to order their behaviour. 'An Introduction to the Holy Scripture' (1669) exhaustively catalogued the types of figurative language in the 'Bible', showed readers how to interpret and apply their meanings to salvation and obedience, and encouraged them to claim God's promises revealed in the text. 'The Interest of the Spirit in Prayer' (1674) was a classically puritan work with its emphases on: the role of the Holy Spirit, practical moral application, 'experimental' knowledge of the Christian graces, genuine piety instead of formalism, God's grace and providence, and man's impotence and total dependence on God. In 'The Chief Interest of Man' (1665; 3rd edn, 1718), Lukin reflected on his cosmopolitan experiences, and used biblical citations, historical examples, and practical insights to argue the benefits of religion for building strong societies. Identifying Christianity as the religion best fitted to do this because it possessed the greatest truth he called for unity among Christians in moral living: 'let us pray like Calvinists, endeavour like Arminians, act like Legalists, hope like Antinomians; be Papists in our works, Protestants in our Faith' (pp. 188-9). This was an uncommonly latitudinarian perspective for a Congregationalist of his day. In 1705 Simon Priest produced a Latin translation of this entitled 'Lucrum hominis praecipuum, sive, De religione tractatus'. Lukin's 'A Remedy Against Spiritual Troubles' (1694) was a practical theological discourse derived from sermons and transcribed for a friend to guide him from faith to assurance and holiness. Lukin's other major works were 'The Life of Faith' and 'A Discourse of Right Judgment', both published in 1660. 
Lukin was also a key source of information about the ejected dissenting ministers of Essex, which Edmund Calamy was gathering for inclusion in his 'Abridgment of Mr. Baxter's 'History'' (1702). Through the Masham family Lukin became a close friend of the philosopher John Locke, who lived with Sir Francis Masham, the third baronet, and his wife, Damaris, at Otes, Essex, from 1691 until his death in 1704, and supposedly was with him when he died. Lukin died on 13 September 1719 at Matching Green, Essex. Afterwards Lauchlan Ross of Abbots Roothing and George Wiggett of Hatfield Heath supplied the ministry at Matching Green every Sunday morning. Their successors continued this until 1743, when George Ross became the minister there. Shortly after this Ross left the neighbourhood, the congregation dispersed, and the chapel was closed. 


@@@@@


doc= 17170


Lukin, Lionel (1742-1834), lifeboat designer, was born at Dunmow, Essex, on 18 May 1742, the youngest son of William Lukin, of Blatches, Little Dunmow, and Anne, daughter of James Stokes. His father belonged to an old Essex family, one of his ancestors being Henry Lukyn (1586-1630), who is described by Anthony Wood as a mathematician, and who is mentioned by Thoroton in his 'History of Nottinghamshire' as having 'dwelt before the wars at South Holme' (369). On his mother's side he was descended from a Lionel Lane, one of Blake's admirals. 
Lukin was for many years a fashionable London coach builder in Long Acre. He became a member of the Coachmakers' Company in 1767, and did not finally retire from business until 1824. He was twice married, and with his first wife, born Walker, and widow of Henry Gilder of Dunmow, had a daughter, and a son of the same name, who patented several inventions, and died in 1839. Lukin appears to have been a man with a taste for science and possessed of a fertile mechanical mind. 
Being a personal favourite of the prince regent and connected with William Windham, secretary of state for war and the colonies, Lukin had many opportunities to bring some of his inventions to public attention. Among these was an 'unsubmergible' boat. He began by making certain alterations to a Norway yawl which he purchased in 1784, the efficacy of which he tested as far as was practicable in the River Thames. He obtained a patent in 1785 for his invention, by which 'boats and small vessels... will neither overset in violent gales or sudden bursts of wind, nor sink if by any accident filled with water' (patent no. 1502, 1785). The patent specification explained that this was to be accomplished by fitting 'to the outsides of vessels... projecting gunnells sloping from the top of the common gunnell in a faint curve towards the water... and from the extreme projection... returning to the side in a faint curve at a suitable height above the water-line. The projections are very small at the stem and stern, and increase gradually to the dimensions required. (ibid.)' The specification further provided that ports of the inside of the boat should be filled up with airtight and watertight compartments or with cork or other light material that would repel water, whereby 'the boat or vessel will be much lighter than any body of water it must displace' (ibid.) Lukin submitted his invention to the prince of Wales, the dukes of Portland and Northumberland, Admiral Sir Robert King, Admiral Schank, and Admiral Lord Howe, who gave him strong encouragement but no official support. 
Lukin's first boat, the 'Experiment', was tested by a Ramsgate pilot but, after crossing the channel several times in rough weather, the boat disappeared -- it may have been confiscated in a continental port. His second boat, the 'Witch', was tested by Sir Sydney Smith and other naval officers, and its qualities were publicly displayed at Margate. But Lukin had to contend with seafaring prejudices, and his 'unsubmergible boats', though they attracted attention, were in little demand. Apart from one built for the Bamborough Charity, only four were ordered, one of which proved very useful at Lowestoft. 
In 1790 Lukin published a description of his lifeboat, with scale-drawings. Some time after the date of Lukin's patent a lifeboat was built (not patented) by Henry Greathead, who was rewarded with a parliamentary grant. Lukin declared that Greathead's boat was in general built according to the principles set out in his patent, and had no additional safety features. In 1806 a Mr Hailes put forward the claims of Wouldham of Newcastle as an inventor of lifeboats, and Lukin wrote three letters in 1806 in the 'Gentleman's Magazine', in which he set out his claims to priority. These he afterwards published as a pamphlet dedicated to the prince of Wales, entitled 'The Invention, Principles of Construction, and Uses of Unimmergible Boats' (1806). 
Lukin also invented a raft for rescuing persons from under ice, which he presented to the Royal Humane Society, and an adjustable reclining bed for patients, which he presented to various infirmaries. He invented a rain gauge, and kept a daily record of meteorological observations for many years until his sight failed in 1824. He died on 16 February 1834 at Hythe, Kent. A headstone, marking his grave in the parish churchyard, described him as the 'inventor of the lifeboat principle.' A memorial window in the local parish church was unveiled on 3 October 1892. 


@@@@@


doc= 17171


Lulach (d. 1058), king of Scots, was the son of Gille Comgain mac Mail Brigte (died 1032), king of Moray from 1029, and Gruoch, who was the daughter of Boite mac Cinaeda and who subsequently married Macbeth. King-lists of the twelfth and thirteenth centuries describe him as 'fatuus' ('stupid') or 'infelix' ('unlucky'). He became king on Macbeth's death on 15 August 1057. It is usually argued that, despite defeat against Malcolm Canmore, son of Duncan I, Macbeth's followers were still able to seize the kingship for Lulach ahead of Malcolm. Lulach was soon defeated and killed 'by treachery' by Malcolm on 17 March 1058, at Essie, near Rhynie, in Strathbogie (in what is now Aberdeenshire). An alternative scenario, however, is that Lulach and Malcolm had been allies against Macbeth, who may have been responsible for the deaths of both their fathers. A late (and debatable) source says Lulach was buried on Iona. He had a son, Mael Snechta (died 1085), king of Moray until dispossessed by Malcolm Canmore in 1078, and an unnamed daughter, whose son Angus (Oengus) was king of Moray until his death at the battle of Stracathro in 1130. 


@@@@@


doc= 17172


Lumby, Joseph Rawson (1831-1895), author and Church of England clergyman, the only son of John Lumby (1799/1800-1864), a joiner, and his first wife, Sarah (died 1844), was born at Stanningley, near Leeds, on 18 July 1831. On 2 August 1841 he was admitted to Leeds grammar school and in March 1848 he left to become master of a school at Meanwood, a village soon to be absorbed in Leeds, where his ability attracted attention. He was encouraged to attend university, and in October 1854 he entered Magdalene College, Cambridge; in the following year he was elected to a Milner close scholarship. In 1858 he graduated BA, being bracketed ninth in the first class of the classical tripos, and was ordained in the following year. He was awarded an MA in 1861, a BD in 1873, and a DD in 1879. 
Within a few months of graduation Lumby was made Dennis fellow of his college, and began to take pupils. He forfeited his fellowship on his marriage on 11 April 1859 to Susanna Mary Parsons (died 1873) of Darlington. In 1860 he gained the Crosse theological scholarship, the chaplaincy of Magdalene, and the curacy of Girton. In the following year he won the Tyrwhitt Hebrew scholarship, and was appointed classical lecturer at Queens' College. In 1873 his name was added to the list of the Old Testament Revision Company; when the 'Old Testament' was completed, he worked with equal enthusiasm on the revision of the 'Apocrypha', just living to see the publication of the latter work. In 1874, then a widower after the death of his first wife in May 1873, he was chosen fellow and dean of St Catharine's College, Cambridge; having resigned his curacy at Girton he became curate of St Mark's, Newnham. In the following year he was appointed, on the nomination of Trinity Hall, to the non-stipendiary cure of St Edward's, Cambridge, where his sermons were much appreciated by undergraduates. In 1879 he was elected to the Norrisian professorship of divinity; he was also Lady Margaret preacher for that year. Having vacated his fellowship at St Catharine's because of his second marriage -- on 16 June 1880 to Luise Theodore Ernestine Albertine Dahlmann (1856/7-1915), second daughter of a German lawyer -- he was appointed to a professorial fellowship in that college in 1886. In 1887 he was made prebendary of Wetwang in the cathedral church of York, and acted as examining chaplain to the archbishop of York and the bishop of Carlisle. On the death of F. J. A. Hort in 1892 he was unanimously chosen to succeed him as Lady Margaret professor of divinity. After an illness of several months he died at Merton House, Grantchester, near Cambridge, on 21 November 1895, leaving a large family. He was buried on 25 November in Grantchester parish church. 
Lumby habitually rose early and worked diligently. H. J. Roby, who taught him, remembered him as 'of all my pupils the one who made the most evident progress from day to day', who winced at criticism but did not repeat mistakes ('Cambridge Review', 23 Jan 1896, 144). Anecdotes about him later entered the folklore of the university, where his omnivorous reading and capacious memory for recondite and often trivial information were a source of wonder and amusement. A large and powerful man, he was reputedly able to twist pokers. He was kindly but, some thought, deficient in humour. The famous observation (attached to more than one scholar, before and since) 'Lumby is omniscient and omnipotent but (thank Heaven!) not omnipresent' and the verses 'I heard the voice of Lumby say' (repeated in full in Venn's 'Alumni Cantabrigienses') are attributed to A. W. Spratt of St Catharine's. 
Lumby's literary career, especially as editor and annotator, was unflagging and wide-ranging. He often had several works, large and small, in preparation and others at press, chiefly in the fields of biblical scholarship and medieval English literature and history. He was co-editor of the 'Cambridge Bible for Schools' series and a contributor to the 'Speaker's Commentary', the 'Expositor's Bible', the 'Cambridge Companion to the Bible', and the ninth edition of the 'Encyclopaedia Britannica'. Among his other works were editions of More's 'Utopia' (1879) and 'History of Richard III' (1883), Cowley's 'Essays' (1887), a 'History of the Creeds' (1873), 'A Popular Introduction to the New Testament' (1883), sermons, and contributions to learned journals. A fairly full list of his publications is included in the 'Dictionary of National Biography'. 
But Lumby attempted too much: although he was active in the Early English Text Society from its beginning, his editions of Old and Middle English texts such as 'Be domes daege' (1876) and 'Ratis Raving' (1867) were indifferent and soon superseded. He stood unsuccessfully against Walter Skeat for the new professorship of Anglo-Saxon in 1878. Above all, the poor reputation of what could have been a worthy memorial, nine large (and to him lucrative) volumes for the 'Rolls Series', has most damaged his memory. He edited seven volumes of Ranulf Higden's 'Polychronicon' (1871-86), in which some errors and omissions misled scholars badly, and his edition of the 'Chronicon' of Henry Knighton (1889-95) was one of the worst of the whole enterprise, causing James Tait to remark that he 'lacked much of the elementary equipment of an editor of a medieval chronicle' (Tait, 569). 


@@@@@


doc= 17173


Lumisden, Andrew (1720-1801), Jacobite politician and antiquary, was the only son of William Lumisden (1688-1756), an Edinburgh law agent and burgess, and Mary (died 1755), daughter of Robert Bruce, a merchant of the same city; and the grandson of another Andrew Lumisden, the nonjuring bishop of Edinburgh (1654-1733). Born into a family with marked Jacobite sympathies, he was educated for a career in the law, following both the precedent of his father and the traditional path for a Scottish gentleman into the respectable professions. However, the arrival in September 1745 of the highland army into Edinburgh prompted a dramatic break with his former existence. Having been deprived of the services of his original secretary, Prince Charles Edward, the Young Pretender, had asked Alexander Cunningham to fill the vacancy. Though refusing the offer himself, Cunningham warmly recommended Lumisden -- his second cousin -- as an individual who would ideally suit the post. Thereafter Lumisden served as the under-secretary and the first clerk of the treasury to the Young Pretender throughout the campaign of 1745-6. He accompanied the army into England, supplied money for its current expenses, and left detailed and graphic manuscript accounts of the battles of Prestonpans, Falkirk, and Culloden, at which he was present (now in NL Scot., MS 279). On the eve of the battle of Culloden (15 April 1746) special orders were given to ensure his safety, as he carried with him 'the sinews of war' (Dennistoun, 1.85), and following the defeat he fled the field, having first been entrusted with the safe keeping of the prince's seal. He obeyed the order to rendezvous with the other remnants of the Jacobite army at Ruthven on 17 April, only to hear that the Young Pretender had advised his followers to disband and to 'Let every man seek his own safety the best way he can' (Youngson, 261). 
As a consequence of this Lumisden spent the next four months wandering the highlands as a hunted fugitive, his importance to the authorities underlined by his inclusion in the act of attainder issued by the Hanoverian government. He returned to Edinburgh heavily disguised as a lady's servant: his yellow hair hidden beneath a black wig and his eyebrows corked to match. Taking refuge at his father's house, he remained hidden in Edinburgh until October 1746, when, having assumed the dress and manner of a poor schoolteacher, he made the acquaintance of a king's messenger and with 'happy audacity' journeyed to London under his protection (H. W. Lumsden, 106). In contrast to his later pursuit of a quiet scholarly life, at this point he seems to have delighted in his various disguises -- passing his old schoolmates by unnoticed in the streets of Edinburgh and slipping into Newgate gaol so that he might visit his friends who had been captured after the failure of the rising. For this latter escapade his father remarked that he truly deserved to be hanged for jeopardizing himself in such a rash and foolish manner. Taking a boat at Tower stairs, he finally made his escape to the continent and journeyed to Paris via Rouen. 
From his place of exile Lumisden maintained a lively correspondence with his family, written in various sorts of sympathetic ink, including milk and water, in order to preserve its secrecy. However, both the novelty of life in a foreign land and his early optimism about his prospects soon evaporated under the grim realities of poverty and unemployment. His application for a commission in Lochiel's regiment was submitted late, and his fluent command of the French language did not, as he had hoped, ensure him a place in a prominent mercantile company. His father's unwillingness to provide credit for his private trading schemes spelt the end of his dreams of financial independence, and he turned instead to the exiled Jacobite court as his primary means of subsistence. Unable to afford the rent in Paris he returned to Rouen, but on the strength of favourable references provided by the officials of the Scots College he secured an annual pension of 600 livres in June 1749. Before the end of that year he had travelled to Rome in the hope of securing employment in the service of the Old Pretender, but had to wait another year to acquire the post of his assistant secretary, working under the direction of James Edgar. On assuming his duties he began to keep scrupulous notes of his correspondence, and his letter-books for the period 1751-73 provide a vital source for reconstructing the diplomatic and social life of the exiled court during those years. 
Lumisden distinguished himself as a competent and dutiful servant, concerned above all with the promotion of a noble and seemly image for the leadership of the Jacobite movement. In the winter of 1758-9 he was dispatched on a secret mission through France and the Italian states to drum up support for a projected French raid upon the coast of England. In Paris he attempted to heal the rift between the Old Pretender and his son, and to urge Charles Edward to reconcile himself to the French crown. After the death of Edgar in September 1764 he became the secretary of state to the Jacobite court. In this capacity he served the Old Pretender faithfully until the latter's death in January 1766 and officiated at his funeral, discharging his last duty to his master by placing three seals in his coffin and seeing that it was closed up. 
Though Lumisden was there to greet Charles Edward upon his entry into Rome on 23 January 1766, and had been quick to congratulate him on his accession to the 'throne', he enjoyed none of the rapport that he had had with his late father. The hero worship which had characterized his accounts of the prince's role in the battles of the 'Forty-Five had rapidly dissipated during his years of exile, and his letters of the 1750s and 1760s speak all too often of a thinly veiled contempt for his new royal master. In particular he strongly disapproved of the prince's drinking and womanizing, and he joined forces with Cardinal Henry Stuart and John Waters, the Parisian banker and factor for the exiled court, to exert pressure on Clementine Walkinshaw to sign a declaration, dated 9 March 1767, that she had never been married to the Young Pretender. It seems likely that Lumisden had threatened her with the severance of her pension if she did not comply with their demands. 
In this light, Lumisden's dismissal by the Young Pretender on 8 December 1768 did not come as a surprise, but formed part of a dramatic incident none the less. After an evening witnessing the prince's heavy drinking at the dining table, a quarrel arose as Lumisden and his friends refused to accompany their master to an oratorio on the grounds that he was too hopelessly drunk to appear in public. Undaunted, Charles Edward staggered out to his coach commanding that they follow him, but when they refused he dismissed them all on the spot. Within two days the prince had thought better of his rash decision and commanded Lumisden to return to his duties. However, on the advice of Cardinal Henry Stuart, Lumisden had resolved to quit his service as secretary of state. He had long complained of Rome's hot climate and mosquitoes, and been shunned by many of the local elites on the grounds of his staunch protestantism. 
From 1769 to 1773 Lumisden resided in Paris and was visited by many British tourists and gentlemen on the grand tour. From 1772 he discontinued his practice of writing an annual letter to the Stuart princes and increasingly distanced himself from their cause. This did much to hasten the raising and acceptance of a petition to allow him to revisit his native land (dated 15 February 1773), which was signed by forty-five of the most distinguished men in Edinburgh society, including David Hume and eight members of the judiciary. Lumisden arrived back in Edinburgh in June and chose to divide his time between Scotland, Paris, and Bath. While in Paris he put himself at great pains to buy up a collection of rare books for George, prince of Wales, which greatly helped to secure him a full pardon from the British government in 1778. 
A member of the royal and antiquaries' societies of Edinburgh, Lumisden corresponded with Joseph Banks, James Boswell, Adam Smith, and David Hume. In 1797 he published his 'Remarks on the Antiquities of Rome and its Environs', the product of almost forty years of intermittent research, which contained a thorough description of those classical remains still extant in the city, as well as copious engraved illustrations. The book was well received and ran to a second edition in 1812. His last years were spent in Edinburgh, sharing apartments with another elderly bachelor, John McGowan, first in Luckenbooths -- which had gained a reputation for its literary salons -- and then in the more fashionable new developments of Princes Street. Lumisden was renowned as a popular and sociable figure in Edinburgh society, much in demand as a dinner guest. On Christmas night 1801 he went to bed in good health, but was seized by a sudden fit of apoplexy at some point in the early hours of the morning and was found dead upon the floor the following day. Writing in 1855, James Dennistoun mentioned that his copious anecdotes and stories were still fondly remembered by those that knew him (Dennistoun, 2.274). Distinguished for his contemporaries by his singularly old-fashioned, 'ancien regime' manners and 'natural mildness of disposition' ('Scots Magazine', 182), Lumisden, it should not be forgotten, was also committed to the absolute necessity of divine-right monarchy, with an almost total distrust of democratic institutions, and manifested a fierce and brutal antisemitism in many of his writings (Dennistoun, 1.174; A. Lumisden, 'Remarks on the Antiquities of Rome', 299). 


@@@@@


doc= 17174


Lumley, Benjamin (1811/12-1875), opera manager and author, was the son of Louis Levy, a Jewish merchant of Canada, who died in London about 1831. Benjamin Levy assumed the name Lumley early in life. After being educated at King Edward's School at Birmingham, he was admitted a solicitor in London in 1832. Within a few years he was solicitor to the Herne Bay Steam Packet Company and had separate chambers as a parliamentary agent. He was studying for the bar when, in 1835-6, Pierre-Francois Laporte, manager of Her Majesty's Theatre, employed him first on legal and then on financial business. For five years he worked as Laporte's assistant, and after the latter's death (on 25 September 1841) he took over as manager from 1842. Her Majesty's Theatre had practically been the sole home of Italian opera since its establishment in England. When Lumley took over, the repertory was all Italian as to language and largely Italian in provenance. Even more than in Italy the genre was dominated by virtuoso singers, in particular by the ''Puritani' quartet' of Giulia Grisi, G. B. Rubini (G. M. Mario soon stepping into his place), Antonio Tamburini, and Luigi Lablache, who together with Fanny Tacchinardi-Persiani were widely known as 'la vieille garde'. Lumley was later blamed by J. E. Cox for having alienated these remarkable artists by choosing to show himself 'sole master... ostensibly and positively'; he himself gloried in his 'policy of silence and reserve' and enjoyed being known as 'l'homme mysterieux'. There is no sign that he was opposing the star system in general in the name of ensemble. He began by dropping Tamburini, with whom the management was already in dispute. In 1844 he made no effort to retain Persiani; a year later he seemed to show greater interest in ballet by setting up the famous 'Pas de quatre' with Marie Taglioni, Carlotta Grisi, Fanny Cerrito, and Lucille Grahn. In 1846 he refused the demand of Michael Costa, the conductor, to be allowed to accept the conductorship of the Philharmonic Society's orchestra. Costa may have had other reasons for discontent -- his own music was not being performed often enough. He seceded, with Grisi, Mario, and the greater part of his fine orchestra, to the new Royal Italian Opera House at Covent Garden in 1847. Lablache alone remained faithful to Lumley. 
Up to 1847 Lumley's management met with brilliant success. Among contemporary critics, often partisan, some credited him with 'revolutionizing' a shabby system, but H. F. Chorley -- always hostile -- thought Costa's discipline had educated the audience to expect 'the entire performance... to be the real object of interest', and, once Costa left, Lumley's reliance on singers brought 'systematic deterioration'. Lumley's cult of ballet was similarly controversial. Besides the four ballerinas already named, he engaged Fanny Elssler and the male dancers Perrot and St Leon, altogether an epitome of Romantic ballet. His success enabled him in 1845 to acquire the lease of Her Majesty's. 
The opening of the rival opera house in 1847 imperilled Lumley's position. He replaced Costa with Michael Balfe and, for the 1847 season, engaged Jenny Lind, paying for her to break a previous contract and gradually overcoming her scruples. He also secured a new opera from the young Verdi ('I masnadieri', a relative failure); an attempt to procure one from the more prestigious Mendelssohn foundered. From Lind's opening performance on 4 May, as Alice in Meyerbeer's 'Robert le diable', she exerted an extraordinary spell over the English public and temporarily saved Lumley from disaster. At the end of her third season at Her Majesty's, in 1849, she retired from the stage, and Lumley's financial embarrassment thenceforth grew rapidly. Far from relying on her alone, he engaged some of the leading Italian singers of the day, as well as the Germans Henriette Sontag and Sophie Cruvelli, who made a considerable impression; but, Marietta Alboni apart, his Italians failed to counter the prestige of Grisi and Mario, and Chorley may have been right in denouncing these seasons as undisciplined 'sham'. Lumley attempted to keep up their social prestige by throwing lavish parties at his riverside house in Fulham, at which artists mingled with 'society'. He also took the classic gambler's step of throwing good money after bad by taking on, from 1850, the winter season at the Theatre Italien in Paris; theoretically this fitted in with the London spring season, but in practice it was difficult to supervise both. Though subsidized, the Paris seasons suffered from political disturbances, cripplingly so after the December 1851 'coup d'etat'. Lumley lost at least $14,400. In 1852 it is clear even from his disingenuous memoirs ('Reminiscences of the Opera', 1864) that he was failing to pay his artists both in London and in Paris; they were leaving or, like Johanna Wagner, turning to the rival Covent Garden management (Lumley won the resulting lawsuit, but no damages). Various devices -- a subscribers' committee, formed to safeguard the wages of permanent staff, and an attempt at limited liability through an act of parliament -- failed. Lumley fled to Paris. Her Majesty's remained closed from 1853 to 1856. In the latter year the burning of Covent Garden led Lord Ward (later earl of Dudley) to reopen Her Majesty's. He bought up Lumley's debts and his lease and reinstalled him as manager and sub-lessee. Until 1858 Lumley secured some good singers, among them Alboni, Giuglini, and the young Therese Tietjens; his greatest draw was Marietta Piccolomini, less a singer than a personality for whom there was a craze. The commercial panic of 1857, however, influenced the receipts; it is again clear, between the lines of Lumley's account, that he owed Lord Ward rent, as well as earlier debts, and on 10 August 1858 he had to give up his sub-lease. In 1863, three benefit performances were given at Her Majesty's on his behalf. 
The few new works put on under Lumley's management included, besides Verdi's, Halevy's 'La tempesta', loosely based on Shakespeare and notable chiefly for Lablache's Caliban. Operas by Costa and Sigismond Thalberg failed. The usual repertory of Bellini, Donizetti, and early Verdi (eight of whose works Lumley introduced to London) was supplemented with a little French grand opera by Meyerbeer and Auber. 
Lumley perhaps did not deserve the description (by the singer Gilbert-Louis Duprez, 'Souvenirs d'un chanteur', 1880, 202) 'faiseur [crook or charlatan] habile et audacieux', but he seems to have left an ambiguous impression which his memoirs do not dispel. 
After resigning Her Majesty's Theatre, he returned to the practice of law, and wrote several books. In 1838 he had published a standard book on 'Parliamentary Practice on Passing Private Bills'. In 1862 appeared, published anonymously, a work of fiction, 'Sirenia', followed in 1873 by 'Another World, or, Fragments from the Star City of Montallayah by Hermes'; both were experiments in what would later be called science fiction. 'Another World' reached a third edition within a year. Lumley also published a pamphlet (1863) about his legal and financial disputes with Lord Dudley. He died, aged sixty-three and unmarried, at his home, 8 Kensington Crescent, London, on 17 March 1875, and was buried at West Ham. 


@@@@@


doc= 17175


Lumley, George, third Baron Lumley (d. 1507), nobleman, was the eldest son and heir of Thomas, second Baron Lumley, and Margaret, daughter of Sir James Harrington. Forty years old and more at his father's death in 1485, he received licence for entry into his inheritance on 12 May 1486. Following an early visit to Newcastle, in the wake of his victory at Towton in March 1461, Edward IV entrusted the defence of Tynemouth Castle to Lumley and a garrison of forty men; even with a reduced force of twenty-four from September he managed to hold this northern fortress until 11 January 1462. On 13 November 1461 he was named a commissioner to array men in the county of Northumberland for defence against Henry VI, Margaret of Anjou, and their adherents, and the king's enemies in Scotland. Lumley also held office as sheriff of the county from November 1461 to November 1463. Significantly, in June 1464, he was excused payment of arrears arising out of his shrievalty, partly because the devastation wrought by the king's rebels and traitors had been so great that he had not been able to collect what was due, and partly because he had resisted them at great expense to himself. In the North Riding of Yorkshire he was justice of the peace from May 1461 to June 1464, a commissioner to arrest and imprison rebels there in May 1461, and, jointly with his father, became constable of Scarborough Castle on 14 December 1461. 
Elected member of parliament for Northumberland on 23 April 1467 Lumley also served as deputy sheriff of Northumberland under John Neville, earl of Northumberland, in the later 1460s and became sheriff of Durham and Sedbergh in 1471. During the 1470s, following Edward IV's decision to entrust the rule of the north to his brother, Lumley entered the service of Richard, duke of Gloucester. In 1480-81, at a time when the threat from Scotland was once more manifesting itself strongly, he became lord lieutenant of the county of Northumberland; in 1482 he took part in a major expedition into Scotland led by Richard of Gloucester; and, for his services against the Scots, he was created a knight-banneret. Although probably among the northerners who supported Richard III at the battle of Bosworth he rapidly entered the service of Henry VII, appearing on a commission as early as 25 September 1485 to array men in the northern counties in readiness for a Scottish invasion. In April 1486 he attended on the new king during his first northern progress; in 1497 he took part in an expedition against the Scots led by Thomas Howard, earl of Surrey; and when, in 1503, Henry VII's daughter Margaret married James IV of Scotland, he and his son were among those who escorted her from Darlington to the Scottish border. 
Lumley married Elizabeth, daughter and heir of Roger Thornton, a wealthy merchant of Newcastle, and granddaughter of John, Lord Greystoke: as a result he seems to have obtained possession of estates including Ludworth and the Isle, co. Durham, and Witton, in Northumberland. Traditionally he is said to have married Elizabeth, bastard daughter of Edward IV, but there is no reliable evidence for this. Lumley died on 13 November 1507 and was buried at Chester-le-Street. Thomas Lumley, his son and heir, had predeceased him and, consequently, in his will George Lumley left his estates in trust for his grandson Richard. 


@@@@@


doc= 17176


George Lumley (d. 1537), rebel, had his marriage settled with Jane (died in or after 1537), second daughter and coheir of Sir Richard Knightley of Upton and Fawsley, Northamptonshire, and his wife, Joan, on 20 May 1524. The couple were married before 1533 and had one son, John Lumley, and two daughters, Jane and Barbara. George Lumley became involved in the second phase of the Pilgrimage of Grace, led by Sir Francis Bigod in January 1537. He participated, with 400 men, in the capture of Scarborough, North Riding of Yorkshire, which the rebels held for several days. He gave himself up on 20 January. As a result of this activity he was attainted and found guilty of high treason on 27 May. He wrote to his wife before his execution, 'good mother and natural to my three children, to whom I give God's blessing and mine', asking her to teach his heir to be a faithful servant to the king and a good Christian (Milner, 30). He was hanged, drawn, and quartered at Tyburn on 2 June and buried in the Crutched Friars, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 17177


Lumley, Henry (c.1658-1722), army officer, was the second son of John Lumley, whose burial is recorded for 10 October 1658. Henry Lumley, however, was described as in his sixty-third year at the time of his death, on 18 October 1722. His mother was Mary, daughter of Sir Henry Compton, and his elder brother Richard Lumley, first earl of Scarbrough. He was probably raised a Roman Catholic, and may have converted to protestantism in 1687. On 13 June 1685 he had attained the rank of captain in the Queen's regiment of horse (later 1st dragoon guards), and served with it throughout the wars of William III and Anne, gaining a high reputation for courage. When Sir John Lanier, the colonel of the Queen's Horse, was killed at Steenkerke in 1692, Lumley was made colonel (10 August) in his stead, and in February 1693 he was promoted brigadier-general. He was at Neerwinden and Landen in 1693, covering the retreat on 19 July, and saving William III from capture by the enemy. In 1695 he was at the siege of Namur. On 1 January 1696 he became major-general. After the treaty of Ryswick (1697) he returned to England, and his regiment, though reduced, was one of those which were not disbanded in February 1699. Lumley married, first, Elizabeth Thimbleby of Lincolnshire, and, second, Anne, daughter of Sir William Wiseman of Great Canfield Hall, Essex. A daughter, Frances, by his second marriage, died in 1719. 
Lumley was elected MP for Sussex in 1701 and 1702, and for Arundel in 1715 in his brother's interest. On 27 February 1702 he embarked at Woolwich for the campaign in Flanders, and was promoted lieutenant-general on 11 February 1703. He became governor of Jersey in 1703, and in 1710 he was given the office for life, on the recommendation of Marlborough; he never visited the island, although he was very attentive to the interests of the inhabitants in London. In July 1704 he took part in the bloody assault on the Schellenberg and with the horse prevented some of the young recruits from running away. At Blenheim he was on the left wing, and he afterwards fought at Ramillies, Oudenarde, and Malplaquet. On 30 January 1711 he was promoted full general. In 1717 he resigned the command of his regiment, and died on 18 October 1722. He was buried in the church at Sawbridgeworth in Hertfordshire, where there is an inscription to his memory. 


@@@@@


doc= 17178


Lumley, John, fifth Baron Lumley (b. in or before 1492, d. 1545), landowner and rebel, of Lumley, co. Durham, was born in or before 1492, being at least eighteen in 1510. He was the son and heir of Richard Lumley, fourth Baron Lumley ('b'. in or before 1477, died 1510), landowner, of Lumley, co. Durham, and his wife, Anne (died 1530), daughter of Sir John Conyers, of Hornby, North Riding of Yorkshire, and his wife, Alice. He succeeded his father, as fifth Baron Lumley, in May 1510 and received his first summons to parliament on 23 November 1514. Surprisingly, he did not take livery of his lands until 18 July 1515. 
From his youth, Lumley followed the traditional chivalric ideals of the nobility. Indeed, members of his family aspired to the crusading values associated with the cult of St George. As such, Lumley participated in several military campaigns during the early years of Henry VIII's reign. He distinguished himself at the battle of Flodden on 9 September 1513 and was knighted on the field by Thomas Howard, earl of Surrey. In 1519 he participated in a raid to destroy fortresses in Scotland and was later involved in the Scottish campaign of 1522-3, where he was mentioned in reports from the commander. More spectacularly, in June 1520 he accompanied Henry to France and was present at the Field of Cloth of Gold. In addition to his military exploits, Lumley participated in the administration of co. Durham, serving as JP. However, his relations with the early Tudor bishops of Durham were strained. In 1508 his father and he had been appointed, jointly, to the office of chief forester of Weardale, a position which had been held, in hereditary succession, by members of the Lumley family since 1436. Lumley's period of tenure was, however, punctuated by disputes with the episcopal administration, and his involvement in the Pilgrimage of Grace in 1536-7 signalled the end of the family's long-standing connection with the office. The office of coroner of Chester Ward, which had likewise been in the family for several generations, was also granted to others. Dissatisfaction at the erosion of his traditional position within Durham society may well have been a factor in his later decision to rebel against the crown. 
On 13 July 1530 Lumley signed the petition from the House of Lords calling on Clement VII to consent to the king's request for a divorce. He felt sufficiently at odds with royal policy in the north by the autumn of 1536 to take a rebel stance in the Pilgrimage of Grace. His Catholicism was probably a strong motivating factor too. As with many of the aristocratic pilgrims, Lumley claimed that he had been coerced into joining the revolt. He had been ordered by the king to raise 100 men to suppress the revolt. Instead, he played a leading role in it, adopting, in the process, an uncompromisingly hard-line approach in terms of rebel demands. Despite this, he came, subsequently, to accept the terms of the peace agreement, as one of their chief negotiators, drawn up at Doncaster in early December. While Lord Lumley avoided further involvement in the revolt, his eldest son and heir, George Lumley ['see below'] of Thwing in the East Riding of Yorkshire, was not so fortunate. 
During the closing years of his life Lord Lumley suffered poor health, although he continued to play some part in public life, being appointed JP for the North Riding in 1539 and 1540. He was also summoned to sit in the parliament which met in January 1541. He concerned himself with local affairs and his estates during the last years. He died between 23 November and 16 December 1545 and was buried at Guisborough Priory, not far from his North Riding manor of Kilton. He had married Joan (died in or after 1545), daughter of Henry Le Scrope, seventh Baron Scrope of Bolton, and his second wife, Mabel or Margaret. They had two sons, George and Percival Lumley. The few details about Percival are contained in the family papers; he married Elizabeth Hussey in 1543. Upon Lord Lumley's death his peerage was forfeited as a result of his heir's attainder. The Lumley estates, however, were settled upon his grandson, John Lumley, first Baron Lumley (c.1533-1609), the son and heir of George Lumley. In 1547 John Lumley successfully petitioned for the restoration of the barony. 




@@@@@


doc= 17179


Lumley, John, first Baron Lumley (c.1533-1609), collector and conspirator, was the only son of George Lumley (d. 1537) ['see under 'Lumley, John, fifth Baron Lumley (b. in or before 1492, d. 1545)], conspirator, of Thwing, East Riding of Yorkshire, and his wife, Jane (died in or after 1537), second daughter and coheir of Sir Richard Knightley of Upton, Northamptonshire. His father was executed for high treason on 2 June 1537 for his part in the Pilgrimage of Grace. Lumley inherited the family estates around Durham on the death of his grandfather John Lumley, fifth Baron Lumley (b. in or before 1492, d. 1545), by virtue of a settlement made after his father's attainder. He inherited extensive estates and was the greatest coal owner among the English aristocracy, obtaining a charter of incorporation for Hartlepool, co. Durham, on 3 February 1593 in order to erect a pier for shipping coal to the south. More important, he was also a committed Catholic. On his petition to parliament in 1547 he was restored in blood and created Baron Lumley. 
Lumley's destiny was determined by his marriage, in or before 1550, to Jane (1537-1577) ['see 'Lumley, Jane], translator, eldest child of Henry Fitzalan, twelfth earl of Arundel (1512-1580), and his first wife, Katherine (died 1542), daughter of Thomas Grey, second marquess of Dorset. Lumley met her brother, Henry Fitzalan, Baron Maltravers (1538-1556), at Cambridge, where they matriculated as fellow-commoners at Queens' College in May 1549. Lumley's manuscript translation of Erasmus, 'Institution of a Christian Prince' (BL, Royal MS 17 A.xlix) is inscribed to Arundel at the end, 'your lordshippes obedient sone, J. Lumley 1550', suggesting that he was married by that date. The couple had two sons and a daughter, none of whom survived to adulthood. Lumley was created KB on 29 September 1553 and attended Mary I's coronation on 1 October. 
The death of Arundel's second wife, Mary, in October 1557 and the deaths of Lady Lumley's siblings during these years increased Lumley's importance; Arundel began to look on him as a son. The Lumleys may have spent the first years of their married life at Lumley's London house in Hart Street near Tower Hill (a house built for the poet Sir Thomas Wyatt) and at Lumley Castle, near Chester-le-Street, co. Durham. However, Arundel's various bereavements led them to move to his new residence, Nonsuch Palace, Surrey. Lumley was keeper of the great park of Nonsuch from 20 August 1559 until his death, a position which carried an annual fee of $4 8's'. 4died Both Arundel and he made various alterations to Nonsuch, the most important of which was the creation of extensive gardens. 
Lumley became high steward of the University of Oxford on 24 February 1559 on the elevation of Arundel to chancellor. He maintained a relationship with the university throughout his life, donating forty books to the Bodleian Library in 1599. He also gave eighty-seven duplicate books from his own library to the University of Cambridge Library in 1598. 
A steady adherent of Arundel's, Lumley was deeply implicated in the Ridolfi Plot of 1571 for the re-establishment of Roman Catholicism and in the marriage negotiations of his brother-in-law, Thomas Howard, fourth duke of Norfolk (1538-1572), to Mary, queen of Scots. His involvement in these intrigues, which went on for a number of years and included telling Guerau de Spes, the Spanish ambassador, in August 1569 that he could raise men, led to incarceration in the Tower of London after September 1571. He was then held at several other locations until released in April 1573. These activities ended any political ambitions he had. It seems likely that Lumley erected the grove of Diana, England's first allegorical garden (an area of inscriptions, sculptures, and tableaux away from the formal privy garden) at Nonsuch as an apology for his involvement in the Ridolfi Plot. 
Despite his long imprisonment on Mary's account, Lumley avoided association with the subsequent plots for her escape and accepted nomination as one of the commissioners for her trial. He was present at Fotheringhay Castle, Northamptonshire, and in the court of Star Chamber in October 1586. He sat in judgment on a number of important trials, including those of Henry Grey, duke of Suffolk, in 1554, Dr Rowland Taylor in 1557, and William Davison in 1587. He was also appointed commissioner for settling claims for the coronations of both Elizabeth I (whom he attended on her journey from Hatfield to London at her accession in November 1558) and James I, and for the creation of the knights of the Bath in 1603. 
Arundel died at Arundel House, Westminster, on 24 February 1580 and Nonsuch passed to Lumley, along with his father-in-law's huge arrears in debt. The greatest single amount owed was the so-called 'Florentine debt'. This was a loan of $11,000 owed to Henry VIII by a group of Florentine merchants. Arundel and Lumley were given responsibility in 1564 for repaying the money, now owed to Elizabeth; they hoped to make money on the deal but were unable to fulfil their promise. Lumley began to negotiate terms for the payment of the debt in 1590 and in 1592 it was agreed that he would give Nonsuch to the queen but remain resident as keeper. He was allowed a lease on the great park and was excused from paying after a few years. Lumley was also the owner of a number of properties in and around Chichester (because of its proximity to his wife's family base at Arundel) and exercised patronage over its parliamentary seat. He sponsored Anthony Watson, rector of Cheam, Surrey, who became bishop of Chichester in 1596, and wrote the most important description of Nonsuch and its gardens. Lumley also had a house at Stanstead, Sussex (which had been the property of his first wife), where it is said that Henry, prince of Wales, visited him in September 1603. 
By the time of Lumley's second marriage, in 1582, to Elizabeth (died 1617), daughter of John Darcy, second Baron Darcy of Chiche, and his wife, Frances, he was no longer a significant figure at court; he seems to have spent more time at Lumley Castle, where he gradually expressed his interest in ancestry and genealogy through a series of decorative embellishments. There were no children of his second marriage. It is said that James I visited Lumley Castle on his journey south to London in 1603 but, Lumley being absent, he was shown around by Tobie Matthew, bishop of Durham, who lectured him on the baron's long and noble pedigree. The king is supposed to have become bored by this lengthy diatribe and stopped the bishop, saying 'oh, mon, gang na futher. I maun digest the knowledge I ha' this day gained, for I didna' ken Adam's ither nam was Lumley' (Milner, 92). 
Lumley was one of the great Elizabethan collector-patrons. His collections, which included books, paintings, and marbles, were catalogued during his lifetime and transcriptions of the manuscripts published during the twentieth century. The significance of these inventories cannot be underestimated -- they provide a unique illustration of his particular interests and intellectual pursuits as well as a more general picture of aristocratic taste in Elizabethan England. Unfortunately there is no trace of the gardens at Nonsuch, but this complex project was Lumley's other significant contribution to Elizabethan culture. 
Lumley's library was one of the largest in Elizabethan England. It was housed at Nonsuch and contained nearly 3000 books. Remarkably, the majority of the books listed in the catalogue survive in the British Library as they passed from Lumley to Henry, prince of Wales (exactly how this happened is not known), and thence into the Royal Library. The books are inscribed with the original purchaser's name. Thomas Cranmer, archbishop of Canterbury, Arundel, and Lumley's brother-in-law, the Welsh antiquary Humphrey Lloyd ('c'.1527-1568), all contributed significant numbers of books. However, the vast majority were collected by Lumley himself. 
The catalogue is divided by subject and size and is remarkable for the wide range of titles it contains, but the predominance of scientific, medical, and geographical titles should be noted. Lumley's interest in medicine led to his sponsorship of a regular surgery lecture at the Royal College of Physicians between 1582 and 1583. The other significant group of titles, although small in number, is listed at the end under the heading 'Musici'. These include religious works by the Catholic composer William Byrd, one of which is dedicated to Lumley, as well as one of the earliest sets of madrigals to be seen in England. This was commissioned by Arundel while in Italy in 1566 and 1567 and sent to him by the composer Innocenzo Alberti. 
Lumley's collection of paintings, furniture, and stone sculptures is included in the famous illustrated inventory, known as the 'Red Velvet Book' (because of a later binding), which remains in the possession of Lumley's descendant the earl of Scarbrough. The inventory includes the contents of all of Lumley's residences and was drawn up in 1590 during his financial negotiations with Elizabeth (presumably in order to establish exactly which of the contents were Lumley's). Unfortunately this inventory does not list the continu by location, but another, of Lumley Castle, dated 1609, helps to establish the locations of at least some of the items in 1590. 
The 'Red Velvet Book' starts with a written account of Lumley Castle, followed by transcripts of various historic deeds and detailed heraldic descriptions. The inventory proper begins with a series of hand-coloured illustrations of sculptures, fountains, and furniture. Notable among the statuary are the free-standing fountains and obelisks, which were situated in the privy garden at Nonsuch. These are remarkable for their classical form and can be related to continental examples. It is possible that Lumley may have known of them through engravings or drawings or perhaps the accounts of Arundel and Lloyd after their journey to Italy. Many of the other objects illustrated were to be found at Lumley Castle, as they can be identified through the description of the castle at the start of the 'Red Velvet Book', including marble busts of Henry VIII and his children (presently at Leeds Castle, Kent). Sadly, none of the furniture illustrated in the inventory survives. 
The inventory continues with a list of paintings. These are described in more detail than almost any other contemporary inventory, often including the artist's name, and it has been possible to identify the hand of at least one artist using evidence from this inventory. As with Lumley's books, it is still possible to identify some of his paintings as each was painted with the so-called 'Lumley cartellino' -- a fictive scrap of paper with the sitter's name written on it. The predominance of portraits in the collection has often been noted, and it has been assumed that Lumley's interests lay more with the sitters than the artists. However, the list includes a number of other genres, such as still lifes and religious works. 
The grove of Diana at Nonsuch is known only through written accounts, the most detailed (and most florid) being the Latin description written by Watson before 1592. The grove was constructed in order to lead the visitor past a series of sculptures, fountains, and buildings which conveyed a complex allegorical message. This type of garden, using all of the senses and many media, was developed in northern Italy during the late first half of the sixteenth century, particularly at the Medici villas outside Florence. Lumley's inspiration must have come through written and verbal descriptions of these gardens, as the grove of Diana was unlike anything else built in England at the time. It portrayed Elizabeth as Diana, while Lumley is both characterized as Acteon and as the apologetic 'smitten fisher'. 
Lumley's concern with family ancestry and genealogy was remarkable and it is not surprising that he is often incorrectly described as being a member of the Society of Antiquaries. It is still possible to appreciate this aspect of his personality through an examination of the various tombs (all surviving) that he erected, as well as through his books and building projects. These interests may also reflect his concern to portray himself as a member of the ancient nobility. The first group of tombs, for himself, his wives, and children, is to be found in the Lumley chapel at St Dunstan's, Cheam. They are all illustrated in the 'Red Velvet Book'. Lumley's own tomb concentrates on genealogy, while that for Jane Lumley is remarkably classical in its decoration and detail. Between 1594 and 1597 he also arranged for the installation of a group of tombs at the church of St Mary and St Cuthbert in Chester-le-Street. These fourteen tombs to his ancestors included real monuments removed from Durham Cathedral, as well as fictive examples that Lumley had made in an appropriately medieval style. In 1596 he erected a tomb to the tenth, eleventh, and twelfth earls of Arundel in the Fitzalan chapel at Arundel Castle. This was deliberately evocative of a medieval chantry chapel, such as that to William Fitzalan, ninth earl of Arundel, opposite, and is yet another example of Lumley's historicizing attitude. 
Certain of Lumley's building projects were intentionally historicizing, particularly his alterations to Lumley Castle of the 1580s, which included the addition of rows of heraldic shields in the main courtyard and the erection of the 'Lumley horseman' (now at Leeds Castle) in the hall. This polychrome wooden equestrian monument (illustrated in the 'Red Velvet Book') represents Edward III in whose time the castle was founded. It relates to the similar monuments and paintings commissioned by various Italian city states (particularly Venice) in honour of foreign warriors, especially the 'condottieri', like Sir John Hawkwood, and it is possible that Lumley was told of these statues by Arundel and Lloyd on their return from Italy. It was the first statue of its kind to be made in England. 
The greatest myth about Lumley is that he travelled to Italy and that this provided him with the inspiration for his collecting and building projects, especially the grove of Diana. Although it is absolutely clear from the documentation that Lumley did not go to Italy, it is easy to understand why historians have made this assumption. Modern research into patterns of patronage and manufacture in Elizabethan England (especially the availability of printed sources and the activities of northern artists and craftsmen) helps to explain how Lumley could have built and collected as he did without leaving England. 
Lumley died on 11 April 1609 at his residence in London and was buried at night (presumably with Catholic ritual) in the Lumley chapel at St Dunstan's, Cheam. In 1607 he had entailed the lands and castle of Lumley on Richard Lumley, first Viscount Lumley of Waterford (bap. 1589, d. 1661x3) ['see under 'Lumley, Elizabeth, Viscountess Lumley of Waterford (c.1578-1658)]. From him descended the earls of Scarbrough. 


@@@@@


doc= 17180


Lumley, Marmaduke (c.1390-1450), administrator and bishop of Carlisle, was the fourth son of Ralph, first Baron Lumley, a major landowner in co. Durham and other northern shires, and Eleanor, sister of Ralph Neville, earl of Westmorland. Ordained in 1414, he was a bachelor of civil law by 1422, probably of Cambridge, where he was later chancellor of the university for at least two years (1425-7) and master of Trinity Hall (1429-43). Before his elevation he was a regular 'chopchurch', being presented to numerous livings, including prebends in Chichester Cathedral and in the Yorkshire secular colleges of Hemingbrough, Harden, and Osmotherley, and the archdeaconry of Northumberland, many of which he later exchanged. His powerful Neville relations and the patronage of Queen Catherine and Henry Beaufort, bishop of Winchester (died 1447), his uncle by marriage, must have assisted him to so much preferment. The latter probably secured the bishopric of Carlisle for Lumley in December 1429, in spite of opposition from the duke of Gloucester. He was consecrated on 16 April 1430. The promotion proved a mixed blessing as it confirmed Lumley's commitment to the interests of Beaufort in return for an impoverished and often war-ravaged diocese. 
In 1431 Lumley's partisanship for Beaufort appears to have led to his eclipse, for his name disappears from among the personnel attending the king's council. He was nominated to attend the councils of Basel (1433) and Ferrara (1438) but, since the exchequer made no payments to him, he probably did not go; his activities from the mid-1430s to the 1440s seem to have been largely confined to his bishopric. His episcopal register has not survived so these have been reconstructed from other sources. He was a commissioner to regulate the keeping of the truce with the Scots in 1433 and 1434. On the latter occasion it proved impossible to secure a permanent peace and, following the expiry of the truce, the Scots besieged Roxburgh in August 1436. Lumley's role in organizing the raising of the siege may have persuaded the government that, unusually, a bishop would be a suitable warden for Carlisle and the west march. It may also have been attracted by his willingness to receive a reduced salary of $1050 p.a. Perhaps too the royal council thought he would be easier to control from London than a lay magnate. Lumley took up office as warden on 12 December 1436. The earl of Salisbury and Lord Dacre certainly seem to have resented his appointment: the former was soon suing for the restoration of the post, and Dacre had to give a bond for 1000 marks in 1443 in the course of a dispute between himself and the bishop. Lumley's rivalry with Dacre also spilled over into the political life of Carlisle, as mayors favourable to one or other magnate alternated in office. Lumley's poverty led to great difficulties in the administration of his bishopric, and his estates were devalued by Scottish raids. He seems only to have been able to afford the services of one lawyer, Alexander Cok, and he relied principally on his relatives and servants to defend the march. In part his problems were due to the fact that his salary was neither fully nor regularly paid. Nevertheless, he completed his seven-year term. 
As the power of Gloucester waned and that of the earl of Suffolk waxed, Lumley's political career at last revived. Late in 1446 he reappeared as a member of the king's council and was appointed treasurer of England on 18 December. He took effective steps to address the financial crisis he inherited. The increasing household expenses of the king and his educational foundations, along with the costs of the French war, coincided with a sharp fall in the yield from customs, the most important source of royal income. In 1447 he effectively put a stop on the exchequer by dismissing a number of customs collectors, so that the tallies they had issued to authorize payments from their revenues could be cancelled. He then controlled an orderly provision for the expenses of the royal households and partial repayment of the most pressing debts to holders of invalidated tallies. By 1448 his policies had been moderately successful and he also initiated a survey of outstanding debts and the effectiveness of revenue collection. However, the deteriorating military situation and plummeting customs receipts combined to provoke a financial catastrophe. Lumley continued to follow the model established by his predecessors, repaying long-outstanding debts instead of satisfying the urgent demands of the commanders and garrisons in France, as they came under increasing pressure in 1448 and 1449. When the military crisis was eventually recognized, royal credit was so bad that revenue could only be raised by loans, and in seriously inadequate amounts. In September 1449 he resigned the treasurership. 
In the previous year Henry VI and Suffolk, who clearly wanted both to reward Lumley and to keep him close at hand, had proposed him for the see of London, contradicting their own earlier recommendation of Thomas Kemp. The pope refused to accept the change, and rebuked king and duke for their ineptitude. On 28 January 1450, however, Lumley was provided to the even more desirable see of Lincoln; the temporalities were restored on 14 March. His failure to defend Suffolk in that year, like his resignation as treasurer, may have been due less to timidity than to bodily infirmity -- his age (about sixty) was one of the reasons given by the pope for allowing him to appoint a deputy for a visitation of his diocese. He did, however, spend some time there between April and October 1450, but he returned to London early in November, perhaps for that month's session of parliament, and died in London on a day variously reported as 20 November and 5 December. No will survives, but he had made gifts of books to the London Charterhouse and Queens' College, Cambridge. 


@@@@@


doc= 17181


Lumley, Elizabeth, Viscountess Lumley of Waterford (c.1578-1658), benefactor, was the second daughter of Sir William Cornwallis of Brome, Suffolk ('c'.1549-1611), and his first wife, Lucy ('c'.1549-1608), daughter and coheir of John Neville, fourth Baron Latimer, and his wife, Lucy. Her father's profligacy at court lost $20,000; he left debts amounting to $4000, to settle which five manors had to be sold. He even allegedly remarked: 'So that I may be about her Majesty, I care not to be groom of the scullery' (HoP, 'Commons, 1558-1603', 1.659). On 22 November 1596 at her father's house in St Botolph without Bishopsgate, London, she married Sir William Sandys (died 1629) of Mottisfont, Hampshire, son and heir of Sir Walter Sandys and a grandson of Thomas, Lord Sandys of the Vyne. On 11 May 1630 at St Bride's, London, she married Richard Lumley, Viscount Lumley of Waterford ['see below']. 
Elizabeth Lumley's second marriage was unhappy as conflict grew over her husband's aid in clearing her debts to the earl of Danby. He petitioned the king on 30 March 1640, complaining of his great costs, and that owing to the differences between him and his wife just satisfaction was denied him. On 18 May 1640 a day was appointed for the House of Lords to hear their differences. Elizabeth's breach with her husband appears to have been unresolved as their wills failed to address each other as husband and wife. Elizabeth's will lamented 'these long miseries of scarcity' and that her personal effects were 'soe poor through my long continued sufferings as I may well shame to have anie eyes upon them' (will, PROB 11/293, sig. 356). She left $2000 towards a marriage portion for her niece, Henrietta Maria Cornwallis. She was 'strong minded, independent and thoughtful' (Jordan, 'Charities of Rural England', 279), and warned the viscount to 'interrupt not nor meddle with anie thing in my possession' (will, PROB 11/293, sig. 356). 
Elizabeth Lumley's greatest significance rests in her foundation of almshouses and schools in the North Riding of Yorkshire and London, which reached the substantial total of $5750. They included almshouses in St Botolph Aldgate, London, and Thornton-le-Dale, the Yorkshire parish in which she usually resided. Her concern for education was such that she also founded grammar schools in Thornton-le-Dale and Pickering, and left an endowment of $40 per annum to support scholarships at Oxford and Cambridge for inhabitants of her three local Yorkshire parishes. She died childless and was buried on 2 February 1658 in Westminster Abbey. 
Her second husband, Richard Lumley, first Viscount Lumley of Waterford (bap. 1589, d. 1661x3) was baptized at Chester-le-Street, co. Durham, on 7 April 1589, the son and heir of Roger Lumley and his wife, Anne Kurtwich. Educated at Cambridge, he was awarded the degree of MA in 1609, in which year he also succeeded to the estates of his cousin, John, Baron Lumley. On 17 August 1614 he married his first wife, Frances (1592-1627), widow of William Holland of Chichester, Sussex, and daughter of Henry Shelley of Warminghurst, Sussex. 
Lumley was admitted to Gray's Inn on 2 March 1615, knighted at Theobald's on 19 July 1616, and created Viscount Lumley of Waterford in the peerage of Ireland on 12 July 1628. He had been living on his Sussex estates, but was ordered to return to Lumley Castle, co. Durham, on 27 January 1638. He was a commissioner for the duchy of Cornwall in 1641. He garrisoned Lumley Castle for the royalists during the civil war and was president of Prince Rupert's council of war at the surrender of Bristol in 1645. He petitioned that he left Stansted in January 1644 to join the king, but never bore arms nor contributed to the royalist service. He took the national covenant and the negative oath, and his composition fine was later reduced to $1925 15's'. In 1646 he petitioned against local people felling wood on his Stansted estate. In 1654 he was granted a pass to travel abroad. Before the meeting of the Convention Parliament in 1660 he signed a declaration of moderate royalists pledging not to take revenge upon old enemies. His will, dated 13 April 1661, was proved on 12 March 1663. He was buried in the vault at Cheam parish church, Surrey. His son John had died in 1658, and he was succeeded as second viscount by his grandson, Richard Lumley, later first earl of Scarbrough. 


@@@@@


doc= 17182


Lumley, Richard, first earl of Scarbrough (1650-1721), politician, was the eldest son of John Lumley (died 1658) and his wife, Mary Compton (died after 1667), daughter of Sir Henry Compton. Richard Lumley, first Viscount Lumley of Waterford ['see under 'Lumley, Elizabeth] was his grandfather, and the army officer Henry Lumley his younger brother. He was educated as a Roman Catholic and in October 1667 went overseas on the grand tour accompanied by his mother and the Roman Catholic divine Richard Lassels (Lascelles). A favourite of Charles II, he accompanied the duke of York to Scotland in 1679 before serving as a volunteer with the reinforcements sent to Tangier in 1680. From 11 September 1681 to 23 February 1682 he served as the earl of Feversham's replacement as master of the horse to Queen Catherine and may have held simultaneously a commission in the 1st troop of Life Guards. Having already succeeded to his grandfather's Irish title, on 31 May 1681 he was created Baron Lumley of Lumley Castle in the English peerage. On 25 October 1684 he replaced the earl of Clarendon as treasurer to Queen Catherine. He married Frances Jones ('c'.1665-1722), daughter of Sir Henry Jones of Aston, Oxfordshire, on 17 March 1685 at St Giles-in-the-Fields. 
Following the outbreak of Monmouth's rebellion Lumley was commissioned to raise an independent troop of horse in Hampshire on 18 June 1685. Accompanied by cavalry from the Sussex militia, his men concentrated at Ringwood in Hampshire, whence patrols captured Lord Grey of Wark on 7 July and Monmouth himself on the following day. Lumley was appointed colonel of a new regiment of cavalry, the queen dowager's, on 31 July 1685, but was sacked in 1686 because of his opposition to the projected repeal of the 'Test Acts' and the penal laws. Converting to protestantism in 1687 -- thereafter his politics were whig -- and piqued at his dismissal, he joined the conspiracy against James II in 1688, helped to organize the petition in support of the seven bishops, and signed the 30 June invitation to William of Orange to intervene militarily in England. Despite repeated orders for his arrest he secured Durham for the prince of Orange on 5 December before claiming Newcastle upon Tyne. During the Convention Parliament he strongly supported the contention that the throne was vacant. His rewards were considerable: he was made a privy councillor on 14 February 1689; a gentleman of the bedchamber on 23 February; colonel of the 1st troop of Life Guards on 2 April; and lord lieutenant of co. Durham and of Northumberland. He was created Viscount Lumley of Lumley Castle on 10 April 1689 and earl of Scarbrough five days later. 
Scarbrough, a conscientious officer, crossed to Ireland with William III in 1690 and fought at the Boyne. Transferred to the Netherlands in 1691, he was promoted to major-general on 1 April 1692 and lieutenant-general on 4 October 1694. He left the army in 1699, selling his colonelcy of the Life Guards to the earl of Albemarle on 9 March. Queen Anne continued him in his appointments, including his membership of the privy council, and he was appointed a commissioner for the union with Scotland on 10 May 1706. Unlike most of his co-commissioners he took his responsibilities in this regard seriously. Although he lost his offices during the tory purge of 1712, he was reinstated by George I and readmitted to the privy council. On 21 November 1714 he was appointed to the court martial that adjudicated on the seniority of regiments and on 9 March 1716 became chancellor of the duchy of Lancaster. Resigning the latter position in May 1717, he received in compensation the vice-treasurership of Ireland jointly with Matthew Ducie, later first Lord Ducie. He died at his home, Lumley Castle, of apoplexy on 17 December 1721 and was buried in Chester-le-Street. His widow, with whom he had seven sons and four daughters, and who had been a lady of the bedchamber to Queen Mary and to Queen Anne, died on 7 August 1722. His second but eldest surviving son and heir, Richard, was summoned to the House of Lords on 10 March 1714, installed as a knight of the Garter on 28 July 1724, appointed a privy councillor in 1727, and commissioned as a lieutenant-general in the army on 2 July 1739. He died by suicide, unmarried, on 29 January 1740. 


@@@@@


doc= 17183


Lumley, Sir William (1769-1850), army officer, seventh and youngest son of Richard Lumley, fourth earl of Scarbrough ('c'.1725-1782), and his wife, Barbara (died 22 July 1797), sister and heir of Sir George Savile, seventh baronet, of Rufford, Nottinghamshire, was born on 28 August 1769. He was educated at Eton College and in 1787 was appointed cornet in the 10th light dragoons (later hussars), in which he obtained his lieutenancy in 1791, and his troop in 1793. In 1794 he was made major in Ward's corps of foot, and on 24 May 1795 lieutenant-colonel of the 22nd light dragoons (the third of four regiments that successively bore that number). He commanded the 22nd dragoons during the Irish uprising, and on 7 June 1798 was severely wounded at Antrim, where he prevented the sack of the town by the rebels, and saved the lives of the magistrates, except Lord O'Neil. He also commanded the regiment in Egypt, where it served during the latter part of the campaign of 1801. He superintended the embarkation at Alexandria of the French garrison of Cairo. The 22nd dragoons regiment was disbanded in 1802. 
In 1803 Lumley was appointed colonel of the 3rd battalion of the army of reserve, and thereafter he took much interest in its organization. When the army of reserve was ordered to be broken up, Lumley induced all the men of the battalion who passed the required test (400 in all) to re-engage for life service, but the authorities then changed their plans, and ordered the men to be disbanded. Lumley, who became a major-general in 1805, commanded a brigade in the London district that year; with his brigade he was afterwards at the recapture of the Cape of Good Hope in 1806, and in the operations in South America in 1806-7, where he commanded the advance of the army in the landing at Maldonado and the attack on Montevideo. He also served with General Whitelocke in the disastrous attempt on Buenos Aires. He held a like position in Sicily, and commanded the light brigade, which formed the advance of Sir John Stuart's expedition to the coast of Italy in 1809, and captured Ischia. An account of the expedition, and of the situation in Sicily, is given by Sir H. E. Bunbury (see 'Narratives of some Passages in the Great War with France', 1854). 
Lumley joined Wellington's army in the Peninsula in 1810. He commanded the attack on the Fort Christoval side during the first siege of Badajoz, and commanded the allied cavalry with Beresford at the battle of Albuera (gold medal), and in the cavalry action at Usagre. He was invalided home in August 1811, and did not serve in the Peninsula again. He became lieutenant-general in 1814. He was governor and commander-in-chief at Bermuda from 1819 to 1825, during which time, in his 'ex officio' position as 'ordinary', or person possessing episcopal authority in ecclesiastical matters, he had disputes with the churchwardens of the colonial parish of St George. A case arising ultimately went before Lord Chief Justice Tenterden, who expressed an opinion that if Lumley possessed the powers claimed, he had used them illegally, and a verdict, with $1000 damages, was given against him. 
Lumley was made KCB in 1815, GCB in 1831, and general in 1837. He was colonel in succession of the 3rd battalion of reserve, the Royal West Indian rangers (disbanded in 1818), the 6th Inniskilling dragoons, and the 1st King's dragoons guards, to which he was appointed in 1840. He was a groom of the bedchamber from 1812 to 1841, and in 1842 was made an extra groom-in-waiting. He married, first, on 3 October 1804, Mary, daughter of Thomas Sutherland of Ulverstone; she died in July 1807. His second marriage, on 3 March 1817, was to Louisa Margaret (died 11 Sept 1859), widow of Colonel Lynch Cotton (died 1799 in India) and daughter of John Robbins. Lumley had no children from either marriage. He died at his residence in Green Street, Grosvenor Square, London, on 15 December 1850. 


@@@@@


doc= 17184


Lumsden, Sir Henry Burnett (1821-1896), army officer, born on 12 November 1821 on the East India Company's ship 'Rose', in the Bay of Bengal, was the eldest son of Colonel Thomas Lumsden (1789-1874), Bengal artillery, of Belhelvie Lodge, Aberdeenshire, and his wife, Hay (died 11 Oct 1873), youngest daughter of John Burnett of Elrick, Aberdeenshire. Lumsden was sent home from India in 1827 and educated at Bellevue Academy, Aberdeen, and at Mr Dawes's school, Bromley, Kent. He returned to India as a cadet at the age of sixteen, and on 1 March 1838 was commissioned ensign in the 59th Bengal native infantry. 
Lumsden displayed a marked aptitude for languages and in the spring of 1843 was attached as interpreter and quartermaster to the 33rd Bengal infantry, which formed part of the army, under the command of Sir George Pollock, that during the First Anglo-Afghan War forced the Khyber Pass. He first saw action on 5 April 1842. While at Kabul, Lumsden struck up a close friendship with John Nicholson. On 16 July 1842 he was promoted lieutenant, and early in 1843 returned to join the 59th native infantry at Ludhiana. Lumsden fought with his regiment during the Sutlej campaign and in February 1846 was severely wounded at the battle of Sobraon. 
When Sir Henry Lawrence was made resident at Lahore, he appointed Lumsden on 15 April 1846 as one of his assistants. Lumsden accompanied Lawrence to Kashmir in October, and in December was sent with 3000 Sikh troops and six guns through Hazara. Lumsden's force encountered resistance from 7000 hostile tribesmen, but he successfully forced the passage of the two tributaries of the Jhelum, near Muzaffarabad, and following two sharp engagements eventually forced them to submit. He received the thanks of government and was given responsibility by Lawrence for raising the corps of guides for frontier service. Lumsden enjoyed complete freedom regarding the recruitment, training, and equipment of this force, which initially consisted of 100 horsemen and 200 infantrymen. Its recruits were chosen from the warlike frontier tribes who knew the terrain of the border hills -- in his own words, men 'accustomed to look after themselves, and not easily taken aback by any sudden emergency'. Lumsden directed that the new unit wear a serviceable khaki uniform, later adopted by the rest of the Indian army, ideally suited to military operations on the north-west frontier. The guide cavalry distinguished itself under Lumsden's command during the siege of Multan in 1848, and again on 3 January 1849, when it surprised and destroyed a Sikh raiding force near the border with Kashmir. For these actions Lumsden again received the thanks of government. 
On 21 February 1849 Lumsden fought at the battle of Gujrat, for which he was mentioned in dispatches and received the Punjab medal with two clasps. On 19 June the strength of the corps of guides was increased to 400 horsemen and 600 infantrymen, in recognition of its success. Following the occupation of the Punjab, Lumsden was appointed assistant commissioner in Yusufzai, in addition to his military duties, and for a short time was placed in charge of Peshawar district, where he had to deal closely with the frequently hostile border tribes over whom he exercised considerable personal influence. He developed an intimate knowledge of the language and of the inhabitants of the tribal territory, demonstrating his ability both as an administrator and as a skilled frontier soldier during repeated skirmishes and punitive campaigns. As Lord Dalhousie wrote: 'A braver or better soldier never drew a sword. The governor-general places unbounded confidence in him and in the gallant body of men he commands.' 
Lumsden went home on leave in November 1852 after fifteen years of continuous service in India. He was promoted captain on 1 March 1853, and on 6 February 1854 he was given a brevet majority for his services during the Second Anglo-Sikh War. He returned to India at the end of 1855 and assumed command of the guides, now permanently deployed in the trans-Indus areas of the Punjab. In 1857 he was sent on a mission to Kandahar, accompanied by his brother Lieutenant Peter Lumsden and by Dr Henry Walter Bellew, to ensure that subsidies paid by the government of India to the amir were used for the payment of troops employed to defend Afghanistan against Persia following the recent capture of Herat. The mission was also responsible for advising and assisting the amir as far as possible without arousing the hostility of the Afghan population. On 25 April they reached Kandahar, but news of the outbreak of the Indian mutiny made their position extremely hazardous. Despite a constant fear of attack by the local population Lumsden remained at Kabul throughout the uprising, in order to maintain British prestige and influence over the amir. He finally returned to India on 15 May 1858 when he was promoted lieutenant-colonel. For his services, and for the sound judgement he displayed at Kabul, Lumsden was made a civil CB on 5 December 1859. However, this proved little reward for the opportunities he had missed for command on active service during the Indian mutiny. On 5 September 1866 he married Fanny, daughter of Charles Myers of Dunningwell, Cumberland, vicar of Flintham, Nottinghamshire; she survived her husband. 
Lumsden was promoted major-general on 6 March 1868, and was made a KCSI on 24 May 1873. He became lieutenant-general on 1 December 1873, and general on 1 January 1880. His later career suffered, however, from his absence from India during the mutiny, when many other senior officers came to prominence. Lumsden was not offered further employment in the army, and he refused civil posts, for which he was qualified, as he intensely disliked official routine. He retired from the army on 15 September 1875, and spent the remainder of his life at Belhelvie Lodge, Aberdeenshire, which he had inherited on his father's death in 1874. He occupied his time with sport, photography, and wood-carving. Lumsden died at Belhelvie Lodge on 12 August 1896. 


@@@@@


doc= 17185


Lumsden, Sir James, of Innergellie (fl. 1629-1651), army officer, was a son of Robert Lumsden of Airdrie, Fife; his mother's name is unknown. Two of his brothers, Robert Lumsden and William Lumsden ['see below'], are known to have become soldiers. 
James Lumsden first appears in Swedish service as an ensign in Colonel James Spens's regiment in 1629. He must have proved a skilful soldier; by February 1631 he was a colonel and Field Marshal Gustav Horn specifically requested the use of his 600 infantry for his campaign in northern Germany. Colonel Robert Monro recorded his exploits with Lumsden as they led their pikemen into Frankfurt an der Oder and claimed the town for the Swedes. Lumsden also distinguished himself at the battle of Leipzig in September 1631. The following year the Scottish privy council granted permission for Colonel Lumsden to raise a further 1200 troops for Swedish service. He became the commandant in 1635 of Osnabruck, where eight companies of his regiment were still serving in March 1637. 
Lieutenant-General James King called in at Osnabruck in February 1639 and probably passed on the news from Scotland that hostilities were afoot with King Charles I. At this point Lumsden made his first request to be released from Swedish service, with the intention of returning home in order to safeguard not only his property but also his honour. The field marshal, Johan Baner, was, however, not keen to lose his service. Lumsden suggested that his brother Robert could replace him as governor of Osnabruck, but Baner did not consider Robert either capable or qualified for that position. Lumsden continued to seek his release until September 1639, when it was noted that he had been provided with an annual pension, along with Field Marshal Alexander Leslie (later earl of Leven) and Patrick Ruthven (later earl of Forth and of Brentford). The Scottish cleric John Durie informed Sir Thomas Roe, the Stuart agent in Hamburg, that Colonel Lumsden and Colonel David Leslie were travelling to Stockholm to petition the Riksrad (Swedish state council) for permission to leave Swedish service, and in August 1640 this was finally granted to them. They left Sweden to serve in the covenanting army during the bishops' wars in Scotland. Lumsden and Leslie received not only a pension of 1000 daler for life and a gold chain with Queen Kristina's image on it from the Swedes, but also 200 muskets and 200 suits of armour. Days later another Scot, Lieutenant-Colonel George Monro, received permission to leave, and they decided to depart for Scotland by 1 November from Hamburg. Sir Thomas Roe suggested that the men could be intercepted upon arrival, but most of them got through. 
On his return to Scotland, Lumsden bought land at Innergellie in Fife and married Catherine (or Christianne) Rutherford, although it is unknown exactly when this occurred. Of his children, all that is known is that a daughter, Magdalen, later married her first cousin William Erskine. From 1644 until 1649 Lumsden served on various shire committees for the Scottish parliament, representing Fife. He was also an officer in the army of the solemn league and covenant. From 1643 to 1644 he was lieutenant-colonel of Lord Gordon's foot, which became known as Lumsden's foot when he took over from Gordon in 1644. He was at the siege of York in June, when he served alongside Lord Fairfax's troops. Lumsden's plan for the battle of Marston Moor still exists. He was in charge of the reserve Scottish foot, with which he successfully supported the first line of infantry. 
Lumsden became the governor of Newcastle upon Tyne on 23 November 1644, although his appointment was ratified by the English only in March 1645. Six companies of Colonel Sinclair's regiment of foot, the Galloway foot, the Mearns and Aberdeen foot, the Merse foot, the Nithsdale and Annandale foot, the Perthshire foot, and Strathearn foot, all came under Lumsden's command at Newcastle. An undated letter signed by William Weems survives in the Swedish archives, referring to Lumsden as the governor at Newcastle and seeking to obtain the remaining balance of Lumsden's pension from Sweden. The Swedish chancellor, Axel Oxenstierna, had released 4000 riksdaler for Lumsden in Hamburg, but there were still 2000 riksdaler lacking. 
On 30 January 1647 the earl of Leven permitted Lumsden to see Charles I, making him the only noble serving in the army of the solemn league and covenant to do so. Lumsden and his forces left Newcastle later that afternoon, and in February the regiment was disbanded. At some point after this Lumsden must have been knighted, as he is subsequently referred to as 'Sir'. 
In 1649 Lumsden was colonel of a regiment of foot raised in the presbytery of St Andrews for the army of the covenant. In August 1650 the earl of Loudoun wrote to King Charles II describing Lumsden's loyalty to his cause. David Leslie appointed him lieutenant-general of horse in 1650, and he served as the brigade commander at Dunbar. The regiment was destroyed and both Lumsden and his brother William were taken prisoner. A ship belonging to Sir James Lumsden had been impounded, along with all its contents, at Whitby in January 1651. A month later the English council of state ordered the commissioners of customs to release the ship and make restitution for all the goods as Lumsden had both Cromwell's protection and a pass for the ship. On 10 June 1651 the committee of estates provided Lumsden with maintenance of $240 collected through voluntary contributions for prisoners of war. From the end of February 1652 the English council discussed the release of a Scotsman, Lieutenant-Colonel James Lunden, from captivity. He was to pay $1000 sterling, report to the commander-in-chief, and offer a further $1000 as security for his good behaviour. He was eventually released from English captivity in September 1652. It has not been determined whether this man was the same as James Lumsden. Some sources imply that Lumsden died in 1660, but this has not been verified. 
James's brother 
Another brother, 


@@@@@


doc= 17186


Lumsden, Matthew (1777-1835), orientalist, was fifth son of John Lumsden of Cushnie, Aberdeenshire, and a cousin of Sir Harry Burnett Lumsden (1821-1896), army general. After education at King's College, Aberdeen, he went to India as assistant professor of Persian and Arabic in the College of Fort William, and in 1808 succeeded to the professorship. In 1812 he was appointed secretary to the Calcutta Madrasa, and superintended various translations of English works into Persian then in progress. From 1814 until 1817 he had charge of the East India Company's press at Calcutta, and in 1818 he became secretary to the stationery committee. 
Owing to ill health Lumsden left India on leave in March 1820, and travelled with his cousin, Thomas Lumsden, through Persia, Georgia, and Russia to England. An account of this journey was published by Thomas Lumsden in 1822. Lumsden returned to India in 1821. In 1808 he received the degree of LLD from King's College, Aberdeen. He died at Tooting Common, Surrey, on 31 March 1835. 
Lumsden published books on the grammars of Persian and Arabic, as well as editing Firdausi's 'Shah Namu', to which he added an English preface. 


@@@@@


doc= 17187


Robert Lumsden of Montquhanie (d. 1651), army officer, appears to have entered Danish service as a lieutenant-colonel in the regiment of Colonel Donald Mackay (Lord Reay) in 1628. He later served as a colonel in the Green regiment in Swedish service from 1630 to 1632. It is uncertain when he returned to Scotland, but by 1644 Robert was a major-general in the army of the solemn league and covenant under Lord Callander. He also sat on parliamentary war committees in 1647 as Major-General Robert Lumsden of Montquhanie. He was acting as governor of Dundee when General Monck stormed the town, and was killed in the fighting on 1 September 1651. 


@@@@@


doc= 17188


William Lumsden (fl. 1645-1650), army officer, is believed to have entered Swedish service during the Thirty Years' War, but no proof has yet been found of this. He was probably the Major Lumsdale of the Merse foot in 1643-4, although that officer is listed without a forename. From 1645 to 1647 he served as lieutenant-colonel of the Strathearn foot in the army of the solemn league and covenant. William led the regiment during its campaigns in 1646. He was captured along with his brother James at the battle of Dunbar in 1650. In December of that year he appealed for the payment of his arrears, but nothing further is known of him after this. 


@@@@@


doc= 17189


Lunardi, Vincenzo (1759-1806), balloonist, was born at Lucca, Tuscany, on 11 January 1759, and passed his early years in the East Indies before becoming, through the patronage of his guardian, Chevalier Gherardo Compagni, secretary to the Neapolitan ambassador to the Court of St James, Prince Caramanico. In July 1784 he obtained permission from Sir George Howard, governor of Chelsea Hospital, to make a balloon ascent from the hospital grounds. This permission was subsequently revoked after onlookers turned violent when the balloon of a French rival, the Chevalier de Moret, failed to inflate at the demonstration on 4 August planned to pre-empt Lunardi's. John Sheldon also attempted an ascent before Lunardi's but on 16 August his balloon managed only a modest captive ascent before it caught fire. Lunardi finally secured permission from the Honourable Artillery Company to use their ground at Moorfields and on 15 September, in the presence of spectators estimated variously to number between 30,000 and 300,000, he made a successful ascent. His balloon was about 32 feet in diameter, and was filled with hydrogen under the direction of the physician and chemist George Fordyce. The balloon, known as a Charliere after Jacques Alexandre Cesar Charles who made the first hydrogen-filled balloon, contrasted with that of the Montgolfier brothers and most other contemporaries whose Montgolfiere balloons rose after the common atmospheric air that they contained had been heated. The only new features of the balloon were the oars by which Lunardi hoped to steer the balloon downwards without needing to lose hydrogen, and the wings with whose flapping he hoped to move the balloon horizontally. These additions had no scientific rationale. He claimed that the use of the oars helped his descent but it seems more probable that loss of gas was responsible for this. The balloon lacked a valve at the top to control the escape of gas. It is not known how far Lunardi was responsible for the design; his partner George Biggin is spoken of warmly in Lunardi's account of the voyages, and may have been responsible for the design, being something of an inventor. Lunardi flew over London before making a brief landing at what is now known as Balloon Corner, Welham Green, where a stone marks his landing and the ejection from the balloon of a cat. He finally descended about 24 miles from his starting point in Stanton Green End, Thundridge, north of Ware, Hertfordshire, where a monument was later erected to mark the event, and shortly afterwards waited on the prince of Wales and other patrons, who had been present at the ascent, with an account of his journey. A 'March for the Flight of an Air Balloon' was composed for the occasion by Samuel Wesley. Lunardi became the hero of the moment. A balloon-shaped bonnet was named after the aeronaut (see Robert Burns, 'To a Louse', 1789, where it is used to signify the social pretensions of a country girl), and Lunardi skirts, decorated with balloon motifs, and Lunardi garters were also fashionable. Several descriptions were printed, the best by Lunardi himself in 'An Account of the First Aerial Voyage in England' (1784). Numerous prints depicting the event were published and a drawing by Paul Sandby (Patent Office) survives. A medal was struck to mark the event and Lunardi exhibited himself and his balloon to enthusiastic crowds at the Pantheon. 
Lunardi subsequently made numerous other more or less successful ascents, including one from St George's Fields, Newington Butts, on 29 June 1785, when Mrs L. A. Sage, a London beauty, ascended and thus became 'the first English female aerial traveller', according to the title-page of her 'Letter Describing... her Expedition with Lunardi's Balloon' (1785). (She flew without Lunardi who gallantly left the balloon when her ample bulk put a strain on its lifting power.) Moving north he made successful ascents from Liverpool, Edinburgh, Glasgow, Kelso, and York, each time to acclaim. A memorial stone marks the place at North Callange Farm, Pitscothe, where he landed after leaving Edinburgh on 5 October 1784. Lunardi took pains to describe himself as 'the first aerial traveller in the English atmosphere' as James Tytler had already ascended in Scotland on 27 August 1784, a fact which is graciously mentioned in Lunardi's 'Account of Five Aerial Voyages in Scotland' (1786). But his string of successes came to an end after a planned ascent on 23 August 1786 from Newcastle upon Tyne at which a young man, Ralph Heron, became entangled in one of the balloon's ropes, rose with it, fell, and died from his injuries, the country's first victim of air travel. The press turned against Lunardi as quickly as they had feted him, thus ending his career, which depended on his being able to raise money by subscription to pay for his balloons. In 1787 he was in London experimenting with a device for saving life at sea, but he was evidently pressed for money, and had turned his hand to other ventures including hotel keeping. 
Having left Britain in August 1787, Lunardi continued his ballooning exploits across Italy, Spain, and Portugal, his last recorded ascent being from Lisbon on 24 August 1794. He died in the convent of Barbadinas, Lisbon, on 31 July 1806 'of a decline'. 
Lunardi added nothing to the technical or scientific development of ballooning (his only innovations being his wings and oars which seemed to be of little use, and a 'double balloon' which he advertised that he would use but never did), but he was a likeable and courageous opportunist who brought the spectacle of ballooning to a wide British public and deserved his description in his death notice in the 'Gentleman's Magazine': 'Mr Vincent Lunardi, the celebrated aeronaut'. 


@@@@@


doc= 17190


Lund, John (fl. 1785), humorous poet, of Pontefract, is said to have been a barber in that town. Little else is known of his life, although a contemporary declared that his satires 'would not disgrace the pen of a Churchill' (Boothroyd, 495). In 1771 Lund published 'The mirrour: a poem, in imitation of C. Churchill, to which are added three tales, in the manner of Prior'. In 1777 he published 'A collection of original tales in verse, in the manner of Prior; to which is added a second edition of 'Ducks and pease, or, The Newcastle rider''. The story is rudimentary, being that of a rider (that is, bagman) who, when airing himself as a person of quality, is suddenly confronted by his master; but it proved extremely popular, passing through numerous editions down to 1838 and was reprinted in Richardson's 'Table Book'. In 1779 there followed 'A collection of oddities in prose and verse, serious and comical, by a very odd author'. Also often attributed to Lund is a piece entitled 'The Bath Comedians', but its publication date of 1753 casts doubt on the matter. The British Library refers to this piece's author simply as 'L., J. M.'. 


@@@@@


doc= 17191


Lundgren, Egron Sellif (1815-1875), watercolour painter, was born in Brunkerberg, Stockholm, Sweden, on 18 December 1815, the sixth child of Erik Lundgren (died 1840x49?) and his wife, Maria Elisabeth Fahreus (died 1846). He trained at the Tekniska Hogskola (College of Technology) in Stockholm and, from 1832, at the gun foundry at Finspang, but he decided to change careers and in 1835 began to study at the Kungliga Akademien for de Fria Konsterna (Royal Academy of Fine Arts) in Stockholm under A. J. Fagerplan. In 1839 he went to Paris, where he trained for two years under Leon Cogniet. With a scholarship from the Kungliga Akademien in Stockholm he then travelled to Switzerland and Italy, settling in Rome with a group of Scandinavian artists led by Bertel Thorvaldsen. In 1848 he was conscripted into Garibaldi's Guardia civica but escaped to Spain in March 1849, leaving behind an illegitimate son, Luigi, and the boy's mother, Eleonora Gonzales. When his travel grant expired he decided to develop his watercolour technique abroad rather than to return to Sweden to take up a professorship. 
In 1852 Lundgren met the English artists John Phillip and Francis William Topham in Seville; on their advice he went to England in 1853 and was introduced to Thomas Oldham Barlow, who later engraved many of his works. Lundgren concentrated on watercolour painting in England, thereafter producing few pictures in oil. His work was shown to Queen Victoria, for whom he completed over thirty theatrical scenes in watercolour illustrating many of Charles Kean's Shakespearian and other productions. He also painted private royal events, including 'The Marriage of the Princess Royal' (which took place on 25 January 1858), and two military occasions (Royal Collection) for the queen. This royal patronage assisted his career and he established himself in a large studio in London. After a visit to the portrait painter Francis Grant at Melton, he was invited to paint for the earl of Wilton at Egerton Lodge, for the Coventry family, and for the Exeter family at Burghley; at Badminton he drew four large oval pastels of the sons of the eighth duke of Beaufort. 
On 4 February 1858, with a letter of recommendation from Queen Victoria, Lundgren was sent to India by Thomas Agnew & Sons; he reached Calcutta on 20 March. He accompanied the commander-in-chief, Lord Clyde, on his journey of reoccupation after the Indian mutiny, making numerous studies of camp scenes, Sepoy prisoners, and soldiers after the fall of Oudh. His portraits included those of Lord Clyde, Sir William Mansfield, the king of Oudh, and the captured Chinese former governor-general, Ye. He made studies to illustrate a book on the mutiny (which was never published), and his sketches were sent back to England for use by Thomas Jones Barker in his oil painting 'The Relief of Lucknow, November 1857'. The majority of Lundgren's Indian sketches were acquired from Agnews by Sam Mendel of Manley Hall, Manchester. (They were sold after Mendel's death at Christies on 16 April 1875.) Barker's completed oil painting and Lundgren's sketches were exhibited in London from 1 May 1860: the oil was damaged and destroyed in the Art Gallery and Museum, Glasgow, during the Second World War; a smaller version is now in the National Portrait Gallery, London. Lady Canning, wife of the governor-general of India, described the sketches to Queen Victoria as 'very rough but full of cleverness' (Royal Archives, Z 502/55), and on Lundgren's return from India in April 1859 the queen acquired over thirty of them. In September 1859 she invited the artist to Balmoral Castle, where he spent over three weeks painting Scottish scenes and making studies at a highland gathering (Royal Collection; Nationalmuseum, Stockholm). 
Lundgren visited Stockholm and Oslo in 1860 before travelling to Cairo in November 1861, where he shared a studio with Frank Dillon and George Price Boyce. In 1862 he was made a knight of the order of Vasa by Karl XV, king of Sweden, and in the same year exhibited two works at the Royal Academy. He was elected an associate of the Society of Painters in Water Colours in 1864 and became a full member in 1865; between 1865 and 1875 he sent fifty-eight watercolours to the society's winter exhibitions and thirty-five to the summer exhibitions at the Pall Mall East Gallery in London. He visited Italy in 1865 and returned to Seville for the winter of 1867-8, and to England in the spring of 1868. He settled in Stockholm with his brother, Mildhog, in the autumn of that year and there received commissions from the Swedish royal family. A talented letter-writer, Lundgren was described by J. L. Roget as 'a gifted artist with keen perceptive and poetic eyes' and a style 'easy, pure, elegant, charming, pleasing, humorous' (Roget, 2.409). He wrote 'En malares anteckningar' ('A painter's notes'), published in 1873-9, which included extracts from his journals and letters. 
Lundgren died of apoplexy on 16 December 1875 at 4 Oxtorget, Stockholm; he was buried in Stockholm. He bequeathed many of his works to his brother, Mildhog, who presented them to the Nationalmuseum in Stockholm and the Goteborgs Konstmuseum; the manuscripts of his books are in the Kungliga Biblioteket (royal library) in Stockholm. A retrospective exhibition was held at the Kungliga Akademien (Royal Academy of Sweden) from March to July of 1876. 


@@@@@


doc= 17192


Lundie, John (b. c.1600), poet, is of unknown parentage. He was admitted to King's College, Aberdeen, in 1618, proceeded AM in 1622, and was elected a regent in 1626. Having become humanist in 1629, he was advanced in 1631 to the title of 'professor of humanity in the university of Aberdeen', though, says Gordon, he was 'raither maister of the grammar scoole' (Gordon, 1.154). On 16 November 1640 he was chosen dean of the faculty of philosophy. On 12 July 1647, at Gordon's Mill, he married Margaret Gordon. 
In contrast to the general opposition to the national covenant in Aberdeen, Lundie secretly subscribed it in July 1638 and refused the king's covenant in October. He was chosen to represent his university at the general assembly at Glasgow in November of that year: his commission extended to little more than reporting news to his superiors in Aberdeen, but the moderator, Alexander Henderson, got wind that he was a covenanter and granted him a voice. On 15 December Lundie asked the assembly to send a committee of visitors to Aberdeen on the grounds that the bishop was unlawfully taking up rents. Lundie returned to Aberdeen and subscribed the king's covenant on 14 January 1639. In the following month he was accused of having exceeded his powers by the Aberdeen authorities, to whom he pleaded guilty. There is, however, a suggestion that Lundie's petition had been engineered by the covenanters to furnish them with a pretext for sending arms against the marquess of Huntly (Gordon, 3.224-5). 
Besides his 'Oratio eucharistica et encomiastica', which was delivered on 27 July 1631 (Marischal College Library, Aberdeen), on the occasion of a gift to the university from Dr Alexander Read, Lundie wrote the dedicatory poem prefixed to Bishop Patrick Forbes's 'Funerals'. The other verses from his pen contained within this volume (pp. 370, 414) are reproduced in the largest collection of his work, which is appended to the Abbotsford Club's edition of 'A Garden of Grave and Godlie Flowers' (1845) by Alexander Garden, who was probably Lundie's brother-in-law. Lundie's miscellaneous verses rarely sparkle and, while they have potential for grace and light-heartedness, they are too often weighed down by an overpowering use of classical allusion. Some show feeling, such as his Latin elegiacs on the death of his son (p. 29), but even these are marred by the admission of a false quantity. Several of the poems are addressed to Garden and to David Leech. Lundie is also supposed to have written in Latin the 'Comedy of the twelve patriarchs' (preface to Garden's 'Garden', xvi). 
Lundie was a baillie for the town of Aberdeen and is recorded in council minutes until 1655. He was predeceased by his son, John, but survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 17193


Lundy, Robert (d. before 1717), army officer, was a Scot, probably from Fife. He was commissioned in Lord Dumbarton's regiment (later the Royal Scots), which served on the continent in the French service until 1678, by which time he was a captain. He served in England and Ireland until 1680, when the regiment was sent to Tangier. He was seriously wounded while leading an attack on the trenches in the victory over the Moors on 27 October 1680. He received $80 bounty in compensation for his wounds in 1683. 
Lundy married Martha, a daughter of Rowland Davies, later dean of Cork, and with her had at least one son and one daughter who survived him. Through his wife's connections he was able to get the duke of Ormond to secure him a commission as lieutenant-colonel in the regiment of William Stewart, Viscount Mountjoy, in Ireland in 1685. Under Lundy's command the regiment formed the garrison of Londonderry until November 1688, when it was recalled to Dublin so as to make way for a newly raised Catholic regiment. Mountjoy's regiment was sent straight back to Londonderry after the citizens rebelled and shut the gates on the replacement garrison. Mountjoy signed articles promising that he would seek a pardon for this act of rebellion and left Lundy as the governor of Londonderry and the commander of the troops in the north-west. 
In March 1689, when civil war was inevitable, Lundy ordered Lord Kingston to evacuate Sligo, and advised Gustavus Hamilton to abandon Coleraine. On 21 March he swore, albeit in private, an oath of allegiance to William and Mary and received his new commission as governor of Londonderry. When the Irish army crossed the River Bann in early April 1689, Lundy consolidated his position by ordering his outlying garrisons back to the city. He burnt the Waterside to deny the enemy shelter, and in a hurried council of war on 13 April he ordered all his troops to assemble at the fords on the rivers Finn and Foyle, which he hoped to be able to hold against King James's army. The plan resulted in a precipitate flight back to Londonderry on 15 April. Lundy was criticized for his handling of the affair and for failing to get those troops commanded by Lord Kingston to join him. This criticism grew after he held a council of war on 16 April with the officers from two English regiments who had been sent by sea to join the garrison. It was concluded that, as there were not enough provisions in Londonderry and as the city was untenable in any event, the reinforcements should not disembark. As soon as it was realized that Lundy had sent the reinforcements away, it was rumoured that he was planning to surrender. He was forced to take refuge in his house from a violent mob led by Adam Murray who had let in to the city all those fugitives whom Lundy had locked out. He called a further council in which he was asked to resume his governorship. Having no control over the mob, he refused, and on 19 April Henry Baker and George Walker were elected joint governors in his place. On the evening of 20 April Lundy disguised himself as a common soldier and with Walker's connivance he slipped out of the city with four others and managed to cross in an open boat to Islay where he was arrested. He was released by the governor of Dumbarton, a relation of his, and made his way to London where he was placed in the Tower. He was in the meantime attainted by King James's Dublin parliament. 
There has over the centuries been an unresolved debate as to whether Lundy was a Jacobite agent intent on preventing resistance or a Williamite who honestly thought that Londonderry would not be able to withstand the Irish army. The fact that Lundy chose to make a hazardous escape to avoid falling into Jacobite hands makes his being a traitor unlikely. In August 1689 he was brought before a House of Commons committee appointed 'to inquire into the miscarriages relating to Ireland and Londonderry'. It was initially recommended that he be sent back to Londonderry to face trial for treason, but this never happened since George Walker let it be known that Lundy still had his supporters there. Lundy remained in the Tower until February 1690, when he was produced on a writ of habeas corpus and bailed in the sum of $12,000, $2000 of which was put up by the earl of Clarendon, the erstwhile lord lieutenant of Ireland. He was never brought to trial but left military life until after the death of King William in 1702. In 1704 he travelled to Lisbon with Queen Anne's letter of recommendation for employment and was appointed the adjutant-general of the king of Portugal's forces in the queen of England's pay, a post he held until 1712. He brought reinforcements to Gibraltar in December 1704 and served there until the siege was raised in the following March. He was later captured by the French at sea in April 1707 and taken to France. He was exchanged for twenty men in June 1709. He died some time before 1717. Since 1788 he has been remembered in Londonderry by the annual burning of his effigy bearing the sign 'Lundy the traitor'. 


@@@@@


doc= 17194


Lunn, Joseph (1784-1863), playwright, of whose early life nothing is known, had his earliest work, 'The Sorrows of Werther', a burlesque, with music by Henry Rowley Bishop, produced at Covent Garden on 6 May 1818 with John Liston and his wife in the chief parts. Liston was successful in four pieces by Lunn produced at the Haymarket between 1822 and 1825. These were: 'Family Jars', a farce in one act produced on 26 August 1822 (acted nineteen times and printed both at New York and in London, in Lacy's 'Acting Edition of Plays', 14, 1850); 'Fish out of Water', another one-act farce, produced on 26 August 1823 (acted twenty-eight times and printed in Lacy, vol. 16); 'Hide and Seek, Petit opera', adapted from the French, in two acts, produced on 22 October 1824 (revived at Covent Garden, 11 November 1830, and printed in Cumberland's 'British Theatre', 12, 1829); and 'Roses and Thorns, or, Two Houses under one Roof', a comedy in three acts produced on 24 August 1825 (printed in Cumberland, vol. 12). Henry Compton also appeared with great success in 'Family Jars' and 'Fish out of Water', and the latter when revived at the Lyceum in the autumn of 1874 ran for over one hundred nights. 
Several of Lunn's plays were translations or adaptations of French originals. These included 'Management, or, The Prompter Puzzled', a comic interlude in one act, a free translation from 'Le beneficiaire' by Theaulon de Lambert and Etienne, which was produced at the Haymarket Theatre on 29 September 1828 and published separately in 1830 and again in Richardson's 'British Drama' and in Cumberland. 'The Shepherd of Derwent Vale, or, The Innocent Culprit', a drama in two acts given at Drury Lane on 12 February 1825, was issued in London in 1825 and reprinted in Lacy. 
Lunn also wrote 'Horae jocosae, or, The Doggerel Decameron', ten facetious tales in verse (1823). He lived some time in Craven Street, Strand, London, and was an original member of the Dramatic Authors' Society. Lunn died at Grand Parade, Brighton, on 12 December 1863, aged seventy-nine, leaving at least two sons, William Arthur Brown Lunn and Henry Charles Lunn. 


@@@@@


doc= 17195


Henry Lunsford (bap. 1611, d. 1643), royalist army officer, another brother of Sir Thomas, was baptized at Framfield, Sussex, on 29 September 1611. After serving in Europe he was lieutenant-colonel in Thomas's regiment at York in 1640. He raised 240 foot for the regiment in Somerset, and was active in one of the first confrontations in the civil war, when on 4 August 1642 he led a successful ambuscade at Marshall's Elm, Somerset, before the king's formal declaration of hostilities. He fought at the action near Sherborne Castle on 26 August, retired into Wales, and, after being present at Edgehill, succeeded to the colonelcy of his brother's regiment, fighting at Brentford (12 November) and the defence of Reading (April 1643). After commanding Prince Rupert's foot at Chalgrove Field (18 June), he was wounded at the siege of Bristol (26 July) and, carrying on in command, was shot through the heart the following day on Christmas Steps, long afterwards known as Lunsford's stairs. Clarendon refers to him as an officer of 'extraordinary sobriety, industry, and courage' (Clarendon, 'Hist. rebellion', 3.114). 


@@@@@


doc= 17196


Sir Herbert Lunsford (b. c.1610, d. in or after 1667), royalist army officer, brother (and possibly twin) of Sir Thomas, like him seems to have experienced the wars in the Netherlands and Germany. In 1630 he was fined $10 for failing to take up the honour of knighthood. It was he who ordered one of his servants to kill Pelham's hound in June 1632. In 1640 he was a captain in his brother's regiment, and he was present at Edgehill. He distinguished himself at Rupert's capture of Cirencester, and, having been made governor of Malmesbury, was taken prisoner when it was captured by Sir William Waller (23-5 March 1643). He commanded Patrick Ruthven, earl of Forth's, foot, at the siege of Bristol (July 1643). By March 1644 he was in command of a regiment, and he fought at Cropredy Bridge, Oxfordshire, on 29 June. He was knighted on 6 July 1645, by when he had succeeded his brother Thomas as governor of Monmouth; he surrendered the town to Colonel Morgan in October and went over to France. 


@@@@@


doc= 17197


Lunsford, Sir Thomas (b. c.1610, d. in or before 1656), royalist army officer, was possibly the third of four sons (there were also four daughters) of Thomas Lunsford (died 1637), of East Hoathly, Sussex, and his wife, Katherine (died 1642), daughter of Thomas Fludd, treasurer of war in France and the Low Countries under Elizabeth I, and sister of Robert Fludd, the celebrated Rosicrucian. 
The Lunsford family was established in Sussex before the Norman Conquest, but its fortunes seem to have decayed in the early seventeenth century, and by the 1630s its insecurity had helped provoke a feud with a relative, Sir Thomas Pelham, of Halland, whose parkland abutted the Lunsford property. The Lunsfords seem to have poached Pelham's deer, and on 27 June 1632 a Lunsford servant killed one of Pelham's hounds; the family were fined $1750. In August 1633 Lunsford foolishly fired his pistol at Pelham's coach outside East Hoathly church after Sunday morning service; the bullet passed through the coach, lodging in the church door, where it remained for many years. Although no one was seriously hurt the incident was generally regarded as attempted murder, and Lunsford was ostracized by Sussex society and imprisoned in Newgate by privy council warrant on 16 August 1633. Allowed to lodge outside the prison, he contrived in October 1634 to escape, despite a game left leg. 
Lunsford entered French service, and in April 1636 he was in Picardy, raising a foot regiment, of which he became colonel. In the mid-1630s Lunsford married Anne Hudson (died 1638), of Peckham, Surrey; their only child, a son, died in infancy. The Pelham case finally reached Star Chamber in June 1637: Lunsford was fined $8000 and was outlawed for failing to appear to receive judgment. Two years later he returned to England, was pardoned, and had his fine remitted (24 April 1639). He joined the royal army against the Scots, and in 1640 commanded a regiment of trained bands raised in Somerset. Although he complained that 'all are forward to disband' ('CSP dom.', '1640', 327) and boasted of having shot a couple of mutineers out of hand, he managed to conduct it from Warwick to Newcastle (June-3 August 1640) and fought bravely at the rout of Newburn (28 August), so retaining a special hold on the king's affections. In 1640 Lunsford married his second wife, Katherine (died 1649), daughter of Sir Henry Neville, of Billingbear, Berkshire; they had three daughters. 
On 22 December 1641 the king, apparently on the recommendation of George Digby, issued an ill-timed warrant appointing Lunsford lieutenant of the Tower of London. Many saw this as a calculated affront to parliament, signalling an impending coup, since the Tower was the key to military control of the capital. The following day the common council of London petitioned the House of Commons against the appointment, depicting Lunsford as an indebted, quarrelsome desperado and a non-attender at church (a charge they later withdrew). On 24 December the Commons voted him unfit to be lieutenant; the same day Lunsford's superior, the earl of Newport, who enjoyed the complete confidence of the anti-court party, was dismissed as constable of the Tower. John Pym declared that Lunsford's appointment was proof that the popish conspiracy was nearing maturity; Londoners feared that Lunsford might use the cannon in the Tower to pound the city to rubble; reports circulated that the City merchants were withdrawing their bullion from the mint within the Tower, to the potential damage of trade; and libels soon appeared that Lunsford was a cannibal, with a penchant for eating children. 
Although the king, on the advice of the lord mayor (who suggested that Lunsford's appointment would lead to an apprentice assault on the Tower), replaced Lunsford with Sir John Byron on 26 December, this was clearly a response to popular protest. The following three days saw a wave of demonstrations by the citizenry, who feared the testy, braggart professional soldiers who hung about London, waiting for their pay arrears and pressing for new commands in Ireland. Lunsford led a party of these officers who were prepared to confront the populace and were not averse to shedding blood. On 27 December, after Lunsford had been examined by the Lords, they drove the citizens out of Westminster Hall (though Lunsford had to escape by wading out to a boat in the Thames); clashes at Westminster Abbey on 28 December were followed by the fiercest fighting the following day round Whitehall. Lunsford received compensation for his dismissal in a knighthood on 28 December and, apparently, a pension of $500 per annum. 
Lunsford accompanied the king in his attempted arrest of the five members on 4 January 1642, and he was with him when he finally left Whitehall six days later. On 12 January, with a large force, he was reported to be at the noted but ill-defined hurly-burly at Kingston-on-Thames, Surrey, site of the county magazine, which it was widely believed the king aimed to seize 'en route' to capturing Portsmouth. An alarmed House of Commons ordered Lunsford's arrest, and on 13 January he was captured at Billingbear, Berkshire, the home of his father-in-law. Bailed on 2 February, he was at liberty before June. On 1 July he was at York with the king, and on 14 July he had an hour-long private interview with him at Beverley. He was present at the armed demonstration against Hull on 29 July and by 3 August was based at Wells, Somerset. 
At Banbury on 8 August Lunsford helped capture parliamentarian ordnance destined for Warwick Castle, and on 14 August he rescued Colonel Hastings near Loughborough from impending imprisonment in Leicester. On 19 August Lunsford received a commission to raise 1000 foot in Yorkshire, and the following day he was appointed governor of Sherborne Castle, Dorset, by the marquess of Hertford, with whom he retired into Glamorgan on 23 September. 
After the battle of Edgehill on 23 October 1642 Lunsford was taken prisoner at Kineton, Warwickshire, and incarcerated in Warwick Castle until early May 1644. Arriving on 6 May at Oxford, where he was given command of a regiment, he was one of those chosen to assist Sir Arthur Aston in his government of the city. After relieving Greenland House (8 June) he entered the service of Prince Rupert, and was at Bristol, possibly as lieutenant-governor, in March 1645. By April he had become governor of Monmouth, a post he resigned to his brother Herbert ['see below'] before 7 July. After suffering defeat at Stoke Castle, Shropshire, on 9 June 1645 he received a royal commission to consolidate royalist forces in Wales; he escaped an assassination attempt, but on 8 December was captured at the taking of Hereford. Imprisoned in the Tower of London on a charge of treason, he remained there, with his wife, until 1 October 1647, when he was removed to Lord Petre's house in Aldersgate Street. 
By 29 June 1648 he had secured his liberty, and in December Lunsford was in Amsterdam, ready to cross to England. He seems to have given up the Stuart cause as hopeless, and on 7 August 1649, having compounded for his delinquency at a sixth ($300), and described as having no personal estate and much indebted, he secured a pass for himself and his family to Virginia. Early in 1650 he was depicted feasting and carousing at Ralph Wormeley's plantation on the York River, and on 24 October he was granted 3423 acres on the south side of the Rappahannock River, known as Portobacco. He was made lieutenant-general of the Virginia militia and a member of the council by the governor, Sir William Berkeley. At some point he married his third wife, Elizabeth, daughter of Henry Wormeley, of Riccall, Yorkshire, and widow of Richard Kempe, secretary of Virginia; they had a daughter. Lunsford probably lived at Richneck, his wife's home; after his death she married Major-General Robert Smith of Middlesex county. Lunsford died in or before 1656 and was buried near Greenspring, Berkeley's residence, where he shared a monument with Richard Kempe and Thomas Ludwell, Kempe's successor as secretary; this was moved to the churchyard at Bruton parish church, Williamsburg, where it remains at the beginning of the twenty-first century. 
Red-haired, and of a markedly turbulent temperament, Lunsford clearly had an unsavoury reputation for sadism, brutality, and violence in the early 1640s, and he was depicted by his cousin, Lord Dorset, as 'a young outlaw who neither fears God nor man, and who, having given himself over to all lewdness and dissoluteness, only studies to affront justice, [taking] a glory to be esteemed... a swaggering ruffian' (Newman, 'Royalist Officers', 242). He was typical of the hard men upon whom Charles I increasingly relied, to the annoyance of moderate royalist opinion. His reputation for cannibalism arose because a libeller had written he was fierce enough to eat children; Sir Walter Scott, in 'Woodstock', mentions drawings in which he was depicted about to cut an infant into steaks. Yet Clarendon, by no means a sympathetic source, merely characterized Lunsford as a man 'of a very small and decayed fortune, and of no good education... who had been forced to fly the kingdom to avoid the hand of justice for some riotous misdemeanours'. If by 1641 he had acquired 'an ill character', he had also earned himself 'the reputation of a man of courage and a good officer of foot' (Clarendon, 'Hist. rebellion', 1.478). Indeed, Lunsford's characterization has been largely couched in parliament's terms, based on hearsay, insinuation, and the vestiges of an unbridled youth. 'Nothing in his wartime career suggests excesses' (Newman, 'Old Service', 145), and Sir John Coke, suffering depredations from royal troops in June 1640, and soliciting Lunsford's help, found him 'a brave gentleman and discreet' (ibid., 144). 


On 29 February 1648 Sir Herbert was licensed to transport soldiers into Europe from Erith, Kent, and in 1652 he petitioned the council of state for permission to transfer 3000 Irishmen into the king of Spain's service. In 1658 he was temporarily in command of three regiments, and the following year he was Charles II's emissary to Marshal Turenne. He returned to England some time after the Restoration and in 1667 was in command of a company of foot. He married (probably in the early 1640s) Margaret, daughter of Sir Thomas Engham, of Goodnestone, Kent; they had a son and two daughters. His captain's commission in March 1667 is the last certain reference to him. 




@@@@@


doc= 17198


Luny, Thomas (bap. 1759, d. 1837), marine painter, son of Thomas Luny and his wife, Elizabeth Wallace, was probably born in Cornwall, being baptized at St Ewe near Mevagissey on 20 May 1759. His mother had a son from a previous marriage, James Wallace (1754-1832), a Royal Navy captain who fought at Copenhagen with Nelson in 1801. By 1773 Luny was apprenticed to the marine painter Francis Holman from whose address, Johnson Street, St George's, London, he first exhibited at the Society of Artists in 1777 and 1778. He first exhibited at the Royal Academy in 1780 from nearby Anchor and Hope Street, with Ratcliffe Highway being his academy exhibiting address from 1782 to 1790. In 1783 his picture 'Battle of the Dogger Bank' (1781) was his only appearance at the Free Society of Artists, submitted from the address of Thomas Merle, a frame maker in Leadenhall Street, near East India House, who appears to have been an outlet for many of Luny's ship portraits of East Indiamen and similar compositions. Luny exhibited annually at the Royal Academy until 1793, then again in 1802, when he showed 'Battle of the Nile' (1798). 
A belief that Luny joined the navy as a purser in 1793 and retired on a pension when incapacitated is now discounted, despite the absence of exhibited works between then and 1802. Many of his subjects suggest that he travelled, but there is no direct evidence of this save for a visit to Paris in 1777. In 1791 he bought a property at 16 Mark Lane, between Leadenhall Street and the Thames, and by January 1795 was earning enough to begin regular investment in interest-bearing government stocks. In mid-1807 he moved to Teignmouth, a fashionable watering place on the Devon coast, probably for health reasons. In 1808-9 he built a home there in Teign Street, later called Luny House. From February 1807 to December 1835 he kept a list of paintings, purchasers, and prices: it includes over 2200 works, but there must have been many more. The earliest paintings listed include views of London and Blackfriars bridges, but Teignmouth features from June 1807. Thereafter picturesque local coastal views, shipping scenes, and naval events were his stock-in-trade, most selling for under $5, some at $10, and a few up to $25. Again he did well: his link with Merle lasted to 1817 and he established others with frame-maker-dealers in Bristol and Plymouth as well as finding many local clients. These included Captain George Tobin, an amateur artist who retired to Teignmouth in 1814 and with whom his supposed naval career was previously linked. 
Luny was able to paint occasional large pictures (up to 5 ft x 8 ft) as late as about 1821 but by the mid-1820s he was confined to a wheelchair by some form of arthritis, which deprived him of the use of his hands and forced him to work with his brush held between both fists or strapped to his wrist. At their best Luny's naval battles, shipping, and wreck scenes are dramatic, strongly drawn, and colourful, with many of the small coastal scenes he did around Teignmouth having a picturesque, atmospheric charm. Unsurprisingly, given his disability, the drawing of some later work is weak and his original bright colour also became increasingly muted. He exhibited a pair, of the battles of the Nile and Trafalgar, at the British Institution in 1825. His last pictures were shown at the Royal Academy in 1837, just before 130 were exhibited for sale in Old Bond Street, when a report states he had given up painting about two years before ('Literary Gazette', 24 June 1837), no doubt because of the arthritis which had then crippled him. The last known date on a painting is in fact 1836. He also painted in watercolour and a number of his pictures, both naval and topographical, were engraved. 
Luny was described by a friend of the late 1820s as probably of medium height, had he been able to stand, and 'as a man of broad and well-nurtured frame, of fair and somewhat florid complexion; not easily drawn into conversation, but of kindly nature and pleasant in his manner with children' (Dymond, 443). He died, unmarried, on 30 September 1837, at his home in Teignmouth, and was buried in West Teignmouth churchyard. He left estate of nearly $14,000, including Luny House, other local property, and his Mark Lane house, which he had retained. Most went to his niece, Mrs Elizabeth Haswell ('nee' Wallace), who was his nearest surviving relative. At the end of his life he is said to have engaged Moses Gompertz ('c'.1813-1893), better known as a diorama painter, as an assistant and after his death either Gompertz or one of his niece's six sons, or both, spent some months completing a large number of unfinished works for sale. This and the fact that a talented amateur pupil, Captain Hulme of Exeter, is said to have 'caught his style' (Dymond, 447) can produce attribution problems. The National Maritime Museum, Greenwich, has forty oils, mostly of naval scenes, and sketchbooks. The Royal Albert Memorial Museum, Exeter, also has a collection and while many museums also hold examples of his work, most are probably still in private hands given their regular appearance on the market. Two large pictures of the bombardment of Algiers (1816), which Luny painted in 1819 for the commander there, Admiral Lord Exmouth, remained at the latter's home, Canonteign House, until sold in 1992. 


@@@@@


doc= 17199


Lupo, Thomas (bap. 1571?, d. 1627/8?), violinist and composer, son of Joseph Lupo (died 1616), violinist, and his wife, Laura Bassano (died in or before 1596), was probably the 'Thomas s[on] [of] Basanew' baptized at St Olave, Hart Street, London, on 7 August 1571. Laura's brother Augustine Bassano ['see under 'Bassano, Alvise] lived in the same house, hence the ambiguous entry in the baptismal register. Both the Lupo and Bassano families had been recruited to the court of Henry VIII from Venice in 1540, the former among a group of string players and the latter as wind instrumentalists and instrument makers. Some, if not all, were Jewish; Lupo (also styled Wolf and Lopez) was a surname frequently adopted by Jews in gentile society. Among the Lupo family who arrived in 1540 were Ambrose (died 1591), Alexander (who served at least until 1544), and Romano (died 1542), all titled 'da Milano'. Two sons born to Ambrose before he left Venice were Peter and Joseph. They may have come to England with their father, but in the 1550s both joined the musicians' guild in Antwerp. Joseph became a member of the string consort at the English court from Michaelmas 1563, and Peter (died 1608) followed at Lady day 1567. By privy seal of 13 January 1601 Joseph received a $200 gift from the queen for his 'long and faithful service'. He was buried at Richmond on 23 April 1616. In 1607 Peter received $20 for his service 'and for relief of his present necessitye', suggesting that he may have been in poor health then. Two sons of Joseph -- Thomas and Horatio ('bap'. 1583, died 1626) -- and one son of Peter -- also Thomas ['see below'] -- in turn joined the group. Horatio was baptized at St Olave, Hart Street, on 5 November 1583. In 1607-8 he was one of ten musicians serving Thomas Sackville, earl of Dorset, and he was a court violinist from Christmas 1611. 
The elder Thomas Lupo, the subject of this article, was admitted among the violins at court on 26 January 1588. Augustine Bassano bequeathed him 'Twoe of my beste Lutes... and alsoe all my musicke bookes and other bookes' (LMA, DL/C/359, fols. 301-2). During James I's reign he participated in the composition and performance of music for a number of masques; the third of five songs printed for 'Lord Hay's Masque' (6 January 1607) was by him. For Jonson's 'Oberon' (1 January 1611) and 'Love Freed from Ignorance and Folly' (3 February 1611) he was paid $5 for setting the dances, and he later received a further $10, perhaps for the corresponding work in Campion's 'Lord's Masque' (14 February 1613). 
Lupo was among the group of musicians appointed to serve Henry, prince of Wales, from Christmas 1610, but they were disbanded following the prince's death on 7 November 1612. Eventually the remaining musicians, including Lupo, were reappointed to serve Charles as prince of Wales from 1617. On 10 May 1619 Lupo resigned his post as violinist, but from Christmas 1620 he became 'Composer for our violins, that they may be the better furnished with variety and choise for our delight and pleasure in that kind'. So far as is known, all music attributed to 'Thomas Lupo' is by this man. On 8 February 1622 $20 was ordered to be paid to 'Thomas Lupo, one of the [prince's] Musicons, for a Booke by him presented' (TNA: PRO, SC 6/Jas. I/1685). 
This present may be one indication of Lupo's new status as an official composer at court; it was among the musicians of Charles, prince of Wales, that the most innovative work was done by Lupo, Orlando Gibbons, John Coprario, and Robert Johnson. Together with his colleague Alfonso Ferrabosco (died 1628), Lupo had already supplied a substantial body of music for viol consort. Lupo, although less strict in using imitative devices than was customary, rather explored a lively instrumental style, with changes of tempo, metre, and groupings within the ensemble. This variety continued in later years, but in company with Orlando Gibbons and Coprario, Lupo turned to smaller groups, writing treble parts apt for violin rather than viol. Some pieces are lightweight, similar to masque dances, while others introduce rapid passage work. Contrasts of instrumental colour -- violin, viol, and organ -- are a feature of much music emanating from Charles's musicians in the 1620s. 
Lupo lived at Greenwich for some years, and four of his children were buried there between 1616 and 1620. He may have moved to Gillingham, Kent, later; from there on 26 July 1627 he appointed a deputy to receive $106 13's'. 4died from his arrears, but 'before he could subscribe his wife by violence kept him of[f], & would not p[er]mitt him' (TNA: PRO, E 406/45, fol. 239'v'). His wife, Lidia, was probably the 'Mrs Lupoe' buried at Greenwich on 10 April 1651. Lupo seems to have died about the end of 1627, since on 16 February 1628 he was replaced as court violinist by his son Theophilus. On 6 June 1629 Theophilus wrote a letter from Cooling, Kent (which is within the manor of Gillingham), assigning arrears to pay debts. In 1631 he was named as one of two players of the contratenor violin in the court band. He played in the inns of court masque 'The Triumph of Peace' in February 1634. Sixteen two-part airs composed by him are known. He was buried at St Giles Cripplegate on 29 July 1650. 




@@@@@


doc= 17200


Thomas Lupo (bap. 1577, d. in or after 1647), violinist, son of Peter Lupo (died 1608) and his second wife, Katherine Wickers, was baptized at St Botolph, Aldgate, London, on 7 June 1577. He began service in the court violin band at midsummer 1598 at the age of twenty-one and served until the breakup of the court music in 1642. Until the death of the elder Thomas Lupo ['see above'] he was usually called 'the younger' or 'junior' in the records, but some references are ambiguous. Evidently he played the tenor violin: he is named as one of two 'low tenors' in a list dated 12 April 1631, and was paid $6 for supplying a tenor violin by warrant of 21 July 1632. He too played in 'The Triumph of Peace' in February 1634, and he was one of the Corporation of Musick in Westminster named in its charter of 15 July 1635. The last known reference to him is dated 5 April 1647, when he signed an acquittance for $6 13's'. 4died from Cromwell's committee of the revenue (responsible for paying some maintenance to former court servants). 


@@@@@


doc= 17201


Lupset, Thomas (c.1495-1530), ecclesiastic and scholar, was the son of Thomas Lupset, member of the Company of Goldsmiths and moneylender, and his wife, Alice, and was born probably in St Mildred's parish, London. Before 1508 he entered John Colet's household. On 24 October 1508 he received from the king the chapel of St Margaret, Hilborough, Norfolk, probably on Colet's recommendation. Lupset studied Greek and Latin under William Lily, probably at St Paul's School. By mid-1513 he was at Cambridge, probably in Pembroke College, when he assisted Erasmus in editing the 'New Testament'. Despite this early prominence, Lupset disappears until three years later when he was in London, enmeshed in difficulties with Erasmus over his revelation of the alleged authorship of 'Julius exclusus' (now thought not to be by Erasmus), a manuscript (apparently autograph) of which Lupset had in his possession. By the same time he had come to know Thomas More, to whom he passed this manuscript and several others written by Erasmus. 
In early 1517 Lupset went to Paris in order to see through the press Thomas Linacre's translation of Galen's 'De sanitate tuenda'. He sought Guillaume Bude's criticism of the manuscript, and after its printing Erasmus repeatedly asked Lupset to send him a copy. Having produced Linacre's book, Lupset also saw More's 'Utopia' into print. Among the prefatory material was a letter from Bude to Lupset. Another such letter prefaced the 1519 Paris edition of Galen's 'Methodus medendi'. In addition to men of the stature of More and Bude, Lupset was already known to Richard Pace, the king's secretary. During a quick visit to Louvain, Lupset met Edward Lee, then deeply embroiled in an attack on Erasmus's 'New Testament', a text which Lupset vehemently supported. Lupset tried to talk Lee out of publishing his most intemperate criticisms by telling him that a young man (Lee) should not contend with an old one (Erasmus). In December 1519 Erasmus wrote Lupset a long letter defending his work. Early the following year, Lupset contributed three of his own letters, and two of More's, to 'Epistolae aliquot eruditorum, nunquam antehac excusae' (published by Thierry Martens in December 1519 and by Froben in 1520) which attacked Lee. Lupset responded to Lee's charge that he was largely responsible for the 'tragedy', although it is unknown what may have lain behind Lee's criticism. The sum of Lupset's sometimes thinly supported argument fell on Lee's lack of principles and his poor scholarship, although Lupset's letter to Wilhelm Nesen made some points in detail, along with the accusation that Lee was insane. The 'Epistolae' went through three editions, helping to make Lupset's reputation. 
Lupset returned to England by late 1519 or early 1520. Shortly before that Colet had died, leaving books to Lupset. Erasmus asked Lupset for information about Colet in order to write a remembrance which became his letter to Justus Jonas of 13 June 1521, but Lupset apparently did not provide very much material -- at least Erasmus's text contains little concrete biographical detail. In early 1520 Lupset took up residence in Corpus Christi College, Oxford, when he was identified as BA (Emden says of Paris, Gee of Oxford), and was made lecturer in rhetoric and humanity by Cardinal Wolsey's appointment. More, Lupset's first biographer George Lily, and the University of Oxford all highly praised Lupset's efforts. He had among his students the subsequently prominent translator Gentian Hervet, but Hervet's chronology is sufficiently confused to make it difficult to say when. Lupset incepted as MA on 9 July 1521. Lily's statement that Lupset left Oxford because he could not compete with his successor as lecturer, Juan Luis Vives, may be disproved by chronology: Lupset had left Oxford before Vives's appointment. 
On 31 January 1522 Lupset received a royal grant of a pension from the abbot of St Mary's, York, and a little later the living of Ashton, Derbyshire. By March 1523 he had vacated the rectory of Claypole, Lincolnshire, and on the 24th of that month became chaplain of St Nicholas's Chapel in the parish of Stanford-le-Hope, Essex (until death). Probably already before these last transactions, Lupset had left Oxford for Padua, very likely in company with Thomas Starkey. He carried recommendations to Niccolo Leonico Tomeo from William Latimer and Cuthbert Tunstall. Once arrived, Lupset immediately encountered Reginald Pole, whom he may have known from Oxford and in whose household he probably lived. With Pole he shared instruction from Leonico, and Leonico asked both to look over the preface to his 'Dialogi' published in 1524. In early 1525 Lupset was in Venice, whence he kept Leonico minutely informed about the campaign leading to the battle of Pavia, sending him a map. Later that year Lupset introduced Pole to Erasmus in a long epistolary encomium dated 23 August 1525. He provided Erasmus with manuscripts, among them one of Chrysostom, perhaps of his commentary on 'Acts'. Possibly through Pole's patronage Lupset received the rectory of Great Mongeham, Kent, on 21 April 1526 (vacated by July 1530; it went next to Pole's client Starkey). At the same time he became rector of Snargate, Kent, and St Martin Ludgate on 3 July 1526 (until death). 
While in Italy, Lupset became close to Pace, ambassador to Venice, with whom he spent much time both there and in Padua, although he probably did not act as Pace's secretary as Anthony Wood thought. Lupset was among four Englishmen who received special credit for preparing the Aldine edition of Galen which appeared in five volumes in 1525. In early 1526 Lupset went to Paris for unknown reasons, returning to Padua whence he set out for England with Pole in the autumn, making another stop in Paris which probably extended into 1527. On his return to England, Lupset hoped to devote himself to sacred literature, especially Chrysostom, but Wolsey appointed him tutor to his illegitimate son Thomas Winter, who was being sent to Paris. Lupset arrived there before 28 February 1528, the date of his first letter thence. Either before or after this episode, Lupset tutored Edmund Withypoll, son of Paul Withypoll, an alderman of London, along with Christopher Smith. He may also have been close to John Leland, who addressed three poems to Lupset. Lupset ended his tutelage of Winter in 1529, and Wolsey apparently recalled him, perhaps intending to employ him in his new college in Oxford. 
That summer, in Wolsey's palace of the More, Lupset wrote his 'Exhortacion to Young Men', addressed to Withypoll and printed by 24 August 1529. It began with a complaint about Lupset's enforced attendance on Wolsey, and urged Withypoll to attend to his soul first, his body next, and worldly possessions only last. Lupset offered Withypoll a short list of essential reading, beginning with the 'New Testament', to be read according to the church's interpretation, which Lupset seems to have thought meant Chrysostom and Jerome, a less than orthodox pairing. He added Aristotle's 'Ethics', Plato, Cicero, Seneca (who appears in all three works), Erasmus's 'Enchiridion', Galen, and lastly Aristotle's 'Politics'. The 'Exhortacion' has been called the most polished piece of English prose written to this time. It was likely at more or less the same moment that Lupset produced 'A Treatise of Charitie', first published in 1533 and intended for the use of a nun. It begins with a definition of charity which Lupset made equivalent to all of Christianity, and argued the Stoic point that tranquillity of mind was its 'chief effect' (Gee, 228). Towards the end of the work, Lupset criticized William Tyndale's translation of the Latin 'charitas' as 'love' in his 'New Testament', just as More had done. Lupset also argued the somewhat peculiar point that faith led to fear of God which issued in works of charity. Charity meant unconditional love of one's neighbour for God's sake, and Lupset concluded that 'both God is charity and charity is God' (Gee, 231). In this treatise, as in all his other writings, Lupset stressed the necessity of contempt of the body and of this life. All three also have an anti-clerical edge. 
In the summer of 1529 Lupset may have visited Pole at his mother's house at Bisham, an occasion which could have given rise to Starkey's 'Dialogue between Pole and Lupset', a work nurtured when Starkey and Lupset were together in Paris immediately afterwards. It is possible that the efforts of Lupset, the character in the 'Dialogue', to induce Pole actively to serve the commonwealth were undertaken on behalf of the king. The real Lupset certainly expected great things of Pole, as the praise of him towards the end of 'A Compendious Treatise of... Dieyng Well' manifests by stressing England's hopes for Pole. The work's point is simple and in line with Lupset's other two original compositions: a good death required contempt of this life. It opened with a lengthy treatment of the Roman Canius who laughed at a death sentence from Emperor Caligula, and included a much briefer list of Christian martyrs. Lupset admitted that he could not do the job on the subject that a Carthusian might, and his stress on the 'paynims' confirms his judgment. 
Whatever his thoughts on the future life, for the moment Lupset attached his career prospects to Pole in preference to Wolsey. In October 1529 Pole left England for Paris, allegedly to continue his studies, but this was a pretence to cover his mission on Henry's behalf to the theologians and lawyers of the University of Paris. Lily repeated the pretence but also correctly observed that Lupset had joined Pole at a time when he stood in 'the king's high favor' (Hirsh, 16). Lupset almost certainly accompanied Pole on the evidence both of a list of instructions from Pole to him concerning a trip to Paris, and the fact that Lupset's last work, 'Dieyng Well', directed to Pole's servant John Walker, was finished in Paris by 10 January of what must be 1530. In any case, Lupset certainly took part in Pole's procuring of a favourable opinion on the king's divorce from both faculties. In the later stages of the negotiations he acted as messenger to and from Pole. At the end of April he received 100 crowns from the king and in May another $10 'by way of reward' (Gee, 139), as well as the rectory of Cheriton, Hampshire, on 1 August 1530, and a canonry of Salisbury and the prebend of Ruscombe Southbury five days later, very likely through royal (or at least Wolsey's) patronage. 
Like Pole himself, Lupset was able to compartmentalize his attitude to royal service and to royal policy. At nearly the same time as he performed well in Paris, he also wrote his neo-Stoic works, and translated Chrysostom (and according to Lily wrote imitations of his sermons), as well as a work, now lost, criticizing the formulation of policy during drunken spells in the royal palace, which may have owed something to Pseudo-Dionysius's 'Celestial Hierarchies', and must certainly have been meant as criticism of Henry VIII. Its only manuscript was burnt in 1538 during the investigation of the Courtenay conspiracy. Lupset also claimed in the 'Exhortacion' to have retranslated Xenophon's 'Oeconomia' since 'Raphael's' translation was so poor, but the only new version known appeared under Hervet's name from Berthelet's press in 1532. Lupset also intended to English Simplicius's commentary on Epictetus's 'Enchiridion'. 
Lupset probably accompanied Pole back to England in late summer 1530, but died in his mother's house of tuberculosis on 27 December. He was buried in St Alfege Cripplegate, under the inscription 'Hic situs est Thomas Lupsetus vir Graece et Latine, atque in sacris literis eruditissimus' ('here lies Thomas Lupset, a man most learned in Greek and Latin, as well as in theology'). Some of his manuscripts passed to Pole. Lily correctly summarized Lupset's position at his death as much in Henry's eye. The first collected edition of Lupset's works appeared in 1546 and was reprinted in 1560. In addition, he translated one of Chrysostom's sermons and probably Colet's convocation sermon. 


@@@@@


doc= 17202


Lupton, Donald (d. 1676), clergyman and writer, was born of unknown parents. The place of his education is unknown, but he took an MA degree and presumably was ordained by 1627, when he served as a chaplain with the English troops in Germany. He was with the force commanded by Sir Charles Morgan that landed in April 1627 and subsequently with the garrison of Stade until its surrender in April 1628. He later wrote that he had many years' experience abroad. Lupton was in London by 1632, when he published 'London and the Countrey Carbonadoed and Quartred into Severall Characters', which is a characterization of aspects of life and places in the city and the provinces. Dedicated to Lord Goring, this is largely light-hearted and witty in tone, but contains some critical comments, such as those concerning animal baiting. In 1636 Lupton's 'Emblems of Rarities' was published -- a wide-ranging selection of brief items covering history, topography, social customs, and natural history, interspersed with legends and fantastic tales. 
Lupton's first publication on spiritual matters was 'Objectorum reductio, or, Daily Imployment for the Soule' (1634), consisting of a set of fifty-nine homilies on both biblical and everyday topics. It was followed by 'The History of the Moderne Protestant Divines' (1637), covering the lives and beliefs of prominent continental and English scholars, and 'The Glory of their Times, or, The Lives of the Primitive Fathers' (1640), which has accounts of leading scholars down to Thomas Aquinas. In March 1642 the House of Commons was told of 'dangerous Words' spoken by Mr Lupton, a clergyman, and the case was referred to the committee for scandalous ministers. There is, however, no evidence that it was Donald Lupton who was reported. 
Lupton's later books were less substantial. With the outbreak of civil war he drew on his earlier experiences in writing 'A Warre-Like Treatise of the Pike' (1642), dedicated to the earl of Essex, the parliamentarian lord general. In it he argued against the continued use of the pike and in favour of the musket and short pike, and included an examination of the morality of the soldier's profession, acknowledging the deleterious effects of warfare. 
By 1652 Lupton was no longer living in London, but his observations during a visit prompted 'The Freedom of Preaching, or, Spiritual Gifts Defended'. He considered that laymen from any background who were so gifted should be permitted to preach, and was critical of the presbyterian clergy for their restrictiveness. But his pleas for greater toleration did not extend to the Quakers, whom he castigated in 'The Quacking Mountebanck, or, The Jesuite Turn'd Quaker' (1655). Lupton was also critical of the clergy and lay impropriators in two pamphlets against tithes, 'The Tythe-Takers Cart Overthrown, or, The Downfall of Tythes' and 'The Two Main questions Resolved... if Tythes be Put Down', both dated 1652. He condemned the existing system and suggested that the clergy could be maintained by a fixed levy. 
State affairs attracted Lupton's attention during the wars with the United Provinces and Spain. In 'England's Command on the Seas, or, The English Seas Guarded' (1653) he justified the government's policy of upholding England's maritime rights. His 'Flanders, or, An Exact and Compendious Description of the Fair, Great, and Fat Countrey of Flanders' (1658) was prompted by the English army's campaign there and includes a description of Dunkirk, recently ceded to England, and an account of the battle of Nieuwpoort in 1600. On 27 March 1663 Lupton was appointed by the dean and chapter of St Paul's as vicar of Sunbury, Middlesex. He died in 1676 and was buried at Sunbury on 8 March. 


@@@@@


doc= 17203


Lupton, Roger (1456-1540), college head and founder of Sedbergh School, was born in July 1456 in the parish of Sedbergh, Yorkshire, possibly the son of Thomas Lupton. He was at King's College, Cambridge, from 1479 until at least 1484; he was admitted BCnL in 1484 and in DCnL in 1504. He was probably employed in the court of chancery. One Ralph Lupton, who attended Eton College and King's College, Cambridge, and who graduated BA in 1510, was also from Sedbergh; and he became a doctor of canon and civil law and is recorded as a member of Doctors' Commons on 8 October 1518, aged about forty. 
Roger Lupton's earliest known appointment was on 15 September 1484, when he was presented by Richard III to the rectory of Harlton, Cambridgeshire. By 24 November 1500, when he was nominated a canon of Windsor, Lupton was already a chaplain to Henry VII. In this capacity he attended the king's funeral in 1509 and was one of those charged with distributing to the poor of the capital the royal bounty of $400 which Henry's will provided. Lupton continued in high standing in the first years of the next reign. He was clerk of the hanaper of chancery between 27 July 1509 and October 1514 at $40 per annum, served on the commission of the peace for Buckinghamshire in 1512, and acted as receiver of petitions from Gascony during the parliamentary session which opened in February 1515. 
Lupton also acquired several ecclesiastical benefices. By December 1496 he was installed as a canon and prebendary of St Mary's College, Warwick; on 29 November 1498 he was appointed prebendary of St Michael in the same college. On 16 November 1503 he was presented to the rectory of Brancepeth, co. Durham, and on 26 October 1506, by royal grant, he was collated to the prebend of Shipton in the diocese of Salisbury, holding both benefices until his death. Admitted on 22 August 1487 to the vicarage of Cropredy, Oxfordshire, he is reported to have vacated it in October 1519. Yet some connection was maintained, for he bequeathed to this parish $6 13's'. 4died 'for keeping the clock at Cropredy and ringing daily both winter and summer the curfew and day bell there'. 
But it is for his connections with the schools of Eton and Sedbergh that Lupton is chiefly remembered. He was admitted as a fellow of Eton College on 22 February 1504, a formal prerequisite of his election as provost on 24 February. Lupton is known to have entertained the countess of Richmond at the provost's lodge in 1504 or 1505, and Henry VII himself dined in the hall in October 1505. Lupton changed the face of Eton. He caused a chantry to be built in the college, completed in 1515, which still stands, and erected Lupton's tower, 'the great tower with double turrets, that is perhaps the most characteristic feature of Eton, leading from Schoolyard to Cloisters' (Benson, 23). On 4 July 1515 Lupton bought from Richard Dycons the manor of Pirton in Hertfordshire for the sum of $500. Through licences secured in April 1516 and a deed of 1518, he arranged for the manor to pass to his successors in the provostship. He also donated to the college several rare books and manuscripts. 
Lupton also founded a chantry at Sedbergh, first mentioned in a deed of 23 July 1523. The earliest evidence that a school was attached to it appears in a decree of 24 March 1525, issued by the archdeacon of Richmond, concerning a lady chapel in Sedbergh church where 'fitting place shall be kept free for the chaplain and scholars celebrating Mass and anthem'; on 12 August 1527 the abbey of Coverham granted to Lupton 'one small close called school house Garth, on which a school house has been erected to found a free school' (Wilson, 3-4). The foundation deed, signed by Lupton on 9 March 1528, provides for a priest, who shall be 'good, honest and of laudable conversation, be able to teach a grammar school' but also be of 'sufficient wit and worldly policy' to manage its property; he was to have a month's holiday yearly, but should provide for an able scholar to deputize in such absences. The school was to admit 'in especial my kinsmen, and them of Sedber, Dent and Garstall, and then all other' (ibid., 5), and its first known master was Henry Blomer, whose will was signed on 5 November 1543. A survey of dissolved institutions recorded on 20 February 1551 that there was at Sedbergh a chantry 'called Lupton chantry, founded for a schole and so contynued... founded by Dr Lupton to pray for his sowle and to kepe a free schole'; the school was refounded by a charter dated 14 May 1552 (Leach, 2. 303). 
In May 1527 Lupton began an association between his new school and Cambridge University, founding six scholarships at St John's College, to be offered first to natives of Sedbergh, Dent, and Garstall. He retained the right to elect the scholars during his lifetime, entrusting the task to the college thereafter. In this period he added further to his own substantial revenues. By 1526 he had vacated the rectory of Great Haseley, Oxfordshire, but took a pension of $30 per annum. On 4 June 1525 he was collated to the prebend of Centum Solidorum in Lincoln Cathedral; installed on 9 November that year, he had resigned by 18 July 1528, the date of his installation as prebendary of Caistor in the same diocese. On 11 July 1529 he was named to a commission for the administration of the chancery during the absence of Cardinal Wolsey, and in November he was a member of the conference advising on the marriage of Henry VIII to Katherine of Aragon. 
It seems that Lupton accepted the legality of the divorce. On 14 July 1534 the provost and fellows of Eton signed unanimously a repudiation of the authority of the pope in England, and acknowledged the royal supremacy. But in 1531 Henry had forced the college to surrender valuable properties in Westminster in exchange for lesser estates elsewhere; the event is remembered to this day in the rhyme '
Rex Henricus Octavus 

Took from us more than he gave us. 

' The fellows may have feared that Eton would be dissolved altogether, which would explain their support for moves to depose Lupton from the provostship in 1535. By this time government policy was in a radical phase, and Lupton may have been thought insufficiently enthusiastic in the cause of change; it has been suggested that the immediate cause of his removal was a statement of his regret at the execution of John Fisher on 22 June 1535. The fellows of Eton were anxious to co-operate; it is clear that they were engaged in selecting his successor without Lupton's knowledge. In March 1536 Lupton resigned. The very next day the fellows met, arranged to inform the bishop of Lincoln (under whose jurisdiction Eton then was) of the news, and proceeded immediately to elect a successor. 
Lupton cannot have been fundamentally opposed to the breach with Rome; he held on to his several benefices, including the canonry of Windsor. When, just before his death, he complained to Thomas Cromwell, it was in the voice of a wronged servant, not of an opponent: 'I have lived eighty three and a half years, and have been taken for an honest man, and now a sort of light men inform you to the contrary' (Clarke and Weech, 10). In his last will, dated 23 February 1540, he bequeathed 'my soul to the Holy Trinity, trusting by my faith that I have in the passion of Cryst to be saved', a formulation which bears the marks of the Reformation. Lupton died, unmarried, at Windsor on 26 February 1540 and was buried the following day in his chapel at Eton, 'where a monumental brass represents him vested in the distinctive cope then worn by the canons of Windsor' (Lyte, 116). 


@@@@@


doc= 17204


Lupton, Thomas (fl. 1572-1584), political and religious controversialist, does not appear in the historical record except as the author of six or seven books and some incidental compositions. Yet his 'oeuvre' gives a good sense of a real individual. His moralistic nationalism and abhorrence of a money economy is already evident in his earliest-known composition -- two poems in fourteeners written in commendation of John Jones's medical treatises on the benefits of the waters of Bath and Buxton ('A Brief Discourse', 1572, 1574), where he argues that English sores should be treated not in foreign spas but by cheaper and better English waters. The same attitudes appear in a more serious vein in his prefatory poem to Barnaby Rich's 'Alarm to England' (1578). There he joins such soldier-poets as Barnabe Googe and Thomas Churchyard in urging immediate action against England's enemies. 
The twenty-nine folios of closely written manuscript that Lupton addressed to the queen cannot be dated, but clearly they come earlier than his 'A Persuasion from Papistry' (1581), where he reminds Elizabeth of his earlier proposal for 'a thing that is necessary, reasonable and commodious to many and hurtful to none, which was by your Grace only to be authorised for the great relief and succour of your subjects'. The 'thing' proposed in the manuscript was nothing less than a scheme of national insurance which would lead not only to the repair of broken bridges and coastal defences but also require the rich and noble to pay annual sums for the support of the indigent and sickly. 
The attitude behind such proposals has its most conventionally literary expression in the morality play 'All for Money' of 1578. In a series of tableaux or dialogues money is shown to destroy all possibility of moral conduct in learning, law, marriage, and priesthood. The section on learning is probably the most interesting: the character Learning With Money hopes to be both wealthy and learned, but he is soon put right by the properly penniless scholar Learning Without Money; Money Without Learning and Neither Money Nor Learning are, of course, doomed to damnation, the latter because 'God hath hardened his heart'. The book culminates in the archetypal oppositions of Jesus against Judas and Lazarus against Dives. The eternal suffering of these money-sinners provides a warning for everyone. 
Dives and Lazarus appear again in Lupton's last printed work, 'A Dream of the Devil and Dives' (1584, republished 1615). Once again money is the issue. Lupton, on the premise that dreams are revelations of God's truth, describes how the dream of a dialogue between the devil and Dives reveals God's judgment of an England where the rich will not help the poor, lawyers cheat their clients, landlords rack rents, judges accept bribes, and soldiers kill their neighbours. The work ends with a vision of the apocalypse forecast by Regiomontanus for 1588. 
Lupton's two contributions to religious controversy, 'A Persuasion from Papistry' and 'The Christian Against the Jesuit' (both 1581), belong to a central denominational controversy of the time. After two years as 'the Pope's Scholar' in the Jesuit-controlled English College in Rome, John Nichols, a lapsed protestant clergyman, returned to England in 1581. Imprisoned in the Tower of London, he was persuaded to return to protestantism, and before the end of the year published a series of works proclaiming the errors and horrors of Rome. These writings were immediately contradicted and ridiculed by Father Robert Persons in 'A Discovery of J. Nichols Minister Misrepresented a Jesuit', incidentally dismissing Lupton's 'Persuasion from Papistry' as a tissue of ignorant irrelevancies. Lupton's theological treatise does not, on the face of it, deal with the Nichols controversy, but its concern for a national church as the basis for a purified moral estate implies the correctness of Nichols's choice. In the manner of the time Lupton immediately countered Persons's attack in 'The Christian Against the Jesuit', narrowing his focus and sharpening the tone. 
Lupton's concern for a national control of morals appears again in 'Siuqila, Too Good to be True' (1580, 1581) but in a more secular mode, following the lead of More's 'Utopia'. An ideal community called Mauqsun ('nusquam', nowhere) is described by one Omen ('nemo', nobody) and contrasted with Ailgna (Anglia, England). In Mauqsun godliness is preserved by unrelenting surveillance and drastic punishment, so that English tolerance of backsliding is avoided. The second part or 'knitting up' of 'Siuqila' is sometimes cited as a possible source for Shakespeare's 'Measure for Measure'. 

'A Thousand Notable Things of Sundry Sorts' (1579) -- a heterogeneous collection of folk remedies and witty sayings largely drawn from Renaissance encyclopaedias -- is Lupton's least moralistic work, and also his most popular one; it was kept continuously in print until the nineteenth century. 


@@@@@


doc= 17205


Lupton, Thomas Goff (1791-1873), landscape, portrait, and subject engraver, was born in Clerkenwell, London, on 3 September 1791, the son of William Lupton, a goldsmith, and his wife, Mary, 'nee' Clarkson. Lupton was apprenticed to the mezzotint engraver and portrait and historical painter George Clint in 1805. He exhibited portrait drawings at the Royal Academy between 1811 and 1820. On 30 May 1818 Lupton married Susannah Oliver ('b'. 1800?), and they had six sons and one daughter. Clint had engraved two plates for J. M. W. Turner's 'Liber Studiorum' ('c'.1806-19), and after Lupton completed his apprenticeship, he engraved, under Turner's close supervision, his first mezzotint plate for the series, 'Solway Moss' (1816; original watercolour untraced), which as Lupton later claimed 'placed me at once among my brother scrapers, an artist' (Pye and Roget, 65). Lupton also engraved for the 'Liber Studiorum' the published plates of 'Dumblain Abbey, Scotland' (1816, original watercolour, 'c'.1806-7, Tate collection), 'Water Cress Gatherers' (1819; original watercolour untraced), and 'Ben Arthur, Scotland' (1819; original watercolour untraced), as well as the unpublished subjects 'Dumbarton' (1820s; original watercolour untraced) and 'Ploughing Eton' (1820s; original watercolour, Tate collection), and may have also worked on 'Stonehenge' (1820s; original watercolour, Museum of Fine Arts, Boston) although this plate is traditionally attributed to Turner. He continued to work with Turner, with whom he became especially friendly, and who valued highly Lupton's expertise and sensitivity. After Turner's death in 1851 Lupton provided important anecdotal information to early commentators on the artist including John Ruskin, John Pye, and Walter Thornbury. 
Lupton played a significant role in the evolution of the use of steel plates for engraving, an important issue, since copper plates were unable to produce large numbers of impressions and were consequently uneconomic. William Say had successfully engraved a soft steel plate in 1820, but found the medium unsympathetic, and abandoned his investigations. Lupton experimented, first with nickel and the Chinese alloy tutenag, and subsequently with steel. In 1822 he successfully engraved Clint's portrait of the actor John Shepherd Munden (original painting untraced) in mezzotint on steel, for which he was awarded the Society of Arts' Isis gold medal on 30 May 1822. Lupton used steel for the remainder of his career. His early engravings on steel include the 'Infant Samuel' (original painting untraced) of 1822, after Sir Joshua Reynolds, the 'Passage Boat', and 'A Group of Cattle' after Cuyp published by W. B. Cooke in 1824, and five plates after Turner's designs for the 'Rivers of England' (1823-7) in the 1820s. In 1826 Lupton collaborated with Turner on the 'Ports of England' (1826-8), acting as engraver and publisher, but by 1828 only six mezzotints of the proposed twelve had been published, and the remaining six did not appear until 1856, after Turner's death, when the complete series was published by Ernest Gambart as the 'Harbours of England' with a commentary by John Ruskin. Lupton also collaborated with Turner on single large mezzotint plates of 'Calais Pier' (original painting, exh. 1803, National Gallery, London) and 'Folkestone' (original watercolour untraced), but they remained unpublished in his lifetime. 'Calais Pier' was abandoned because of the excessive alterations demanded by Turner, but was eventually published in 1892 by Henry Graves on behalf of the Artists' General Benevolent Institution. Between 1858 and 1864 Lupton re-engraved fifteen of the 'Liber Studiorum' subjects on steel for a projected series to be published by Colnaghi and dedicated to John Ruskin, but the plates were never issued. 
Lupton was a highly regarded, versatile, and prolific engraver. In addition to his accomplished work for Turner, he also engraved numerous portraits after artists such as Henry Perronet Briggs, George Clint, Thomas Lawrence, and Joshua Reynolds, as well as illustrations for 'Gems of Art' (1823), 'Beauties of Claude Lorrain' (1825), and Lady Charlotte Bury's 'Three Great Sanctuaries of Tuscany' (1833). His finest single plates include 'Wellington Surveying the Field of Waterloo' after Benjamin Robert Haydon (1841; original painting, 1839, NPG); 'Lord Byron' after Thomas Phillips (1824; original painting, 1814, Gov. Art Coll., British embassy, Athens); and 'The Eddystone Lighthouse' (1824; original watercolour untraced) and 'Sunrise, Whiting Fishing at Margate' (1825; original watercolour untraced) after Turner. Lupton became friendly with John Ruskin in the 1850s, and engraved a number of plates for his publications, notably the 'Stones of Venice' (1851-3). Lupton taught Ruskin's protege George Allen, who subsequently made engravings for Ruskin's books. Lupton also took on William Oakley Burgess as his pupil in the late 1830s. An active supporter of the Artists' Annuity Fund, Lupton was president between 1836 and 1838. Lupton died on 18 May 1873 at his home at 4 Keppel Street, Russell Square, London, where he had lived for thirty-six years. His youngest son, Nevil Oliver Lupton ('b'. 1828), became a landscape painter; he was awarded the first Turner medal at the Royal Academy in 1857, and exhibited landscapes regularly there until 1857. 


@@@@@


doc= 17206


Lupton, William (1676-1726), Church of England clergyman, was born on 1 June 1676 at Bentham, Yorkshire, the son of Thomas Lupton, who served as rector there for fifty years. William matriculated at Queen's College, Oxford, on 30 March 1694, and graduated BA in 1697, MA in 1700, BD on 14 February 1709, and DD on 15 February 1712. He was elected a fellow of Lincoln College in 1698, and briefly served as curate to George Bull at Avening, Gloucestershire. It was probably through Bull's influence that he became rector of Richmond, Yorkshire, in 1705. He resigned this position in the following year and was appointed lecturer of St Dunstan-in-the-West, London; and in 1714 he became preacher of Lincoln's Inn and afternoon preacher at the Temple. On 13 September 1715 he was presented to the ninth prebendal stall in Durham Cathedral. 
Described as a 'violent partizan of the high church' (Noble, 3.110), Lupton was known to be a good preacher. Robert Nelson spoke of his sermons as 'a fit model for the preachers of the rising generation' (Allibone, 'Dict.', 1.1144). His reputation led to his selection as the preacher for the fiftieth anniversary of the episcopal consecration of Nathaniel Crew, and to his delivery of the Lady Moyer's lectures at St Paul's, London. He published several of his sermons separately, and a collection of sermons was published posthumously in 1729. 
Although he claimed in his farewell sermon at St Dunstan's that his sermons had been focused on the 'practical duties of religion' (Lupton, 'Christian Conversation', 40-41), they did at times have political implications. He was notable for his championship of the doctrine of eternal punishment, and upheld the orthodox view of this doctrine in a sermon preached before the University of Oxford on 24 November 1706, entitled 'The Eternity of Future Punishment Proved and Vindicated' (1708). In this sermon, which was one of several attacks by high-churchmen on John Tillotson's sermon preached before Queen Mary on 7 March 1690, Lupton claimed that the reflections of Tillotson's sermon were 'not only precarious, but plainly false' (Lupton, 'Eternity', 9). Another address with political overtones came on 30 January 1724, when he preached before the House of Commons an anniversary sermon for the martyrdom of Charles I entitled 'National Sins Fatal to Prince and People' (1724). In it he suggested that the wickedness of the people led to the downfall and sufferings of the king, an event allowed by God so that the rebellious might 'fall into the pit'. Lupton complained of attempts during his lifetime to 'demolish [Charles's] virtues, and improve his infirmities scarce separable from man, into vices of the first magnitude' (Lupton, 'National Sins', 28-9). 
Lupton died at Tunbridge Wells, Kent, on 13 December 1726, and was buried there. 


@@@@@


doc= 17207


Luscombe, Matthew Henry Thornhill (bap. 1775, d. 1846), missionary bishop, baptized on 16 April 1775 at St Paul's, Exeter, was the son of Samuel Luscombe, physician at Exeter, and his wife, Jane a collateral descendant of Sir James Thornhill. He was educated at Exeter grammar school and admitted pensioner at Trinity College, Cambridge, on 22 May 1793. He migrated to St Catharine's, Cambridge, on 27 December 1793, where he graduated BA 1798 and MA 1805. He was ordained to the curacy of Clewer, Windsor. From 1806 to 1819 he was master of the East India Company's school at Haileybury, Hertford, and held the curacy of St Andrew's in that town. Walter Farquhar Hook was one of his pupils at Hertford, and became a close friend. On 20 January 1810 he was incorporated MA of Oxford University, joining Exeter College, and proceeding BCL and DCL in February 1810. 
In 1819 Luscombe moved to Caen, and subsequently to Paris. In 1824 George Canning looked to appoint Luscombe embassy chaplain at Paris, and, in recognition of the need for supervision of Anglicans overseas, general superintendent of the English congregations on the continent. However, he soon afterwards agreed to a proposal made originally by Luscombe's former pupil Hook, that the bishops of the Scottish Episcopal church should consecrate Luscombe to a continental bishopric, with the status of a missionary bishop, giving him jurisdiction over people rather than territory. On 20 March 1825 Luscombe was consecrated at Stirling by Bishop Jolly of Moray. Hook attended as chaplain to preach the sermon on the Catholicism of the Anglican church. In the course of the same year Luscombe assumed the office of chaplain at Paris. In lieu of the room at the embassy or the French protestant Oratoire in which the services had been held, he erected in 1834, and partly paid for, a church in the rue d'Aguesseau. He officiated at Thackeray's marriage in Paris in 1836. Luscombe met immediate difficulties arising from the lack of clarity regarding his authority, and the extent to which he had government backing. One congregation at Boulogne refused to recognize his authority, and there were complaints that he was attempting to exercise jurisdiction rather than influence over the clergy in Belgium. Luscombe's right to ordain was questioned, and in 1840 was restricted to confirmation, thus calling into question the status of clergy he had previously ordained. 
Luscombe married the only daughter of Henry Harmood, commissioner of the navy. They had a son, Henry, who died in 1833, and two daughters, Susan and Frances. Luscombe held high-church principles. He was one of the founders in 1841 of the 'Christian Remembrancer'. He also published sermons and 'The Church of Rome compared with the Bible, the fathers of the church, and the Church of England' (1839). He dedicated an anonymously published poem 'Pleasures of Society' to Canning. Luscombe also interested himself in fine arts, both as a collector and as an artist. 
Luscombe died suddenly of heart disease at Lausanne on 24 August 1846, and was buried at La Sallaz cemetery. No attempt was made to appoint a successor as missionary bishop. He left a bequest for divinity scholarships at Glenalmond College, Perthshire. 


@@@@@


doc= 17208


Lush, Sir Robert (1807-1881), judge, was born at Shaftesbury, Dorset, on 25 October 1807, the eldest son of Robert Lush of Shaftesbury, and his wife, Lucy, daughter of Joseph Foote of Tollard, Wiltshire. He was educated at a school in Shaftesbury and afterwards spent several years in a solicitor's office. In 1836 he entered himself as a student at Gray's Inn. He published several law books before he was called to the bar. 'The Act for the Abolition of Arrest on Mesne Process' appeared in 1838, together with a treatise on the 'Wills Act'. In October 1840 'The practice of the superior courts of common law at Westminster in actions and proceedings over which they have a common jurisdiction' was published; it became a standard work on common-law practice and ran to several editions. The editor of the third edition (1855) was James Stephen, the eminent professor of jurisprudence at King's College, London. 
In 1839 Lush married Elizabeth Ann (died 1881), daughter of the Revd Christopher Woollacott of London. They had several children, including at least four sons. Two of these became prominent lawyers: Herbert W. Lush, KC and judge, and Sir (Charles) Montague Lush QC. Another, suffering from delirium, committed suicide, and the fourth died suddenly and unexpectedly. 
Having practised for a short time as a special pleader, Lush was called to the bar by Gray's Inn on 18 November 1840, and joined the home circuit. Until 1857, when he became a queen's counsel and a bencher of Gray's Inn, he was a busy junior. In 1842 he edited the common-law portion of 'Chitty's General Practice of the Law'. Although he was small and unassuming, his learning and clarity of expression gave him instant success in commercial practice. He attached himself to the court of common pleas, and shared with Sir William Bovill the lead of the home circuit. He never sat in parliament. He was, as Lord Westbury wrote of him, 'a very learned and distinguished man', who, 'so far as I know, has no politics at all' (Nash, 69). 
On 30 October 1865 Lush succeeded Mr Justice Crompton in the court of queen's bench. He was one of the three judges who tried the Tichborne claimant. When the 'Judicature Acts' came into force in November 1875, he sat in chambers for many weeks drafting the rules of practice with Sir George Jessel. Lush was a member of the judicature commission and of the commission on the penal code in 1878. Afterwards, in May 1879, while still a puisne judge, he was appointed a member of the privy council by Lord Beaconsfield. In October 1880 he succeeded Lord Justice Thesiger in the Court of Appeal, but his health soon failed, and on 27 December 1881 he died at his home, 60 Avenue Road, Regent's Park, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 17209


Charles Lushington (1785-1866), born in London on 14 April 1785, East India Company servant, was secretary to the government of Bengal, 1823-7. On returning to England he was elected to parliament for Ashburton, 1835-41, and then for Westminster, 1847-52. He was a reformer, favouring the ballot, triennial parliaments, and the extension of the suffrage. He opposed all religious privileges, and published three works on religious questions. He married, first, in 1805, Sarah (died 1839), daughter of General Joseph Gascoigne, and second, in 1844, Julia Jane, widow of Thomas Teed of Stanmore, Middlesex, who died in February 1866. Charles Lushington died at 118 Marine Parade, Brighton, Sussex, on 23 September 1866. 


@@@@@


doc= 17210


Lushington, Edmund Law (1811-1893), classical scholar, was born on 10 January 1811 at Prestwich, Lancashire, the son of Edmund Henry Lushington (1766-1839), chief commissioner of the colonial board of audit and master of the crown office, and his second wife, Sophia ('c'.1780-1841), daughter of Thomas Philips of Sedgeley, near Manchester. He spent his childhood at Hanwell, Middlesex, and was educated at Charterhouse School (1823-8) where he became head of the school while still young and not very robust and found the exacting duties of captain somewhat irksome. Thackeray was one of his contemporaries there and was also with him for a time at Cambridge. Entering Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1828, Lushington was two years Tennyson's junior and with him, Arthur Hallam, Trench, and others, was associated in the select club of twelve called the Apostles (commemorated in 'In Memoriam', lxxxvii). He was made a scholar in 1830. 
In 1832 Lushington was senior classic and senior chancellor's medallist. The year was a specially brilliant one, Henry Alford, Richard Shilleto, and William Hepworth Thompson, afterwards master of Trinity, also being in the list. In 'The Virginians' (vol. 1, chap. 41) Thackeray makes a covert though sufficiently obvious allusion to the brilliant scholarship of Thompson and Lushington. Lushington was elected a fellow in 1834 and became an assistant tutor in 1835. 
In 1838 Lushington succeeded Sir Daniel Keyte Sandford as professor of Greek at Glasgow, gaining the appointment over Robert Lowe (Lord Sherbrooke), after Archibald Campbell Tait, subsequently archbishop of Canterbury, had withdrawn his candidature. On 14 October 1842 Lushington married Cecilia Tennyson, sister of Alfred, Lord Tennyson. The marriage ceremony was performed by Charles Tennyson Turner, Lushington's marriage with his sister being celebrated by Tennyson in the epilogue to 'In Memoriam'. 
Lushington's colleague as professor of humanity was William Ramsay. C. J. Fordyce, a more recent occupant of Ramsay's chair, described them as 'a pair of professors who not only outshone all their predecessors but vastly outshone their contemporaries in the other [Scottish] universities'. Their pupils included a number of men who later became prominent classical scholars: W. Y. Sellar, L. Campbell, D. B. Monro, and J. Frazer. Nevertheless, Lushington's abilities were not as well suited as Ramsay's to the teaching of large elementary classes which constituted much of their work. His wife disliked Glasgow and preferred to remain in England during the university term. In 1875 he resigned his chair, the university conferring on him the honorary degree of LLD. He settled at Park House, Maidstone, the residence described in the prologue to 'The Princess', which is dedicated to his brother Henry. In 1884 he was elected lord rector of Glasgow University, and the principal, John Caird, welcomed him with a fitting eulogy when he delivered the customary rectorial address. He died at Park House on 13 July 1893. He was survived by his wife and his daughter Cecilia. 
Although believed to have written anonymously for some of the reviews, Lushington made few acknowledged contributions to literature. He translated into Greek Tennyson's 'Oenone' and 'Crossing the Bar', the version of the latter giving the poet especial satisfaction. He contributed interesting reminiscences to volume 1 of H. Tennyson's memoir of his father, Lord Tennyson. He collaborated with Sir Alexander Grant in editing in 1866 (2nd edn, 1875) the 'Philosophical Works' of James Frederick Ferrier, prefixing to the volume of 'Philosophical Remains' a thoughtful memoir and appreciation. He published the Glasgow rectorial address in 1885. 


@@@@@


doc= 17211


Lushington, Henry (1812-1855), colonial administrator, was born at Singleton, Lancashire, on 13 April 1812, the second son of Edmund Henry Lushington (1766-1839), of Park House, Maidstone, chief commissioner of the colonial audit board, and his second wife, Sophia, 'nee' Philips ('c'.1780-1841). He was educated from 1823 to 1828 at Charterhouse School, where he was head boy at the age of fifteen, and became a student of Trinity College, Cambridge, in October 1829. Despite ill health, which became chronic, he won the Porson university prize for Greek iambics twice -- in 1832 and again in 1833 -- and graduated senior optime with a first class in the classical tripos. He graduated BA in 1834, was elected fellow in 1836, and proceeded MA in 1837. Although he was called to the bar at the Inner Temple on 20 November 1840, he lacked the constitution and interest to build a law practice, and his skills as a writer and interest in political affairs made him more successful as a pamphleteer. 
Lushington was an admirer and later favourite adviser and critic of Tennyson's work; in 1839 he met the poet for the first time, and they became friends. In 1847 Tennyson dedicated 'The Princess' to him. Lushington's elder brother, Edmund, married Tennyson's sister Cecilia. 
In 1847 Lushington was unexpectedly appointed chief secretary to the government of Malta by Lord Grey. This was a demanding post, since the first civil and Catholic governor had just been appointed and constitutional reform was being proposed. In 1849 Lushington brought forward the proposed code of laws before the newly elected legislative council and became deeply involved in debates, in which he supported full religious equality before the law. Although in weak health, he remained at his post until 1855. 
Lushington's interests were literary and political. He wrote verse and commentary, and published 'Joint Compositions' with George Stovin Venables in 1840 and ''La Nation Boutiquiere' and other Poems' with his brother Frank in 1855. His first political pamphlet was 'Fellow Commoners and Honorary Degrees' (1837), an indictment of title and privilege, and this was followed by other criticisms of contentious political decisions, such as Britain's invasion of Afghanistan ('A Great Country's Little Wars, or, England, Afghanistan and Sinde', 1844) and the imposition of the railways at home ('The Broad and Narrow Gauge' and 'Fallacies of the Broken Gauge', both 1846). In 1851 he published 'A Detailed Exposure of the Apology put forth by the Neapolitan Government in reply to the Charges of Mr Gladstone', and in 1853 'The Double Government, the Civil Service, and the Indian Reform Agitation'. 
In 1855 Lushington's health became poor enough for him to decide to leave Malta to visit England. He died on the way home, while staying in Paris, on 11 August 1855. He was buried in Boxley, Kent. 


@@@@@


doc= 17212


Sir James Law Lushington (1779-1859) obtained a cadetship in the Madras army in 1796 and was promoted to colonel, 3rd Madras light cavalry, in 1829 and general in 1854. Elected a director of the East India Company in 1827, he served as vice-chairman of the court of directors in 1837-8, 1841-2, and 1847-8, and chairman in 1838-9, 1842-3, and 1848-9. He was created CB in 1829, KCB in 1837, and GCB in 1838. A tory, he represented in succession Petersfield (1825-6), Hastings (1826-7), and Carlisle (1827-31) in the House of Commons. In 1836 he married Rosetta Sophia Costen; the marriage produced no children. He died at his residence in London, 26 Dorset Square, on 29 May 1859, and was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 17213


Lushington, Stephen (1782-1873), judge, was born in London on 14 January 1782, the second of five children of Sir Stephen Lushington (1744-1807) of South Hill Park, Berkshire, a director and later chairman of the East India Company, and his wife, Hester (died 1830), daughter of John Boldero of Aspenden Hall, Hertfordshire. His father was created a baronet in 1791, the title passing to his older brother, Henry, in 1807. 
Lushington was educated at Eton College and at Christ Church, Oxford, where he took degrees in civil law. He matriculated in 1797, at fifteen, and graduated BA in 1802, MA in 1806, BCL in 1807, and DCL in 1808. He was elected a fellow of All Souls College in 1801 and held the fellowship until 1821, resigning it on his marriage as was then required. His marriage, on 8 August that year, was to Sarah Grace ('b'. 1794), daughter of Thomas William Carr (1770-1829) of Frognal, Hampstead, Middlesex. She died in 1837 after a harrowing illness, by which Lushington was deeply moved. There were ten children, of whom one, Edward Harbord Lushington (1822-1904), became a senior Indian civil servant, another, Vernon Lushington (1832-1912), a county court judge, and another, Godfrey Lushington (1832-1907), Vernon's twin, permanent under-secretary in the Home Office. 
Lushington was called to the bar in 1806 (Inner Temple), and in 1808 he was admitted as a member of Doctors' Commons, the society of civil lawyers who, until 1858, constituted an independent branch of the English legal profession. The civilians had a monopoly in the practice of Admiralty law and of ecclesiastical law, which then included matrimonial disputes and the probate of wills. 
Lushington had a distinguished career as a civilian, becoming judge of the most important diocesan court (the consistory court of London) in 1828, judge of the high court of Admiralty in 1838, and judge of the court of arches (the court of appeal for the ecclesiastical province of Canterbury) in 1858. As dean of the arches (as the judge was called) Lushington was also president of Doctors' Commons, attaining that office, however, only to preside over the dissolution of Doctors' Commons, because the law reforms of 1857, transferring jurisdiction over matrimonial cases and over the probate of wills to secular courts, effectively put an end to the separate profession of civil law. As Admiralty court judge he became a member of the judicial committee of the privy council, which was the final court of appeal from the English civilian courts, and from colonial courts throughout the British empire. 
Lushington was a member of parliament in 1806-8, and in 1820-41 (with a short absence in 1830-31). After the 'Reform Act' of 1832 he sat for the populous London borough of Tower Hamlets until his retirement from parliament in 1841. He was a consistent supporter of the whigs and described himself at the close of his parliamentary career as still a party man and strongly attached to party principles. However, Lushington voted independently where whig policy on sugar duties conflicted with his anti-slavery sentiments, and he did not hesitate to praise political opponents when he considered that they had embraced sound policies, as, for example, Peel on Catholic emancipation. He was described by a contemporary observer as a reformer, between the categories of whig and radical reformer. He was a forceful and effective speaker, who had the ear of the House of Commons. Lushington supported most of the liberal reforms of his era, including parliamentary reform, Catholic emancipation, full civil rights for Jews and dissenters, and reform of the criminal law. He favoured the secret ballot, and triennial parliaments, but not universal suffrage -- not even universal adult male suffrage. He was one of the founders of the Society for the Diffusion of Useful Knowledge, and spoke at the laying of the foundation stone of London University. Above all else he was constantly active, in and out of parliament, in the cause of anti-slavery. 
The anti-slavery campaign was directed first at the abolition of the slave trade, which was achieved in 1807, and only later at the prohibition of slavery itself, which occurred in 1833. Lushington spoke and voted for the abolition of the slave trade in 1807. He was chiefly responsible for an act of 1824 to abolish the transfer of slaves between British colonies, a kind of intercolonial slave trade. He was extremely active in securing the emancipation act of 1833, working very closely with T. F. Buxton, Wilberforce's successor as leader of the anti-slavery movement. Buxton admired Lushington's diligence and judgement and relied on him heavily: Buxton's son, Charles, wrote that 'every idea, and every plan, was originated and arranged between them' (C. Buxton, 'Memorials of Sir Thomas Fowell Buxton', 1850, 133). On the monument to emancipation erected in 1866 by Charles Buxton, Lushington's is one of the six names inscribed (the others being Buxton, Wilberforce, Clarkson, Macaulay, and Brougham). For many years after 1833 the slave trade was carried on under the flags of other nations, and Lushington played an active and important role in the campaign to suppress this trade, presiding over a committee in 1842 to draw up a code of instructions for British naval officers, and negotiating a treaty with France on this question in 1845. 
The reason for Lushington's retirement from parliament in 1841 was a statute (the 'Admiralty Court Act') disqualifying the judge of the high court of Admiralty from membership of the House of Commons. Lushington himself saw no incompatibility in the two roles. Ten years later he was offered an opportunity to re-enter parliament as a life peer. There was an urgent need at the time for reform of the House of Lords in its role as a supreme judicial court. One solution canvassed was that distinguished judges might be appointed as life peers. The suggestion, however, was controversial because it altered the political balance between the government and the House of Lords, and, in the end, the idea was abandoned. Lushington was offered a life peerage in 1851, and the offer was repeated in 1856, but he, accurately foreseeing the political controversy that would ensue, declined both offers. 
Lushington had a successful practice in Doctors' Commons until his appointment as Admiralty court judge. In 1816, as adviser to Lady Byron, he was largely instrumental in securing for her a separation from Lord Byron, the poet, a result for which Lady Byron was grateful throughout her life. In 1820 there occurred an enormous political sensation when a bill was introduced in the House of Lords to deprive the queen (Caroline of Brunswick) of her title and to dissolve her marriage with the king (George IV) on the ground of the queen's alleged adultery. The proceedings in the House of Lords were conducted as a trial, and Lushington was one of the counsel for the queen. He spoke in her defence forcefully, and, according to contemporary accounts, effectively. The defence was successful, and the bill (though it passed by a narrow margin) was dropped by the government. Lushington kept in close touch with the queen, who made him an executor of her will. He was present at her death, and accompanied her body for burial in Brunswick. 
Lushington's judicial philosophy preceded the scientific school of thought that flourished in the second half of the nineteenth century. The traditions of Doctors' Commons, where law reports only came into use at the beginning of the century, did not lend themselves to a theory that every point of law was objectively determinable. Nor did Lushington lean towards such a view: his decisions in the consistory court and in the Admiralty court show his determination to retain a large measure of flexibility, even at the cost of certainty and predictability. He gives the impression of a judge who has selected his own destination. The style of his judgments is confident, forceful, and persuasive, with frequent references to general considerations of justice. In matrimonial cases he showed himself very sympathetic to the interests of women, not because he favoured political rights for women (he did not) but because he thought that the wife was the weaker party and required the protection of the court for that reason. In the prize cases that came before him during the Crimean War, which he himself described as 'political' cases, he showed himself very sympathetic to the interests of the British crown, and most impatient with technical arguments in the opposite direction. His judgments in instance (non-prize) cases in the Admiralty court were highly respected and widely influential, and continue to be cited throughout the English speaking world, well over a century after Lushington's death. 
The mid-nineteenth century was a period of high controversy in the Church of England, and Lushington was at the centre of several disputes. One of the most politically controversial questions of the time was that of church rates, which were taxes levied on the whole population of a parish to support the fabric of the parish church. Rates were vigorously opposed by many of those who dissented from the Church of England. Lushington was pulled in two directions on this question. Politically his sympathies were with the dissenters, and he had spoken in parliament against church rates. But as an ecclesiastical court judge it was his duty to enforce the law, and in that capacity he caused the committal to prison of a conscientious objector to church rates, John Thorogood. In a case on a crucial legal point (the Braintree case) Lushington decided against the validity of the rate. 
Other controversial ecclesiastical cases arose out of the revival of Catholic doctrine and ritual in the Church of England, and out of the beginning of a critical study of the scriptures. On these issues Lushington's decisions show him to be as conservative in theology as he was liberal in politics. He was himself a loyal churchman, and an attender at services in the parish church at Ockham, where he occupied the principal pew as one aspect of his role as conscientious and generous village squire. He had no sympathy whatever with the changes in church furnishings associated with the Gothic revival, nor with the introduction into the Church of England of what he saw as alien Catholic doctrines and practices. On the other hand he was not an evangelical, and his friends in the anti-slavery movement regretted that he was not 'truly religious'. On the question of critical study of scripture Lushington had to judge an important book of essays published in 1860 ('Essays and Reviews'). He condemned two of the essayists, who, however, subsequently appealed successfully to the privy council. 
After an illness in 1867, at the age of eighty-five, Lushington resigned his judicial offices but retained the administrative office of master of the faculties until his death in 1873, hearing disputed cases at his house in his ninety-first year. In December 1872 he travelled from Ockham in Surrey to Oxford in order to vote for A. P. Stanley in a controversial election for the office of select preacher. He returned the same day, fell ill, and died four weeks later, at his home, Ockham Park, Surrey, on 19 January 1873, just after his ninety-first birthday. A. P. Stanley was the generally acknowledged leader of the broad church party, who had been invited to contribute to 'Essays and Reviews', and whose views Lushington might be said to have condemned in his judgment, which Stanley had reviewed in a courteous, but critical, article. The journey to Oxford and back therefore suggests a gesture, and it was so perceived at the time. Stanley reciprocated by officiating at Lushington's funeral in Ockham church, and at his burial in the churchyard, on 20 January. Two weeks later Stanley paid handsome tribute to Lushington, describing him as: 'the venerable judge whose career was fired from first to last by a generous sympathy with human suffering, by noble indignation against wrong, [and] by a firm persuasion of the indissoluble bond between what was highest in religion and what was greatest in morality. (Waddams, 347)' Lushington's younger brother, 


@@@@@


doc= 17214


Lushington, Sir Stephen (1803-1877), naval officer, second son of Sir Henry Lushington, second baronet (1775-1863), who was consul-general at Naples, 1815-32, and his wife, Fanny Maria (died 26 May 1862), eldest daughter of Matthew Lewis, under-secretary at war, was born at Bedford Square, London, on 12 December 1803. Dr Stephen Lushington (1782-1873) was his uncle. He entered the navy in October 1816 on the frigate 'Tagus' (Captain James Whitley Deans Dundas) in the Mediterranean. From 1817 to 1821 he was with the Hon. Robert Cavendish Spencer in the 'Ganymede' and 'Owen Glendower' on the Mediterranean and South American stations. He was afterwards in the 'Hind', also in the Mediterranean, with the Hon. Henry John Rous, and in her boats was employed in suppressing piracy in the Greek archipelago until promoted lieutenant on 13 July 1824. In 1825 he was lieutenant of the sloop 'Zebra', and in 1826-7 of the frigate 'Cambrian', in which he was present at the battle of Navarino on 20 October 1827. Three days later he was moved by Sir Edward Codrington into his flagship, the 'Asia', from which, on 13 May 1828, he was promoted to command the bomb-vessel 'Aetna'. In her he had a distinguished part in the capture of Kastro Morea on 30 October 1828, for which he was especially complimented by the French admiral in command and was nominated a knight of the orders of St Louis and the Redeemer of Greece. 
On 28 October 1829 Lushington was promoted captain, but had no employment until 19 January 1839, when he was appointed to the 'Cleopatra' (26 guns), fitting for the West Indies. His health broke down, and after a long illness he was invalided home in November 1840. He married in 1841 Henrietta (died 22 Sept 1875), eldest daughter of Rear-Admiral Henry Prescott; they had two daughters. In 1845-6 Lushington commanded the steam frigate 'Retribution' on the home station, and in 1847-8 the 'Vengeance' (84 guns) on the home station and in the Mediterranean. From November 1848 to March 1852 he was superintendent of the Indian navy. In July 1852 he commissioned the 'Albion' for service in the Mediterranean, and was still in her when the Crimean War broke out in 1854. 
At the beginning of the siege of Sevastopol, Lushington was landed in command of the naval brigade, with the services of which his name was throughout most closely associated. He was promoted rear-admiral on 4 July 1855, was nominated a KCB the following day, was made an officer and a commander of the Legion d'honneur, and was awarded the order of the Mejidiye (second class). From May 1862 to December 1865 he was lieutenant-governor of the Royal Naval Hospital, Greenwich. On resigning he was promoted vice-admiral (1 October 1865), placed on the list according to his original seniority, between April and October 1862. On 2 December 1865 he was made admiral, and on 13 March 1867 a GCB. He died at Oak Lodge, Thornton Heath, Surrey, on 28 May 1877. 


@@@@@


doc= 17215


Lushington, Stephen Rumbold (1776-1868), politician and administrator in India, was born at Bottisham, Cambridgeshire, on 6 May 1776. He was the fourth son of James Stephen Lushington of Rodmersham, Kent, vicar of Newcastle upon Tyne and prebendary of Carlisle, and second son of his father's second wife, Mary, daughter of the Revd Humphrey Christian of Docking, Norfolk. 
Lushington was educated at Rugby School and the Linton Academy, Cambridgeshire, and in 1791 obtained a writership in the East India Company's Madras service. In 1792 he was appointed assistant in the military, political, and secret department; in 1794, deputy Persian translator to the government; in 1796, deputy secretary to the board of revenue; and in 1798, secretary and Persian translator to the board of revenue. From 1795 to 1799 he was private secretary to General George Harris (afterwards first Baron Harris), commander-in-chief of Madras and conqueror of Mysore, and in 1797 married Harris's eldest daughter, Anne Elizabeth (died 1856), with whom he had six sons and two daughters. 
In January 1803, after four years as a district collector in Ramnad and Tinnevelly, Lushington was appointed registrar of the 'sadr' and 'faujdari adalat'. Later that year, however, he returned to England and settled on an estate in Kent procured for him by General Harris. In 1807 Harris propelled him into parliament as the conservative member for Rye, a seat purchased with Lord Wellesley's aid on the understanding that Lushington would use his parliamentary privilege to champion Wellesley and Harris's record of conquest in India. In 1812 he was returned for Canterbury, which seat he continued to hold until 1830. He was chairman of the committee of ways and means from 1810 until 1813, and, under Lord Liverpool's administration, joint secretary of the Treasury from 1814 until 1827. In 1827 he became a privy councillor and was appointed governor of Madras. 
Lushington's predecessor in Madras had been Sir Thomas Munro (1761-1827) and Lushington soon quarrelled with Munro's acolytes, notably Henry Sullivan Graeme and David Hill. Schooled in the Cornwallis tradition of permanent settlement, he disliked Munro's famous ryotwari settlement and also his proposal for criminal trials by Indian juries. His tussle with Munro's supporters, however, was not essentially one of principle, but an attempt to stamp his own authority on an entrenched administrative cadre. He was accused, with justification, of jobbery and nepotism, instances of which stood out all the more against the background of stringent economies he introduced in order to reduce Madras's deficit before the company's charter came up for renewal in 1833. 
Lushington returned to England in 1832 at the end of his five-year term. Having refused to surrender his Canterbury seat on his appointment to Madras, he had lost it in the general election of 1830. He regained it in 1835 but retired from parliament at the dissolution of 1837. He was created an honorary DCL of Oxford in 1839 and in 1840 published a biography of his father-in-law, 'The Life and Services of General Lord Harris'. His first wife died in 1856, after which he married, in 1858, Marianne, daughter of James Hearne of Great Portland Street, London. There were no children of this marriage and Marianne died in 1864. Lushington himself died at his residence, Norton Court, Norton, near Faversham, Kent, on 5 August 1868, aged ninety-two. 
Lushington's younger brother 


