@@@@@


doc= 1152


Balchen, Sir John (1670-1744), naval officer, was born on 2 February 1670 at Godalming, Surrey, the fourth and only surviving child of John Balchin and Ann Edsur. His paternal forebears were yeoman landholders of long standing in the vicinity. (Although the name is commonly spelt Balchin, the admiral always wrote Balchen, as did most of his correspondents.) He went off to the navy at fifteen and for much of the 1690s was in the West Indies, where he was made lieutenant in 1692. In a memorial to the Admiralty requesting employment, dated 12 June 1699, he related his early history: 'I have served in the navy for fourteen years past in several stations, and was lieutenant of the 'Dragon' and 'Cambridge' almost five years, then had the honour of a commission from Admiral [John] Neville in the West Indies to command the 'Virgin''s prize, which bears date from 25 July 1697, and was confirmed by my lords of the admiralty on our arrival in England. I continued in command of the 'Virgin' till September 1698, then being paid off, and never at any time have committed any misdemeanour which might occasion my being called to a court martial, to be turned out or suspended.' The death rate of officers in Neville's squadron was phenomenal; Balchen was a survivor and thus, though he lacked influential connections, made post aged twenty-seven. In 1701 he was appointed to command the fireship 'Firebrand'. During the period ashore he had married, about 1699, Susannah, daughter of Colonel Apreece of Washingly, Huntingdonshire; they had six children. 
In December 1701 Balchen moved to the fireship 'Vulcan' and was attached to the main fleet under Sir George Rooke on the coast of Spain. Whether he took part in the attack on French and Spanish ships at Vigo (12 October 1702) is not certain, but near there he captured the 'Modere' (56 guns) and was given command of her; in February 1703 he was appointed to the 'Adventure' (44 guns), in which he continued for the next two years, cruising in the North Sea and channel. On 19 March 1705 he was transferred to the 'Chester' (54 guns) and was sent out to the west African coast (1705-6). Having survived that, he saw service in home waters where in autumn 1707 he was part of a small squadron escorting the Virginia and Portugal convoys to open sea. They were intercepted, however, by a dozen French warships, the conjoined squadrons of Forbin and Duguay-Trouin. Nearly all the merchant ships and transports escaped while the British escorts were being severely mauled. After rebuffing multiple attacks (10 October), the 'Chester' at length succumbed to boarding when she was slowed and hemmed in by two enemy ships. A year later Balchen, back in England on parole, was fully exonerated by the court martial which tried him for loss of his ship on 27 September 1708. He was not formally exchanged until 1709; in August of that year he was given command of the 'Gloucester', a new ship of 60 guns. Leaving Spithead with cruising orders in late October, he had scarcely cleared land before encountering Duguay-Trouin and was again forced to surrender his ship (26 October). At the court martial (14 December 1709) the evidence showed that the 'Gloucester' was engaged for above two hours with Duguay-Trouin's own ship, the 'Lis' (74 guns), while another ship was also firing at her and three other ships were standing by, ready to board. Greatly damaged aloft, she could not carry head-sails. The court found no fault in Balchen or his ship's company and he was soon appointed to the 'Colchester' (54 guns). On 9 November 1710 while 'en route' from Plymouth to Portsmouth he encountered a 20-gun French privateer, 'chace'd him Large with a very strong Gale of wind', and secured his prize (TNA: PRO, ADM 1/1470). 
During 1712 and 1713 the 'Colchester' was in the Mediterranean with Sir John Jennings. After coming home in December 1713 Balchen had a quiet year before being appointed to the 'Diamond' (40 guns) in February 1715 for a voyage to the West Indies and the suppression of piracy. He returned in May 1716. Immediately on paying off the 'Diamond' Balchen was appointed to the guardship 'Orford' in the Medway; he continued in her until February 1718, when he commissioned the 'Shrewsbury' (80 guns), in which he accompanied Sir George Byng to the Mediterranean. On arrival Vice-Admiral Charles Cornwall, until then the commander-in-chief, hoisted his flag on the 'Shrewsbury', and was second in command in the battle off Cape Passaro on 31 July. The ship returned to England in December, and the following May Balchen was appointed to the 'Monmouth' (70 guns), in which he accompanied Admiral Sir John Norris to the Baltic in the three successive summers of 1719, 1720, and 1721. Between 1722 and 1725 he commanded the guardship 'Ipswich' at Spithead, and in February 1726 he was again appointed to the 'Monmouth', which cruised in the Baltic, in 1726 with Sir Charles Wager, and in 1727 with Norris. He was afterwards, in October 1727, sent out as part of a reinforcement to Wager at Gibraltar, thought to be still under Spanish siege, though in reality a cessation of arms had been arranged. On 19 July 1728 Balchen was promoted rear-admiral. After moving his flag from the 'Dreadnought' (60 guns) to the 'Princess Amelia' (80 guns) in 1731 he went out to the Mediterranean as second in command under Wager. The mission was designed to solidify peace with Spain by exhibiting a strong force alongside the Spanish navy to ensure a quiet landing of a Spanish garrison at Leghorn. After this was successfully done the British fleet returned home in December. In February 1734 Balchen was advanced to the rank of vice-admiral. 
During the later 1730s and early 1740s Balchen generally served as flag-officer in charge of the ships at Plymouth. War with Spain in 1739 led to his being ordered to cruise off Ferrol to inhibit movements of Spanish warships and transports; on 9 April 1740 he left Plymouth with four ships of the line and was joined by three others. The mission was decided upon too late; the Cadiz and Ferrol squadrons had already come together and Balchen's force was outnumbered 14 to 7. When this was learned in London (28 April) there was great anxiety. Sir Charles Wager, the first lord, insisted that Balchen should be either recalled or reinforced. In May news came from France that Balchen had been beaten and taken (TNA: PRO, SP 42/81, fols. 323, 330), but the report was false. Balchen had learned that the Spanish forces had joined and therefore withdrew to 46 degree N to await further orders. Throughout the rest of 1740 he was kept in constant readiness because neutral France's mobilization of the Brest squadron meant that a powerful squadron would be needed to escort the planned expeditions (Lord Cathcart's assault force for the West Indies and Commodore George Anson's adventure to the Pacific) 150 leagues to sea, and Balchen was to command it. 
In fact, however, Balchen was seldom ordered to sea, and then only to guard convoys. In June 1741 he confided to an old friend, Admiral Nicholas Haddock, stationed in the Mediterranean, his sense of missing out on fame and fortune: '[We] have Nobody spoke of Now but Mr. Virnon ['sic']; he has all the Glory, and success pursues him. The West Indie people will be so Rich there wont be Roome for them to purchase Lands; whilst I am forced to drudge from place to place for Nothing. (BL, Egerton MS 2529, fol. 220)' At long last he was a flag-officer in time of war yet he saw no prospects. At this same time Philip Vanbrugh, naval commissioner at Plymouth, wrote to a friend, 'Vice Admiral Balchen is here, but no flag hoisted, nor much to do, which gives him much trouble; whereas ease and quiet is most agreeable to me' (Matcham, 159). Seniority advanced Balchen to the rank of admiral on 11 August 1743. Retirement came the following April; he was made governor of Greenwich Hospital and given a handsome pension of $600 per annum. A knighthood was added in May. 
Almost immediately, however, on 1 June, he was called back to active duty. A senior admiral was needed to command a large combined fleet of seventeen British and eight Dutch warships to counter the Brest squadron, which, it was soon learned, had gone to the Tagus and was blockading a fleet of desperately needed storeships and victuallers for the Mediterranean. At the start of the voyage some rich prizes finally came Balchen's way, as six large merchant ships from St Domingue fell to his squadron. In early September he escorted the replenishment ships to Gibraltar, safely past the French force which had withdrawn to Cadiz. Ideally he would have remained, as ordered, to seal that squadron in Cadiz harbour and look out for the incoming treasure ships from Havana, but the Dutch warships were destitute of provisions and though the British supplied them there was only enough to see the fleet home. 
On 3 October, in the Channel approaches, the ships were caught in a ferocious storm and dispersed. Most were dismasted or seriously leaking when they got into Plymouth or Spithead, but Balchen's flagship, the 'Victory' (100 guns), last seen on 4 October, was not among them. Frigates were sent to search, and Captain Thomas Grenville of the 'Falkland' called at Guernsey, where he heard that wreckage had also washed up on Jersey and Alderney. On Guernsey's western and northern shores he saw masts and spars with 'VICT' carved on them, and countless other fragments and furnishings that were unmistakably hers. He did not report seeing bodies. From the evidence and complete absence of survivors -- over 1100 men were aboard -- it appeared that the ship may have overturned, but it was practically certain that it had also been broken upon rocks, possibly on the Caskets (TNA: PRO, ADM 1/1830, Grenville, 18 Oct 1744). 
Balchen died at the age of seventy-five after fifty-eight years of naval service. He was a hard-working, thoroughgoing professional, recognized for his readiness to accept duty whenever and wherever required. When the Admiralty sent a notice in August 1740 stipulating that officers resigning their new appointments (almost always on a claim of ill health) must apply through the admiral in command, he responded, 'I believe I shall have but few Applications for that purpose, for they know I am no favourer of Quitting; they must be bad if I write for them' (Baugh, 'British Naval Administration', 117). Yet he was sympathetic when it came to issues affecting lower-deck morale. In 1729 he asked the Admiralty to allow volunteer recruits to go with the captains they had chosen if the captain happened to be re-assigned, and in 1741 he strongly recommended that trustworthy volunteers should be allowed ashore. His practical knowledge respecting ships and seamanship may be seen in plain-spoken letters of January 1735 concerning the 'Princess Amelia''s frightening instability (Baugh, 'Naval Administration', 212-16). It was an absurd twist of fate that he became best known to history by a shipwreck. 
Balchen's unexpected death in the line of duty having terminated his pension, the crown immediately settled $500 per annum on his widow. Four of Balchen's six children predeceased him. His youngest and only surviving son, George, who was promoted lieutenant by Nicholas Haddock in 1735 as a favour to the father (BL, Egerton MS, 2528, fol. 22), did not survive him long, dying of illness at Barbados in December 1745, aged twenty-eight, while captain of the 'Pembroke'. The monument to the admiral in Westminster Abbey was erected by his wife. Its inscription (fully quoted in some older naval histories and biographies) mentions George Balchen's death and ends with the comment that he 'imitated the virtues and bravery of his good, but unfortunate father'. A surviving daughter, Frances, married Captain Temple West. 


@@@@@


doc= 1153


Bald, Alexander (1783-1859), poet, was born at Alloa, Clackmannanshire, on 9 June 1783, the son of Alexander Bald (died 1823) and his wife, Jane, 'nee' Christie. His father was the superintendent at a local coal works and author of 'The Farmer and Corn Dealer's Assistant' (1790), for many years an indispensable book for tenant farmers in Scotland. His elder brother, Robert Bald (1776-1861), later became an eminent mining engineer. Alexander was from an early age trained for commerce, and for more than fifty years conducted business at Alloa as a timber merchant and brick manufacturer. On 15 September 1809, he married Ann, 'nee' Geddes, at Alloa. Throughout his life he devoted much of his leisure to literature, and was the friend and patron of many literary men in Scotland including John Grieve and James Hogg, whose talents he was among the first to recognize. He established a Shakespeare Club in his native town, and attracted eminent literary figures to its annual celebrations. Bald regularly contributed poems to the 'Scots Magazine', including 'The Lily of the Vale', which has been erroneously attributed to Allan Ramsay. Bald died at his home, Craigward Cottage, Alloa, on 21 October 1859. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 1154


Baldock, Ralph (d. 1313), administrator and bishop of London, was first recorded in February 1275, when he was admitted as rector of Little Woolstone in Buckinghamshire. In St Paul's he held, probably successively, the prebendal stalls of Holborn and Newington and is also found as prebendary of Islington. He first occurs as archdeacon of Middlesex in June 1278, became dean of St Paul's in 1294, and was elected bishop of London on 23 or 24 February 1304. Three canons, who had been deprived by the archbishop during the vacancy of the see, appealed to the pope to declare the election void owing to their exclusion, but the bishop-elect prevailed, and was consecrated at Lyons on 30 January 1306. 
Later that year Baldock was commissioned by Pope Clement V ('r'. 1305-14) to conduct an inquiry at Hereford into the miracles attributed to Thomas de Cantilupe (died 1282). At the Carlisle parliament in January 1307 he was sworn a member of the king's council. Edward I promoted him to chancellor in April, but his tenure of this office lasted only until the king's death in July. His presence at the Stamford parliament in August 1309 denotes loyalty to Edward II. Baldock was one of five bishops appointed as lords ordainer in March 1310. In late 1311 he attended the Council of Vienne. He provided for the resumption of theological lectures in his cathedral by appropriating the church of Ealing to the chancellorship of St Paul's, and wrote a history of England, which existed in the sixteenth century but is now lost. The extent of his intellectual interests is shown by the list of 126 'libri scolastici' made after his death; mostly devoted to theology and canon law, they also include works of natural science, medicine, and history. Baldock's codification of the customs and statutes of St Paul's, made while he was dean, was unparalleled among medieval English cathedral codes for its comprehensiveness and logical arrangement. 
St Paul's Cathedral was at this time being rebuilt and enlarged, and its new lady chapel was built by Baldock. He began it while he was still dean, continued it as bishop, bequeathed money for its completion and, after his death at Stepney on 24 July 1313, was buried there, under a handsome monument which was destroyed in the mid-sixteenth century. Master Robert Baldock, chancellor of England from 1323 to 1326, probably his nephew, was one of the bishop's executors. Robert's brother Richard, described as a king's clerk in 1325, became a canon of Salisbury and York. 


@@@@@


doc= 1155


Baldock, Robert (d. 1327), administrator, was of obscure origins, but was probably born in Baldock in Hertfordshire. He was an executor, and almost certainly a relative, of Ralph Baldock (d. 1313), bishop of London (1306-13) whose family name, the Pauline annalist suggests, was Catel. His brother Richard was a royal clerk. He was educated at Oxford, where he was BCL by 1294, and also entered royal service. Named king's clerk in 1316, he embarked upon a number of diplomatic missions in France and Scotland, before in January 1320 assuming custody of the privy seal. He remained keeper until 7 July 1323, being the first holder of the office to take an important role in a wider political and administrative sphere. This arose from the confidence placed in him by Edward II -- he is occasionally described as his secretary -- and by the younger Hugh Despenser, whose protege he seems to have been. He reunited the office of keeper with that of controller of the wardrobe, thereby circumventing an intention of the ordinances of 1311. Other activities often prevented Baldock from discharging all the responsibilities of these dual offices in person. Thus he was scheduled to accompany the king abroad in the spring of 1320 and in anticipation located his household at Wissant. He did go to the continent in June when he left behind a 'small seal of absence'. In September of the same year he was appointed to treat with Robert I of Scotland and on 3 December received safe conduct for attending to royal affairs in various parts of the realm. 
The Bridlington chronicler cited as a grievance of the lords assembled at Sherburn in Elmet (28 June 1321) the fact that the keeper and other officers had been appointed contrary to the ordinances and were the source of novelties, evils, and oppressions. In July of that year Baldock was named first among the evil and false councillors whom the younger Despenser had allegedly appointed for the disinheritance and destruction of magnates and people. But his rise continued. He succeeded Bishop Salmon as chancellor on 20 August 1323 and in November of the following year was a commissioner for negotiating peace with the Scots. He retained the chancellorship until 26 October 1326, by which time the king was a fugitive. 
Despite Edward's efforts Baldock was the only chancellor of the reign who was not supported by the resources of a bishopric. This may be attributed in part to the deliberate policy of Pope John XXII, and in part to the opportunism of other potential candidates, coupled with Baldock's unpopularity at the curia. And so the king's attempts to secure for him the sees of Coventry and Lichfield, Winchester, and Norwich, in 1321, 1323, and 1325 respectively, all came to nothing. He did secure a number of canonries and the archdeaconry of Middlesex, but this and most of the canonries were for varying periods subject to litigation. The king's attempt to give him the Lincoln prebend of Aylesbury in 1322 led to an acrimonious conflict at Avignon which lasted for the remainder of the reign. He was summoned to the curia, and in 1324 excommunicated. 
His close association with their regime meant that Baldock shared the intense unpopularity of Edward II and the Despensers; in particular he was held responsible for the measures against bishops Stratford, Orleton, Burghersh, Hotham, and Droxford. He stayed by the king in his retreat from London in October 1326 and was captured with him and the younger Despenser in the neighbourhood of Neath Abbey on 16 November. At Hereford he was claimed as a clerk by Bishop Orleton, who allegedly took him to London to answer in convocation for his misdeeds. A mob, claiming infringement of the city's liberties, dragged Baldock from Orleton's house, Monthalt, and lodged him in Newgate gaol where, miserably abused, he died on 28 May 1327. He was buried in the cemetery of the canons, St Paul's, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 1156


Baldock, Sir Robert (1624/5-1691), judge, was born at Stanway, Essex, the son and heir of Samuel Baldock ('b'. 'c'.1599), rector of Stanway. He was admitted a sizar of Pembroke College, Cambridge, on 29 October 1640, aged fifteen. Baldock entered Gray's Inn in July 1644, was called to the bar on 11 February 1651, and earned the degree of ancient on 18 May 1667. A decade later he gave the last of more than 400 recorded readings at Gray's Inn. Initiated over 250 years earlier, these readings had been held regularly until 1642 and quickly died out afterwards. Readers were selected from among the company to interpret cycles of statute law for the instruction of the students. The readings encompassed ten to twelve days spaced over three to four weeks (Baker, 31-7). In the same year (1677) he took the degree of serjeant. 
Baldock married Mary, daughter of Bacqueville Bacon, coheir of her brother Henry, and the couple settled at Great Hocham in Norfolk. Mary died in 1662 and Baldock later remarried; however, the name of his second spouse is not recorded. He and Mary had two children: Robert, who died in a naval battle in 1673, and Mary, his surviving heir, who married George, son of Thomas Townshend of West Wretham, Norfolk, in 1675. 
Early references to Baldock's legal career beyond Gray's Inn are scattered. He served as a justice of the peace for Norfolk after the Restoration. Robert Doughty reported in July 1664, 'I was at Norwich general quarter sessions, where Mr Bacon had the cushion, as Mr Long had before him & Mr Corey & Mr Baldock were to have after him' (Rosenheim, 38). In the only case in which he is specifically mentioned, Baldock ordered a verdict of not guilty returned in a dispute over the theft of 50's'. In 1671, while recorder at Great Yarmouth, Baldock was knighted by Charles II during the latter's visit there. Two other references concerning his legal duties are extant for the period before Baldock became a serjeant in 1685. In the first, Edward L'Estrange was ordered to meet with him 'or in his absence, with Mr Norris about the validity of unexecuted warrants issued during the last Lieutenancy' (Cozens-Hardy, 40). Baldock was not available and Norris held that the warrants were still valid. Roger North, describing the fraudulent conveyance in a case involving Sir William Doyly, observed that Baldock possessed the 'wit and will' to prepare one (North, 2.124). Contemporary views of his legal abilities seem somewhat mixed; nevertheless, he became a serjeant under James II. 
In this capacity Baldock gained notoriety in June 1688, when he served as one of the prosecutors in the trial of the seven bishops. The case centred on the refusal of William Sancroft, archbishop of Canterbury, and six others to read the king's declaration of indulgence. When the bishops met with James and presented their petition of protest, they were arrested and charged with seditious libel. During the ensuing trial, in June 1688, Baldock followed the opening arguments of Sir Thomas Powis for the crown and Lord Somers for the bishops with a 'feeble speech: admitting the right of the subject to petition the King, but objecting to the manner in which the Bishops had petitioned' (Phillipps, 2.316). His statement adds to the conclusion that none of the prosecutors 'made any significant contribution' to the case (Landon, 210). After a lengthy debate regarding the right of the bishops to petition, Baldock concluded, 'I cannot deny, nor shall not, but that the subject has a right to petition; but I shall affirm it also, he has a duty to obey' ('State trials', 12.417). Throughout the proceedings, though he did not speak frequently and played a distinctly subordinate role to the principal prosecutors, William Williams and Powis, Baldock consistently defended the royal prerogative to suspend and dispense with laws enacted by parliament. After the bishops were acquitted, an angry King James dismissed two of the justices who heard the case, replacing one with Sir Robert Baldock. 
The appointment to the king's bench on 6 July 1688 marks the high point of Baldock's legal career; yet it also illustrates the lack of outstanding legal talent willing to serve the monarch: the consequence of long-term efforts to politicize the bench. Under Charles and James generally undistinguished justices served the state and their tenure grew less secure. Sir Robert Baldock had little opportunity to justify the king's confidence or prove his own ability, as James fled to exile by the year's end and William never seriously considered him for a judicial appointment in the new administration. Baldock retired to Great Hocham and died there on 4 October 1691. He was buried in Great Hocham, where there is a monument to him in the local church. 


@@@@@


doc= 1157


Balthere (d. 756), hermit, is often confused with an earlier saint of the same name. The later and better-known Balthere was described by his near contemporary Alcuin, in his poem on the bishops, kings, and saints of York. The so-called York annals, which underlie the chronicle of Symeon of Durham of the late eleventh century, give 756 as the date of Balthere's death (there spelt Balther). Alcuin regarded the solitaries Balthere and Echa as examples of the most complete monastic dedication to poverty, chastity, and solitude, as associated with Northumbrians like Cuthbert and Drythelm. One story has it that by his prayers Balthere moved the Bass Rock into the Firth of Forth; his temporary residence on the rock may be at the base of this tradition. The hermit died at Tyninghame (near North Berwick) and another legend claims that Tyninghame, Auldhame, and nearby Preston all claimed his body after death and that it was miraculously multiplied by three so that each church gained possession of it. This story, also recounted of other Celtic saints, was probably invented to explain how each church could claim his relics. A simple division seems a more likely explanation. During the late eleventh century Alfred Westow of Durham, a notorious relic collector, claimed to have found the bodies of Balthere and Billfrith, the goldsmith who decorated the binding of the Lindisfarne gospels, and brought them both back to Durham, where their feast was celebrated on 6 March. 
Alcuin praised the hermit Balthere as 'a mighty warrior who vanquished time and again the hosts of the air that waged war on him in countless shapes'. This language seems to echo the life of Antony by Athanasius and that of Guthlac by Felix. Alcuin also attributed to him the miracles of walking on water and of the deliverance from diabolical torments of a deacon who had touched a woman unchastely. Sparse as these details are, they represent esteem and respect on the part of one of the most articulate writers of his age. 
Northumbrian saints such as Wilfrid, Bede, Cuthbert, and the hermit Balthere gained recognition through Alcuin. No such writer existed in the Glasgow area to record the life of 


@@@@@


doc= 1158


Baldred (fl. c.823-827), king of Kent, is a very obscure figure. In 823 the Mercian king Ceolwulf, who had ruled Kent as part of the Mercian kingdom, was deposed and replaced by Beornwulf (died 826?). At about this time the moneyers of the Canterbury mint began to issue coins in the name of a certain Baldred, 'king of Kent'. It is not clear whether Baldred was an independent ruler, or whether he was an under-king who had been established by Beornwulf and who acknowledged his overlordship. The Canterbury moneyers do not seem to have struck any coins for Beornwulf; on the other hand, an archiepiscopal charter of 826 suggests that Beornwulf's authority was recognized in Kent. Earlier, the Mercian king Cenwulf had briefly set up his brother as under-king of Kent, and it is possible that Baldred was similarly a kinsman of Beornwulf; the alliterating initial letter of their names may point to such a relationship. Baldred's brief reign ended when a West Saxon army, acting on the orders of Ecgberht (died 839), king of Wessex, invaded Kent and drove him north across the Thames; this probably took place in 826 or 827. In the course of his flight Baldred granted an estate to Archbishop Wulfred of Canterbury, but this attempt to enlist the support of God and a powerful local figure did not save him; he is not heard of again. There are no surviving charters in his name. William of Malmesbury incorrectly treats him as the successor of King Cuthred (died 807) and gives him a reign of eighteen years. 


@@@@@


doc= 1159


Baldrey, Joshua Kirby (1754-1828), draughtsman and engraver, was the eldest son of Andrew Baldrey (died 1802), of Ipswich, and his wife, Mary (1728-1806). Andrew, the illegitimate son of Andrew Rankin and Elizabeth Baldrey, was successively apprentice, partner, and successor in the general painting business of Joshua's godfather Joshua Kirby, and trained his own sons Joshua and Robert. Joshua in turn took as pupils Robert Clamp, stipple portrait engraver, and his own son John Baldrey, by his first marriage. 
For over twenty years Joshua Baldrey worked in London or Cambridge, never settling permanently in either. His first imprints as engraver and printseller were issued from Mr Dibbs's at Green Street, Grosvenor Square, in 1780, but he was in Trumpington Street in Cambridge in 1785, and back at Doughty & Co. in Holborn three years later, producing a series of satires against Hastings, Thurlow, and Pitt. He exhibited portraits at the Royal Academy in 1793 and 1794. Among his best works are 'The Finding of Moses', after Salvator Rosa (1785); 'Diana in a Landscape', after Carlo Maratta; 'Lady Rawdon', after Reynolds (1783); and 'Atalanta', after Henry Bunbury (1790). Baldrey worked after George Morland in soft-ground etching and after Bunbury in stipple. From about 1800 he and his son John, whose satires and portraits are in stipple and line, were together in Trinity Street, Cambridge. In 1811 Baldrey described himself as a miniature painter there, but in May 1809 he had published at 5 guineas a two-sheet reproduction of the east window of King's College chapel, Cambridge, which he had drawn, engraved, and, for an extra guinea, coloured by hand. His eight-page 'Dissertation on the Windows of King's College Chapel, Cambridge' (1818) was to advertise the remaining stock of the prints and to solicit orders for a projected engraving of one of the south windows. His 'Dissertation' concludes sadly: 'All these works have been executed by a man with a large increasing family, experiencing much sickness; and from the unpropitious state of the times, struggling with great difficulties' (p. 19). A large engraving of the Nollekens statue of Pitt in the Senate House, published in London in 1815, while competent, is heavy and lifeless. 
Baldrey must have been a widower when on 12 June 1808 he married Mary Jane Copsey by licence at Great St Mary's in Cambridge; a daughter, Sarah, was witness. When he died in poverty at Hatfield Woodside, Hertfordshire, on 6 December 1828 it was reported that he left a large family. 


@@@@@


doc= 1160


Baldwin (d. 1097), abbot of Bury St Edmunds, was born in Chartres and became a Benedictine monk at St Denis, Paris, before serving as the prior of one of the abbey's daughter houses at Leberaw in Alsace. He came to England as Edward the Confessor's physician, and he received the church of Deerhurst in Gloucestershire and the manor of Taynton in Oxfordshire from the king, which he held as a dependency of St Denis. His royal and continental connections made him the ideal successor to Leofstan, abbot of Bury St Edmunds, in 1065. 
With the appointment of Lanfranc as archbishop of Canterbury in 1070, the ecclesiastical landscape changed dramatically as he wished to implement the plans of the reforming papacy, which called for sees to be located in the major towns and for abbots to be subject to diocesan control. To protect Bury from this threat Baldwin travelled to Rome in 1071 where he secured a privilege which placed his abbey under the protection of the papacy. Neither letters of criticism from Lanfranc nor the testimony of jurors from nine counties persuaded Herfast, the bishop of Thetford, to abandon his claim to Bury. According to the 'Liber de miraculis sancti Eadmundi', when Herfast damaged his eyes in a riding accident, Baldwin agreed to save his sight only if he agreed to give up his claim. Orders from Rome, oral memory, and oaths made under duress did not, however, resolve the dispute, and at Easter 1081 the rival parties assembled in front of the king and the royal council in London. Baldwin defeated his opponent by producing four spurious charters in which English kings forbade the bishop of East Anglia from interfering with Bury Abbey in any way. Subsequent attempts to move the see to Bury were easily disposed of, as Baldwin not only kept the writ which enforced this decision but also had the foresight to forge a diploma in which William I expressly forbade Herfast and his successors from seeking to revive their claim to Bury. Baldwin's actions ensured that Bury was not chosen as the new ecclesiastical capital of East Anglia, and the documents which he collated guaranteed the monastery's independence until the dissolution. 
One of the problems which many abbots faced during the Norman conquest was the hostility of Norman lords towards their founding saints, which was often the prelude to seizing these houses' wealth. As late as 1095 the nobles of William II's court recommended that the king should seize the wealth from Edmund's shrine as they argued that the saint was buried elsewhere. Baldwin responded with a programme of hagiography which quashed these dangerous rumours and justified the Bury version of events. Scribes interpolated AElfric's life of St Edmund to establish that Edmund was buried at Bury. Baldwin also commissioned Hermann, the archdeacon, to write the 'Liber de miraculis sancti Eadmundi'. In this work it was claimed that the saint had made himself 'as heavy as a mountain' in order to avoid being buried elsewhere, and that Abbot Leofstan had conclusively proved during Edward the Confessor's reign that Edmund was buried in the abbey's shrine. Baldwin worked with English monks and continental scholars to establish a new past in order to protect the abbey from episcopal and baronial aggression. 
Norman barons also posed a threat to abbeys by occupying the latter's estates and seeking to exercise lordship over their men. At some time between 1066 and 1070, Baldwin received two writs which ruled out such enterprise. The first guaranteed his right to retain the lands which had formerly been leased out to his subtenants who had died while fighting against William I, and the second excluded royal tax collectors from the eight and a half hundreds in western Suffolk, confirming the fiscal privileges which the abbey had received 'c'.1043-1044. The best means by which land could be transferred to Norman barons, namely through forfeiture for treason and failure to pay the geld, were expressly ruled out by these privileges. Baldwin also commissioned the feudal book which, by listing all the abbey's human and arable capital, made it extremely difficult for other lords to exploit the ambiguities between soke, commendation, and tenure in order to gain control of the monastery's property. This inventory drew upon the accounting techniques introduced by his predecessor, Abbot Leofstan, and was used until the late twelfth century by the Bury monks. 
Baldwin continued to have connections with the region of his birthplace, as many of the post-1066 tenants in the eight and a half hundreds came from the Chartres region. In the town of Bury St Edmunds, Baldwin cleared arable land to make way for 342 new houses, and it is possible that some of the burgesses who abandoned 328 dwellings in Ipswich about that time may have moved to Bury, attracted by the extremely low rents offered by Baldwin. The 'Liber de miraculis' records that Abbot Baldwin sat in silence for three days as he pondered how to pay for the building of a new abbey church, and he actively encouraged both English and French to settle on the abbey's estates. The abbey choir was built in the new Gothic style and, with its splendid carved vaulting, was thought by contemporaries to rival the temple of Solomon. When it was completed in 1095, St Edmund was translated to the new shrine. Baldwin died in January 1097 and was buried at Bury St Edmunds. He defended his abbey's rights against the ideals of a reforming episcopate and the avariciousness of the Norman aristocracy by drawing upon his medical knowledge, the skills of his monks, and connections with both the royal and papal courts. Contemporaries observed that Baldwin 'renewed everything within and without' ('De gestis pontificum', 156) and that 'he was the true father and the illustrious restorer of his house' (Hermann, 58). 


@@@@@


doc= 1161


Baldwin (d. 1086x90), magnate, is usually described in contemporary sources as son of Count Gilbert, brother of Richard son of Count Gilbert, or as Baldwin the Sheriff (of Devon) or Baldwin of Exeter. He was the second son of Gilbert, count of Eu and possibly also of Brionne. The latter was a son of Godefroy, an illegitimate son of Richard (I), duke of Normandy. One of the guardians of the young duke (the future king, William I), Gilbert was murdered either late in 1040 or in January 1041. His sons Baldwin and Richard escaped to Flanders, returning thence after the marriage of Duke William to Matilda of Flanders. William gave to Baldwin the lordships of Meulles and Le Sap. Baldwin's wife was a kinswoman of the duke. At a later date, in the chronicle of Forde Abbey, she is named as Albreda, but in a ducal charter of 1066 and in 'Domesday Book' as Emma. The Forde tradition may thus be an error, but the possibility that Baldwin married twice cannot be discounted. It has been suggested that Emma may have been a daughter of Richard Goz, vicomte of the Avranchin (Keats-Rohan, 50). 
Orderic Vitalis included Baldwin and his brother Richard de Clare, ancestor of the Clare family, in his list of notable laymen at Duke William's court in 1066. His presence at the battle of Hastings is not attested, though, like that of his brother Richard, it is probable. In 1068 King William travelled to south-west England to deal with resistance there spearheaded by Gytha, mother of Harold Godwineson, and he ordered a castle to be built at Exeter, which he committed to Baldwin. The latter is found soon afterwards as sheriff of Devon, an office he evidently still held at the time of the 'Domesday' Survey, and possibly retained until his death not long afterwards. In 1086 he was the major lay landholder in the county. His estates were concentrated round Exeter and Okehampton, where a castle is referred to in 'Domesday Book', and they extended along the valley of the River Torre towards the north coast of Devon. They had been acquired from various pre-conquest landholders; this, together with a heavy obligation to knight service of more than 90 fees, suggests that military considerations had been very much to the forefront in the creation of what came to be known as the barony of Okehampton. Moreover, the fact that Baldwin's English estates were concentrated in the south-west, unlike those of many others of the greatest landholders, points to his having been most active at an early stage of the conquest, but not participating in the takeover of the midlands and the north; nor were his lands overall as valuable as those acquired by his brother Richard. His presence at the royal court is attested occasionally in the witness lists of royal documents. 
The precise date of Baldwin's death is not known, but in Orderic's account of a terrifying vision of spectres of the dead experienced by a priest of Lisieux on 1 January 1091 there figured Baldwin and Richard his brother, who had died 'recently' (Ordericus Vitalis, 'Eccl. hist.', 4.236-50). Baldwin's estates were divided between two sons: Robert succeeded to Le Sap and Meulles, and William fitz Baldwin to the lands in south-west England. There was a third son, Richard, and at least two daughters. An illegitimate son, Wiger, became a monk of Bec, a house with which Baldwin had strong family connections. His father, Count Gilbert, had been the overlord of Herluin, founder of the abbey, and Baldwin himself gave land to the abbey from his estates in Normandy and in England. 


@@@@@


doc= 1162


Clare, Baldwin de (fl. 1130-1154), soldier, is called thus once by Orderic Vitalis, but was more usually known as Baldwin, son of Gilbert (Baldwin fitz Gilbert). He was a younger son of Gilbert de Clare (d. 1117), the second post-conquest lord of Clare, and Alice, daughter of Hugues or Hugh, count of Clermont in northern France. He was thus the brother of Richard fitz Gilbert de Clare, lord of Clare, Tonbridge, and Ceredigion, and of Gilbert, earl of Pembroke (died 1148). Before 1130 Baldwin bought for himself from Henry I the marriage of Aelina, heir of Richard and William de Rollos, whose lands centred on Bourne, Lincolnshire. 
On the seizure of the throne by Stephen, Baldwin supported the new king, and seems to have remained loyal to him: he therefore supported the new regime at a time when his brother Richard opposed it. Following the ambush and murder of Richard in Wales in April 1136 Stephen gave Baldwin a large sum of money and sent him to take charge of the situation. Baldwin hired knights and archers, and arrived at Brecon to hear that the Welsh were out in force and had blocked the roads by felling trees. 'Struck with fear' ('Gesta Stephani', 13) he stayed where he was, hoping to wear the Welsh out or starve them out, but he used up his own supplies first and returned to England needy and discredited. More heroic were his actions at the battle of Lincoln on 2 February 1141. One chronicler attributes to him a lengthy speech to Stephen's troops before the battle, on the justness of Stephen's cause, the superiority of his forces, and the shortcomings of his opponents. Baldwin was among those who fought dismounted round King Stephen, and, when the cavalry fled, 'stood loyally by the king and fought courageously with him to the end' (Ordericus Vitalis, 'Eccl. hist.', 6.544). He was severely wounded, and was captured. 
Baldwin de Clare and Aelina had a son, Roger, who does not appear to have survived his father, and three daughters; Emma married Hugh Wake, and Margaret married Robert, younger son of Aubrey de Vere. Emma seems to have transmitted the bulk of the inheritance to her Wake descendants. The other daughter, also Margaret, to whom Aelina gave three estates that Baldwin left to his wife on his deathbed, is not known to have married. In 1138 Baldwin founded Bourne Abbey, a house of Arrouaisian canons, to which he gave ten churches on his lands. He gave to Thorney Abbey the church of Deeping St James, Lincolnshire, where a small cell took shape; he occurs as a witness of several charters of Henry I and Stephen for Thorney, and was clearly a friend of that house. He also confirmed gifts of Hugh of Envermeu to the monks of St Lawrence, Envermeu, a priory of Bec in Normandy, and thus continued his family's friendship with Bec. The date of his death is unknown; he was still alive in 1154, but by 1166 his lands were held by his son-in-law Hugh Wake. 


@@@@@


doc= 1163


Revieres, Baldwin de, earl of Devon (c.1095-1155), magnate, was the eldest son of Richard de Revieres and Adeliz, daughter of William Peverel of Nottingham. The family originated from Reviers (Calvados) but their estates, by the end of the eleventh century, centred on Nehou (Manche) and Vernon (Eure). Richard de Revieres was a follower of William I's youngest son, Duke Henry, and when Henry became king in 1100, he rewarded Richard with the grant of extensive estates in Devon, Dorset, Hampshire, and the Isle of Wight, later known as the honours of Plympton, Christchurch, and Carisbrooke. Richard died in 1107 leaving his eldest son, Baldwin, probably little more than twelve years old. 
Baldwin acted for Henry I as a minor local administrator in the 1120s and early 1130s, but emerged clearly at the beginning of Stephen's reign when, in the spring of 1136, he seized the royal castle at Exeter. The citizens appealed to the king for help and during the summer the castle was kept under close siege. Baldwin was not among the besieged, but nor was he at Plympton, the 'caput' of his Devon estates; for the castle there was handed over to the king by the garrison which Baldwin had left to defend it. It seems he had withdrawn to his castle at Carisbrooke to organize a pirate fleet to prey on shipping running between Normandy and England. Following the fall of Exeter, Stephen moved quickly to Southampton, intending to invade the island. When the water supply in Carisbrooke Castle failed, Baldwin appeared before the king to plead for mercy and the restoration of his lands. Stephen was unmoved and Baldwin left the country soon afterwards, a landless exile. He took refuge at the court of Geoffrey, count of Anjou, and for the next three years was actively involved in the count's attacks on Normandy. In 1138 he was captured by the Norman baron Ingram de Say outside the castle of Isle Marie (Manche). 
Baldwin must soon have regained his freedom as in July 1139 he led the Empress Matilda's invasion of England, landing at Wareham and seizing the nearby castle of Corfe. In the military campaigning of the next three years he remained a firm supporter of Matilda's cause. He fought in her army at the battle of Lincoln early in 1141 and was then among those who escorted her to London, where it was hoped she would be crowned. On her arrival there in midsummer she created him earl of Devon. He stayed with her during her retreat to Oxford and, in July 1141, when she moved her army to Winchester. But when Matilda's forces were routed in September, he may have left her entourage; in any event he is not again recorded in her company. In the late 1140s he may have gone on crusade, but he was at Westminster at the end of 1153 to witness the treaty between Stephen and Duke Henry, Matilda's son. 
Baldwin was a prominent benefactor of religious houses. In the 1130s he founded a priory of Augustinian canons at Breamore, Hampshire, and a Cistercian abbey at Quarr, on the Isle of Wight. After becoming earl he established a priory on his manor of St James Church, to the south of Exeter, dependent on the monastery of St Martin-des-Champs, Paris, and gave leave for the abbey of Lyre to found a priory at Carisbrooke. He was a patron of Plympton Priory and of Christchurch Priory, Dorset, where he introduced regular canons. 
Baldwin left at least five children from his first marriage, to Adeliz (parentage unknown). Adeliz died around 1146, and between 1151 and 1155 Baldwin married as his second wife, Lucy, the widow of Gilbert de Clare, earl of Hertford. He died on 4 June 1155 and was buried at Quarr Abbey. He was succeeded in his estates and the earldom by his eldest son, Richard. However, neither Richard nor his descendants achieved the prominence of the first earl. Three of the six earls who followed Baldwin either married or were betrothed to important heiresses, showing that they were regarded as potentially men of consequence, but a series of early deaths and often prolonged minorities reduced the family's influence, at court and also in south-west England, which was increasingly neglected in favour of the Isle of Wight. The seventh earl, named Baldwin like his great-great-grandfather, died without a male heir in 1262, when his estates and title passed to his sister Isabella de Forz, countess of Aumale. She died in 1293, having outlived all her children. In 1335 the earldom of Devon was granted to Hugh Courtenay, lord of Okehampton, a descendant of Isabella's great-aunt Marion. 


@@@@@


doc= 1164


Baldwin (c.1125-1190), archbishop of Canterbury, was born in Exeter, probably the son of Hugh d'Eu, archdeacon of Totnes, and a woman of unknown name. This parentage is suggested by Baldwin's having succeeded to the archdeaconry of Totnes on Hugh's death and by his being called Master Baldwin fitz Hugh in a charter. Gervase of Canterbury's claim that Baldwin was born of people of no account expressed the contempt of an aristocratic community. His mother became a nun and must have been literate, since Roger, a monk at Forde, asked for a copy to be made for her in readable letters of the 'Visions' of Elisabeth of Schonau. 
The decade of Baldwin's birth is deduced from the fact that Eugenius III appointed him to be tutor to his nephew in 1150 or 1151: it is likely that he was then in his mid-twenties. Before that he studied law in Bologna under the future Urban III, and his writings suggest that he had followed theology in the schools, perhaps at Laon. Exeter probably provided his earlier education. By 1155 he was back home as a clerk serving the bishop of Exeter, Robert of Chichester. This is the most likely time that he himself taught; the monk Roger mentioned above recalled that Baldwin had read his boyish verses and suggested subjects to him. 
Bishop Bartholomew made Baldwin archdeacon of Totnes -- after his father's death -- on 23 May 1162, in which post he was active until about 1170 when he became a Cistercian at Forde Abbey. His decision reflects the pressures on the bishop and his clerks from the increasingly bitter disagreement between Henry II and Thomas Becket. Bartholomew on the whole stuck by Becket: his clerks numbered relatives of John of Salisbury, Thomas's confidential clerk and companion in exile. At this stage John wrote warmly of Baldwin's loyalty and integrity. 
An abbey had existed at Forde only since 1141. It must have been attracting other recruits besides Baldwin since in 1172 it was able to found a daughter house. Within a short time the new and able monk became abbot at Forde. Exactly when is unknown, but by 1173 Baldwin was at the general chapter at Citeaux where he had 'secret matters' to discuss with the abbot of Citeaux, who had been asked by the pope that year to try to make peace between Henry II and his sons (Baldwin, 'De commendatione fidei', preface, section 4, 344; cf.xxix-xxx). Baldwin's years as abbot saw the pope put Baldwin's legal training to use, appointing him judge-delegate in a number of cases, when he often worked with bishops and gained a reputation as a man with a future. His writings show other sides of his character. 
The longest of Baldwin's writings, 'De sacramento altaris', was dedicated to Bartholomew. Twelve manuscripts survive showing that it continued to be read into the fifteenth century, getting attention well beyond his own order, though not much outside England. It explores the biblical account of the institution of the eucharist and its forerunner, the passover. The influence of Augustine is very strong. Baldwin's twenty-two sermons, on the other hand, most of which started as addresses to his community, echo Bernard of Clairvaux, and the biblical book which that saint loved best, the 'Song of Solomon'. Here too twelve manuscripts from England and northern France survive, the latest from the late fifteenth century. Two sermons were printed at Cambridge in 1521. Another work, on faith, survives in two English manuscripts, though at least five others are known to have existed before the dissolution. 
Not surprisingly, in 1178 Baldwin attracted the notice of a cardinal visiting England, Peter of St Agatha, who recommended him to Alexander III as a possible cardinal since he was 'held in very high esteem by the whole Cistercian order, because of his very broad culture, his worthiness and his piety.' (Glorieux). Perhaps these very qualities, as well as the political role he had played in 1173, induced Henry II to support his election to Worcester in 1180. He was consecrated bishop on 10 August. In this new role he continued to act as judge-delegate, an activity reflected in the notable Worcester collection of decretals, possibly put together by Master Silvester, a clerk whom Baldwin had inherited from his predecessor, Bishop Roger, and whom he was to take with him to Canterbury. 
Although Walter Map, scarcely a friend of Cistercians, praised Baldwin's determination to continue to write after he had become a bishop, the only piece definitely linked to the Worcester years is a sermon on the cross written for the lately reformed canons of Waltham. 
On Sunday 22 July 1184 Baldwin intervened to delay the hanging outside the city of a seducer and thief who had been condemned before the king. His foolhardiness, inspired by respect for the day, the feast of St Mary Magdalen, instead of bringing down royal wrath, seems to have increased the king's opinion of him, for Henry began to move him higher, to Canterbury, vacant since February. Negotiations to secure the agreement of both the bishops of the province and of the monks who served the cathedral took until the middle of December. Baldwin's enthronement occurred on 19 May 1185, by which time his pallium had arrived from Rome. 
Baldwin's Canterbury 'acta' show that he had an active concern for his diocese and province. There is little specifically Cistercian in them, except for a moving letter to the abbots' meeting at Citeaux asking for their prayers, and pleading that the duties of his new office prevented him from being with them. A very positive achievement was his assertion of Canterbury's claims over Wales. Urban III created him legate on 17 or 18 December 1185, but it was not until June 1187 that Baldwin travelled towards the Welsh border, and then crossed briefly over to 'visit' it formally. In the next year, from early March to the middle of April, he travelled more widely through the principality than probably any archbishop, everywhere preaching the crusade. His route can be reconstructed thanks to the lively account written by one of his companions, the testy and witty Gerald of Wales. Gerald provides the only good description of what the archbishop looked like: 'swarthy... with an honest, venerable face, only moderately tall, of good physique and inclined to be thin rather than corpulent' (Gerald of Wales, 'Journey', 205). In each cathedral Baldwin celebrated mass, symbolizing his superior position as legate and archbishop. For a sixty-year-old he showed impressive stamina, even urging his companions to dismount and walk up a valley to make them fit for the journey to Jerusalem. 
Baldwin had taken the cross in March 1185, when bad relations within the royal family and between Henry and Philip Augustus made any expedition very unlikely. In 1188 Angevin-Capetian relations were better, and circumstances for a crusade more propitious. Although Baldwin's sermons often had to be translated into Welsh, Gerald claimed that 3000 took the cross. No sooner was Baldwin back in England than he set out for Normandy to try to make peace between the old king and his restless sons. He only returned to England at the end of July 1189, by when Henry was dead (6 July). 
By that time Baldwin's quarrel at Canterbury had reached its nadir, the monks having been virtually imprisoned in their monastery since January 1188. It is hardly surprising that the Canterbury historian Gervase thought that Baldwin's keenness to preach in Wales was caused chiefly by the desire to put a distance between himself and the community. The whole story goes back to December 1185, a year after Baldwin's election, when he began to try to regain control of some property and revenues that his predecessor had let slip into the hands of the monks. His full purpose emerged in 1186, when Urban III gave him permission to build and endow a new collegiate church at Hackington, just outside Canterbury. He claimed to be fulfilling an intention of his two great predecessors, Anselm and Becket, and that he would dedicate it to the latter, whom he said lacked churches in his honour. To the monks the scheme was totally unacceptable, especially when they realized that Baldwin had got authority to divert up to half of the offerings in the cathedral, most of which were given at the martyr's shrine. It seemed to them that the saint upon whom they depended was to be hijacked on behalf of an institution which they foresaw as the beginning of the end for their wealth and privileges. Massive documentation survives from the struggle: a narrative account by Gervase, and a dossier of over 550 letters, compiled by another monk, Reginald. This last reveals that the Canterbury Benedictines bombarded everyone they could think of -- the German emperor, the king of France, cardinals, bishops, and abbots, these last including even Baldwin's Cistercian colleagues, the abbots of Citeaux and Clairvaux, and the general chapter of the order. 
The monks posed as the heirs and protectors of Becket, and Gervase records how one young monk dreamed that Thomas put Baldwin to flight with a burning sword. His prior interpreted the fact that the sword was inscribed 'The sword of blessed Peter' as a sure sign that Rome would ultimately quash Baldwin's plans. Now it is clear that Rome was in no very good position to settle anything quickly, since no fewer than four men served as pope between 1185 and the end of the struggle in 1189. The claim that Thomas and the monks were one now seems odd, since, as Barlow has shown, 'His lasting unpopularity with the monks is undoubted' (F. Barlow, 'Thomas Becket' 1986, 271). Symptomatic of that is the fact that the candidates whom the monks would have preferred in 1172 and 1184 (and later in 1191), Odo of Canterbury, abbot of Battle, and Reginald fitz Jocelin, had both opposed Becket when he was alive. It is also clear that Baldwin was not the first, or last, archbishop to have difficulties with Christ Church. It was a rich and touchy body with which an austere Cistercian might well have found it hard to establish friendly relations, but it may well have been crucial that in the early days of his primacy Baldwin spent little time at Canterbury. Certainly his high ideals about the corporate life of a religious community, as expressed in one of his Forde sermons, never stood a chance of taking shape at Christ Church once he had embarked upon the Hackington scheme. 
Baldwin's persistence can look like mere stubbornness, but it seems more likely that his previous experience as well as a real need had more to do with it. His promotion probably rested principally upon his training as a canon lawyer, which must have predisposed him to believe that if he had a pope on his side, as well as the king, he would triumph. But he never had any pope for very long. As archbishop of a church served by monks he lacked any canonries and lesser posts in his cathedral with which to reward loyal clerks. At Hackington he would have many -- the monks reckoned he planned on sixty or seventy -- and so he stood his ground. But the monks did all they could to frustrate him, deploying people and money at Rome to good effect, so that Baldwin was forced to temporize over papal mandates ordering him to desist while leaning more heavily on what the king might do by threats. Finally it was the new king, Richard I, who in November 1189 oversaw the patching up of a compromise. The monks were pleased that Baldwin had to give up the Hackington plan but dismayed that he got permission to try something similar at Lambeth. His successor, Hubert Walter, attempted this, but eventually the monks forced him to desist. 
Richard's motive in making peace at Canterbury was his determination to go on crusade. Baldwin left England in March 1190 with an advance party, never to return. He travelled with Hubert Walter, the bishop of Salisbury, his own nephew Joseph, a poet, and his old companion at Forde, Abbot Robert. The party made their way steadily south through France, reaching Marseilles at the beginning of August. The voyage to Tyre took about five weeks, and by 12 October they were at Acre. It was there that Baldwin died on 19 November, sickened perhaps by the army's dissolute behaviour. He made Hubert Walter his executor, and the latter saw to the pay of some twenty knights and fifty serjeants. Baldwin also left some of his vestments to the community at Canterbury, a generous gesture which did not soften the picture that they kept of him. 
Baldwin's whole career reveals a deeply spiritual person, and it is striking that now his writings probably circulate more widely and in more languages than those of any other medieval archbishop of Canterbury, with the one exception of Anselm. This spirituality was recognized by Urban III, who commented that whereas Becket when he dismounted went straight to the hall and Richard of Dover went to the barn, Baldwin went to the church. Yet in a now lost letter the same pope is supposed to have addressed him as 'the most fervent monk, warm abbot, lukewarm bishop, negligent archbishop' (Gerald of Wales, 'Speculum' in 'Opera', 4.76). Although Baldwin was capable of serious errors of judgement, like the promotion of the worthless Roger Norreys (died 1223), first to be prior of Christ Church, Canterbury, and then to be abbot of Evesham, Urban's comment still seems too hard. But it is easy now to see that the archbishop's decision to create a collegiate church made an unbreakable rod for his own back, forcing him into excessive dependence on royal support. 


@@@@@


doc= 1165


Baldwin, George (1744-1826), diplomatist and writer, son of William Baldwin, hop merchant, was born, in the Borough, near London, in May 1744 according to his own account, though others give 1743 as the date. In 1760 he went to Cyprus (where his brother was consul) and in 1763 to Acre. Increasingly aware of the political structure and commercial potential of the area, he returned to England in 1768 to obtain leave to explore possible connections between India and Egypt by way of the Red Sea, a route in theory blocked to non-Muslims to protect the holy cities and trade through Jiddah but in fact open to them provided enough profit accrued to the beys. Baldwin returned to Cyprus to settle his late brother's affairs and acted as consul there. In 1773, in Cairo, Mehemed Bey promised him 'if you bring the India ships to Suez, I will lay an aqueduct from the Nile to Suez, and you shall drink of the Nile water' (Baldwin, 'Political Recollections', 3-4). He was favourably received too in Constantinople by Britain's ambassador. 
In 1774 Baldwin returned to Cairo with the holy caravan from Mecca, and thence to England. Learning that John Shaw had successfully reached Suez up the Red Sea from Bengal, he offered his services to the East India Company, whose ships were to come up the Red Sea to Suez for trans-shipment. His offer was accepted. Back in Egypt in 1775, as the only English merchant, and a fluent Arabic speaker, he set up commerce with England, and began linking this trade to Suez and India, organizing schedules and quick turnarounds. Between 1776 and 1778, with ships arriving both at Alexandria and Suez, Baldwin reputedly drank prosperity to England with the combined waters of the Nile, Thames, and Ganges atop the pyramid. The success of his business competed with the trade of the Porte and the East India Company's trade around the Cape; the sultan issued a prohibitory firman, and threatened reprisals. In May 1779 a caravan from Suez to Cairo was attacked; some merchants died, others were imprisoned. In July Baldwin became a hostage or 'prisoner at large' to secure their release. In November he escaped and reached Izmir. There he married Jane (1763-1839), the strikingly beautiful daughter of his agent, William Maltass. 
Baldwin set out for India, hoping to restore his fortunes, but was robbed and wounded and quickly returned. He then set off, with his wife, for Europe in 1780, where she drew much attention from rich and powerful men. In Vienna, the sculptor Cerroschi executed her bust for the emperor, and her full-length portrait was painted for Count Kaunitz, the foreign minister. In London, Joshua Reynolds, William Pyne, and Richard Cosway all painted her. Cosway's portrait entitled 'A Grecian Lady' (1782) was engraved by Bartolozzi. The Baldwins' marriage was tempestuous and unhappy. She died in 1839 leaving a daughter. 
Baldwin was welcomed into London society as an exotic newcomer. He was described by Wright as 'lolling on oriental cushions, amid strange hangings' (T. Wright, 'Life of William Blake', 1929, 2.31) and had some interesting pictures to share. Baldwin became intrigued by Cosway's keen interest in the therapeutic powers of magnetism as expounded by John de Mainauduc. Baldwin's presence was noted in William Blake's lines: '
Cosway, Frazer and Baldwin of Egypt's lake, 

Fear to associate with Blake, 

This life is a warfare against evils, 

They heal the sick, he [Blake] casts out devils. 
(ibid.)' Baldwin presented the India board with his 'Narrative of Facts Relating to the Plunder of the English Merchants by the Arabs... in 1779' (1780) and at the board's request prepared the memorial 'Speculations on the resources of Egypt' (written between 1773 and 1785 but published in 1801 in his 'Political Recollections'), in which he pointed to Egypt's pivotal position and trading potential ('She is the resort of all traders of the world'), and the instability of the government. He advised that, with no English presence, Mediterranean trade would go to France, and English trade should be supported by political means. Very few senior officials in London, however, found his argument about the strategic importance of Egypt convincing. 
In 1785 an envoy signed agreements for safe French transit through Egypt and the Red Sea. To counter-balance this influence, in June 1786 Baldwin was appointed to Egypt as consul-general with a brief to obtain a similar agreement for Britain, to discover 'the motions of the French' and keep the English in India advised (TNA: PRO, FO 78, 24/1). In 1790 he published 'A Memorial Relating to the Slave Trade in Egypt' at the request of the privy council. In 1792 he sent news to India of the declaration of war on France, enabling British forces to expel the French from Pondicherry. In 1796 another agent came 'to inveigle the Beys of Egypt into the designs of the French', and to obtain consent to pass an army through Egypt to annihilate British dominion in India (Baldwin, 'Political Recollections', 30). 
While in Egypt, Baldwin's interest in magnetism continued; he believed the cures effected to be 'many and marvellous'. He created a special room in the form of a temple at his consulary mansion at Alexandria. Here, between 1795 and 1797 he held more than fifty sessions with an itinerant Italian poet who sank easily into a 'magnetic sleep' and responded in verse. Baldwin collected these responses and published them privately as 'Investigation into Principles' (1801) and 'La prima musa' (1802). He also conducted research on the powers of sweet olive oil to combat plague, described in 'An essay on the plague', written in 1791 and published in his 'Political Recollections' (1801). 
In 1793 Britain, dissatisfied with Baldwin's progress with a treaty, abolished his post. The letter dismissing him did not arrive until 1796 and he continued to act as consul-general until that date. In 1794 he agreed a commercial treaty with the beys which acknowledged the right of the British to navigate all ports of the Ottoman empire. In March 1798, ill and disillusioned, he left Cairo. That May Napoleon sailed for Egypt, took Alexandria and marched south, vindicating Baldwin's repeated insistence on the region's strategic importance. 
Baldwin moved around war-torn Europe, but after the battle of Marengo in June 1800 left Florence, and eventually reached Naples. There, in December 1800, he was asked to join the British expedition at Malta to advise them on Egypt. He recommended they land on the Red Sea, make a direct assault on Alexandria, or land at Abu Qir. Attached to Admiral Lord Keith, he also advised the military commander, Sir Ralph Abercromby. In his 'Political Recollections' Baldwin provides eyewitness accounts of the preparations for and landing at Abu Qir on 8 March 1801, and of Abercromby's last hours. He used his local knowledge to set up supplies for the army. By May he was back in London reporting on the invasion. 
Baldwin's interest in magnetism was now 'cried down' and its supporters 'held up to derision' (Baldwin, 'Legacy', xxxix), and he did not publish on the subject again until 1811, when the privately printed 'Legacy to his Daughter' commented on, among other matters, the present and past state of magnetism as he saw it and repeated his records of the sessions with the Italian poet. 
Baldwin died in Earls Court, Brompton, London, on 19 February 1826. His collection of classical cameos and busts, illustrated in his privately printed, undated collection of sixty lithographs (BL), was sold at Christies in London on 8 and 9 May 1828. 


@@@@@


doc= 1166


Baldwin, Sir John (bap. before 1470, d. 1545), judge, was born shortly before 1470, a younger son of William Baldwin (died 1479?) of Aylesbury, Buckinghamshire, and Agnes, daughter of William Dormer of Wycombe in the same county. William's brother, John Baldwin (died 1469), was a bencher of Gray's Inn and common serjeant of the city of London. The Aylesbury estates had been left to William by the common serjeant, and were inherited by the younger John from his brother Richard in 1484. John joined the Inner Temple, but the details of his career there suggest that he cannot have been admitted much before 1500, and it is not clear how he spent his earlier years. The identity of his first wife is also uncertain, but she was probably called Agnes and was the mother of his only son and three daughters. She died before 1518, when he married Anne, daughter of Sir William Norris MP (died 1506) of Yattendon, Berkshire, and widow of William Wroughton. Anne, however, became insane before her husband's death. 
John Baldwin is mentioned as counsel in the court of requests in 1506, and by 1510 was a justice of the peace for Buckinghamshire. Thereafter his rise was steady. He gave his first reading in the Inner Temple in 1516, and served as its treasurer from 1521 to 1523, in which latter year the subsidy commissioners rated him as being worth $133 in goods. In 1529 he was elected member of parliament for Hindon, Wiltshire, and the following year became attorney-general for Wales and the duchy of Cornwall. When he was nominated for the coif in 1531, he delivered a third reading in the Inner Temple, on the statute 'De prisonam frangentibus', a text of which survives in BL, Harley MS 1691. Upon his creation he was appointed a king's serjeant, together with his brother bencher Thomas Audley, and three years later was knighted, an honour that Spelman noted as unprecedented for a serjeant. Following the death of Robert Norwich he was selected (presumably by Audley) to be chief justice of the common pleas, and was appointed on 19 April 1535. 
The printed year-books come to an end in 1535, and what little is known of Baldwin's judicial career is mostly derived from Dyer's reports. Dyer was not wholly complimentary, noting of a case in 1538 that neither he nor anyone else understood Baldwin's dissenting opinion. Spelman reports that Baldwin was given the task of passing sentence on the Carthusian priors in June 1535 for treason, the other judges not bothering to await the verdict. Baldwin went the Norfolk circuit until 1541, and then the home. At Bury assizes in 1538 he was an innocent party to a tragic miscarriage of justice. After a man had been tried before him and executed for murder on the evidence of his small son, it was discovered that the supposed victim was still alive and that the boy had been suborned; the case was the subject of a thorough investigation by the king's council. 
Baldwin retained the family seat at Aylesbury, a town where he was the principal inhabitant and rebuilt the sessions house in 1538. In his later years he made numerous further land purchases in the same vicinity and elsewhere, including in 1536 an estate in Little Marlow, which provided a country home, and in 1540 the site of the Greyfriars in Aylesbury. He died in office on 24 October 1545, probably at Marlow, and was buried in Aylesbury church. His daughter Alice (the last abbess of Burnham), who died a few months later, directed her executor to erect a marble tomb with pictures of her parents and their children, and 'such epitaff or scripture as he shall thinke convyent'; but it is not known whether this was done. Baldwin's son William was admitted to the Inner Temple in 1525 but died in 1538, and so after the death of Alice the inheritance was shared between his two remaining daughters, Agnes and Pernel. The Aylesbury estate descended to Sir Thomas Pakington (died 1571), son of Agnes and Robert Pakington MP (assassinated in 1536), and the Little Marlow estate to John Burlace MP (died 1593), son of Pernel and Edward Burlace (died 1544). It was to Burlace that the chief justice left all his law books. 


@@@@@


doc= 1167


Baldwin, Richard (c.1666-1758), college head, is of uncertain origins. The matriculation register of Trinity College, Dublin, recorded that he entered the college on 29 April 1684, at the age of seventeen, had been born in Athy, in co. Carlow (though Athy is in co. Kildare), the son of Richard Baldwin of Athy, and that he had attended Kilkenny College under the care of the Revd Dr Edward Hinton. Much to the puzzlement of his colleagues Baldwin never discussed his background. Dr John Lawson, professor of oratory and history at the college, who gave the oration at Baldwin's funeral, enlightened those in attendance by stating that Baldwin had in fact been born in England and brought to Ireland in his infancy. Lawson's revelation was supported by an account in a local history of Colne, Lancashire: 'Richard Baldwen the son of James Baldwen, of Parke Hill, near Colne, born AD 1672, and educated at the grammar school of that place, where he is said to have given a mortal blow to a school fellow, upon which he fled to Ireland, and was admitted to Trinity College, Dublin, where in 1717 he became provost. (Whitaker, 2.519)' A more detailed retelling of this account, by a Mr Adamson, which was prepared in connection with a subsequent legal challenge to Baldwin's will, was included in Taylor's 'History of the University of Dublin'. The baptismal register of St Bartholomew's in Colne records that Richard Baldwen, son of James Baldwen of Park Hill, Barrowford, Colne, was baptized on 14 April 1672, but the dates are inconsistent, since if this was the record of Baldwin's birth he would have been only twelve on entry to Trinity. Another variation of Baldwin's background appeared in a letter to the 'Daily Express' in July 1892 from J. R. Baldwin, who claimed that Baldwin had been the son of a James Baldwin from Ingthorpe Grange, Skipton, Yorkshire, and that the incident in which he supposedly killed a fellow pupil had occurred at Sedbergh School and had involved a cricket ball. 
The real circumstances behind Baldwin's arrival in Ireland remain unclear, but his attendance at Kilkenny College can be confirmed by the college register, which records that he left the school to enter Trinity College in 1685. His entry into Kilkenny College was not recorded, since he arrived before the granting of a charter and statutes to the college by James, first duke of Ormond, in March 1685, which required that a register be taken when boys were 'admitted into the said School... as also the time of their departure' (Macalister, item 18). Although Baldwin is recorded as having matriculated a year earlier than when he was supposed to have left Kilkenny the date noted for matriculation was not always the date from which attendance at university began. The dramatist William Congreve was also a pupil at Kilkenny during this time. Baldwin was elected as a scholar of Trinity College in 1686 and commenced with a BA in early 1689. 
After the Jacobite occupation of Trinity in 1689 Baldwin fled to England and possibly took up a teaching position in Chester. His experiences during this time made a deep impression and contributed to his becoming an avowed whig and constant opponent of the tories within and without the college for the rest of his life. Samuel Burdy's biography of the Revd Philip Skelton, of 1792, contained a number of anecdotes concerning Baldwin's battle with Jacobite sympathizers, including his supposed comment about his tory antithesis, Jonathan Swift, whom he judged 'remarkable for nothing else while a student than his skill in kindling a good fire' (Burdy, 33). Baldwin was elected fellow of Trinity in 1693, became senior fellow in 1697, vice-provost in 1713, and provost in 1717. The speed of his elevation to high office has caused some historians to speculate that whig forces outside the college led to Baldwin's 'being preferred to men more highly gifted' (Taylor, 250) than himself; this is supported by the fact that his selection as provost coincided with the Hanoverian succession. His manner of leadership has been described as autocratic and he himself 'a forerunner of the more severe type of Victorian head-master, with sound but unimaginative scholarship and an insistence on hard work and the observance of a strict disciplinary code', but behind Dublin's Georgian facade was a culture of 'riots and drunken brawls among half-educated would-be gentlemen' (McDowell and Webb, 38) to which students were easily attracted. Baldwin made significant progress in improving student behaviour, however; Swift, in a letter to the earl of Peterborough in April 1726, described Trinity as a place where 'youths are instructed with much stricter discipline than either Oxford or Cambridge' (Williams, 3.133). Two of the college's finest buildings, the printing house (1734) and the library (1732), were completed during his provostship. 
Baldwin died in Trinity on 30 September 1758, reputedly at the age of ninety-two, having completed forty-one years as provost, the longest tenure of any before or since; he was buried in the college chapel on 4 October. He left the college his entire fortune of $24,000 and 200,000 acres in real estate located in several counties in Ireland. His will was disputed by certain persons in England who claimed to be his relatives citing the evidence that suggested that Baldwin had been born in Colne. Litigation continued intermittently for sixty-two years before the case was decided in favour of the college in 1820. There is a large, sculpted monument to Baldwin by Christopher Hewetson in the public theatre of the college. 


@@@@@


doc= 1168


Baldwin, Robert (1804-1858), lawyer and politician in Canada, was born on 12 May 1804 at York, Upper Canada, the eldest of the five sons of 
Although neither William nor his father had trouble securing government appointments, William identified more with the 'outs' than the 'ins'. Anxious about the prospects of his family, he felt that a Scots clique discriminated against all others. Indeed, several friends and acquaintances had already fallen foul of officialdom. His father had sought parliamentary reform in Ireland: William found similar reason to agitate for reform in Upper Canada. Although the province had an assembly, it had an appointed lieutenant-governor and two appointed councils, one legislative, the other executive. This structure invited abuses. In 1820 William stood successfully for the assembly, and soon gravitated to the side of the government's critics. In the country tradition of British politics, he was for limited government and the independence of its constituent parts. He proposed a bill in 1822 to free the assembly from the control of the legislative council (the latter emasculated the legislation). In 1824 he failed in a bid for re-election, but he was soon joined in his political and legal enterprises by his son Robert. 
Robert, who had earlier attended the district grammar school in York, had begun studying law in 1819; he became a clerk in his father's law office in 1820 and was called to the bar in 1825. On 31 May 1827 he married a first cousin, Augusta Elizabeth Sullivan (1811-1836), to whom he was devoted and with whom he had two sons and two daughters. In 1828 he stood unsuccessfully for the assembly but had the satisfaction of seeing his father triumphant. Both Baldwins were identified with the nascent reform movement, whose members prized their status as gentlemen because it helped make reform respectable. None the less, both men lost in the elections of 1830. Neither stood four years later when reformers won a majority of seats. This angered the fiery William Lyon Mackenzie, who felt that they had failed their colleagues. 
The Baldwins distrusted Mackenzie and other radicals, who they felt were inclined to take the reformers in an American, republican direction. They desired British forms and solutions. In a reform petition of 5 July 1828 to the British government William complained of the irresponsibility of officials, arguing that responsibility had already been granted constitutionally. He informed the prime minister, Wellington, that Upper Canada needed 'a provincial ministry... responsible to the provincial parliament' (Careless, 105). Increasingly the Baldwins, especially Robert, came to see responsible government as the great panacea. The governor should choose his executive councillors from the party that had control of the assembly and should hear their advice on all matters. If unable to accept that advice, he should dissolve the assembly and call an election. 
The conception that the ministers of the crown should be responsible to parliament for the conduct of the executive arm of government was well established in Britain. In both Canadas, notably Lower Canada, notions of responsibility had been raised before the Anglo-American War (1812-14). It was the Baldwins' genius that they (especially Robert) came to promote responsible government which, as William explained to Joseph Hume in 1830, 'would, of itself, indirectly lead to the removal of all our present grievances and prevent the recurrence of any such for the future' (Wilson, 22). The issue of responsible government was to become heated after the arrival of a new governor in January 1836. 
Sir Francis Bond Head had the reputation of a tried reformer. He decided to bring Robert Baldwin into the executive council. Baldwin accepted the offer, albeit reluctantly, being desolate after the recent death of his beloved wife. Joining Baldwin and the three tories on the council were two reformers, John Rolph and J. H. Dunn. On 3-4 March 1836 the entire council drafted and adopted a memorandum arguing that the constitution demanded the establishment of responsible government. Head denied that he needed to consult the council on all matters. Four of the councillors, but not Baldwin and Rolph, were prepared to yield. When the penitents failed to secure the agreement of the recalcitrants, all resigned. Head appointed a new council, including two relatives of the Baldwins, one being William's brother Augustus. The assembly stopped the supplies in protest. Head refused assent to all money bills, dissolved the assembly, and called an election. 
William Baldwin, who headed both the newly formed Constitutional Reform Society of Upper Canada and the Toronto Political Union, was one of those Head purged from office, being dismissed as a judge. Neither Baldwin stood in the election that summer, but Robert took his concerns, and those of the reformers generally, to England. A dispatch from Head beseeched Glenelg, the colonial secretary, not to see him. Glenelg, who certainly felt that the old councillors had been wrong to argue that the governor must always consult them, obliged. Consequently, Baldwin set out his understanding of responsible government for the colonial secretary in a missive of 13 July. He did talk to other influential politicians, Lord John Russell, J. A. Roebuck, and Joseph Hume among them, before going to Ireland, and arrived back in Upper Canada in February 1837. 
That December Mackenzie and a small group of radicals, dismayed at the smashing victory of the tories in the election of 1836, and spurred on by a revolt in Lower Canada, led a rebellion at Toronto. The Baldwins were not involved, though Head used Robert's good offices to offer the rebels an amnesty. He revoked the offer when reinforcements arrived, leaving Baldwin feeling that his trust had been abused. The insurgents were soon put to flight. Although he was not sympathetic to the rebels, Baldwin later defended several accused insurgents in court. 
The British dispatched Lord Durham to investigate the causes of the rebellions in the Canadas and to make recommendations. Reflecting the fact that rebellion, exacerbated by national tensions between French and 'English', had been more serious in Lower Canada, Durham spent most of his time there, but while in Toronto he met both Baldwins, and asked them to put their views in writing. William produced a rather prolix document, enumerating varied grievances and making several recommendations, including the establishment of both an aristocracy and a responsible executive council. Robert sent a copy of his missive to Glenelg of 13 July 1836. Durham's landmark report of January 1839, in which he recommended the establishment of responsible government, echoed the phrases of Robert's letter. However, Durham elaborated on the proposal therein by arguing that the provinces should have control of internal affairs while the imperial government should manage external ones. The report fuelled a widespread reform campaign for responsible government in which both Baldwins were active. 
The British government dispatched Charles Poulett Thomson, a prominent whig, to preside over Durham's proposed union of the two Canadas. He arrived in October 1839 and trumpeted the idea of 'harmony', that men of goodwill could make the existing political system work. In February 1840 Robert Baldwin agreed to become solicitor-general of Upper Canada. He declared publicly, but opaquely, that 'in accepting the office I consider myself to have given a public pledge that I have reasonably well-grounded confidence that the government of my country is to be carried on in accordance with the principle of responsible government' (Wilson, 93). It is likely that his decision had been influenced by colonial secretary Lord John Russell's dispatch of 16 October 1839 which declared that the holding of public office was no longer contingent only on good behaviour: officials could be asked to relinquish their posts for reasons of public policy. William Warren Baldwin also chose to view the Russell dispatch as a grant of responsible government. 
The Canadian union was proclaimed in February 1841; an election followed. Like many Reformers in Lower Canada, but unlike most in Upper Canada, Robert Baldwin was successful. In June he told the governor-in-chief, who had been elevated to the peerage as Baron Sydenham, that representatives of the French-Canadian Reformers must be added to the council. Sydenham chose to regard Baldwin's insistence as a resignation. The episode left the tories delighted and Sydenham convinced, if his dispatches to Britain can be believed, that Baldwin was an unprincipled scoundrel. The latter worked to forge a province-wide Reform alliance. He had won two seats in the election, and, after choosing one, suggested that Louis-Hippolyte LaFontaine, the leader of the French-Canadian Reformers who had been defeated in his riding by chicanery, run in the by-election for the other. LaFontaine agreed, and won the ensuing contest. Sydenham's system was threatened, though he did not live to see it crumble, since he died on 19 September 1841. 
Sydenham's replacement, Sir Charles Bagot, a career diplomat, arrived in January 1842. Bagot had been told by the new tory colonial secretary, Lord Stanley, to bring the ablest men into his council. Although Bagot was not anxious to see 'radicals' like Robert Baldwin or the French Reformers in office, he recognized reality and brought both LaFontaine and Baldwin into his ministry that September. The new ministers had to face by-elections. Baldwin was defeated -- by a cousin. Bagot was not displeased. LaFontaine, however, obligingly found a seat for Baldwin in Lower Canada, which, though he was unable to speak French, he won by acclamation in another by-election. Bagot told Stanley that responsible government now existed in practice, but he persisted in making various appointments personally. LaFontaine persuaded Baldwin not to protest because Bagot was increasingly ill. His deteriorating condition eventually removed him from day-to-day affairs, making Baldwin and LaFontaine, in a practical sense, the first prime ministers of the province. 
In March a new governor, Charles Metcalfe, arrived, carrying instructions from Stanley not to feel himself obliged to accept his ministers' advice in every particular and to control the use of patronage. Baldwin fell out with Metcalfe over the crucial question of patronage as well as the governor's reservation of a bill aimed at the Orange order. On 26 November 1843 all but one of the ministers resigned. Some weeks after, at Toronto on 8 January 1844, William Warren Baldwin died, and was buried in the family cemetery at their country home, Spadina, leaving his son Robert, who pined still for his wife, even more bereft. He was to miss the advice of his father, whom he regarded 'as one of the kindest of parents and best of men' (Wilson, 198). William's strong personality had helped offset the rather drab and wooden public persona of his son. That prop was now taken from Robert, though William had convinced his son that he was destined to bring the country responsible government. A devout Anglican, William felt that God had foreordained it. 
The political battle was joined in earnest. Loyal addresses poured in on Metcalfe, as did assurances from Lord Stanley and others that he had been right not to compromise the governor's authority. Nevertheless, Metcalfe's political position became ever more difficult. He was obliged to let his chief minister, William Henry Draper, have free use of patronage to maintain his slim parliamentary majority. The election in November was marred by vitriolic campaigning and violence at the polls; the government maintained a slim majority and Baldwin and LaFontaine were both returned in opposition. Baldwin went on the offensive, endlessly lecturing his opponents on responsible government and on the necessity of Canadians managing their own affairs. 
Since he was dying from cancer, Metcalfe returned to Britain in October 1845. Lord Cathcart, commander of the forces in British North America, was appointed, first administrator, then governor-general. Interested in military matters, he let his councillors have a free hand, and once again the government, with Draper still at the head, acted as a responsible party government. Earl Grey, the colonial secretary, suggested to Lieutenant-Governor Harvey of Nova Scotia in a dispatch of 3 November 1846 that the members of his council could expect him to accept their advice. Grey sent Lord Elgin to Canada as governor-in-chief, intimating that he should allow a responsible executive to dispense patronage. 
The new governor-in-chief arrived in Montreal, the capital of the Canadas, in January 1847. Despite the reconstitution of the ministry that spring, he felt it no longer reflected the will of the people, and he dissolved the assembly on 6 December 1847. The ensuing election saw the Reformers win a majority in both sections of the Canadas, with Baldwin again elected. The Baldwin-LaFontaine government, which came to be known as the 'Great Ministry', took office on 11 March 1848, with Baldwin as attorney-general for Upper Canada. Baldwin and LaFontaine formed the first truly responsible ministry in that they took office and exercised complete authority over internal affairs as a matter of course. Other responsible ministries had existed, but only on sufferance. The establishment of responsible government was inextricably bound up with its recognition. 
Baldwin always insisted that the new ministry was LaFontaine's, but he was, in fact, co-premier. The government was exceedingly active legislatively and carried two measures with which Baldwin is particularly identified: a bill providing for the secularization of the University of Toronto, and the 'Municipal Corporations Act', which went some distance towards introducing responsible local government to the western half of the province. More controversial was the 'Rebellion Losses Bill', which promised to compensate those in Lower Canada who had suffered property losses in the troubles of 1837-8. Opponents of the measure worried that traitors would be rewarded. The bill passed the assembly, with Baldwin speaking briefly on its behalf. Despite his personal doubts, Elgin gave it royal assent on 25 April 1849, signifying for all to see that responsible government was in place, that the ministers, not the crown, controlled policy and legislation. A tory mob roamed Montreal for days, burning the parliament buildings and searching for LaFontaine, Baldwin, and other perceived traitors. 
The bill helped persuade the tories of Montreal that they had been deserted by the British government. On 13 October they published a manifesto advocating annexation to the United States. Annexationist sympathy existed too among a group of ultra-Reformers known as the Clear Grits, who sought the introduction of American democratic devices. Baldwin, who, unlike his father, believed that Canada's ties to Britain must be permanent, battled annexationists of whatever stripe, helping extirpate them from office. He annoyed the radicals further when he proved hard to draw out on the vexed clergy reserves issue, which raised the question of state support for organized religion. His retreat on school reform provoked them yet again. On the other hand, he disagreed with Francis Hincks, the inspector-general, who favoured railroads and government involvement in their financing. And he quarrelled with other Reformers such as George Brown of the Toronto 'Globe', who took an increasingly intolerant stance with respect to French and Catholic rights. A devout Anglican but no religious bigot, Baldwin had struggled hard to forge a bi- 'racial' Reform Party. Symbolically, he had had his four children educated in Catholic, Francophone schools in Quebec. Increasingly tired, ill, and disillusioned, he announced, on 30 June 1851, his retirement as minister after an old adversary, William Lyon Mackenzie, had proposed abolition of the court of chancery, which Baldwin had reformed in 1849. Although it was defeated, Mackenzie's motion had won a majority of votes from Upper Canada. LaFontaine soon followed Baldwin's lead. Baldwin did stand in the ensuing election, but, seen as yesterday's man and harried by Mackenzie, suffered a humiliating defeat. 
Reclusive and plagued by ill health, Baldwin lived out his days at the estate he had inherited from his parents, obliging his elder daughter to forsake her happiness and look after him. He refused several prime appointments. A weak heart and lung congestion carried him off at Toronto on 9 December 1858. Uxorious to a fault, he had been melancholy and unhappy since the loss of his wife in 1836. He joined her in death, with his coffin chained to hers and his body mutilated in imitation of the scars she bore from her tragic last birth. He was buried initially in the family cemetery at Spadina, on 13 December, but in 1874 was reinterred at St James's cemetery, Toronto. 
A cold, reserved public man, Baldwin had not inspired great love or affection. Although he was somewhat taller than average, his hunched posture, paunch, rather lifeless grey eyes, and increasingly bald pate made him physically unprepossessing in later life. This evidently clouded some judgements. The anonymous author of an obituary in the 'Upper Canada Law Journal' (January 1859, 1) paid him a most modest compliment. Of but moderate talents, he had been 'an able and honest politician'. He had been that -- and much more. Possibly driven by a desire to measure up to the father he so respected, he rarely stooped and seldom pandered. He knew his objective -- responsible government. His genius was that he recognized its efficacy in conferring legitimacy on colonial government and in ensuring the maintenance of the imperial tie. His contribution was that he persevered through much political turmoil and personal anguish. 


@@@@@


doc= 1170


Baldwin, Sir Timothy (bap. 1619, d. 1696), lawyer, was baptized at Burwarton, Shropshire, on 28 September 1619, the second son of Charles Baldwin (1598-1675) of Elsich, Shropshire, and his wife, Mary (died 1669), daughter and coheir of Francis Holland of Burwarton and widow of Robert Lutley. He matriculated at Balliol College, Oxford, on 6 March 1635, graduating BA on 17 October 1638. He was elected a fellow of All Souls College the following year and retained his fellowship until 1661. He gained a BCL on 26 June 1641, and in 1647 he was appointed sinecure rector of Llandrillo-yn-Rhos, Denbighshire. After initially losing his fellowship during the parliamentary visitation of the university in 1648, he retained it by dint, according to Wood, of paying judicious attention to Thomas Kelsey, deputy governor of the city of Oxford, and plying his wife with presents. He gained a DCL on 6 December 1652. 
In 1654 Baldwin published 'The privileges of an ambassador, written by way of a letter to a friend who desired his opinion concerning the Portugal ambassador', which deals with the manslaughter charge against Don Pantaleone, the brother of the Portuguese ambassador. In 1655 he was reported by Wood to be one of a number of royalists who were encouraging an Oxford apothecary to sell coffee publicly near to All Souls. In 1656 he translated into Latin and published Lord Herbert of Cherbury's 'History of the Expedition to Rhe in 1627'. On 24 January 1660 Baldwin was admitted to Doctors' Commons and on 21 June 1660 he became principal of Hart Hall, Oxford. On 31 July 1660 he was named one of the royal commissioners to visit the university. In 1663 he edited and published Richard Zouch's 'The Jurisdiction of the Admiralty of England'. Baldwin resigned his principal's office in 1663, the same year he was appointed chancellor of the diocese of Hereford and Worcester. In 1667 he became high steward of Leominster. At some point in or after 1668 he married Ellen, daughter of Sir William Owen of Condover, Shropshire, the widow of Sir George Norton (died 1668) of Abbotsleigh, Somerset. On 29 June 1670 he was made a master in chancery, and knighted on 10 July following. 
Baldwin resigned his mastership in 1682. This may have been because of ill health, for he made his will, 'languishing and weak in body' (will, TNA: PRO, PROB 11/436, sig. 24), on 1 May 1685. By the time he came to make his will he had married again, his second wife being Mary (1630-1702), daughter of Gerard Skrymsher of Aqualate, Staffordshire, the widow of Nicholas Acton (died 1664) of Bockleton, Worcestershire. In 1685 he was replaced as steward of Leominster, but returned to the post in 1688. Although he may have relinquished it to his nephew Charles Baldwin in 1691, Luttrell thought Baldwin was in possession of it until his death, mentioning his successor in an entry dated 4 August 1696. The main recipient of his will was his nephew Charles Baldwin (son of his brother, Sir Samuel), who had married Elizabeth, the daughter of his second wife, Mary, and her first husband, Nicholas Acton. 


@@@@@


doc= 1171


Baldwin, William (d. in or before 1563), author and printer, has left few biographical traces, although uncorroborated evidence -- including claims that he himself lodged in the 1587 edition of 'Mirror for Magistrates' -- suggests that he was from Wales. Records survive concerning a Shropshireman named William Baldwin, whose service in the household of Mary I may correspond with Baldwin's involvement in the production of court revels. Baldwin may have supplicated the regents of Oxford University in 1533 for a degree and entered service as a schoolmaster but this too cannot be confirmed. 
Nothing certain is known about Baldwin's life until 1547, when he entered into employment with Edward Whitchurch, a London printer with protestant leanings, whom he served as corrector. Whitchurch published Baldwin's 'Treatise of Moral Philosophy' (1547) and 'Canticles or Balades of Salomon' (1549). A collection of classical and humanistic adages and sententiae, the former text is tinged with Erasmianism. It attempts on the one hand to introduce classical learning to a readership dedicated to self-education, and on the other to harmonize classical philosophy with Christian belief. A very popular text, the 'Treatise' underwent frequent revision and expansion by the compiler and others; it had been reissued twenty-four times by 1620. Baldwin's 'Canticles', dedicated to the young Edward VI, is a metrical translation of the 'Song of Solomon'. In Solomon's wise aphorisms Baldwin found a Christian analogue to classical philosophy considered in the 'Treatise', further strengthening his humanist project by popularizing an important collection of scriptural poetry. 
Anti-papal propaganda infuses Baldwin's translation of 'Wonderful News of the Death of Paul III' (1552), from a Latin original by Matthias Flacius Illyricus. It exploits the scriptural figure of spiritual fornication, familiar from 'Hosea' and other prophetic texts, to satirize the alleged depravity of Roman Catholicism. The pamphlet purports to report on the damnation of the late pope, whose infractions, which include sodomy, incest, and poisoning, are inscribed on stone pillars in hell. The translation qualifies eirenic humanistic concerns with a vitriolic protestant attack on the structure and teachings of the Church of Rome. 
By late 1552 Baldwin had composed his 'Marvelous History Entitled Beware the Cat, Concerning Diverse Wonderful and Incredible Matters' but it was not published until 1570, after the accession of Queen Elizabeth. Baldwin's 'Argument' sets the story within the context of the Christmas revels of 1552, when the author assisted George Ferrers, master of the revels, with the annual festivities at the royal court. The work is structured as a dialogue among Ferrers, his 'astronomer' (Master Wilmot), 'divine' (Streamer), Baldwin's rather naive narrative persona, and others concerning whether or not animals are capable of speech and rationality in the manner of human beings. 
In the manner of humanistic satires the work constitutes a virtuoso array of diverse literary forms: beast fable and dream vision coexist with medical treatise, proverb, and hymn. Through Streamer's outrageous insistence that animals can reason, superstitions of all kinds are held up for examination and ridicule. But if the didactic purpose of 'Beware the Cat' betrays the influence of Erasmian humanism, parodic inversion and scepticism concerning human rationality are reminiscent of carnivalesque tradition in England and in Europe. In the manner of satires attributed to Luke Shepherd, Thomas More's 'Utopia', and Francois Rabelais's 'Gargantua and Pantagruel', Baldwin's satire dramatizes a topsy-turvy travesty of sanctioned forms of social order that highlights the arbitrariness and transitory nature of norms that govern everyday life. 
Baldwin's next literary endeavour, his edition of 'A Mirror for Magistrates', continues in the vein of anti-Catholic polemic. For that reason the first edition ('c'.1554) appears to have been suppressed during the reign of Mary I, and it survives only in the form of two duplicate leaves from the tale of Owen Glendower and five title-pages. The text remained unpublished until Thomas Marsh printed it in 1559, soon after Elizabeth's accession. A collection of visionary poems by Baldwin, Ferrers, Thomas Churchyard, Thomas Phaer, Thomas Chaloner, and Thomas Sackville, the 'Mirror for Magistrates' exemplifies misconduct by public officials and warns them of vices to be avoided. Enjoying great popularity, the text went through seven more editions by 1610. It influenced tragedies composed by Christopher Marlowe, William Shakespeare, and others. Baldwin's only other extant literary effort is 'The Funerals of King Edward the Sixth', a funeral elegy on the late monarch printed in 1560, again by Marsh. 
During his literary career Baldwin continued to work at Whitchurch's printing shop and played an occasional role in the production of revels at the royal court. Accounts and correspondence of the master of the revels, Thomas Cawarden, indicate that Baldwin may have had a hand in 'a comedy concerning the way of life' and perhaps in a morality play but this cannot be confirmed. 
Baldwin wrote in the 1563 'Mirror' that he had been 'called to an other trade of lyfe' in 1559, and he is probably the William Baldwin who was ordained deacon by Archbishop Grindal in that year; Thomas Churchyard describes him as a minister in the 1587 'Mirror', and Wood noted that he gave up printing for the church. Baldwin was appointed vicar of Tortington, Sussex, in 1559-60 and rector of St Michael-le-Querne, London, in 1561; he died some time before 1 November 1563. Stowe's 'Historical Memoranda' gives an account of a Baldwin preaching at Paul's Cross in September 1563, who died a week later of the plague. This was probably the writer. 
Baldwin is remembered not only as an anti-Catholic satirist but also as a literary innovator whose works influenced writers as historically distant and as thematically diverse as Thomas Nashe, Edmund Spenser, and Alexander Pope. 


@@@@@


doc= 1172


Baldwin, William (1562-1632), Jesuit, was born on 10 November 1562 in Cornwall, perhaps near Bodmin, birthplace of John Cornelius, with whom, according to Henry More SJ, Baldwin made his rudimentary studies. He entered Exeter College, Oxford, on 20 December 1577. Presumably he was reconciled to the Roman church some time in 1582 before his departure for the English College in Rheims, where he arrived on 31 December 1582. He was sent to Rome on 13 August 1583. Richard Barret, prefect of studies in Rheims, held Baldwin in high esteem, describing him as 'most obedient' and as a 'disciple of Cornelius' in a letter to Alfonso Agazzari, rector of the English College, Rome, on 11 August 1583 ('Diaries of the English College', 331). Baldwin enrolled at the English College on 1 October. He was ordained in Rome on 16 April 1588 and entered the Society of Jesus there on 2 February 1590. He remained in Rome as English confessor at St Peter's for a year after his noviceship. On 12 January 1593 he was sent to the Spanish Netherlands, where he lectured on theology in Louvain for a year. 
Summoned to Spain by Robert Parsons in late 1594, Baldwin, disguised as a Neapolitan merchant, Octaviano Fuscincelli, escorted six boys to the English College in Seville. The boys did not know that the merchant, who consistently spoke Latin and Italian, was an English Jesuit. Their vessel was intercepted at Calais by an English man-of-war. Taken to England, the boys were entrusted to John Whitgift, archbishop of Canterbury, and Baldwin was gaoled in Bridewell. He got word to Henry Garnet, the Jesuit superior, but the speed with which Catholics sought to ransom Baldwin aroused suspicions. To quell them he suggested that officials ask John Gerard if he knew a merchant named Fuscincelli. Since that was Baldwin's official Jesuit alias, Gerard recognized it and replied yes. Cleared of suspicion Baldwin was ransomed in exchange for an English prisoner named Hawkins. He remained in England, living with Richard Cotton at Warblington, Hampshire, until late 1595, when he went to Rome to serve as minister of the English College under Father Rector Muzio Vitelleschi, future general of the society. In April of 1598 he was sent to Brussels as William Holt's successor as vice-prefect of the English mission, supervising English affairs at the court of Isabella and Albert in Brussels and relaying communications between Rome and England, a position he held until 1610. In Antwerp on 10 February 1602 he was professed of the four vows. 
In 1605 Sir Thomas Edmonds, English ambassador, demanded that Baldwin, proclaimed a traitor because of alleged conspiracies with Ambrogio Spinola, commander of Spanish forces in Flanders for an invasion of England at the time of the Gunpowder Plot, be returned to England for trial. Archduke Albert refused. Recognized by letters he carried, despite his disguise, Baldwin was apprehended near Speyer in 1610 by soldiers of the elector palatine. Chained and imprisoned he was eventually turned over to Edward Cecil, brother of Robert Cecil, earl of Salisbury, who treated him with respect and kindness. By November he was in the Tower of London. King James replied to the archduke's demand for Baldwin's immediate release by promising that he would be free to return to the Spanish Netherlands once his innocence of any involvement in the Gunpowder Plot was established. But no legal proceedings were initiated and he remained in the Tower until 15 June 1618 when he and eleven other Jesuits were banished from the realm through the intercession of the count of Gondomar, Spanish ambassador. His stay in Brussels was brief: he hastened to Rome to explain and defend the unique status of the beleaguered English mission to Vitelleschi, now father-general. On 16 January 1619 he left Rome for Spain where he visited the English colleges on his journey back to Flanders. On 22 January 1621 he was named rector of the English College in Louvain and in early 1622 was transferred to the English College in St Omer. On 12 November 1622 he became, with the support and approval of the Infanta Isabella, the first Englishman to be rector of the college. He died at St Omer on 28 September 1632. 


@@@@@


doc= 1173


Beadwulf (fl. 791-795), bishop of Whithorn (known in Latin as Candida Casa), was consecrated on 17 July 791 by Archbishop Eanbald (I) of York and Bishop AEthelberht of Hexham, the last Anglian bishop of that see. He assisted at the coronation of the Northumbrian king Eardwulf in 795. The date of his death is not known. His see may have come under the nominal charge of the bishop of Lindisfarne, Heathored, but there is no evidence for an Anglian presence at Whithorn thereafter. 


@@@@@


doc= 1174


Baldwyn, Edward (bap. 1745, d. 1817), schoolmaster and pamphleteer, was baptized on 21 August 1745 in the parish of St Lawrence, Ludlow, Shropshire, the son of William Baldwyn and his wife, Ann. He matriculated from St John's College, Oxford, on 25 June 1762, aged sixteen, and graduated BA in 1767 and MA in 1784. He became a fellow of the college while still an undergraduate, vacating the fellowship only on his marriage in Ludlow on 9 July 1772 to Mary Nash, with whom he had four sons. Baldwyn is described as being of average height, with a light, fresh complexion, bright blue eyes, and sandy hair, with a very upright and sprightly walk but delicate health (Claridge, 146). 
In 1784 Baldwyn was appointed as master of Bradford grammar school. Under his leadership the school flourished. The number of pupils rose to fifty and the school began to make a net profit of about $225 per year. To increase the number of scholars still further, Baldwyn added a modern side to the curriculum. French and geography were introduced as well as writing and accounts, to be taught by a newly appointed master, the students paying extra for the classes. His commercialization of education emulated the developments already seen at Bingley and Leeds grammar schools. Baldwyn's salary was increased to 100 guineas in 1791 and a 'proper house', worth $25 per year, was built for him. 
Baldwyn's time in Bradford was, however, dominated by his quarrel with the vicar of Bradford, John Crosse, and with the Sunday lecturer at the parish church, William Atkinson. Since 1703, the master of Bradford grammar school had, save for four years, also held the post of lecturer. Baldwyn regarded the post as a perquisite, but Crosse, who became vicar in the same year that Baldwyn took over the school, appointed Atkinson instead. Baldwyn attributed this to a grudge, for Crosse had also been a candidate for the job as master of Bradford grammar school, but there were also theological differences. Crosse, like Atkinson, was an evangelical, with sympathies for Methodism. Baldwyn was more orthodox. 
When Atkinson published a volume of 'Poetical Essays' in 1786, Baldwyn could not resist the opportunity to attack. Under the pseudonym Trim he published 'A Critique on the Poetical Essays of the Rev. William Atkinson' (1787) criticizing both Atkinson's writing and morality. He followed this up with 'Remarks on Two of the most Singular Characters of the Age' (1788?, 2nd edn 1790), accusing Crosse of simony and embezzling money from the parish. Atkinson's printed replies (and perhaps also a physical skirmish) provoked Trim to write four more pamphlets sarcastically attacking Crosse, Atkinson, and Atkinson's brother Johnson Atkinson Busfeild, one of the grammar school's governors. Busfeild had accused Baldwyn of mismanaging the school and drinking on Sundays, charges which were soon dropped. After a lull from 1791, the hostilities reopened in 1797, perhaps for political reasons. Busfeild was captain of the volunteers, while Baldwyn opposed Pitt and the war with revolutionary France. He was blackballed from the Bradford Coffee Room for his political views by a Major Sturges, and in response published 'A Letter to Major Sturges on the Injustice and Illiberality of his Late Conduct' (1797), an anti-Pittite pamphlet. Sturges responded by getting up a petition levelling fifteen specific charges of pedagogical misconduct at Baldwyn (he was accused 'inter alia' of leaving school during school hours, of cruelty to the boys, of not taking the boys to church). Since two other governors of the school, in addition to Crosse and Busfeild, had signed the petition, Baldwyn's position was in jeopardy, but his denials and counter-assertions, published in a sixty-eight-page document (now lost) seem to have quieted the opposition and he remained in his post for another five years. Baldwyn is also credited with entering a number of other literary squabbles with several anonymous short pamphlets, perhaps including 'A Letter to Richard Hill, Esq. Member for the County of Salop' (1782) by 'a burgess of Ludlow'. He was not, as is sometimes claimed, the author of those works for children written under the name Edward Baldwin. This was a pseudonym used by William Godwin. 
In 1802 Baldwyn returned to Shropshire where he was rector of Abdon and perpetual curate of Clee St Margaret's. He planned to produce an edition of Catullus, writing to Wilkes for advice, but the project was never completed. He died in Kentish Town, London, on 11 February 1817 and was buried in St Pancras churchyard. 


@@@@@


doc= 1175


Bale, John (1495-1563), bishop of Ossory, evangelical polemicist, and historian, was born to parents of humble means at the village of Cove, near Dunwich in Suffolk, on 21 November 1495. In his 'Illustrium maioris Britanniae' Bale names his parents as Henry and Margaret. 
Throughout his life, despite wide travels, Bale continually proclaimed his identity as a Suffolk man. He began his formal education at the Carmelite convent at Norwich at twelve years of age and went to Jesus College, Cambridge, about 1514 in order to continue his schooling. Despite the intellectual ferment at Cambridge University, instigated by clerics like Hugh Latimer and Miles Coverdale who had been influenced by Lutheran ideas, Bale remained at this time a friar loyal to the old religion. After study at Cambridge and abroad, at Louvain and Toulouse, he was awarded the degree of BTh at Cambridge in 1529 and the DTh about two years later. In 1530 he became prior of the white friars' convent in the port town of Maldon in Essex. In 1533 he was promoted to the Carmelite convent at Ipswich, and he had become prior at Doncaster by July 1534. 
At the time of England's separation from the Church of Rome during the early 1530s, Bale fell under the influence of Thomas, first Baron Wentworth of Nettlestead, to whom he attributed his conversion to protestantism. Bale enjoyed the patronage of Wentworth, an important East Anglian peer who used his influence at court in order to further the protestant cause. He began to come under suspicion himself, and about 1534 was charged with heresy before Archbishop Lee of York, but escaped conviction. In 1536, immediately before his final break with the Carmelite order, Bale left his priorate at Doncaster for the post of a stipendiary priest at Thorndon in Suffolk. 
Although Bale's desire to marry was probably one reason for his leaving the Carmelites, he never made this explicit in his writings. Nevertheless by 1536 he had renounced clerical vows, laid aside monastic attire, and married a woman named Dorothy. Virtually nothing is known about her besides her name, but she must have been a widow when Bale married her because she had a son of apprentice age. Bale's silence about her, even though she accompanied him during two periods of exile and his intervening service as a bishop in Ireland, is noteworthy. For example, she receives only a passing comment in 'The Vocacyon of Johan Bale to the Bishoprick of Ossorie in Ireland' (1553), when he mentions that he set sail for Ireland with 'my wyfe & one servaunt' ('Vocacyon', 51). Bale's commitment to marriage is in keeping with his obsessive attack on clerical celibacy, which resounds throughout his polemical writings. He sees the mandatory vow of celibacy as an invitation to all forms of sexual transgression, including fornication, adultery, paedophilia, and homosexuality. Thus the 'Vocacyon' attacks an Irish priest for fathering bastards in order to increase the size of church offerings, and his writings repeatedly allege that the papacy established 'stews of both kinds in Rome' (that is, heterosexual and homosexual brothels) for the patronage of unmarried clergy. It may be that Bale's boyhood experience at a Carmelite convent shaped his views on clerical sexuality. 
Bale and other reformers soon became dissatisfied with the conservative nature of religious reformation in the later years of Henry VIII's reign. In 1537, while he was serving as a priest at Thorndon, Bale was arrested for preaching heresy in a sermon that denounced 'papistry'. He was subsequently freed, thanks in part to the intercession of John Leland, the king's antiquarian, who was a strong supporter of Bale and his writings, and to whom Bale dedicated his 'Anglorum Heliades' of 'c'.1539-1540, a historical and bibliographical account of the Carmelite order in England. This work has the additional interest of showing that Bale had not yet completed his transition from Catholic to protestant theology. Bale also enjoyed the support of Thomas Cromwell, the king's principal minister and vicegerent for religious affairs, and would later acknowledge that Cromwell had arranged his release from prison as a reward for his polemical comedies. The minister supported a troupe of actors led by Bale, who staged allegorical morality plays which promoted protestant ideas and satirized Catholic beliefs by personifying the two sides as Virtues and Vices respectively. 
Of twenty-four plays known to have been written by Bale, only five are still extant. His first composition, and the one most widely read today, 'King John', was staged at Archbishop Cranmer's house during Christmastide at the end of 1538. Based upon historical material in William Tyndale's 'Obedience of a Christian Man', the play flatters Henry VIII as the successor to King John who attacks papal tyranny and completes England's schism from the Church of Rome. Despite assistance from Nobility, Clergy, and Civil Order, the medieval king's attempts at religious reform are blocked by a variety of stage Vices who include Usurped Power (as Pope Innocent III), Private Wealth (as Cardinal Pandulphus), Dissimulation (as Raymundus, a papal legate, and Simon, monk of Swinset), and Sedition (as Stephen Langton). Poisoned by Usurped Power, King John dies before he can complete the task of ecclesiastical reform. After John's death, the play moves triumphantly to Bale's own age when Imperial Majesty (a dramatic type for Henry VIII) defends 'Christian faith' and 'the authority of God's holy word' against continuing papal aggression. 
Printed in 1548 but probably composed much earlier, Bale's 'Comedy Concerning Three Laws' depicts the downfall of the personified virtues Natural Law, Mosaic Law, and Christian Law. Allegorical costuming presents the victorious Vices and manifestations of Roman Catholic 'error': Sodomy is presented as a monk, Avarice as a common lawyer, Covetousness as a bishop, False Doctrine as a popish doctor, and Hypocrisy as a Franciscan friar. Appearing as an old witch, Idolatry is identified with the Whore of Babylon, herself a symbol of papal Rome. Along with Infidelity, many of these figures possess the attributes of the medieval Vice, whose comic aspect included vulgar blasphemy and obscene jesting. Modelled on the book of 'Revelation', the last two acts of the drama culminate in the expulsion of Infidelity by Divine Vengeance. The consequent restoration of the three laws in preparation for the marriage of the Bridegroom and the Spouse at the descent of the New Jerusalem provides an optimistic allegory of the completion of the protestant reformation. 
Bale's three remaining plays, composed in 1538 under Cromwell's patronage, adopt themes, conventions, and devices from the medieval mystery and morality plays to protestant purposes. 'The Chief Promises of God', 'John the Baptist's Preaching', and 'The Temptation of Jesus Christ' reverse the emphases of the cycles of biblical mystery plays popular during Bale's lifetime. (Derek van der Straten printed them at Wesel, in the county of Cleves, in 1547, during Bale's first exile from England.) Thus 'The Chief Promises of God' consists of dialogue between Pater Coelestis (the Heavenly Father) and Adam, Noah, Abraham, Moses, David, Isaiah, and John the Baptist, and represents divine covenants as precursors of the protestant reformation. 
The passage of the 'Act of Six Articles' in 1539 marked a major shift in religious policy by reimposing strict orthodoxy and banning protestant tracts, and presaged the downfall of Cromwell, who was executed in the following year. After this reversal of Henry VIII's commitment to ecclesiastical reform Bale fled to the continent, where he continued to produce outspoken controversial writings, including a number of anti-Roman Catholic martyrologies: 'A Brief Chronicle Concerning the Examination and Death of Sir John Oldcastle' (1544), 'The Examination of William Thorpe', and 'The Examinations of Anne Askew' (1547). These works provided models for John Foxe's highly influential 'Actes and Monuments', known popularly as the book of martyrs (1563). While in Germany, Bale also compiled 'Acts of English Votaries' (1546), an expose of alleged monastic corruption, as well as 'Yet another Course at the Romish Foxes' (1543), which denounces Stephen Gardiner, bishop of Winchester, for persecuting English protestants. (Foxe's 'Actes and Monuments' records Gardiner's counter-attack on Bale's propagandist tracts.) The most influential product of Bale's first exile, however, was 'The Image of both Churches' (1545), which provided the first complete commentary on the book of 'Revelation' to be printed in English. This work views Christian history as a continuing struggle between the 'true' church, based on Jesus's teachings in the gospels, and the 'false' Church of Rome, whose leadership by the pope results from its subversion by Antichrist and the misinterpretation of scriptural texts. 
During this exile Bale also wrote and edited numerous tracts including the 'Apocalypsis goliae', an anticlerical satire attributed to Walter Map and reissued by Bale as 'Rhythmi vetustissimi de corrupto ecclesiae statu' (1546); an eyewitness account of the death of Martin Luther by Justus Jonas; and Princess Elizabeth's translation of a devotional text by Marguerite de Navarre entitled 'Godly Meditations of the Christian Soul' (1548). These works, with many others like them, generally denounce the papacy, the ritualism of the Roman liturgy, belief in transubstantiation and the mass, the veneration of saints, and the cult of the Virgin Mary. In their place Bale advocates protestant practices designed to nurture individual faith: gospel preaching, lay education in the vernacular 'Bible', and a service of holy communion that commemorates Christ's sacrifice rather than re-enacting it. Owing to tighter restraints on publication in the later years of Henry VIII's reign, Bale arranged for the printing of his polemical works in Antwerp and, after the imperial authorities also imposed tighter restrictions on protestant publication, in Wesel. He courted death in arranging for the smuggling of his tracts into England, where they went on sale surreptitiously under the pseudonyms of James Harrison and Henry Stalbridge. 
Bale also compiled his 'Illustrium Maioris Britannie scriptorum... summarium', which was printed in Wesel in 1548. He more than once expresses indignation and dismay at the destruction of libraries resulting from the dissolution of the monasteries -- 'To destroye all without consyderacyon, is and wyll be unto Englande for ever, a moste horryble infamy amonge the grave senyours of other nacyons' (Aston, 327) -- and in this book he continued John Leland's antiquarian project of preserving and cataloguing their manuscript holdings, in an arrangement along the lines of his own apocalyptic periodization of history in the 'Image of both Churches'. The book was distributed from Wesel for a learned continental readership, and from Ipswich for English readers literate in Latin. In this and his other writings at this time, Bale was trying to capitalize on the major shift in religious policy that followed Henry VIII's death in 1547 and the accession of his nine-year-old son, Edward VI, as successive governments countenanced a thorough programme of protestant reform of a kind prevented during the late king's reign. Bale's dedication of his 'Summarium' appeals to Edward VI for patronage, but he failed to secure assistance from the crown until Protector Somerset's downfall in 1549 and the installation of John Dudley in his place. In certain respects, Bale's 'Index Britanniae scriptorum', an untitled manuscript that remained unpublished until the twentieth century (Bodl. Oxf., MS Selden supra 64), is a more useful bibliographical tool than his 'Summarium' (or its printed successor). Mostly compiled between about 1548 and 1552, entries in this private notebook document Bale's monumental effort to record the title, opening lines, and location of every extant learned book composed by a British author. 
Edward's accession enabled Bale and other reformers to return to England. In 1548 he and John Foxe are recorded as living in the duchess of Richmond's house in London. He was collated rector of Bishopstoke, Hampshire, on 26 June 1551 by John Ponet, bishop of Winchester, and in the same year was made vicar of Swaffham. Then on 15 August 1552 he met Edward VI at Southampton and was promised the Irish bishopric of Ossory; formal nomination followed on 22 October. His appointment, typical of the increasingly radical religious climate that followed Somerset's removal from office, was intended to contribute to Dudley's efforts to convert the Irish to protestantism. 
Late in 1552 Bale travelled to Ireland, where he was consecrated at Dublin on 2 February 1553. Residing at Kilkenny, he took up his diocesan duties. Even before his installation Bale's ardent upholding of protestant doctrine had created controversy. The Irish church had not yet accepted the official 'Form of consecrating bishops' enacted by parliament, but retained a Catholic ordination ceremony to which Bale refused to subscribe. He succeeded in his protest, but not without the disapproval and formal complaint of the dean of Dublin Cathedral. 

'The Vocacyon of Johan Bale' provides a detailed account of Bale's uncompromising activity as an evangelical prelate in a remote see beyond the pale. Although the Irish bishops formally accepted the royal supremacy, they resisted changes in religion. The refusal of the conservative archbishop of Armagh, George Dowdall, to implement ecclesiastical reforms meant that traditional ceremonies remained in place. Other bishops either barely conformed or resigned their sees. Bale added to his own difficulties by trying to enforce the use of the 1552 revision of the 'Book of Common Prayer', even though it was effectively unknown in Ireland, where the 1549 version was reprinted in 1551, a year after it had ceased to be published in England. None the less, in spite of unco-operative clergy and a generally hostile populace, his powerful sermons had made a number of converts by the time of Edward VI's death in 1553. 
Bale's 'Vocacyon', one of the earliest known autobiographical writings in English, is largely a record of conflict between the bishop and his flock. Among the events recounted in this lively work are the poisoning of Bale's superior, Archbishop Goodacre, by a group of priests, and the murder of Bale's own servants for following his orders by working on a Catholic feast day. The text fashions Bale's identity as an uncompromising reformist bishop pitted against recalcitrant Irish clerics who, he alleges, broke their religious vows but continued to observe Catholic practices. When Mary I succeeded to the throne of England, Bale's position became precarious. Nevertheless, he stirred up further contention by the staging of his own polemical plays at the market cross in Kilkenny. 
In the face of their bishop's opposition and continued preaching, the Irish clergy restored the mass and other prohibited religious practices. Fleeing from priests who he feared were plotting to murder him, Bale withdrew to Dublin in September 1553 and then set sail for the Netherlands. 'En route' he was taken prisoner by a Flemish man-of-war, which was then forced into port at St Ives in Cornwall by bad weather. Arrested on suspicion of treason, he was released to continue his voyage, only to be arrested for a second time at Dover and held there for several weeks. Eventually, being 'by that time so full of lyce as I coulde swarme' ('Vocacyon', 77), a payment of $30 secured his passage to the Low Countries. 
Bale reassures the readership of his 'Vocacyon' that the persecution of English protestants under Queen Mary is only the latest bout of suffering in a cycle that will eventually lead to providential deliverance. Offering his own experience as an example of how the persecuted faithful will undergo this deliverance, Bale styles himself a martyr, not in the sense of one who dies for his faith, but as one who openly testifies to the point of death if necessary. He stresses the typological relationship between his own experiences and those of various 'New Testament' figures, notably St Paul. Although the book's colophon bears the impudent joke that it was 'Imprinted at Rome before the sign of St Peter in December anno domini 1553', it seems likely that Hugh Singleton and Joos Lambrecht printed it at a later date in Wesel, the place of Bale's earlier exile. The false colophon helped to protect the publishers of the volume from reprisals. 
Following his landing in the Netherlands, Bale made his way to Frankfurt am Main, where in September 1554 he took part in the disputes among the English protestant exiles over liturgy and church government, eventually siding with Richard Cox and the 'Book of Common Prayer'. He was still in Frankfurt in July 1555, when his former patron John Ponet wrote to him urging him to continue with his polemical writings: 'blow therfor boldly the trumnpet of Gods treuth, and play the bushop amonge your companions ther, as thoughe ye were among your flok in Yerland' (Baskerville, 443). By the end of that year he was living in Basel, where he channelled his energy into the completion of his massive bibliographical project, a revision of his 'Summarium'. He laboured on this while residing at the home of the master printer Joannes Oporinus, along with his friend and fellow exile John Foxe. Under the title of 'Scriptorum illustrium Maioris Brytannie... catalogus', Oporinus published the fruit of decades of bibliographical toil in two weighty folio volumes (1557-9). Like its predecessor, the 'Catalogus' is divided into 'Centuries' -- groupings of 100 authors. Although Bale enumerates texts regardless of their theological content, he places great emphasis on documenting the continuity of the 'true' church from early Christian times until his generation. To this end he devotes great effort to recording the works of proto-protestant writers, notably English Lollards who looked to John Wyclif for their inspiration. Bale interspersed the entries in this catalogue of manuscripts and printed books with historical summaries that supply an apocalyptic context for texts by British authors. In 1558 Oporinus published related anti-papal material in another work by Bale, his 'Acta Romanorum pontificum'. 
Following the accession of Elizabeth, Bale returned to England, and on 10 January 1560 was appointed by the crown as canon of the eleventh prebend in Canterbury Cathedral. In the previous year Queen Elizabeth had ordered Warham and Robert St Leger, the son and brother respectively of Sir Anthony St Leger, lord deputy of Ireland, to return to Bale books and manuscripts which he had been forced to leave behind in 1553. The St Legers denied all knowledge of them, and their fate remains uncertain. None the less, Bale continued to complain to Archbishop Matthew Parker that he had not received his property. The queen had spoken for Bale on the grounds that the return of his manuscripts and continuation of his historical research was needed 'for the illustration and settyng forth of the storye of this our realme, by him, the said Bale' (McKisack, 18). The aged scholar was unable, however, to undertake the work envisioned by the queen. Writing nothing of great significance toward the end of his life, he did praise Elizabeth in a revised ending to 'King John'. In May 1560 he was reported to be staging a play satirizing the friars in a private house in Canterbury, with a cast of schoolboys from the city's grammar school. In the following year he published his 'Declaration of Edmonde Bonners Articles', originally written in 1554, which attacks the Catholic bishop of London for persecuting protestants under Mary. He attended the convocation of 1563, but had died before 26 November that year, and was buried at Canterbury. Eight years later the fervently protestant preacher Robert Pownall asked in his will to be buried next to Bale, whose widow had in the meantime been granted a generous pension by the cathedral authorities. 
Extensive holdings of Bale's papers are preserved in the British Library, London, the Bodleian Library, Oxford, Cambridge University Library, and the Henry E. Huntington Library in California. A number of his works were collected in 'The Select Works of John Bale', published by the Parker Society in 1849. More recently, his 'Index Britanniae scriptorum', first published in 1902, was reissued in 1990, the same year in which the Renaissance English Text Society published a scholarly edition of his 'Vocacyon'. Bale's edition of Anne Askew's 'Examinations', with his own commentary, was published in 1996 as part of Oxford University Press's 'Women Writers in English' series. Biographical studies include works by H. McCusker (1942), L. P. Fairfield (1976), and P. Happe (1996). The importance of the apocalyptic in Bale's thinking has been investigated by John N. King. 
Bale's writings are indeed notable for a consistent historiographical vision which is expressed most fully in his 'Image of both Churches', but is also vital to the polemical plays, propaganda tracts, and works of scholarship written from the 1530s onwards. Above all, his interpretation of 'Revelation' affords an apocalyptic paradigm for virtually everything that he wrote. In his eyes, a proper understanding of 'Revelation' should enable believers to trace the historical trajectory of the conflict between 'true' and 'false' churches through the seven ages prophesied by the blowing of seven trumpets, the opening of the seven seals, and the pouring of the seven vials. These ages proceed from an initial period of apostolic purity to the sixth age, which encompasses the persecution of the faithful from the time of John Wyclif until Bale's own lifetime. Wyclif and William Tyndale are leading representatives of the 'true' religion which had been brought directly to England by Joseph of Arimathea, one which remained uncorrupted by fraudulent apostolic succession of Roman pontiffs who act as agents of Antichrist. Present history looks forward to the final age, when the world as it is known will come to an end. 
Bale was an outstanding radical reformer of the first generation of English protestants. Surviving many of his colleagues who were burnt at the stake as heretics or died in exile, he enjoyed a literary career noteworthy for his mastery of an ensemble of polemical forms, the intensity of his invective, his satirical flair, and his breadth of learning. His unparalleled acerbity earned for him the epithet (coined by Thomas Fuller) of 'Bilious Bale'. As the standards of Elizabethan literary taste became more decorous, a process signalled by the poetic treatises of Sir Philip Sidney and George Puttenham, Bale's recourse to invective, scatological humour, and sexual innuendo alienated many English readers, and his works soon fell out of print. His apocalyptic ideas, however, exerted a continuing influence on works as diverse as John Foxe's 'Actes and Monuments' (1563), book 1 of Edmund Spenser's 'Faerie Queene' (1590), and Thomas Dekker's 'Whore of Babylon' (1607), while the antiquarian learning contained within his comprehensive bibliographies continues to influence scholars. 


@@@@@


doc= 1176


Bale, Robert (b. c.1410, d. in or after 1473), chronicler, was, according to John Bale (died 1563), a lawyer, public notary, and judge in civil cases in London, as well as being a chronicler of London affairs. He was probably the Robert Bale identified by Kingsford as a scrivener who married Agnes Haunsard before 1438 and had several children with her. A wedding gift of $100 from Agnes's uncle, Thomas Haunsard, was invested in houses and tenements at Southwark. A man of some means, Bale the scrivener was involved in legal disputes concerning debt and deceit in 1457 and 1465-70 and is last referred to in a further legal action in 1473. 
By 1509, according to the great chronicle, the name Bale was associated with the authorship of a long book. That book was probably the chronicle later attributed to Robert Bale. In his attribution John Bale is making specific reference to the London chronicle found in Trinity College, Dublin, MS 509, with the last entry written into TCD, MS 604. A second copy of this text, down to 1437, exists in Hatfield House, Cecil MS 281, but this text has never been associated with Bale; after 1437 the Cecil text varies from that in TCD, MSS 509 and 604. Bale's chronicle, as preserved in TCD, MSS 509 and 604, commences in 1189 and concludes in 1461, dating by mayoral years. The later years are recorded contemporaneously with the events they describe, and include an extensive eyewitness account of Cade's uprising (1450), one of the best surviving records of this event. It may be the material from 1438-1461, in particular, which should be considered to be the work of Robert Bale. 
According to John Bale, Robert Bale wrote 'Londinensis urbis chronicon', 'Instrumenta libertatum Londini', 'Gesta regis Edwardi tertii', 'Alphabetum sanctorum Angliae', and 'De praefectis et consulibus Londini'. Only the London chronicle is extant. 


@@@@@


doc= 1177


Bale, Robert (d. 1503), prior of Burnham Norton and historian, was born 3 miles from Walsingham, Norfolk, and joined the Carmelites at their house at Burnham Norton in the same county. He was a great lover of the liturgy and history of his order, which is reflected in his three known works. He composed a short chronicle of the Carmelites (Bodl. Oxf., MS Selden supra 72, fols. 5-11'v') and a liturgical office to the prophet Elijah (CUL, MS Ff.6.28, fols. 34-42'v') which has been published by B. Zimmerman, 'Ordinaire de l'ordre de Notre-Dame du Mont-Carmel' (1910), though the lessons of matins are omitted. An office of St Simon Stock, now lost, was probably a text used in the English province. John Bale (no relation) noted a few years later that, although not an eloquent preacher, he impressed with his learning and his ability to resolve legal problems. Bale adds that his works were 'unpolished and dull' and certainly there is little in them to support the assertion that Robert Bale spent part of each year studying at Oxford and Cambridge. His title of lector was an award from the order itself. He was prior for some years in Burnham Norton and died there on 11 November 1503. He bequeathed his collection of books to his convent. 


@@@@@


doc= 1178


Bales, Christopher (1564-1590), Roman Catholic priest, was born (or baptized) on 12 March 1564 in Coniscliffe, co. Durham, a son of John and Katherine Bales; he had a brother, John, a tailor. He was brought up a protestant, but on 10 June 1581 he entered the English College, then at Rheims, and on 13 August 1583 he was among a large party who left for the English College in Rome, which he entered on 1 October that year. However, a year later he returned to Rheims on account of ill health and continued his studies there until his priestly ordination at Laon on 28 March 1587, for which he seems to have obtained a dispensation because he was under the canonical age. He was sent back to England on 2 November 1588 and probably served in and around London, lodging in the Gray's Inn area and using the aliases Evers, Mallett, and Rivers. He was arrested and tortured by Richard Topcliffe in Bridewell before being moved to the Gatehouse. Bales was tried under the act of 27 Elizabeth proclaiming seminary priests in England to be guilty of treason. He was convicted and put to death in Fleet Street on 4 March 1590. On the same day two laymen accused of harbouring him were hanged, Nicholas Horner in Smithfield and Alexander Blake in Gray's Inn Lane. 


@@@@@


doc= 1179


Bales, Peter (bap. 1547, d. 1610?), writing-master and calligrapher, was baptized at St Michael Cornhill, London, on 15 June 1547. Parish records show that he was the eldest child of Thomas Bales of Birchin Lane, a draper and a citizen of London, and his wife, Elizabeth. According to the preface of Joseph Champion's 'The Parallel' (1750), Bales had already begun to practise his art by 1559, when he was only twelve years old. Wood's 'Athenae Oxonienses' provides information about the next stage of his career, linking his name to Gloucester Hall, Oxford, where it is most likely that he was a writing-master rather than a student. On 10 March 1575 his penmanship was brought to the attention of the court when he presented Queen Elizabeth with a gold and crystal ring, set with a specimen of his 'micrographical performance, in which the writing was so wonderfully small, yet so very legible, that it surprized all who saw it' (Kippis, 1.536). This virtuoso piece, which included, among other devotional texts, minute transcriptions of the 'Credo', the Lord's prayer, and the ten commandments, much impressed the queen, who is said to have worn the ring on many occasions. 
While such marvellous calligraphic feats suggest a natural inclination towards flamboyance and self-promotion, the mainstay of Bales's career was in the rather more prosaic dissemination of 'swift', 'true', and 'fair' writing. To this end, by 1590 he had set up a school near the sign of the Dolphin at the upper end of the Old Bailey, London, where some of the leading citizens sent their children. In an age before the wide-scale availability of printed texts Bales also offered his services as a scribe and a copyist in an advertisement that promised: 'you may have anything faire written in any kind of hand, usuall, and bookes of copies faire as you shall bespeake' (Heal, 9). He was evidently successful in this enterprise: in the 1580s and 1590s he was regularly commissioned to transcribe public documents into book form in his even, 'type-like lettering' (ibid.). According to the extensive memoir in the 'Biographia Britannica' (1778), his connection with courtly circles also led him to become involved in Elizabethan espionage. Working alongside one Thomas Phillips -- whose job was to decipher the letters in code which were intercepted by Arthur Gregory, who could ''unseal' a letter, and so dextrously 'close' it again... that no eye could discern its having been opened' (Kippis, 1.536) -- Bales was employed either to transcribe their contents or to forge new letters and additional paragraphs to send on in their place. In a bid to secure himself a permanent position, Bales next attempted to gain a place at court; although he was unsuccessful in his efforts, it was around this time that he was appointed to the chancery as a clerk, a fact which is attested at the foot of another of his celebrated micrographical performances: a complete, hand-written 'Bible' small enough to fit into a walnut shell. 
Several events in Bales's life suggest that he was an innovative, rapacious, and competitive man. In 1590 he published 'The Writing Schoolemaster', one of the first engraved copybooks. Owing to an error by John Evelyn in his 'Numismata' (1697), it has long been considered as the first work to present a system of ciphers as a form of shorthand. In fact, it was neither the first treatise on shorthand (that honour can be awarded to Timothy Bright for his 'Characterie: an Art of Short Swift, and Secret Writing, by Character', 1588) nor a full exposition on a new system of ciphers, as it was dependent on reducing full words into abbreviated longhand characters. Nevertheless, Bales was determined to profit from this publication, and his underhand dealings led to a lawsuit between the author and his publisher, Thomas Orwin, in which the former was found guilty of undercutting the publisher for his personal gain. His showmanship and competitiveness can be witnessed again in 1595, when, at the age of forty-eight, he challenged Daniel Johnson, a rival penman whose youthfulness assured him greater steadiness of hand, to a writing match for the prestigious prize of a golden pen valued at $20. It was conducted in public at the 'Black Fryers within Conduit Yard', and the jury consisted of William Seager, a herald at arms; Anthony Dew and John Gwilliams, both clerks in the high court of chancery; William Pank, a penman in the court of London; and George Chapman, a gentleman. Under their judgement Bales and Johnson matched their talents for, as Bales put it, 'best and fairest writing of all kinde of handes... for Secretarie and Clerklike writing... [and] for best teachinge' (Heal, 9). Evidently Bales's hand was still steady, and his experience was pre-eminent; despite Johnson's publication of vociferous accusations of Bales's corruption in packing the jury with his friends, the golden pen was awarded to the older penman. By posting public placards returning Johnson's slur upon him, Bales proudly capitalized on his victory: in addition to renaming his premises 'the Hand and Golden Pen', he also wrote his own account of this public spectacle in a piece of penmanship entitled 'The original cause' (1596/7, now Harl. MS 675, held in the British Library, London). 
Bales's leading patrons at court in the 1570s and 1580s seem to have been Sir Francis Walsingham and Sir Christopher Hatton; their deaths in 1590 and 1591 respectively led him to concentrate his attention on Lord Burghley (died 1598), who either then or earlier had made Bales his writing-master and penman. The last known facts of his life are remarkably eventful. During the later part of his career he was 'innocently engaged' in the employment of John Danyell of Deresburie. This gentleman, one of the retinue of the earl of Essex, sought to improve his own fortunes by trying to sell some revealing letters, forged by Bales, to the earl's enemies. On being brought to trial at the Star Chamber for this crime Danyell was convicted on Bales's evidence, forced to pay damages totalling $3000, sentenced to sit in pillory, and then imprisoned for life. Although Bales had also been incarcerated, during the trial he was eventually absolved of all guilt in Danyell's scheme to destroy the earl of Essex. 
That Bales weathered the Danyell debacle is clear from his advancement to the position of 'tutor to the late noble Prince Henry' (Heal, 9), which must have taken place early in the new reign. Although no research has been undertaken to support this conclusion, it seems possible that he owed both his survival and his promotion to Burghley's son, Robert Cecil, first earl of Salisbury, who served as principal minister in the last years of Elizabeth's reign and the beginning of James I's. With the premature death of Henry, prince of Wales, Bales's career is difficult to trace. In his 'The Origins and Progress of Letters' (1763), William Massey assumed that he died before 1614; indeed no mention of Bales's name is known after 1610, when the writing-master John Davies of Hereford made a scathing reference to his rival with his 'golden Pen' in a satiric verse entitled 'The Scourge of Folly'. His reputation survived intact, however: by the late seventeenth century, his flamboyant character and idiosyncratic experiences had become a touchstone of virtuosity for later writing-masters, who often drew comparisons between themselves and this celebrated figure. 


@@@@@


doc= 1180


Balfe, Michael William (1808-1870), composer, the third child of William Balfe and his wife, Kate, 'nee' Ryan, was born at 10 Pitt Street, Dublin, on 15 May 1808. The family moved to Wexford when he was two years old. Balfe received his first musical instruction from his father, a competent violinist and dancing-master, and continued to study violin with Joseph Halliday, the bandmaster of the Cavan militia. In 1814 his teachers included a bandmaster named Meadows, who apparently directed a performance of a polacca by Balfe before the boy was seven years old. He continued his studies in Dublin under William O'Rourke (Rooke), demonstrating his precocity by his first public performance as a violinist on 20 June 1817 and by the composition in the same year of the ballad 'Young Fanny', sung under the title 'The Lover's Mistake' by Madame Vestris. After O'Rourke went to London about 1820, Balfe studied with James Barton and Alexander Lee, and was just beginning his professional career as a violinist when, on 6 January 1823, his father died. Having refused an offer of adoption from a rich relative of his mother's, who wished him to join him in the West Indies, Balfe approached Charles Edward Horn, then on a concert tour to Ireland with the request that he become his articled pupil. Impressed by Balfe's talent, Horn agreed. In London, Balfe also studied composition with Horn's father, Carl Friedrich Horn, an enthusiast for J. S. Bach and an accomplished musician. At the same time he tried his luck as a singer: he appeared without success at the oratorio concerts on 19 March 1823, and then made an equally unsuccessful stage debut in Norwich as Caspar in a version of Weber's 'Der Freischutz'. 
In 1825 Balfe attracted the attention of Count Mazzara, who invited him to accompany him to Italy. On the journey through Paris he met Cherubini, on whom he made a very favourable impression. In Rome, maintained at the count's expense, he took lessons in composition with Ferdinando Paer, and when Mazzara returned to England in 1826 he sent Balfe to Milan to study singing with Fillipo Galli and counterpoint with Vincenzo Federici. In the autumn of 1826 Balfe's first theatrical composition, a 'ballo pantomimo serio' entitled 'Il naufragio di La Perouse' was staged in Milan at the Teatro alla Cannobiana. Unable to obtain an engagement in Milan as a singer, however, he returned to Paris. There Cherubini introduced him to Rossini, who, impressed by his singing, undertook to recommend him to the Theatre des Italiens if he would study with Bordogni for a year. Supported in his studies by Cherubini, he made excellent progress and duly appeared in 1827 as Figaro in Rossini's 'Il barbiere di Siviglia' with notable success. A three-year engagement on advantageous terms followed, but after only two seasons Balfe returned to Italy, apparently because of ill health. He soon obtained an engagement at the Teatro Carolino in Palermo, where, on 1 January 1830, he appeared as Valdeburgo in Bellini's 'La straniera'. 
During his time in Paris, Balfe had composed insertions for a revival of Zingarelli's 'Romeo e Giulietta' and had begun an opera on Chateaubriand's 'Atala', and in Italy he continued to compose. A dispute between manager and chorus at Palermo during the carnival of 1829-30 led to a commission to write a short opera without chorus, 'I rivali di se stessi', which, composed in some twenty days, became his first staged opera. After completing his engagement at Palermo, Balfe appeared at Piacenza and at Bergamo, where he met and shortly afterwards married the Hungarian singer Lina Roser (died 1888), with whom he had two daughters -- one of whom predeceased him, while the other, Victoire Balfe, began a successful singing career in 1857 and was married successively to Sir John Crampton and the duke of Frias. At Pavia in 1831 Balfe wrote 'Un avvertimento ai gelosi', a 'farsa giocosa', for the Teatro Fraschini. The next two years were spent in Milan, where his third opera, 'Enrico Quatro al passo del Marno', was produced at the Teatro Carcano on 19 February 1833, with himself and his wife singing principal parts. Through Maria Malibran's influence he was engaged to sing at La Scala, but at her suggestion returned to England in 1834. 
In London, Balfe decisively established himself as a composer with the success of 'The Siege of Rochelle', the first of a number of works to librettos by the highly experienced purveyor of English opera Edward Fitzball. After opening at Drury Lane on 29 October 1835, it achieved seventy-three performances in its first season. For Malibran, Balfe then wrote 'The Maid of Artois', given its premiere at Drury Lane on 27 May 1836, which set the seal on his success; his librettist this time was the manager of the theatre, Alfred Bunn, who was to provide Balfe with several more librettos. Three further operas ('Catherine Grey', 'Joan of Arc', and 'Diadeste'), and incidental music to Planche's 'Caractacus', followed at Drury Lane during the next two seasons. 'Diadeste' received particular acclaim and later that year, on 19 July 1838, Balfe enjoyed the honour, unique among his generation of English composers, of having an opera, 'Falstaff', commissioned for the Italian Opera and performed with a distinguished cast at Her Majesty's Theatre. Balfe took more than usual care over this work, which contains some of his most finished music. 
At the same time Balfe continued his singing career, his roles including Papageno in the first English production of 'The Magic Flute' at Drury Lane on 10 March 1838. For the next two seasons he composed little, but toured in Ireland and England, producing several of his operas with success. He then determined to form his own English opera company and opened a season at the Lyceum with his latest work, 'Keolanthe', on 9 March 1841, in which his wife made her London debut. But the venture collapsed in little more than two months, and Balfe decided to pursue his career in Paris. His nearly completed opera 'Elfrida', designed for the Theatre des Italiens, had to be abandoned because of the pregnancy of its intended leading lady, Giulia Grisi, but he was soon offered a libretto by Scribe. The resulting opera, 'Les puits d'amour', created a sensation at its premiere at the Opera-Comique on 20 April 1843, and Balfe was offered alluring inducements to retain him in Paris; however, he returned to London to mount the opera in an English version, as 'Geraldine, or, The Lovers' Well' at the Princess's Theatre in August 1843. Then, at Drury Lane on 27 November 1843, he presented 'The Bohemian Girl', on which he and Bunn had been working for some time. This was to be Balfe's greatest success. Despite some harsh reviews, it ran for more than a hundred nights and soon became the only nineteenth-century English opera to enjoy a genuinely international reputation; it was translated into Italian, French, and German, and was performed throughout Europe and America. 
During the next two years Balfe produced four more operas, two for Paris ('Les quatre fils fils Aymon' and 'L'etoile de Seville') and two for London ('The Daughter of St Mark' and 'The Enchantress'). Of these 'Les quatre fils d'Aymon', produced at the Opera-Comique on 15 July 1844, was especially successful; as 'The Castle of Aymon' it was given in London the same year, and, as 'Die vier Haimonskinder', was directed by Balfe at Vienna in 1846, along with 'The Bohemian Girl' ('Die Zigeunerin'). In the same year Balfe accepted the direction of the Italian Opera at Her Majesty's Theatre in succession to Michael Costa. Two more operas, 'The Bondman' and 'The Maid of Honour', followed at Drury Lane in 1846 and 1847, and Balfe also directed a season of opera at the Theatre Royal in Manchester in 1848-9. For the 1849-50 season he was in Berlin, where, among other works, he produced 'The Bondman' as 'Der Mulatte'. Back in London he took over the direction of the Grand National Concerts, and in 1851 provided Italian recitatives for Beethoven's 'Fidelio', for its performance at the Royal Italian Opera; at the same time he published 'Indispensable Studies for a Bass Voice' and 'Indispensable Studies for a Soprano Voice'. The following year he launched his two newest operas, 'The Sicilian Bride' at Drury Lane and 'The Devil's in it' at the Surrey. After the closure of Her Majesty's Theatre he began a series of travels that took him to St Petersburg, Vienna, and Italy. In Italy he wrote the opera 'Pittore e duca', performed at Trieste in 1854, and began, but did not complete, another ('Lo scudiero'). He returned to England in 1857, and in that year published 'A New Universal Method of Singing'. Stimulated by the establishment of the Pyne-Harrison Opera Company he wrote six more operas between 1857 and 1863 ('The Rose of Castille', 'Satanella', 'Bianca', 'The Puritan's Daughter', 'Blanche de Nevers', and 'The Armourer of Nantes') and an operetta, 'The Sleeping Queen', which, together with the cantata 'Mazeppa' (1862), brought his active career in London music to a close. 
In 1864 Balfe purchased a small estate, Rowney Abbey, in Hertfordshire and relinquished the house in Seymour Street where he had lived for several years. Leading the life of a gentleman farmer, he worked slowly and painstakingly on his last opera, 'The Knight of the Leopard', based on Sir Walter Scott's 'The Talisman', which remained incomplete at his death. (Balfe declined an invitation to produce the opera in Paris, and, completed by Costa, it was given its premiere in London in 1874.) It was probably also during these last years that Balfe wrote his two tuneful but superficial chamber works, the A major piano trio and the A[flat] major cello sonata, published after his death. In 1869 he supervised an acclaimed French five-act version of 'The Bohemian Girl' ('La bohemienne') in Paris. He returned to Rowney in the spring of 1870, where his long-standing bronchial condition worsened, leading to his death on 20 October 1870. He was buried in London at Kensal Green cemetery, and in 1878 a memorial tablet was erected in Westminster Abbey. 
Although Balfe admitted to William Harrison (the first Thaddeus in 'The Bohemian Girl') that he specially admired and even borrowed from Beethoven, his music owed little to nineteenth-century German models. His aim was generally to give the public precisely what it wanted with as little useless expenditure of time as possible. G. B. Shaw shrewdly observed: 'Balfe, whose ballads are better than Tchaikowsky's, never, as far as I know, wrote a whole scene well' (G. B. Shaw, 'Music in London', 1932). This ignores the fact that Balfe's ephemeral 'Catherine Grey' (1837) was one of the first English Romantic operas with continuous music rather than spoken dialogue, though it rightly identifies the ballads as the key to Balfe's success. It was these ballads, raised by their inspired tunefulness to the level of genuine art, which Balfe made the centrepiece of his operas, introducing the melodies at various points in the work so that they made their fullest impact, ensuring the success of the opera and the subsequent sales of the favourite number. The most famous of many was 'I dreamt that I dwelt in marble halls', from 'The Bohemian Girl'. For French and Italian stages he modified his approach somewhat, following more closely the examples of Auber and Rossini, and occasionally imitating the sensationalism of Meyerbeer, though the role of the ballad remained central. 'The Knight of the Leopard' suggests his familiarity with Verdi. In addition to his operas, Balfe wrote about thirty-five songs, among the most well known being 'By Killarney's Lakes', 'Come into the garden, Maud', and 'Excelsior'. His 'Seven Poems by Longfellow' ('c'.1855) contain some of the best English art songs of the period. Although Balfe was criticized by contemporary English adherents of German music trained at the Royal Academy for not being like Spohr, Weber, and Mendelssohn, and in the late nineteenth century for his failure to anticipate Wagner, his most popular work, 'The Bohemian Girl', nevertheless remained a repertory piece until the 1930s, and was revived, in a bowdlerized version, by Sir Thomas Beecham as late as 1951; it lasted even longer in Irish theatres. 


@@@@@


doc= 1181


Balfour, Alexander (1767-1829), novelist, was born in the parish of Monikie, Forfarshire, Scotland, and was baptized on 1 March 1767 which was possibly also the date of his birth. He was the son of William Balfour and his wife, Ann, 'nee' Honyman. Being a twin, and physically weak, he was cared for by a relative. His education was scanty, and he was early apprenticed to a weaver. Nevertheless, Balfour started writing poetry when he was twelve and was published in the 'poets' corner' of local newspapers. Later he taught in a school in his native parish, where his rough and ready but successful teaching was much appreciated. 
In 1793 Balfour became one of the clerks of a merchant manufacturer in Arbroath, and in 1794 he married. His writing career continued with poems published in the 'British Chronicle' newspaper and Anderson's 'Bee'. In 1793 he was one of the writers in the 'Dundee Repository' and in 1796 in the 'Aberdeen Magazine'. In 1797 he changed his employment, but in 1799, on the death of his first employer, he carried on the business in partnership with his widow. On her retirement in 1800 he took another partner, and, having succeeded in obtaining a government contract to supply the navy with canvas, in a few years he possessed considerable property. During the war with France, he published patriotic poems and songs in the 'Dundee Advertiser', which were reprinted in London. He also contributed poems and songs to the 'Northern Minstrel' of Newcastle upon Tyne, and to the Montrose 'Literary Mirror', wrote an account of Arbroath for Brewster's 'Encyclopaedia', and produced several papers for Tilloch's 'Philosophical Journal'. In 1814 he moved to Trottick, near Dundee, as manager of a branch of a London house. In the following year it became bankrupt, and Balfour was again thrown on the world. He found inferior employment as manager of a manufacturing establishment at Balgonie, Fife, from 1815 to 1818 and turned to literature as a source of income. 'Campbell, or, The Scottish Probationer' (1819) was very successful. In the same year, he also edited his friend Richard Gall's 'Poems' with a memoir. 
In October 1818, for the sake of his children's education, Balfour moved to Edinburgh, to work as a clerk in Blackwood's publishing house. Unhappily in the course of a few months he was struck down by paralysis, and in June 1819 was obliged to relinquish his employment. He recovered so far that he could be wheeled about in a specially prepared chair. His intellect was untouched, and he devoted himself to literature. In 1820 he published 'Contemplation, and other Poems', in 1822 came his second novel, 'Farmer's Three Daughters'; and in 1823 'The Foundling of Glenthorn, or, The Smuggler's Cave, a Romance'. Though written for the popular press, his novels are characterized by penetrating insight and skilful depiction of character. In 1825 he republished from Constable's 'Edinburgh Magazine' 'Characters Omitted in Crabbe's Parish Register', and his 'Highland Mary' appeared in 1827. In that year, too, he received a Treasury grant of $100 from Canning. In his last two years he was a voluminous contributor to the 'Saturday Evening Post', under the pseudonym of Penseroso, as well as to other periodicals. Many of these articles were posthumously published as 'Weeds and Wildflowers' (1830). 
Balfour died on 12 September 1829 at Lauriston Place, Edinburgh, and was buried on 15 September at the West Church. He was survived by his wife, two sons, and three daughters. 


@@@@@


doc= 1182


Balfour, Sir Andrew, first baronet (1630-1694), botanist and antiquary, was born at Balfour Castle, Denmiln, Fife, on 18 January 1630, the fifth and youngest son in the large family of Sir Michael Balfour and his wife, Jane or Joanna (died 1640), daughter of Sir James Durham of Pitkerro. His eldest brother was Sir James Balfour, first baronet (1600-1657), the antiquary. Andrew Balfour was brought up at Balfour Castle, the family seat. After an early education at the parish school of Abdie he studied philosophy under Thomas Gleig at St Andrews University and graduated MA about 1650. Encouraged by his brother James to be a keen collector of literary, antiquarian, and natural history objects, and by then an aspiring medical student, he probably visited Oxford and London before travelling to France in 1657, primarily to see the gardens of the duc d'Orleans at Blois. These beautiful gardens were superintended by Robert Morison with whom Balfour struck up a friendship. He then lived for several years in Paris, undertaking the most advanced medical education available in Europe; he went on to Montpellier, and then graduated MD at Caen on 20 September 1661. 
Arriving afterwards in London, Balfour became acquainted with many famous physicians of the day, including Harvey, Glisson, Charleton, and Wedderburn, the king's physician, and was presented to Charles II. The king recognized Balfour as an exceptionally cultivated man and acquired for him a position as tutor to the wayward young earl of Rochester, John Wilmot, whom he accompanied on a grand tour from 1661 to 1664. Balfour made good use of his time abroad, especially in Padua and Bologna, and gathered a magnificent collection of medical and natural history books, curiosities, medals, instruments, pictures, and busts. His taste and varied interests are well shown in letters to Patrick Murray, laird of Livingstone, which were collected by Balfour's son for anonymous publication as 'Letters Written to a Friend' (1700). 
In 1667 Balfour went to live in St Andrews where he practised as a physician, collected local plants, experimented in science and medicine, and made anatomical dissections ('Scots Magazine', 1803, 752). But he soon got bored with St Andrews and moved in 1670 to Edinburgh where he built up another medical practice. At this point he is reputed to have experimented on blood transfusions in dogs. In Edinburgh he started a small botanical garden in which he grew a number of exotic species, enhanced by Murray's collection and by seeds from European botanists and from Morison, now at Oxford. It is not clear if this is the same garden he indubitably took on with Robert Sibbald, a distant cousin, in 1670 at St Anne's Yards, near Holyrood Abbey. Balfour appointed James Sutherland as first curator, and bore the cost of the salary until he persuaded the university to take the garden over as an adjunct to the medical school. In 1675 a larger plot next to Trinity Church and Hospital (now underneath Waverley Station) was acquired, to which Balfour transferred many of his plants. Sutherland's catalogue of 1684 reveals that there were some 2000 non-indigenous species growing in the garden. Balfour continued to act as patron to the garden. 
Balfour played a prominent role in Edinburgh's learned society, and opened his remarkable private museum, gallery, and library to scholars. He was also active in establishing professorial chairs in Edinburgh University (making sure to place his own candidate, James Gregory, in mathematics) and in founding the Royal College of Physicians of Edinburgh. He became its third president in 1685. He improved the infirmary and arranged publication of the first 'Edinburgh Pharmacopoeia' (1685), in which he wrote the parts on materia medica. He was created baronet (at an unknown date) and physician-in-ordinary to Charles II. Balfour's old age was uncomfortable with gout and other disorders, and he died on 9 or 10 January 1694, suddenly while walking in the street. His wife, about whom little is known, apparently predeceased him; there was certainly one son, Michael Balfour, of Northbank, who served as executor. Balfour was buried in Greyfriars kirkyard, Edinburgh. 
Most of Balfour's collections were broken up after his death. The library was sold, and its contents are listed in 'Bibliotheca Balfouriana' (1695). The Royal College of Physicians of Edinburgh holds only a manuscript list of 'Plants I have seen'. He left his valuable collection of medical and scientific manuscripts to Robert Sibbald; this is also presumed sold. The medical and natural history specimens (listed in 'Auctarium musaei Balfouriani', 1697), which included a rattlesnake and a crocodile, were purchased by the city for Edinburgh University although hardly any items survive. His 'Letters written to a Friend... containing excellent direction and advices for travelling thro' France and Italy', originally intended for Patrick Murray, laird of Livingstone, was published posthumously in 1700. Sibbald produced an authoritative account of Balfour's life, much of which is repeated in translation in John Walker's 'Essays on Natural History' and in various biographical dictionaries. 


@@@@@


doc= 1183


Balfour, Clara Lucas (1808-1878), advocate of women's advancement and temperance activist, was born in the New Forest, Hampshire, on 21 December 1808. She was the only child of John Lydell Lucas ('c'.1767-1818), a butcher and cattle dealer from Gosport, and Sarah (died 1834, maiden name unknown), both of whom were relatively well educated. By the age of four Clara could already read exceptionally well. At a very young age she was removed from her mother's care and went to live with her father and his family on the Isle of Wight. Family oral history has it that 'a great wrong' had been done to Sarah, having been 'deceived by a form of marriage she later discovered to be bigamous' (Cunliffe-Jones, 10). This may help explain why Clara was baptized only at the age of nine after her father's death in 1818, and why there is no evidence of Clara's parents living together during her childhood. In 1818 Clara and her mother moved to London, where for several years they lived close to poverty, supporting themselves by needlework. However, between 1819 and 1822 enough money was scraped together to send Clara to a boarding-school in Woodford. 
On 29 September 1824 Clara married James Balfour (1796-1884), who was nearly twenty-eight. Clara was not yet sixteen. For the first two decades of their married life the Balfours lived 'at the bottom of the wheel of Fortune' (Dunlop, 153) with no reliable income. Between 1825 and 1843 they had seven children, four of whom, including Jabez Spencer Balfour, survived into adulthood. During the first thirteen years of their marriage Clara Lucas Balfour's already harsh life was further burdened by her husband's excessive drinking. Her firsthand experience of the physical and psychological consequences of alcoholism is vividly and accurately portrayed in her later temperance writing. However, in spite of the hardship of their early married life, she still somehow found time to continue her self-education, and at some point in the mid-1830s she began to write. 
A key event in the lives of the Balfours occurred in 1837 when they became aware of the still young temperance movement. After hearing a temperance address on 9 October 1837 James signed 'the pledge'. Clara then signed on 16 October 1837. From this point onwards, both the Balfours remained dedicated to the cause of temperance. 
At this period, some time between 1837 and 1840, Clara Lucas Balfour wrote 'Common Sense versus Socialism', an attack on a local Owenite group, which brought her to the attention of the Carlyles, Jane (1801-1866) and Thomas (1795-1881), who quickly became key patrons and friends of the Balfours. In 1838 she began writing for the temperance cause, publishing 'The Triumph of Teetotalism over Quackery' and 'King Alcohol's Walk'. Although she herself had been christened, and had christened her own children, in the Church of England, in 1840 Clara Lucas Balfour wrote to Jabez Burns (1805-1876), temperance campaigner, writer, and minister of the Baptist chapel, Church Street, Edgeware, asking to be rebaptized. Having converted, she then remained an active and central figure in the Baptist community throughout her life. 
Also in 1840 the Balfours met John Dunlop (1789-1868), pioneering temperance campaigner and author of 'Artificial and Compulsory Drinking Usages in Great Britain and Ireland' (1839). Dunlop encouraged Clara Lucas Balfour to expand her temperance work, arranging for her to have a salary of $25 for co-editing the 'Temperance Journal' in May of 1841, and then encouraging her to lecture. She began by speaking on temperance at ladies' 'drawing room' meetings, but in October 1841 gave her first public lecture. Almost immediately she branched out from the subject of temperance and began lecturing on a wide variety of topics, including literature, biography, and history, but most notably on such subjects as 'Capacities of women' and 'The idea of education as applied to woman'. Clara Lucas Balfour's unusual and pioneering career as a professional woman lecturer was in full swing by the end of 1842, with her lectures no longer limited to speaking to groups of ladies in the London area. For the next thirty years she maintained a gruelling schedule, speaking to large audiences of working men at mechanics' institutes and to other single- and mixed-sex public forums as far afield as Sheffield and Plymouth. 
At the same time as her lecturing career began, Clara Lucas Balfour's first collection of temperance poems and tales, 'A Garland of Waterflowers', was published in 1841. From this point on she wrote as prolifically as she lectured. She contributed almost weekly to a number of temperance journals, such as 'British Workman', 'Band of Hope Review', and the 'Temperance Journal'. She wrote over thirty temperance works, including 'Morning Dewdrops' (1853), prefaced by Harriet Beecher Stowe (1811-1896) and still being reprinted in the 1890s, 'The Victim' (1860), 'Confessions of a Decanter' (1862), and 'Our 'Old October'' (1868). In 1850 she edited and republished Margaret G. Derenzy's 'A Whisper to a Newly Married Pair from a Widowed Wife' (1824, hitherto mistakenly attributed to her); and then, building on her love of reading and literature, 'Sketches of English Literature from the Fourteenth to the Present Century' was written for Longman in 1852. 
Clara Lucas Balfour's other non-temperance writing focused on issues of social and moral reform, and on women's role in society and history. In works such as 'The Women of Scripture' (1847), 'Working Women of the Last Half Century: the Lessons of their Lives' (1854), 'The Bible Patterns of a Good Woman' (1867), and 'Women Worth Emulating' (1877), she manipulated Victorian 'domestic ideology', which situated women exclusively in the private sphere. Arguing for a drastic improvement in women's education in order that they would then be better prepared to carry out their duty as society's moral and spiritual guardians, she has been interpreted as merely reinforcing patriarchal notions of the ideal Victorian woman. However, Clara Lucas Balfour also consistently argued that the women who strove to live up to this notion of 'ideal womanhood' were not in any way feeble-minded or inadequate in relation to men. For her, woman was 'emphatically called the 'help-meet' of man, not help-less, not inadequate, and therefore not inferior' ('The Women of Scripture', 12). Whereas she has previously been regarded almost exclusively in the light of her temperance work, a century later feminist historians can view her 'separate spheres feminism' as a necessary precursor to the late nineteenth-century women's movement. Through the example of her own life, and through her use of biography and history in her writing and lectures, Clara Lucas Balfour provided her contemporaries with much needed examples of women 'doing, as well as suffering; thinking as well as feeling; directing, as well as obeying' ('Working Women of the Last Half Century', 3). 
In 1876, after almost forty years of temperance campaigning and lecturing on 'the woman question', Clara Lucas Balfour was a key motivator in the creation of the British Women's Temperance Association, which over the next two decades would be closely involved in the social purity movement and in the fight for women's suffrage. She was elected its president in May 1877. Clara Lucas Balfour died of cancer of the uterus at 88 London Road, Croydon, on 3 July 1878, and was buried in Paddington cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 1184


Balfour, Edward Green (1813-1889), surgeon and naturalist, was born on 6 September 1813 in Montrose, the second son of Captain George Balfour of the East India Company marine service, and Susan Hume, a sister of Joseph Hume MP. After studying at the Montrose Academy, Balfour went to Edinburgh where he studied surgery at the university. He was admitted to the Royal College of Surgeons of Edinburgh in 1833 and a year later set sail for India, where a family friend had arranged for a commission as an assistant surgeon in the Madras medical service. Balfour's voyage to India was delayed by a visit to the island of Mauritius, where he was able to observe at first hand the ecological destruction about which French naturalists had written. This kindled in him a lifelong interest in what he believed was a direct relationship between deforestation, climatic change, and environmental degradation. 
On arrival in India Balfour was attached to a European regiment. However, rapid progress first in Hindustani and later in Persian brought him to the attention of his superiors and he was soon transferred to a regiment of sepoy infantry. Sepoy regiments, unlike European ones, moved frequently between stations and were more likely to be posted to the smaller cantonments, and Balfour accordingly spent most of the next ten years travelling about southern India. His interest in environmental change and its relationship to human societies was further provoked and he was able to collect a great body of information which would serve as the basis for a string of articles and books on health and the environment in India. These writings brought him to the attention of the government. His article entitled 'On the influence exercised by trees on the climate of a country' (1849), in which he argued that tree felling in southern India lay behind recent climatic change, was employed by the government of Madras in its efforts to persuade the East India Company to allow it to impose a stricter conservation regime in its territories. This work also made an impact upon the newly arrived governor-general of India, Lord Dalhousie, who was persuaded of the need for tighter forestry controls. 
In 1848 Balfour returned to the presidency capital where he was given medical charge of the governor's bodyguard. While this was a prestigious appointment, it did not entail much regimental duty and Balfour could devote a substantial amount of his time to his writings and his other interests. The reduced medical demands also enabled him to take up an appointment as agent to the court of the nawab of the Carnatic, which eventually culminated in his serving from 1858 to 1861 on a commission called to look into the nawab's debts. He also served briefly in 1850 as assistant assay master at the Madras mint. 
Even when faced with these extensive outside commitments Balfour continued to keep up his medical career, and in 1852 he was promoted to the rank of full surgeon. This year also saw his marriage on 24 May to Marion Matilda Agnes Gilchrist, the daughter of a fellow surgeon on the Madras establishment. Their first and apparently only child, Edith, was born on 28 June 1861. Following his promotion Balfour filled a number of staff positions in Madras, Mysore, Burma, and Hyderabad, and in 1871 his talents and lengthy service were rewarded when he was promoted to the highest ranking medical post in the presidency, that of surgeon-general. He held this position until his departure from India in 1876. 
Balfour was clearly a polymath whose writings spanned topics as diverse as forestry, Persian poetry, cholera, and indigenous medical knowledge. Nevertheless, certain patterns can be discerned in his work. Most significant perhaps is the connection he identified between forests, climatic change, famine, and the outbreak of diseases. The importance he attached to this relationship stemmed partly from his medical training in Edinburgh where the impact of environmental factors on human health had been stressed, partly from his readings of French physiocrats as well as the works of Alexander von Humboldt and Joseph Priestley, and partly from his firsthand observations in Mauritius and in India. Balfour's major work on forestry was 'The timber trees, timber and fancy woods, as also the forests of India and of eastern and southern Asia', which was first published in 1858. In 1863 the government of India had set up a timber-purchasing agency in Burma, largely on the recommendation of the military finance department, which coincidentally had been headed by Balfour's brother George ['see below'] until 1862. The government's expanded presence in commercial forestry led it to pressurize Balfour to bring out a second edition, which provided a more comprehensive listing of the types of trees to be found in India and their possible commercial use. A third edition appeared in 1870. Balfour's insistence that the state should take on a greater role in policing and preserving India's forests was instrumental in pushing the British administration in India into taking up a more proactive conservationist role, and hence we can conclude that Balfour was one of the most important figures in nineteenth-century environmentalism. 
Balfour's environmental efforts cannot, however, be separated from his views of society, and here again Balfour shared many characteristics with the French physiocrats. In particular he accepted that the state had a major role to play in engineering necessary or desirable social change. Like many of his contemporaries, Balfour held fairly fixed views as to what denoted proper social organization and productive economic activity, and again like many of his contemporaries he believed that statistics were a crucial tool in determining benchmarks and in guiding policy. In the case of forest conservation, Balfour not only singled out agriculturists, landowners, and timber merchants as contributing to deforestation, he also emphasized what he saw as the destructiveness of India's tribal population. He insisted that their 'slash and burn' style of agriculture was responsible for the destruction of large stands of timber. Hitherto tribal communities had been stereotyped as unproductive; Balfour and his readers could now argue on the basis of what was presented as scientific evidence that tribal societies were inherently destructive. This helped to justify demands that tribal societies be disciplined and reformed. 
Balfour also employed statistics to make judgements on how best to preserve the health of Europeans in India. In works such as 'Statistical data for forming troops and maintaining them in health in different climates and localities' ('Quarterly Journal of the Statistical Society of London', 8, 1845, 192-209), 'Statistics of Cholera' (1849), and 'Remarks on the abstract tables of the men discharged from the military' ('Quarterly Journal of the Statistical Society of London', 14, 1851, 348-56), which was read by his uncle, Joseph Hume, to the Statistical Society of London, Balfour spoke out against the common belief in 'seasoning', the idea that given enough time humans will adjust to new climates. He believed instead that different races had different tolerances for climates and diseases. The statistics he accumulated suggested that Europeans fared better at higher altitudes and he accordingly became a champion of locating asylums and cantonments in the hills of India. Balfour also chaired a committee which in 1853 published the 'Barometrical Survey of India'. 
Arguably, Balfour's most influential work was his 'Cyclopaedia of India and Southern Asia', which was first published in Madras in 1857. It had been compiled from the notes he had taken when organizing exhibitions of local items for display at London's Great Exhibition. His accumulation of further information led him to release a second edition in Madras in 1871. The second edition, which was largely self-funded, had almost triple the number of entries. Sales were good and he managed to recoup his investment within a few years. The third edition was again larger and this time it was published in Britain where it was favourably reviewed. It was a mammoth undertaking, containing entries on historical and mythological figures, the flora and fauna of India, castes, historical battles, soil types, diseases, minerals, major texts, marriage customs, and towns and villages. It also provided definitions of some of the more common words from the major vernaculars. There is even a lengthy entry on himself as well as one for his brother George. 
Edward Balfour's commitment to collecting and organizing information on India led to his appointment as secretary to the committees called to prepare Madras's contributions to the Great Exhibition of 1851, the Paris exhibitions of 1855 and 1868, the Universal Exhibition of London in 1862, and the Vienna Exhibition of 1873. In addition, much of the material he collected was used to stock the government central museum in Madras, which had been founded in 1850 with Balfour as superintendent. He held this post until 1859. Balfour passionately believed that museums were an ideal medium through which useful information could be communicated to the people of India. He had initially envisaged a network of museums across southern India. The plan was for six satellite museums to be located in various regions of the presidency with the main museum in Madras serving as a central repository. However, the outlying museums quickly faltered and by 1861 there remained only one at Rajahmundry and it had been turned over to district authorities. Despite these setbacks the museum in Madras became one of the most popular museums in India, particularly through such innovations as setting aside special days when only women would be admitted. By 1879 the museum was attracting just under 180,000 people per year and by 1886 this figure had risen to 230,000. Balfour was particularly pleased at the number of visitors who were apparently illiterate, for this confirmed his faith in the museum as a means for public instruction. At the outset the museum had an unmistakably utilitarian purpose -- most of the collection consisted of items of commercial value. In one surviving document of 1851 it was described as a museum of practical and economic geology. To these collections Balfour added samples of all the woods of India which he had been able to acquire. Only later were archaeological and ethnological items added. Balfour's enthusiasm for collecting can also be glimpsed in the Madras Zoological Gardens, which he helped to found in 1856. Also, in 1866, he had a hand in establishing a museum in Mysore. 
While Balfour is best-known for his work in scientific disciplines, he did maintain an interest in Indian languages and literature. In 1850 he published 'Gul-Dastah, or, The Bunch of Roses', which consisted of his translations of a number of works by Indian and Persian poets. Credit for the erection of the Muhammadan Public Library in Madras can also be assigned in part to Balfour. He translated several English works on astronomy into Hindustani and a statistical map of the world into Hindustani, Tamil, and Telugu. Yet despite his knowledge of Hindustani and Persian, which was sufficiently advanced that he continued to serve as interpreter to the government on many occasions, Balfour was very sceptical of the state of indigenous scientific knowledge. In the preface to the first edition of the 'Cyclopaedia', he insisted that indigenous people are so close to subsistence level that they do not have the means or the freedom to reflect accurately upon their surroundings. 
Balfour's final years in India were marked by a number of initiatives he took in an effort to make Western medicine more accessible to the peoples of India. He personally translated an English midwifery manual into Hindustani and arranged for it to appear in Tamil, Telugu, and Kannada, and in 1871 he urged (unsuccessfully) the Madras government to establish five vernacular medical schools: two in Telugu-speaking areas, two in Tamil-speaking areas, and one in the Malayalam-speaking region. He also published a description of medical discoveries and recent lessons that was entitled 'Medical Hints to the People of India'. He intended that this book would inspire Indians studying Western medicine as well as win over practitioners of traditional medicine ('vaids' and 'hakims') to Western medical practices. Balfour's other great initiative was to try to open up medical opportunities for European women in India. He had long recognized that their maleness prevented European doctors from penetrating into the domestic spaces of Indian society. In contrast, European women would be able to move more freely within a large segment of Indian society. His lobbying of the government and the medical establishment in Madras began in 1872 and his first success came in 1875 when Mary Scharlieb was admitted to the Madras Medical College as its first woman applicant. Scharlieb, the wife of a barrister in Madras, had been trained as a midwife but found midwifery too constraining. Her entry into the Madras Medical College cleared the way for other women applicants. 
Balfour continued to write about India following his retirement and return to England in 1876. The outbreak of the Deccan famine of 1877-9 and its horrific death toll prompted him to return to the subject of deforestation and climatic change. This resulted in his book 'Indian Forestry', which appeared in 1885. He also brought out revised editions of some of his earlier works, notably his 'Cyclopaedia', and a book on agricultural pests. Balfour died on 8 December 1889 at 107 Gloucester Terrace, London. He was survived by his wife. Balfour was a major figure in Britain's scientific encounter with India, and his researches into a number of areas, including botany and public health, became standard reading for several generations of scholars, surgeons, and administrators. However, he never received the attention many felt he merited. There was no knighthood, nor was he the subject of a biography. D. G. Crawford, the historian of the Indian Medical Service, was sensitive to this slight, and argued that had Balfour been stationed in India at a later date, when India featured more prominently in British public life, he would not have been so overlooked. 
Edward Balfour's elder brother 
British relations with Chinese officials during his time in Shanghai were also facilitated by Balfour's willingness to take a hard line on the opium trade. Opium was a banned product in China, and while consuls could do little about opium trading occurring outside their jurisdiction, many would also turn a blind eye to that being carried out under their noses. Balfour co-operated with Chinese authorities in seeking to interdict the trade. On one occasion he used British sailors to board a British merchant vessel; once aboard they discovered several bales of opium, which were thrown over the side, and those in charge of the ship were fined. He also sought to prevent conflict by limiting European movement outside the city to journeys of no more than one day's ride. He left Shanghai in 1846 after a disagreement with his superiors as to whether he was entitled to maintain his position in the army lists. A furlough in Britain resulted in his marriage in 1848 to his cousin Charlotte Isabella Hume, the third daughter of Joseph Hume. It is not clear whether they had children. 
In late 1848 Balfour returned to Madras, where he served in a number of administrative positions. These included a spell on the military board from 1849 to 1857 which brought him to the attention of the governor-general. He was consequently appointed to the military finance commission, which had been formed to look into India-wide economies in the aftermath of the revolt. He gained a reputation for 'obstinate ability' ('The Times', 15 March 1894), though his 'largely generous nature' prevented him from lapsing into complete 'obstinacy'. His command over detail led to his appointment as chief of the military finance department from 1860 to 1862. He returned to England where he served on the royal commission on recruiting in 1866 and in 1868-70, and in 1868 he was appointed assistant to the controller-in-chief, war department, a post he held until 1871. 
Balfour then turned to politics and sat as the Liberal MP for Kincardineshire from December 1872 until 1892. His parliamentary career was, however, far from distinguished. While in principle an advocate of Irish land reforms and home rule, he spoke rarely in parliament and generally failed to attract much attention: significantly, he only merited one entry in Gladstone's diary and that was in 1866, six years before his election as a Liberal MP. He made a somewhat greater impact outside parliament. In letters to 'The Times', which were later collected together and printed as 'Trade and Salt in India Free' (1875), Balfour argued for the abolition of duties on most goods imported into India as well as the abolition of taxes on the production and selling of salt. He reasoned that not only did these taxes hamper economic growth, they antagonized the population of India which might ultimately weaken British rule from within, should British India ever be threatened from without. Four years earlier he had written to 'The Times' to criticize some of their correspondent's facts on Indian budgetary affairs. Balfour was also convinced by the deforestation arguments of his brother, and in 1866 he took exception to several papers delivered to the Royal Geographical Society which were critical of Edward's work in this area. George Balfour was made CB in 1874 and KCB in 1870. He died in London on 12 March 1894 and was buried in Kensal Green cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 1185


Balfour, Francis (d. in or after 1816), surgeon and orientalist, was born in Edinburgh and took his MD degree there in 1767. He entered the East India Company's service in Bengal as assistant surgeon on 3 July 1769, and was appointed full surgeon on 10 August 1777. 
Balfour was a close acquaintance of Warren Hastings and dedicated a book -- 'The Forms of Herkern' -- to him in 1781. In 1783, while at Benares, he corresponded frequently with Hastings in an abortive attempt to disclose a plot between the resident of Benares, Francis Fowke, and Raja Cheyte Sing, which he claimed to have discovered. 
Balfour devoted much time to oriental studies. 'The Forms of Herkern', translated into English by Balfour, was published in Calcutta in 1781 and in London in 1804. The work comprised the endeavours of a state letter-writer in Persian; a vocabulary is given by Balfour at the end and the book is by far the most valuable of his publications. Balfour was one of the earliest members of the Bengal Asiatic Society, founded in 1784, and he contributed two papers to its 'Transactions' (in 1790 and 1805) on oriental languages and literature, and a third (in 1795) on the barometer. Of his medical works one of the most remarkable was 'A Treatise on Sol-Lunar Influence in Fevers' (1784), which went to several editions and saw a German translation. In it Balfour expounded his favourite theory, that fevers are under the direct influence of the moon, and reach their critical stage with the full moon, a theme he returned to in a paper of 1805. Contemporaries regarded his views as rather extreme. 
Balfour retired from the East India Company's service on 16 September 1807 and returned to Edinburgh. He is thought to have died in or after 1816. 


@@@@@


doc= 1186


Balfour, Francis Maitland (1851-1882), comparative embryologist and morphologist, was born on 10 November 1851 at Queen Street, Edinburgh, the fifth of the eight children (and third son) of James Maitland Balfour (1820-1856), landowner and MP, and Lady Blanche Gascoyne-Cecil (1825-1872), second daughter of James Gascoyne-Cecil, second marquess of Salisbury, and his wife, Frances Mary. Arthur James Balfour (1848-1930), Conservative prime minister, was an elder brother; his sister Nora married Henry Sidgwick (1838-1900), the philosopher. 
Raised at Whittingehame in East Lothian, Frank, as he was known, showed an early aptitude for natural history. After two years at The Grange, a private boarding-school at Hoddesdon, Hertfordshire, in 1866 he went to Harrow School. There his abilities in natural history were honed by George Griffith, the school's first science master. Although he was considered by some to be awkward and uncoordinated, Balfour's forceful personality was already obvious, and it led many to believe he would soon make his mark. Indeed, a geological essay written for the Harrow Scientific Society in 1868 brought him to the attention of Thomas Huxley, whose influence was to be lifelong. 
Balfour entered Trinity College, Cambridge, in October 1870, and won a natural science scholarship the following spring (Huxley was an examiner). Michael Foster, praelector in physiology, encouraged him to undertake original research on the nature of the primitive streak in chick embryos and its possible relationship to the amphibian blastopore. Thus began Balfour's pursuit of homologies between embryos of different organisms, which led to his first three papers in embryology and 'The Elements of Embryology' (1874), co-authored with Foster. Balfour graduated in December 1873, though the time spent on his investigations 'diminished somewhat the brilliancy of his degree, for he was placed second instead of first, as had been expected, in the Natural Sciences Tripos' (Clark, 284). 
In February 1874 Balfour was one of the first two British naturalists to work at Anton Dohrn's Stazione Zoologica in Naples, where shark and dogfish embryology was the subject of his investigations. Embryology was considered the best means to establish evolutionary relationships, and elasmobranchs, as primitive vertebrates, were thought likely to illuminate vertebrate ancestry. This initial work, presented in August to the British Association for the Advancement of Science (BAAS), brought Balfour to the attention of the British scientific community. On 17 October he was elected natural sciences fellow of Trinity College; Huxley, the examiner, gave more weight to research than to examination results. 
As part of his efforts to establish physiology, histology, and embryology at Cambridge, Foster gave responsibility for embryology and morphology to Balfour. The latter's first lectures in embryology in July 1875 were only a modest success, and an inadequate forecast of his enormously popular lectures as lecturer in animal morphology from October 1876. During this period Balfour also continued his research work at Naples. His 'Monograph on the Development of Elasmobranch Fishes' (4 vols., 1878) enhanced his reputation as a leading evolutionary embryologist, and led to his election as FRS at the age of twenty-six in June 1878. 
Under Balfour's direction the Cambridge Morphological Laboratory became the world centre for comparative and evolutionary embryology. Students such as Adam Sedgwick, William Bateson, D'Arcy Thompson, William Weldon, and Henry Osborn were attracted to work with Balfour, as much for his personality as for his growing scientific reputation. The awkward, uncompromising youth had grown into a tall man who, though brilliant and admired by all, retained an endearing shyness. 
Although most of the research was left to his students, Balfour was not idle. He ran the laboratory, assisted by Adam Sedgwick, who succeeded him as director. He threw himself energetically into college and university committees, and in 1880 was vice-president of section D of the BAAS. In four years of intensive labour he synthesized all available embryological knowledge into the comprehensive and highly acclaimed 'Treatise on Comparative Embryology' (2 vols., 1880-81). While he accepted a recapitulation of evolution in development, he avoided the doctrinaire excesses of Ernst Haeckel. From his very first paper he sought to separate primary features from secondary embryonic or larval adaptations, and sought evidence for natural selection during ontogeny, as he documented the links between embryology and evolution. Balfour's law relates yolk concentration to the rate of cell division in the early embryo. 
Balfour's work brought him much acclaim, especially after publication of the 'Treatise'. A Royal Society medal, appointment as the youngest member of the society's council, and an honorary LLD degree from Glasgow University all came his way in 1881 and it seemed that an illustrious career lay ahead. However, despite these accolades, and the growth of animal morphology at Cambridge, the brightest new star in the biological sky, who Darwin thought would 'one day be the first of English Biologists' (Dugdale, 1.70), held no appointment at the university. Oxford sought him as Linacre professor of human and comparative anatomy, and Edinburgh as regius professor of natural history. Balfour was tempted by Edinburgh, which was less than 30 miles from Whittingehame, the family seat. In January 1882, however, Foster spearheaded a petition to the Cambridge senate seeking a university position for Balfour. Just weeks later, in Capri, while nursing a student, William Caldwell, back to health, Balfour contracted typhoid. It was thought he would not live. Cambridge was finally moved to act and appointed him to a 'Professorship of Animal Morphology terminable with the tenure of the first Professor' (Clark, 288). 
By July 1882 Balfour had recuperated sufficiently to travel to Switzerland for his favourite relaxation, alpine climbing. After testing his condition on some easy climbs, he and a guide set out on 18 July to scale Mont Blanc. Both men died on the glacier of Treyney, Courmayeur, Italy, on 19 July. Balfour was buried at Whittingehame on 5 August. Reactions to his death indicate the depth of loss felt by friends and the scientific and university communities. For Huxley the deaths of Darwin and Balfour in the same year meant the loss of 'the best of the old and the best of the young' (Huxley, 2.38). Cambridge established a library and a studentship in Balfour's name. The first studentship went to William Caldwell, whose discovery 'monotremes oviparous, ovum meroblastic', cabled to the BAAS meeting in Montreal in 1884, was a dramatic demonstration of the evolutionary embryology espoused by Balfour. 


@@@@@


doc= 1187


Sir George Balfour (1809-1894), army officer and politician, was born in Montrose, and studied at the Montrose Academy and the East India Company's Addiscombe College. He entered the Madras artillery in 1825. He transferred to the Royal Artillery in the following year but continued to serve in India where he first saw action with the Malacca field force in 1832-3. Promotion to captain came in 1844, major and lieutenant-colonel in 1854, colonel in 1855, major-general in 1865, lieutenant-general in 1874, and general in 1877. His administrative skills and particularly his detailed knowledge of military accounts led to his appointment as a staff officer with the Madras force during the war with China in 1840-42. The commander of that expedition, Henry Pottinger, was so impressed with Balfour's handling of the indemnity levied against the defeated Chinese that Balfour was appointed to serve as British consul at Shanghai; he served from 1843 to 1846. Shanghai was one of the treaty ports which the Chinese had reluctantly agreed to open under the terms of the treaty of Nanking (Nanjing). Balfour proved to be quite successful in negotiating with the Chinese. While he was thought to be of insufficient rank to merit an audience with the provincial governor, he did meet frequently with the highest-ranking official in Shanghai, the 'taotai' or intendant, with whom he established excellent working relations. Balfour's military rank no doubt helped, for it invested him with greater stature than would have accrued had he been simply a merchant as was the case with other consuls in India. Balfour reinforced this impression by emphasizing diplomatic relations and protocol, even at the expense of commercial transactions. It was during Balfour's time in Shanghai that the area of international settlement was laid down. It began initially with his purchase of land amounting to 150 acres. This was done without the prior approval of the government and was partly funded by his own money. Balfour was, however, convinced of the long-term importance of Shanghai as a point of entry into the vast interior markets of China. 


@@@@@


doc= 1188


Balfour, Sir James, of Pittendreich (c.1525-1583), politician and legal writer, was the eldest son of Sir Michael Balfour (died 1577) of Mountquhanie in Fife, and Joneta Boswell. He may have been educated at St Andrews in 1539 or 1540, when he would have been about fifteen years old, and was at Wittenberg in 1544. In 1546, with his father and his brothers David and Gilbert, he entered St Andrews Castle and joined those who on 29 May had slain Cardinal David Beaton and were holding out against the earl of Arran, the governor of Scotland. Balfour had at some point taken priest's orders, but was now a fanatical Calvinist. After the castle surrendered, on 31 July 1547, Balfour and the evangelical preacher John Knox were among those impressed into the French service as galley slaves. About 1549 the Balfour brothers were released, and by 1553 James Balfour had become official of Lothian, a high ecclesiastical judge, while by 1555 he was vicar of Kilmany, Fife. After the 'uproar for religion' which broke out at Perth in May 1559 Balfour became a propagandist for the queen regent, Mary of Guise, and he also joined the reformers in order to bring dissension among them and to spy on their activities. In 1560 he became rector of Flisk, Fife. After the young Queen Mary's return from France, on 14 August 1561, Balfour was made an extraordinary (and unpaid) lord of the court of session on the spiritual side (12 November 1561), and on 15 November 1563 he was promoted to an ordinary (permanent and paid) place on the bench. 
When the new commissary courts were organized at the beginning of 1564 to replace the pre-Reformation church courts, Balfour, as a former official of Lothian, was chosen as chief of the four commissaries of Edinburgh, with a salary of 400 merks. He held the office until October 1565. By 1565 he was a privy councillor, at first (in July) as one of the 'extraordinarii', and from September onwards as a regular councillor. In the spring of 1566 he was appointed to the valuable office of clerk register; he was also knighted, with the style of Sir James Balfour of Pittendreich, Fife. At this time he claimed to be a Lutheran. In the same year he was appointed to a parliamentary commission to revise the laws. The result of the commission's labours was the collection of the acts of the Scottish parliament from 1424 to 1566, published at Edinburgh in the latter year and known as the 'Black Acts' because the typeface used was English black letter. Balfour's work is commended in the preface to this compilation. 
By October 1566 Balfour was active in support of James Hepburn, fourth earl of Bothwell, who regarded King Henry (formerly Lord Darnley) as an obstacle to his ambitions. When the king was murdered on 10 February 1567, Balfour was widely regarded as the principal counsellor and deviser of the deed, and as a result he was arrested by the earl of Moray and warded in Edinburgh Castle. But his confinement was brief, and he was soon made captain of the castle. He appeared at the parliament of April and served on the committee dealing with the manner of holding the sessions. A fortnight after Mary's marriage to Bothwell (15 May 1567), Balfour joined with the opposition lords in a band to free the queen from Bothwell's control. When Mary marched to defeat and capture at Carberry Hill, on 15 June, Balfour did nothing to support her. At Bothwell's request, he gave out a casket of letters to a servant of Bothwell, but at the same time he informed the opposition lords, who intercepted the papers, and he also gave them artillery from the castle. 
After Mary's abdication the new regent, the earl of Moray, agreed that Balfour, as the person most strongly implicated in King Henry's assassination, was to use his good offices to pursue the murderers. In exchange for the captaincy of Edinburgh Castle Balfour received a remission for any crimes and was granted the priory of Pittenweem, Fife; he also received a pension out of the priory of St Andrews for his son, and was given a lump sum of $5000. In addition, he exchanged the office of clerk register for that of lord president of the court of session (6 December 1567). In the same month he appeared in parliament and among the lords of the articles as prior of Pittenweem. However, at the insistence of the earl of Lennox, father of the murdered king, and after acrimonious debate in the council, the government decided to prosecute William Maitland of Lethington and Balfour. The latter was warded in Stirling and almost immediately placed in free ward in St Andrews on caution of $20,000 not to practise with England. But when Lennox became regent in July 1570, after Moray's murder, Balfour joined the Marians, and for two years was the most extreme partisan of the queen in the ensuing civil war. Forfeited in August 1571, Balfour received a remission in November 1572 for crimes of which he declared himself innocent: his forfeiture was reduced, and he made profession of the true religion. He assisted in the pacification of Perth (23 February 1573) between the parties to the civil war, and took his place in parliament as prior of Pittenweem and served on committees to revise the law and consider church policy. In May 1579, however, the earl of Morton (formerly regent, and still in control of the person of the young James VI) began proceedings against Balfour and the Hamiltons, and on 24 November the forfeiture of 1571 was extended to disinherit Balfour's heirs. Balfour, who was probably now over fifty, joined the Hamilton exiles in Paris. After he had left Scotland, he corresponded with the captive Queen Mary, and about August was present at a meeting of the chief conspirators against Morton. He was now regarded as a Catholic and a Spanish agent. 
Balfour spent most of his brief exile in France. In 1580 he went to Dieppe, and then returned to Scotland, reaching the Isle of May in the Forth, with, it was said, a 'messe' of French crowns, on 17 December. He had been engaged in searching for evidence to incriminate Morton in King Henry's death. Since he was still under sentence of forfeiture, Balfour was conveyed secretly to Edinburgh, where on 31 December Morton was arrested as an accessory in the late king's murder; he was executed six months later, an interval which suggests that Balfour had failed to discover any truly damaging evidence to support the accusation. Queen Elizabeth marvelled at Balfour's presence in Scotland and wanted his arrest. Almost immediately after Morton's execution Balfour was granted a remission or respite for three years, on condition of his standing trial for King Henry's death, and was thereby enabled to continue the work of codifying the laws which had been begun under Morton. King James made a declaration of protection in his favour, but was twice compelled to declare that the protection did not wipe out the previous forfeiture, and that it did not decide the question of Balfour's guilt. In June 1582 Balfour appeared as an elder at the general assembly of the church and he regained possession of his lands, for in 1582 and 1583 he directed the transcription of ancient chronicles at Burleigh. 
Balfour died in 1583, some time after 31 July, and was survived by his wife, Dame Margaret Balfour, heir of Burleigh, and by six sons and three daughters. The family subsequently benefited from further restoration of Sir James's properties. His eldest son, Michael, was created Lord Balfour of Burleigh by James VI in 1607, and that line continued uninterrupted until the forfeiture of the fifth lord after the 1715 rising. 
There is no doubt that Balfour was a most able man, of undisputed legal talents. These are apparent from his contribution to the 'Black Acts', and still more from his 'Practicks' (1754; new edn, 1962-3). The latter, effectively a legal encyclopaedia compiled from all available sources -- statutes, decisions, and the 'auld lawes' -- was unique in respect of its great bulk. The pre-eminent written record of Scots law for over a century, the 'Practicks' must have satisfied a pressing need for a compendium of this kind. About twenty manuscript copies survive from between the sixteenth and the eighteenth centuries. As late as 1861 Lord President Inglis referred to it as a work of undoubted authority. Besides its intrinsic worth, it is valuable as a source of judicial records no longer extant. The opinion of contemporaries (including Mary, queen of Scots, and John Knox) was that Balfour was a repeated religious and political turncoat; and he had some involvement in the deaths of many of the public figures of his time -- particularly King Henry. Richard Bannatyne, John Knox's secretary, reported in 1573 that it was said of Balfour that he would 'tak the way that myght mak him advancement, howbeit that the same were to the destructione of all honest and godlie men, and of his native cuntrie also' (Bannatyne, 41). Walter Goodall, in his preface to the 1754 edition of the 'Practicks', attempted a limited rehabilitation, but subsequent historians have found no reason to question these opinions. 


@@@@@


doc= 1189


Balfour, Sir James, of Denmiln and Kinnaird, first baronet (1600-1657), antiquary and herald, was probably born at Denmiln, Fife, the son of Sir Michael Balfour of Denmiln ('c'.1580-1652), later MP for Fife and comptroller of the household to Charles I, and his wife, Jane or Joanna (died 1640), daughter of Sir James Durham of Pitkerro. His youngest brother, Andrew Balfour, later first baronet, became a noted botanist and antiquary. He was educated at home and entered St Andrews University in 1610, graduating MA in 1614. He was then sent to travel on the continent as a young man, for an unknown period of time. 
On his return some time before 1626 Balfour began to interest himself in literary pursuits. His first interest was poetry, and he translated the 'Panthea' of Johannes Leochaeus, or John Leech, into Scots verse; Leech himself praised Balfour's learning in a poem of 1626. However, the age was one in which many Scots undertook research into the national past, and Balfour soon turned to the study of Scottish history and antiquities. He was particularly interested in heraldry, and to further his knowledge of this subject he went to London in 1628. Here he attached himself to Sir William Segar, Garter king at arms, and became acquainted with antiquarians Roger Dodsworth and Sir William Dugdale, and was awarded the title of herald on 4 December 1628. He later contributed a short account of Scottish religious houses entitled 'Coenobia Scotica' to Dugdale's 'Monasticum Anglicanum'. His chief patron was George Hay, earl of Kinnoul and chancellor of Scotland, by whose influence Balfour was created Lyon king at arms by Charles I as replacement to Sir Jerome Lyndsay of Annatland; he was crowned as Lyon by Kinnoul on 15 June 1630. He also received other marks of favour from King Charles. He was knighted on 7 May 1630, and on 9 January 1631 he was granted the lands and barony of Kinnaird in Fife by royal charter. He seems, however, to have been in possession of these lands before the grant, because some Latin verses addressed to him by Leech in 1626 already refer to him as 'Kinardius'. He was created a baronet by the king on 22 December 1633, and granted 16,000 acres of land in Nova Scotia, of which, however, he appears never to have taken possession. 
Although a staunch presbyterian, Balfour was a firm supporter of King Charles, and was frequently at court while the king still held effective power. When the civil war began, he was naturally regarded with suspicion by the party hostile to the king, and to avoid being embroiled in conflict he retired to his Scottish estates, to which he had succeeded on his father's death on 14 February 1652. Here he pursued his antiquarian studies, mostly at Kinnaird. He continued to perform the duties of Lyon king at arms until he was deprived of the office by Cromwell in 1654. 
Balfour was four times married. His first wife was Anne, daughter of Sir John Ayton of Ayton, whom he married on 21 October 1630. She died on 26 August 1644. He next married Jean, daughter of Sir James Durham of Pitkerro, who died shortly after the marriage, on 19 July 1645. His third wife was Margaret, daughter of Sir James Arnot of Ferney, who died on 15 December 1653, aged only twenty-five. His fourth and last marriage was to Janet, daughter of Sir William Auchinleck of Balmano, in June 1654. She may have outlived him. By these marriages Balfour had six sons and twelve daughters, many of whom died young. 
In the pursuit of his antiquarian interests, Balfour maintained a literary correspondence with Dugdale and Dodsworth, as well as other leading figures in the field, including David Buchanan, Sir Robert Gordon of Straloch, Robert Maule, Henry Maule of Melgum, and William Drummond of Hawthornden. He produced a number of original works, only one of which, the 'Annals of the History of Scotland from Malcolm III to Charles II', has ever been published (in 1824-5, edited by James Haig). This was compiled with great care with regard to proper names, titles, and offices, taken from original manuscripts, and a painstaking consideration for the accuracy of dates. As the title implies, however, it is not a history proper, but a chronological list of historical events, with no sustained narrative, and may have been a collection of materials made for the composition of a full history of Scotland. Some of Balfour's manuscript treatises are still preserved in the Advocates' Library in the National Library of Scotland, but many others were dispersed among his friends, and some were destroyed during the English capture of Perth, where he had sent them. The subjects of his treatises were mainly heraldic, but he also wrote on Scottish officers of state, princely revenues, the archbishops of St Andrews, gemstones, the coronation of Charles I, funeral ceremonies, the genealogy of Scottish earls to 1647, and the geography of the Fife coastline. 
Balfour was also a diligent collector of manuscripts and related materials, and it is due to him that much material was preserved which might have been lost in the dispersion of Scotland's monastic libraries. These included many chronicles, registers of Scottish religious houses and bishoprics, the cartularies of Dunfermline, Dryburgh, Arbroath, and Aberdeen, and the registers of the priory of St Andrews and the monastery of Cupar. He amassed, at great expense, a large and valuable library of books dealing with Scottish history, antiquities, and heraldry. This and his manuscript collection are thought to have passed to his brother, Andrew, after Sir James's death and were sold at two auctions in 1698 and 1699, the manuscripts being acquired by the Faculty of Advocates. 
Balfour died in Fife on 14 February 1657, and was buried in Abdie church in Fife. He was succeeded in the baronetcy by Robert Balfour, his eldest surviving son and heir by his third marriage. 


@@@@@


doc= 1190


Balfour, James, of Pilrig (1705-1795), moral philosopher, was born at Pilrig, near Edinburgh, the eldest child of James Balfour (1681-1737), businessman, and his wife, Louisa, 'nee' Hamilton (1686-1750), of Airdrie. His brother John Balfour (1715-1795) became a prominent Edinburgh bookseller and papermaker. James was sent by his father to study at Leiden in 1729. Having returned later that year, he was called to the Scottish bar and was made advocate on 17 September 1730. In August 1737 he married Cecilia Elphinstone (1705-1780), and having served as treasurer to the Faculty of Advocates, he became sheriff-substitute of the county of Edinburghshire in 1748. 
In 1754, on the death of William Cleghorn, Balfour was appointed professor of moral philosophy at the University of Edinburgh, despite Cleghorn's reported recommendation that the post go to Adam Ferguson. Balfour's timely attack on David Hume in his anonymously published work 'A Delineation of the Nature and Obligation of Morality with Reflexions upon Mr. Hume's Book Entitled 'An Inquiry Concerning the Principles of Morals'' (1753) much improved his chances of election. However, Balfour proved a far from accomplished teacher, and the moral philosophy class at Edinburgh 'dwindled to nothing', prompting efforts to replace him (Sher, 'Church and University', 107). In June 1759 there was an unsuccessful proposal to give the chair to Ferguson. In 1761 Lord Provost George Lind tried again to remove Balfour, asking Lord Milton to suggest that the professor be made commissary clerk in exchange for his resignation from the university. Two years later Principal William Robertson proposed to make Balfour sheriff-depute in exchange for his vacation of the chair. Finally, in 1764 Adam Ferguson was able to take tenure as Balfour accepted transfer to the professorship of the law of nature and nations. 
Balfour was the author of three philosophical studies. In his 'Delineation of the Nature and Obligation of Morality' he sought to establish principles through which the good of individuals may be made to coincide with the 'general good'. Private happiness was posited as the chief end of each person, while it was the good of others that was supposed to constitute the greatest happiness. Moral obligation was based on the will of God. Balfour adopted Francis Hutcheson's notion of a 'moral sense' as the basis of moral judgements emphasizing the beauty of the virtuous character in a manner close to the third earl of Shaftesbury, and attempted to subvert Hume's 'anatomical' portrait of human individuals motivated by pride and self-interest. Selfish motives and pride, in particular, were judged inimical to the general good of society, with Hume's refusal to condemn such motives being seen as an abandonment of the moral philosopher's duty to cultivate selfless motives and humility in his audience. Balfour accepted that 'a general sentiment of humanity' did not naturally arise and therefore believed it imperative that the moral philosopher encourage such passions in society. His attempt to do so involved liberal citation of classical examples and the use of Christian language and argument. Hume's response, a politely engaging letter to the author via the publishers, was met with a reply from Balfour, which is printed in the family history (Balfour-Melville, 113-16). 
In 1768 Balfour's 'Philosophical Essays' (also published anonymously) presented reflections on 'academical philosophy', 'active power', and 'liberty and necessity'. His views were critical of Lord Kames as well as Hume. The 'Philosophical Dissertations' (1782) contained essays on matter and motion, liberty and necessity, the foundation of moral obligation, and evidence for the truth of revealed religion. Balfour's eldest sister, Helen, married the Edinburgh bookseller and publisher Gavin Hamilton; their eldest son, Balfour's nephew, was Robert Hamilton (1743-1829), professor of mathematics in Marischal College, Aberdeen, and author of a treatise on the national debt. The character David Balfour in 'Kidnapped' was modelled on Balfour's cousin, who was a great-great-grandfather of Robert Louis Stevenson. James Balfour died at his home, Pilrig House, near Edinburgh, on 6 March 1795. 


@@@@@


doc= 1191


Balfour, John, third Lord Balfour of Burleigh (d. 1696/7), nobleman, was the son and heir of Robert Balfour (formerly Arnot), second Lord Balfour of Burleigh (d. 1663), and Margaret Balfour, Lady Balfour (died 1639), who married in 1606. After being sent to France to complete his education and to avoid the dangers of civil war, he managed to embroil himself in a quarrel with another nobleman and subsequently fought a duel in defence of his honour, in which he was badly wounded. Whether on account of this affray, or as a response to the deteriorating political situation of the French crown, he determined to travel back home to Scotland early in 1649. His journey took him to London, where he met and hastily married his kinswoman Isabel, the daughter of Sir William Balfour of Pitcullo (d. 1660), lieutenant of the Tower of London. However, his father had not been informed of the match, and when the couple returned to his estates in March 1649 he attempted to have their union annulled, purely on the grounds that he had not given his permission for it. Greatly angered, Lord Balfour brought the case before the general assembly of the Church of Scotland, but received no answer to his petition. The matter was sidelined and quickly forgotten by the assembly, and John and his bride went on to raise a family of three sons and six daughters in quiet obscurity. John inherited the title of Lord Balfour of Burleigh from his father in August 1663, and died between 10 December 1696 and 27 February 1697. However, he gained a posthumous and entirely undeserved notoriety, as a covenanter rebel, through the confusion of his identity with that of John Balfour of Kinloch (fl. 1663-1683), who had been nicknamed 'Burley' purely on account of his appearance. 


@@@@@


doc= 1192


Balfour, John Hutton (1808-1884), botanist, was born in Edinburgh on 15 September 1808, the eldest son of Andrew Balfour, an army surgeon who later settled in that city as a printer and publisher, and Magdalene, daughter of the Revd George Goldie, an Edinburgh minister. James Hutton the geologist was a first cousin of his grandfather. Balfour was a brilliant student and was able to resist his mother's determination that he follow her father into the church. After a thorough grounding in classics at Edinburgh high school and Edinburgh University, he was initially sent at sixteen to study theology at St Andrews, but he had acquired his father's fondness for botany and both he and his teachers there saw he was better suited to a medical career. His parents reluctantly permitted him to attend Professor Robert Graham's botany class at Edinburgh, on the condition that he completed his divinity studies. In 1827 they finally gave way, and Balfour was apprenticed to the professor of military surgery, Sir George Ballingall, apparently with the aim of following his father into that branch of the subject. He graduated MD in 1832 and, after qualifying MRCS and FRCS Edinburgh, extended his surgical studies in Paris before returning to Edinburgh in 1834 to take up private practice. The next year he was elected a fellow of the Royal Society of Edinburgh, of which he was later to be an active secretary for more than ten years. 
Botany now increasingly took over. In 1836 the Botanical Society of Edinburgh, the first specialist body in that subject in Britain of national standing, had its inaugural meeting in Balfour's house, and in 1838 he was equally to the fore in the founding of the Edinburgh Botanical Club. In 1840 he began lecturing on botany in the Edinburgh Extra Academical School of Medicine, and equipped by that he successfully competed the next year for the chair at Glasgow University vacated by Sir William Hooker, which at last enabled him to give up medical practice. His Glasgow stay, however, proved brief, for in 1845, on the death of Graham, he returned to Edinburgh as professor of medicine and botany, regius keeper of the Royal Botanic Garden, and queen's botanist for Scotland. Soon after, with his future now on a settled course, he married Marion Spottiswood Bayley, the daughter of Isaac Bayley, a writer to the signet. Among their children was the botanist Sir Isaac Bayley Balfour. 
Though Balfour served the Edinburgh medical faculty as dean for nearly thirty years, he took no regular part in the clinical teaching and was otherwise free to devote all his considerable energies to botany. His induction into botany occurred before microscopical work had been largely developed, and before the advent of later concerns with plant morphology and physiology, so he was, almost of necessity, for the most part a systematist. His original work was not extensive and it was as a teacher and writer of textbooks that he was distinguished academically. His teaching was painstaking and conscientious, earnest and impressive, and characterized by a wealth of illustration and a gift for imparting his own enthusiasm. 
That enthusiasm was most of all in evidence in the lively tradition of Saturday student excursions that Balfour inherited from his predecessor. On the longer of these trips, undeterred by the frequently rough going and primitive conditions, leading botanical 'outsiders' would often join the party, augmenting with taxonomic expertise the professor's discourses on the local vegetation and geological features. No one was more tireless than the wiry Balfour, his geniality contagious, his jokes and puns keeping everyone in good spirits as they toiled up some long ascent. Not for nothing was he known to generations of students by the nickname 'Woody Fibre'. On one occasion, in the Isle of Arran, the party became lost in the hills in deep mist, and in the account subsequently published by him of that shaking experience the deeply religious strain in his character is strikingly apparent. He resembled an 'Old Testament' prophet in appearance, and his youthful immersion in theology had left its mark so that the intricacy of nature was always for him indubitable testimony to a great designing mind. Among the many books he wrote were several linking botany with religion, one of them, 'Phyto-Theology' (1851), winning a wide enough readership to achieve a third edition. 
Amid all this activity the Royal Botanic Garden was in no way neglected. Under Balfour's care and in co-operation with the successive principal gardeners, the very able McNabs, father and son, the garden was much enlarged and improved, and a fine new palm house, an arboretum, a good museum, and excellent teaching accommodation provided. Latterly as many as 354 students a year were attending Balfour's botanical lectures there. A final accomplishment was the construction and planting of the great rock-garden. 
Severe illness brought about Balfour's retirement in 1879, when each of the three universities with which he had been connected marked the occasion by conferring on him an honorary LLD. He had been elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1856, and was also a member of a wide range of other scientific bodies. He died at Inverleith House, Edinburgh, on 11 February 1884. He is commemorated in the genus 'Balfourodendron'; two British plants long bore his name as well, but 'Poa balfourii', a grass which he collected on Ben Voirlich in 1842, is now considered a mere variant of a more widespread species, and 'Rubus balfourianus', a name given in his honour by Babington to a blackberry, after a century disappeared into synonymy. 


@@@@@


doc= 1193


Balfour, Nisbet (1743-1823), army officer, was born at Dunbog, Fife, the son of Henry Balfour, laird of Dunbog, and his wife, Katherine Porterfield. He and his four brothers all entered the army, as had their father before them. The family expended much of its money on buying commissions; in February 1778 Nisbet explained that his progress in the service had caused him to go 'monstrously in debt' (Polwarth papers, Bedfordshire RO, L30/12/3). He became an ensign in the 4th or King's Own foot on 27 January 1761, and thereafter rose steadily within the regiment: when the American War of Independence began he was a captain, serving with his corps at Boston. 
Balfour was wounded at the battle of Bunker Hill (17 June 1775) but recovered to take part in the fighting around New York in the summer and autumn of 1776. At the end of that campaign, promoted major in the army, he returned home with General Howe's dispatches. In January 1777, dining at Lord Grantham's, Balfour presented a distinctly pessimistic view of the course of the war across the Atlantic (Robinson papers, Bedfordshire RO, MS L29/214). He was sent back to America with instructions from the ministry to do all he could to encourage greater activity and less conciliation by the British commanders. His advice seems to have been ignored. Even so, early in 1778, despite the loss of Burgoyne's army at Saratoga the previous October, Balfour, newly promoted lieutenant-colonel of the Royal Welch Fusiliers, was confident that only a few more reinforcements were needed to extinguish the rebellion. He returned home again at the end of that year on sick leave, and took no further part in the war until he joined General Clinton's army before Charleston, South Carolina, in March 1780. 
Balfour played a prominent role in the southern campaigns that followed. On the capture of Charleston in May, Clinton sailed back to New York and Earl Cornwallis took command of the British troops left to reclaim the rest of South Carolina. Balfour proved a loyal and conscientious subordinate to Cornwallis. He shared his chief's view that plunder had to be kept to a minimum if the local population was to be won over, and expressed sharp criticism of the ill conduct of some of the loyalists who had been armed by the British. His letters show a keen appreciation of the relationship between military operations and what he described as 'the fluctuating State of Politicks' in the southern states (Cornwallis papers, TNA: PRO, PRO 30/11/109, fol. 49). Cornwallis clearly valued this awareness of the political dimension of the struggle, telling Balfour of his 'most implicit faith in your discretion & experience' (ibid., 30/11/78, fol. 3). Given his evident sensitivity to the problems encountered by the civilian population in a bitter internecine conflict, it was somewhat ironic that Balfour earned considerable notoriety when, as commandant of Charleston, he ordered the execution of a planter, Isaac Hayne, who had broken the terms of his parole and taken up arms again against the British. 
After the war Balfour was promoted colonel and aide-de-camp to the king. In 1790, thanks to the influence of his brother-in-law, Robert Stewart of Castle Stewart in Wigtownshire, and on the interest of John Stewart, seventh earl of Galloway, Balfour became MP for Wigton Burghs, which he represented until 1796. From 1797 to 1802 he was MP for the scot and lot borough of Arundel, Sussex, after Sir George Thomas vacated the seat and offered the nomination to Pitt. He was a loyal supporter of Pitt's ministry. Meanwhile he had been promoted major-general on the outbreak of the war against revolutionary France (February 1793), and in 1794 he joined the duke of York's forces in Flanders. He never again saw active service, but became lieutenant-general in 1798 and general in 1803. He died, unmarried, at Dunbog on 10 October 1823. 


@@@@@


doc= 1194


Balfour, Robert (b. c.1555, d. in or after 1621), philosopher and classical scholar, was born at Tarrie in Forfarshire; that he matriculated at St Andrews University in 1571 suggests a date of birth about 1555. After graduating he taught at St Andrews, but subsequently travelled to France to continue his studies, as many Scots did in the sixteenth century. Having spent some time in Paris, where he may have taught as well as studied, he moved to Bordeaux, probably before 1580, to teach at that city's major educational institution, the College de Guyenne. He remained there for the rest of his life, initially holding the chair of philosophy and then one in mathematics, which had been specially endowed for him by the noted mathematician and student of hermeticism Francois Foix de la Candale. Balfour became principal of the College de Guyenne in 1602 and held this position until 1621. It is not known when he died. 
As a teacher Balfour offered courses covering most of Aristotelian philosophy, as well as more general surveys of logic, ethics, and astronomy. His published commentaries on Aristotle's 'Organon' (2 vols., 1618-20) and his edition of Cleomedes' astronomical treatise, 'De motu circulari corporum caelestium' (1605), were undoubtedly derived from his teaching. His Aristotelian commentaries are notable for the rhetorical flair of their literary style and also for their energetic defence of moral philosophy as a guide to a useful and virtuous life. His edition of Cleomedes won the approval of Isaac Casaubon and Joseph Scaliger, and was so far respected by Cleomedes' next editor in 1820 that he reproduced its commentary. The prefaces to these works reveal Balfour's wide range of contacts among contemporary scholars in southern France, especially Toulouse, and his high standing in the Bordeaux community. They show vast erudition, as well as a strong conservatism, particularly in a predictable emphasis on Copernican cosmology as merely hypothetical. His Catholicism is also reflected in his edition of works by Gelasius and Theodoret relating to the early fourth-century Council of Nicaea (1599). Balfour was a minor figure, significant primarily as a representative of the long-standing cultural affinity between Scotland and France, one which persevered in spite of the divisions created by the Reformation. Within this tradition he managed to be an effective scholar, teacher, and university administrator. 
Balfour's general course on philosophy, mathematics, and astronomy is preserved in manuscript as Bordeaux, Bibliotheque Municipale, MS 1558. There also survive letters which he wrote to Federic Morel, professor of Latin at the College Royal at Paris (Leiden, Bibliotheek der Rijksuniversiteit, MS 758 C 28). 


@@@@@


doc= 1195


Balfour, Robert, second Lord Balfour of Burleigh (d. 1663), politician, was the son of Sir Robert Arnot of Fernie (died 1606), chamberlain of Fife, and his wife, Margaret Averie. In September 1606 he married Margaret (died 1639), daughter of Michael Balfour, Lord Balfour of Burleigh, and Margaret, daughter of Lundie of Lundie. Apparently prior to the marriage he took his future father-in-law's surname and, in return for large sums paid over by the elder Robert Arnot, was made joint heir to Lord Balfour with Margaret. Balfour entered local affairs as a JP for Fife and Kinross in 1610 and on 8 July 1613 assumed his father's former position as chamberlain of Fife. He and his wife succeeded her father on 15 March 1619 and by a letter from James VI and I he became second Lord Balfour of Burleigh and as such sat in the parliaments of 1621, 1633, and 1639, and in the 1625 convention of estates. In 1627 he was appointed to the commission for surrenders and teinds, set up to implement Charles I's revocation scheme. He was also named to local government positions, to oversee the highways from Dunfermline to Falkland, and as a Fife member of commissions for warning beacons (1627) and to implement legislation against Jesuits and seminary priests (1629). 
Although Burleigh lacked the obvious presbyterian-constitutionalist background of some Fife nobles, his allegiance to those causes quickly became apparent. At the Scottish parliament on 11 June 1640, in the absence of a royal commissioner, the estates appointed the radical Burleigh their president. He sat on the committee for provisioning the army (4 June 1640) and on the committee of estates. In the autumn of 1640 he was fitting out a regiment in Fife for Alexander Leslie's army in Newcastle. He served as a commissioner in London for the treaty of peace with England (1640-41) and in 1641 again held the office of president of parliament. The Scottish parliament appointed Burleigh 'ad vitam aut culpam' to the privy council on 11 November 1641 and he was a constant member of the committee of estates from 1641 to 1647. He continued to support the covenanter military by serving on the committee for standing regiments (November 1641) and on the committees for levying and supplying the army raised for service in Ulster and for funding the army of the solemn league and covenant, raised for service in England (1643-4). On 28 February 1643 he lent $300 for provisioning the Ulster army. During the campaigns against Montrose he energetically supported the covenanter government. His military career, however, though enthusiastically embarked upon, met with signal failure. From April 1644 he was joint colonel of a regiment of Fife foot with his future son-in-law David Wemyss, Lord Elcho. The unit served in Argyll's spring campaign against the north-eastern royalists, and Burleigh took an active role in suppressing them. He served as president of the committee for the north from 16 April 1644. Following orders from the estates, he took command in Aberdeen after the covenanter defeat at Tippermuir. He addressed the inhabitants at Greyfriars Kirk on 26 August, appealing for men to defend the covenant, the Reformation, and their lives, women, children, and goods against the Irish and their highland allies. Montrose defeated him outside Aberdeen on 12 September 1644 when instead of using the burgh defences he marched his forces outside the burgh, then failed to exercise any control of his subordinates. After the battle he fled south. At Kilsyth, on 15 August 1645, he was one of the committee of estates who forced General William Baillie into a disastrous flank advance which resulted in Montrose's greatest victory. Burleigh's regiment ceased to exist some time after 30 January 1646. 
As one of ten kirk party nobles, Burleigh unsuccessfully opposed the engagement to rescue the king from the English parliamentarians in 1648 and helped lead the Fife contingent in the whiggamore raid that overthrew the engager regime in late September. In September and October 1648 he was an unofficial member of the committee of estates. In January 1649 Burleigh was one of only sixteen nobles present at parliament. The estates named him a colonel of foot for Fife, though he failed to act on the commission, and in the same year he became one of the commissioners of the treasury and exchequer. In 1650 he served as vice-president of parliament. On 28 June parliament appointed him to the committee set up to purge the army of former royalists and engagers, and on 3 July he received a commission as colonel of foot for the shires of Roxburgh, Selkirk, and Peebles. On 13 August he was one of the colonels who presented the anti-royalist West Kirk declaration to the committee of estates. Burleigh's radical sympathies led him to vote against condemning the western remonstrance (critical of Charles II and of alleged breaches of the covenants) in a meeting of the committee of estates in late November 1650. The only reference to activities of his last military command was an order of 24 December to garrison Lochleven Castle. On 31 March 1651 he began his final stint as president of parliament. He became protectorate JP for Fife in 1656. From August to December 1660 he was the only radical noble who regularly attended the committee of estates meetings, and he remained active in politics, attending the 1661-3 parliaments despite the defeat of the covenanters at the Restoration. 
Burleigh died at his home, Burleigh Castle, near Kinross, on 10 August 1663, and was buried at Orwell parish church on the 12th. His wife had died before him, at Edinburgh in June 1639, and was also buried at Orwell. They had one son, John Balfour, third Lord Balfour of Burleigh, who married Isabel, daughter of Sir William Balfour of Pitcullo, lieutenant of the Tower, in 1649 -- which marriage his father tried to annul -- and four daughters: Anna married David Wemyss, second earl of Wemyss ['see under 'Wemyss, David, fourth earl of Wemyss]; Margaret was the wife of Sir James Crawford of Kilbirnie; Isabel married Thomas Ruthven, first Lord Ruthven of Freeland; and Jean seems to have married a cousin, Arnot of Fernie. 


@@@@@


doc= 1196


Balfour, Robert, fifth Lord Balfour of Burleigh (d. 1757), murderer and Jacobite sympathizer, was the son of Robert Balfour, fourth Lord Balfour of Burleigh (died 1713), and Lady Margaret Melville, daughter of the first earl of Melville. Robert's attraction to a young woman of lesser social rank prompted his parents to send him on the grand tour in the hopes of breaking their attachment. Before leaving, however, Robert threatened the young woman that if she married in his absence, he would return and kill her husband. During his tour she married Henry Stenhouse, the schoolmaster at Inverkeithing, after acquainting him with the threat. Balfour returned in 1707, immediately enquiring after his lady-love. On 9 April 1707, at the news of her marriage, he and two attendants rode directly to the schoolhouse at Inverkeithing, where he called Stenhouse out and wounded him in the shoulder. Balfour returned quietly to the family home at Burleigh. On 21 April the schoolmaster died from his wound. Balfour was arrested, tried for murder before the high court of the judiciary in August 1709, and found guilty. Under sentence of death by beheading, Balfour escaped from prison ('the heart of Midlothian') by exchanging clothes with his sister, to whom he bore a strong resemblance. He lay low on family lands around Burleigh, perhaps hiding for a period in a large hollow ash tree associated with him in local legend. 
Balfour became the fifth Lord Balfour of Burleigh on his father's death in 1713. He resurfaced in May 1714, drinking to the health of the Pretender (James Stuart) at a meeting of Jacobites at Lochmaben, and damning all those who would not participate. For his participation in the 1715 rising, he was attainted by act of parliament and his estates forfeited to the crown. When he died, without issue, in 1757, his claims passed to his sisters, Mary and Margaret, one of whose descendants, Alexander Bruce, succeeded in reversing the act of attainder in 1868. 


@@@@@


doc= 1197


Balfour, Thomas Graham (1813-1891), physician, the son of John Balfour, a merchant of Leith, and his wife, Helen, daughter of Thomas Buchanan of Ardoch, was born in Edinburgh on 18 March 1813. He was great-grandson of James Balfour, professor of moral philosophy at Edinburgh, and of Robert Whytt, physician. He graduated MD at Edinburgh in 1834, and in 1836 entered the Army Medical Service. 
Soon after joining the service Balfour began work on the first four volumes of the 'Statistics of the British Army'. From 1840 to 1848 he served as assistant surgeon in the Grenadier Guards. In 1848 he became surgeon to the Duke of York's Asylum for Soldiers' Orphans at Chelsea. In 1856 he married Georgina, daughter of George Prentice of Armagh; they had one son, Graham Balfour (1858-1929), author and educationist. In 1857 he was appointed secretary to Sidney Herbert's committee on the sanitary state of the army, and in 1859 he became deputy inspector-general in charge of the new statistical branch of the army medical department. He was elected FRS on 3 June 1858 and in 1860 became a fellow of the Royal College of Physicians of London. Promoted to surgeon-general in 1873, he became principal medical officer at Netley and later at Gibraltar. 
In 1876 Balfour was placed on half pay as surgeon-general. He was appointed honorary physician to the queen in 1887, and in the following year he became president of the Royal Statistical Society. Balfour died at his home, Coombe Lodge, Inner Park Road, Wimbledon Park, Surrey, on 17 January 1891. 
Balfour is best-known for his reorganization of army medical statistics between 1857 and 1860 while serving in the new statistical branch of the Army Medical Service. His efforts yielded the 'Statistical Report on the Health of the Army', which he presented to parliament in 1860. A. R. Skelley considers this report to have contained such 'accurate and complete' medical statistics about the army that 'they became the most reliable of any army's in Europe' (Skelley, 44). Balfour's work in this area of military medical statistics also contributed to 'the realisation that the ill-health of the British people was mirrored in the physical condition of army recruits' (ibid.). Ultimately Skelley suggests that although Balfour is not as well known as Florence Nightingale and Sidney Herbert, he deserves consideration as an influential reformer of military medicine who showed contemporaries how this field could affect matters of public health. 


@@@@@


doc= 1198


Balfour, Sir William (d. 1660), parliamentarian army officer, was the son of Colonel Henry Balfour (died 1580), a member of the Balfour family of Pitcullo, Fife, and his wife, Christian Cant. 
William Balfour followed his father's example by serving the Dutch in the Scottish brigade. By 19 February 1594 he had risen to lieutenant, and he was then advanced to the captaincy of Colonel Bartolt Balfour's company of 150 heavy infantry. Balfour seems to have returned to Britain at some point. On 15 April 1605 James VI and I supported a petition of Balfour's to the Dutch estates for a debt due to his father, describing him as 'notre serviteur domesticque' ('our household servant'); Balfour had by that point also acquired a knighthood. From March to November 1605 he served as a captain in Scott of Buccleuch's regiment in the Netherlands. In 1608 he petitioned the estates again for money owed to his father and Captain David Cant, his uncle, but he met with no success. He served as sergeant-major of the Scots regiment on the Juliers campaign in 1610. Between 1613 and 1615, with the assistance of King James, the elector palatine, and the Dutch ambassador to Britain, Balfour managed to secure the payment of 2000 guilders in cash and 600 guilders per annum for his father's, his uncle's, and his own arrears. Balfour served as a captain of horse arquebusiers from 1615 or 1616 to 1624. In April 1621, as a cavalry captain in Nijmegen, he petitioned for eleven months' pay incurred between November 1618 and September 1619, while his petition noted that he had been absent once on business in England. In 1622 the Spanish captured him at Emmerich. 
In 1625 Charles I requested that the estates lend him Balfour to command a company of Carabiniers, but the Dutch refused. Two years later, on 18 August 1627, the king approved Balfour as the earl of Morton's choice as his lieutenant-colonel, and again wrote to the Dutch for his services. This time he was released and served on the Ile de Re expedition under the duke of Buckingham. In January 1628 he and Colonel John Dalbier received orders to raise 1000 horse from Friesland. However, the estates refused permission for levying in the United Provinces because of their own needs in the war with Spain. Balfour and Dalbier moved their efforts to Emden in north Germany. Buckingham's death in July led to the refusal of bills of exchange for the regiment; thus the English could not support the 1000-man regiment. The Dutch had no desire for the unit, but agreed to pay for its quartering before it disbanded. Meanwhile Balfour had resigned his commission with his long-time employers, who reluctantly released him with a gold chain worth 1000 guilders and the promise to keep him in mind for future services. 
Balfour's first wife, Helen, daughter of Sir Archibald Napier of Merchiston, died in December 1629, and at some later point he married a woman named Isabella (died 1661). Balfour's concentration on serving Charles I in England during the personal rule proved to his advantage. The king appointed him a gentleman of the privy chamber, and he succeeded Sir Allen Apsley as lieutenant of the Tower of London on 18 October 1630 following the latter's death. In July 1631 the crown paid him for his recruiting efforts of three years earlier. From 24 September to 9 November Balfour went on a secret mission for the king observing French activities near Dunkirk. Balfour continued as a dedicated servant of the crown for some years. In 1633 with Sir William Parkhurst and Andrew Palmer he received a grant to make gold and silver money in the Tower for eleven years. That December the privy council named him one of the commissioners to investigate the complaints of the opponents of the soap monopoly. In January 1635 he was named to the commission examining the conduct of the keeper of the Fleet prison. In the following year he assisted with plague control in London and as a surveyor of the armoury's swords (which dragged on until 1641). His role as a royal gaoler involved him in the seizure of the papers of William Prynne and with conducting Bishop John Williams of Lincoln to Lambeth in 1637. His support for the crown continued with appointments to the council of war in June 1638 and to boards investigating illegal duties charged in Bristol and the fortification of the Isles of Scilly. In May 1640 he mobilized the London militia and reinforced the Tower garrison with some of them. 
The king's defeat in the second bishops' war seems to have wrought a change in Balfour's attitude. The arch-Scotophobe Clarendon later wrote, 'from the beginning of [the Long] Parliament (according to the natural custom of his country), [he] forgot all his obligations to the King, and made himself very gracious to those people whose glory it was to be thought enemies to the Court. (Clarendon, 'Hist. rebellion', 1.477)' Religious motivation, his presbyterianism, and anti-Catholicism probably played the largest part in his volte-face (in 1638 he struck a priest 'two or three sound Blows with his Battoon' who was trying to convert his wife; Radcliffe, 2.166). But latent Scottish nationalism may also have had something to do with his change. Balfour served as the earl of Strafford's gaoler and sat beside him daily during his trial in the spring of 1641. He refused entry to Captain Billingsley's band of would-be rescuers of the condemned earl on 2 May and a few days later he spurned Strafford's offer of $20,000 and a good match for his son for allowing him to escape. It was reported that Balfour voluntarily resigned the lieutenancy of the Tower on 22 December 1641 but it is likelier, given the king's confrontational attitude in the winter of 1641-2, that his parting was forced; his departure from a post so vital to the security of the capital alarmed both the House of Commons and inhabitants of London. 
Balfour's departure from a position of public trust proved only temporary. In the spring of 1642 he was given command of a horse regiment destined for service in Ulster, a command which would have combined religious commitment and self-interest (one newsbook indeed suggested that he had resigned the lieutenancy so that he could go to protect his estates there against the Catholic rebels). However, the war in England intervened and the parliament rapidly secured the sexagenarian Balfour's services. On 7 August 1642 he was appointed lieutenant-general of horse under the command of the earl of Bedford. In September he won a skirmish on the Severn. At Edgehill he commanded the reserve and performed a brilliant role in preventing a parliamentarian collapse. At the head of his and Stapleton's horse regiments he charged and broke Sir Nicholas Byron's foot brigade. Turning on Colonel Richard Fielding's foot brigade Balfour's command routed it. The cavalrymen then charged the royalist artillery, driving the gunners away and capturing some guns. However, Balfour lacked the equipment to spike the guns, so he had his men merely cut the guns' ropes. Before withdrawing Balfour attacked the guard protecting princes Charles and James. 
In 1643 he missed the first battle of Newbury, having gone abroad to take the waters. In March 1644 Essex detached him to Sir William Waller's army with four regiments of horse and a regiment of dragoons (1500-2000 men). At the battle of Cheriton on 29 March Balfour assisted Waller in defeating Sir Ralph Hopton's royalist army. In the pursuit on 30 March he captured Elizabeth, Lady Hopton, and 200 royalists. Afterwards he rejoined Essex and marched with him into Cornwall, having taken Weymouth and Taunton in June 1644. When Essex's army was surrounded Balfour managed to break out with the cavalry. He linked up with Lieutenant-General John Middleton, commander of Waller's horse. At the second battle of Newbury he commanded the right wing of the parliamentarian horse. On 28 October Sir Archibald Johnston and John Crew MP reported that 'Sir W. Balfour used great diligence' in the battle ('CSP dom.', '1644-5', 76). 
Essex reported Balfour ill on 7 November and requested a replacement. On 21 January 1645 the House of Commons ordered that Balfour receive 'fit recompense and acknowledgement of the faithful services done by him to the public' as he left the army owing to the self-denying ordinance (which forced foreigners to resign) ('JHC', 4.26). Six days later the earl of Leven received orders to give Balfour's ten troops of horse who were serving in Ulster to the command of Lieutenant-Colonel George Munro. In mid-February Balfour undertook his last public service for parliament when he subdued a mutiny of three cavalry regiments (including his own) at Beaconsfield, Buckinghamshire. Suspicions about Balfour's loyalty to the English parliament arising from intercepted correspondence delayed the settlement of his arrears: the $1677 awarded him in November 1646 went unpaid until late 1655. On 3 July 1650, as Cromwell's invasion of Scotland loomed, the Scottish parliament put Balfour in command of 'strangers or native volunteiris' ('APS', 6, part 2.600). Although he does not seem to have acted on the commission his allegiance was with the Scots. In April 1651 his wife was given four weeks to leave England. Balfour lived in obscurity in Westminster in the 1650s, and died there, having made his will on 16 July 1660; he was buried twelve days later in St Margaret's, Westminster. 
Two of Balfour's sons had, like their father and grandfather, served in the Dutch army; both had been killed in the civil wars, one in Somerset and one in Ireland, so that only one son, Charles, outlived Balfour. Charles was eventually succeeded by his son, Charles William (died 1739). Sir William had four daughters. Isabel (or Isabella) married John Balfour, master of Burleigh (later third Lord Balfour of Burleigh), in London in 1649, a marriage which the young man's father tried to get annulled. Emilia (died 1683) married Alexander Stewart, fifth earl of Moray, in or before 1658. Susanna (or Susan) married Hugh Hamilton of Ballygally, co. Tyrone, Baron de Deserf in the nobility of Sweden and first Lord Hamilton of Glenawly in the peerage of Ireland; after his death she married Henry Mervyn of Trillick, co. Tyrone. Balfour's fourth daughter, Lucy, married Blayney Townley, another Irish settler. Their son Harry became the heir of Charles William Balfour and founded the family of Balfour of Townley Hall, co. Louth. 


@@@@@


doc= 1199


Balfour, William (1784-1838), army officer, was born at Edinburgh on 16 July 1784. He was appointed ensign in the Hon. George Hanger's recruiting corps on 31 August 1798, and joined the 40th regiment on 25 July 1799, being promoted lieutenant on 8 August 1799. He served at The Helder, where he was commended by Sir John Moore. He served on the staff of Major-General Sir Brent Spencer in the Mediterranean, and was promoted captain on 22 September 1802. He was present at the capture of Copenhagen, where a horse was shot under him, and became a regimental major on 4 February 1808. He received a brevet lieutenant-colonelcy for service in the field with the 40th in the Peninsula and the south of France in 1813-14, having been present at the battles of Nivelle, Nive, Orthez, and Toulouse. He received the gold medal in command of his regiment at Nivelle. In 1810, at Dublin, he had married Charlotte Stanley Clarke, who died on 22 August 1825 at Launceston, Van Diemen's Land; they had five sons and three daughters. 
After a few years on half pay Balfour became lieutenant-colonel of his former regiment, commanding it for several years in New South Wales, and he was afterwards in command of the 82nd foot in Mauritius. He retired from the army in 1832, having 'suffered much from bad health, the effect of a residence in a tropical climate' ('GM', 661), and died in London on 10 February 1838. 


@@@@@


doc= 1200


Balguy, Charles (1708-1767), physician, son of Henry Balguy of Newbold, Derbyshire, was born at Derwent Hall, Derbyshire, and was educated at Chesterfield grammar school and St John's College, Cambridge. He took the degree of MB in 1731 and MD in 1750. He practised in Peterborough, and was secretary of the literary club there. He contributed to the 'Philosophical Transactions', and in 1741 he published, anonymously, a translation of Boccaccio's 'Decameron'. This was reprinted several times. He wrote some medical essays and particularly a treatise on the 'sweating sickness', entitled 'De morbo miliari' (1758). He died at Peterborough on 28 February 1767 and was buried in the chancel of St John's Church, where there is a marble monument to his memory bearing the inscription 'a man of various and great learning'. 


@@@@@


doc= 1201


Balguy, John (1686-1748), Church of England clergyman and moral philosopher, was born on 12 August 1686 at Sheffield, son of Thomas Balguy ('c'.1643-1696), master of the Sheffield Free School for over 30 years, and his wife, Sara Hathornwhite, whom he had married on 8 June 1682. He studied under his father, his father's successor (Charles Daubuz), and Mr Drake (probably a relation), and on 3 February 1702 he was admitted as sizar to St John's College, Cambridge, his father's old college, where his tutors were William Edmondson and Robert Lambert, who later became the master. Balguy confessed to wasting two years at Cambridge reading romances, but after encountering Livy he turned to more serious work. He graduated BA in 1706 and proceeded MA in 1726. After leaving Cambridge he taught for a while at his old school, and then in 1708 became private tutor to Joseph Banks, son of Mr Banks of Scofton, Nottinghamshire, and grandfather of Sir Joseph Banks the naturalist. In 1710 he was ordained deacon and in 1711 priest by John Sharp, archbishop of York; he then entered the family of Sir Henry Liddel, of Ravensworth Castle, co. Durham, who presented him to the livings of Lamesley and Tanfield. He married Sarah Broomhead ('bap'. 1686), daughter of Christopher and Sarah Broomhead of Sheffield, on 6 June 1715, and left Sir Henry's house for one nearby called Cox Close, Lamesley. They had one son, Thomas Balguy (1716-1795), whose contribution to the 'Biographia Britannica' provides the principal source of detailed information about his father's life. 
For the first four years of his clerical career Balguy wrote a new sermon every week; he destroyed most of them (on one occasion burning 250) in order to encourage his son to follow his industrious example. His first publications were contributions to the Bangorian controversy: under the name of Sylvius he published three defences of Hoadly against Stebbing and Sherlock (1718-20). Sherlock, despite being severely treated by Balguy on this occasion, recommended him to Queen Caroline for promotion and was a great admirer of his later work. Hoadly persuaded Balguy to suppress another reply to Stebbing on the grounds that the booksellers and the public were losing interest in the controversy. He also persuaded him not to print a letter to Samuel Clarke, whom Balguy greatly admired: Hoadly and Clarke were both afraid of anything being published that would prejudice Clarke's interest, though the subject of the letter was not the Trinity but purely philosophical matters. 
Balguy's most important publications in the fields of theology and moral philosophy were contributions to the deist controversy and the debate about the foundation of morals. He attacked Shaftesbury's 'Inquiry Concerning Virtue', despite his considerable admiration for the work, because of its dismissal of future rewards and punishments: 'to prescribe and preach up Virtue without a Future State, appears to me no otherwise than as a Sort of Religious Knight-Errantry' (J. Balguy, 'A Letter to a Deist, Concerning the Beauty and Excellency of Moral Virtue', 1726, 15). He was always a strong supporter of Clarke, and in 'A Second Letter to a Deist, concerning a Late Book Entitled, 'Christianity as Old as the Creation'' (1731) he took exception to what he saw as Tindal's gross misunderstanding of Clarke's supposed inconsistencies. In two important analyses of Hutcheson's moral sense theory, 'The Foundation of Moral Goodness' (1728) and 'The Second Part of the Foundation of Moral Goodness' (1729), the latter in the form of answers to a friend (Lord Darcy) who had defended Hutcheson, Balguy explored very effectively the problems of founding morality on instinct instead of reason: 'In short, acting according to 'Instinct', may be looked upon as the Infant State of 'Virtue'; but acting according to 'Reason', its Maturity and Perfection' (p. 82). Balguy was described by Thomas Rutherforth, who disagreed with him, as 'the most candid, the clearest, and most judicious writer, that ever undertook the defence of this scheme of morality' (T. Rutherforth, 'An Essay on the Nature and Obligations of Virtue', 1744, 130), and he was cited approvingly by Richard Price, who used many of the same arguments in 'A Review of the Principal Questions in Morals'. 
Balguy's theological writings included 'Divine Rectitude' (1730), in which he argued that the Deity's first spring of action was rectitude (his respondents, Bayes and Grove, thought it benevolence and wisdom respectively), and its sequel, 'An Essay on Redemption' (1741), in which he explained the doctrine of the atonement in a manner similar to that later employed by John Taylor of Norwich. He published his chief works as 'A Collection of Tracts Moral and Theological' (1734), with a long dedication to his patron, Hoadly; in addition there were three collections of sermons, two of them posthumous, the fullest being that published in two volumes by his son in 1790. 
On 25 January 1728 Balguy was collated by Hoadly to a prebend in Salisbury, and through the friendship of Bishop Talbot obtained from the chapter of Durham (12 August 1729) the vicarage of Northallerton in Yorkshire, worth $270 per annum. He probably got to know Talbot through Rundle (later bishop of Derry), and he was acquainted with the future bishops Benson, Secker, and Butler. He had many friends among Presbyterians and Quakers, especially Lord Barrington and Philip Glover, and maintained a philosophical correspondence with the latter. He remained vicar of Northallerton until his death. His son writes that his remaining in this position was his own fault for neglecting ways of recommending himself to his superiors, adding that he declined many invitations from Blackburne (archbishop of York) and Chandler (bishop of Durham). He became an invalid and withdrew from company except at Harrogate, which he frequented every season, and where he died on 21 September 1748. 


@@@@@


doc= 1202


Balguy, Thomas (1716-1795), Church of England clergyman, was born on 27 September 1716 at Cox Close, Lamesley, co. Durham, the only child of John Balguy (1686-1748), Church of England clergyman and moral philosopher, and his wife, Sarah Broomhead ('bap'. 1686). He was educated at the free school, Ripon, Yorkshire, under Mr Stephens, and on 28 May 1734 was admitted as pensioner to St John's College, Cambridge. He graduated BA in 1738, proceeded MA in 1741, and on 17 March 1741 was elected to a Platt Fellowship, which he held until 1748. He was ordained deacon (21 September 1740) and priest (21 December) by the bishop of Lincoln, and on 9 April 1741 he was collated rector of North Stoke, Lincolnshire, by Potter, archbishop of Canterbury, his father's right of presentation having lapsed. He was instituted rector of Hagworthingham, Lincolnshire, on 26 July 1746, having resigned North Stoke; he petitioned the archbishop of Canterbury and received dispensation on 21 November 1746 to hold the two livings together (worth respectively $95 and $55), and was reinstituted to North Stoke (once more in the gift of his father) on 16 December 1746. 
From the early 1740s to 1760 Balguy was active in Cambridge. In 1744 he became assistant tutor to his friend William Samuel Powell (afterwards master of St John's), who had just been promoted principal tutor, and for 16 years he read lectures in moral philosophy and the evidences of natural and revealed religion in St John's. In 1743 he was deputy public orator under James Tunstall, who was acting as chaplain to Potter at Lambeth. In 1758 he took the degree of BD. His closest friends in Cambridge were Powell and Richard Hurd. When Powell died in 1775 Balguy edited his 'Discourses on Various Subjects' (1776), with a brief life of Powell, and it was thought that he had a chance of succeeding him as master. His friendship with Hurd can be traced through Hurd's letters to him over a period of almost 50 years. Other members of his Cambridge circle were Thomas Gray and William Mason; Gray refers affectionately to Mason's former tutor as 'your Uncle Balguy' ('Works', 2.574). Hurd introduced Balguy to Warburton, who valued his friendship and welcomed his criticisms: the long appendix added to volume 2 of the 'Divine Legation' is indebted to some of Balguy's remarks. Samuel Parr regretted that Balguy did not write Warburton's biography. 
Balguy said he owed all his clerical preferments to the favour and friendship of Bishop Hoadly, also his father's patron. He was for a time Hoadly's chaplain. In 1748 he was collated (31 May) and installed (16 July) to a prebend in Lincoln Cathedral; on 1 November 1757 he was collated to a prebend in Winchester Cathedral; and on 23 July 1759 Hoadly appointed him archdeacon of Winchester. In 1760 he gave up his connection with St John's and moved to Winchester, his cousin Sarah Drake joining him to keep house. On 19 September 1771 he was instituted vicar of Alton, Hampshire, on the presentation of the dean and chapter of Winchester, whereupon he ceded his two benefices in Lincolnshire; he held the vicarage of Alton, the archdeaconry of Winchester, and the two prebends until his death. 
Balguy was greatly esteemed by churchmen like Warburton and Hurd, who were anxious to defend the established church from the attacks of dissenters, modernizers, and sceptics. He published little, but he kept these enemies firmly in view. He took a very conservative view of the need for subscription to the 'Thirty-Nine Articles', claiming in a sermon 'On church authority', preached at the consecration of Bishop Shipley of Llandaff and published by order of the archbishop of Canterbury (1769), that 'A religion founded on Reason willingly submits to human authority in all points not essential to the cause of Piety and Virtue' (T. Balguy, 'Discourses', 1.94). This was answered by Priestley in 'Considerations on Church-Authority' (1769). Another sermon on the same subject, preached at the consecration of bishops Hurd of Lichfield and John Moore of Bangor and similarly published by order, was answered by John Disney in 'Remarks on Dr Balguy's Sermon' (1775); Disney took particular exception to Balguy's argument that subjection to authority is the invariable duty of a Christian. On the publication of Hume's 'Dialogues Concerning Natural Religion' (1779) Hurd set about persuading Balguy to 'obviate' Hume's 'destructive impiety' (Kilvert, 135-7). Balguy had long been interested in the subject of Hume's attack; as an undergraduate he published a Latin poem entitled 'Divina bonitas demonstrari potest a posteriori' ('The divine goodness is capable of proof from its effects'; see 'GM', 94/2, 1824, 596-8). In response to Hurd's urging he published 'Divine Benevolence Asserted; and Vindicated from the Objections of Ancient and Modern Sceptics' (1781). Hume's name is not mentioned, but the context can readily be inferred: in the preface Balguy describes it as a specimen of a larger work on natural religion, 'why published at this time, will be too easily conjectured' (Balguy, 'Divine Benevolence Asserted', iii). It is interesting as an illustration of what he was lecturing on at St John's in the 1740s and 1750s (his arguments are mainly drawn from Cicero and Butler), but disappointing as an answer to Hume. An oddity of the work is his enthusiasm for Hutcheson, his father's 'bete noire'. He never completed it. 
At one stage Balguy must have been ambitious for high office: Gray refers to him in a doggerel poem to Mason as ''Balguy' with a Bishop in his belly!' ('Works', 3.993). In 1781 George III, who thought him 'the first Man in point of reputation in the Republic of Letters of either University' ('Letters', ed. Hurd, xxiii), offered him the see of Gloucester, but he refused on the grounds of ill health. In 1785 he published his 'Discourses on Various Subjects' with a dedication to the king; they were reissued in 1822 with a second volume of unpublished manuscripts by his relation James Drake. Balguy died on 19 January 1795 at Winchester, and on 26 January was buried in the cathedral, where a tablet commemorates him as 'a strenuous and able defender of the Christian Religion and of the Church of England'. 


@@@@@


doc= 1203


Balliol, Alexander de (d. 1310?), nobleman and administrator, was the second son of Henry de Balliol (d. 1246), chamberlain of Scotland, and his wife, Lora de Valognes (died in or before 1272). Alexander, who was lord of Cavers in Roxburghshire, is clearly distinguishable from his namesake and contemporary, Alexander de Balliol, lord of Barnard Castle from 1271 to 1278 and third son of John de Balliol (died 1268), who was cousin german to the subject of this memoir. Alexander de Balliol of Cavers was heir to his elder brother, Guy, who was killed while serving as standard-bearer for Simon de Montfort at the battle of Evesham on 4 August 1265. Since Alexander himself was also a baronial rebel, he was not allowed to succeed to his English estates until he returned to the king's peace, which he did in late 1266. He married, shortly after 7 November 1270, Isabel, heir to the barony of Chilham in Kent, which Alexander continued to hold 'by courtesy of England' after her death in 1292. His tenure of this barony, together with his mother's Valognes inheritance, which was particularly extensive in Hertfordshire and Essex, made Alexander a landowner of some consequence in south-eastern England. 
Already holder of extensive estates in southern Scotland, Alexander de Balliol's Scottish interests were also enlarged by marriage. His wife was the widow of David of Strathbogie, earl of Atholl from 1264 until his death in 1270, when Alexander's stepson, John Strathbogie, was probably still a minor. After a long period of difficulties, Alexander and Isabel eventually secured John's succession -- he was first styled earl of Atholl early in 1284. Whatever the source and nature of the difficulties, Alexander's involvement in Scottish affairs increased noticeably following the accidental death of Alexander III, king of Scots, in 1286. 
By early December 1287 Balliol was serving the guardians of the realm of Scotland as chamberlain, a post held by his father, his maternal grandfather, and great-grandfather before him. He continued in this office during the remaining period of the guardianship and for much of the reign of his second cousin, King John, at least until early December 1295. Throughout his period of office, the fortunate chance survival of a series of letters of protection and attorney, together with numerous official writs and receipts, even the transcript of an exchequer account, not only testify to much intense activity on his part in Scotland, but also clearly demonstrate how this important and demanding office worked. His brother, William, a clerk and probably the rector of Kirkpatrick Durham (Kirkcudbrightshire), acted as his deputy or agent in 1288 and again in 1291-2. Clearly, Alexander was regarded as a key figure in Scottish government circles, being one of the twelve guardians elected at the Stirling parliament of July 1295 to take the direction of government out of King John's hands. 
Enough is known of Balliol's later career to suggest that, although he was frequently employed in the service of the king of England, Edward I never regarded him as being above suspicion. His English and Scottish estates were temporarily forfeited in 1296-7 but were restored after Alexander's performance of military service in Flanders in 1297. He served with Edward on military campaign in Scotland, evidently being present on the English side at the battle of Falkirk (1298) and the siege of Caerlaverock (1300). His role as one of Edward's agents in southern Scotland was enhanced upon his appointment in 1302 as keeper of the forest of Selkirk and warden of the important garrison of the peel of Selkirk. However, in 1301 his eldest son, another Alexander, had been taken into English royal custody, probably as surety for his father's conduct, and in early February 1303 Balliol himself was arrested for alleged trespass. About six weeks later, upon delivery as hostage of another son, Thomas, he was released and had his lands restored; in the meantime, the peel of Selkirk had fallen to Edward's enemies. 
After February 1304, when the submission of most Scots seemed to assure permanent success for Edward I, Alexander de Balliol began to petition him vigorously for the restitution of those Scottish lands and rights which had been confiscated (for instance his lands between the Mounth and the Forth), or for the granting of those which had been promised (such as Kirkpatrick Durham in Kirkcudbrightshire) or had come into the English king's gift (notably the lands of Richard Fraser and Alexander Menzies). The greater emphasis that Alexander placed latterly on his Scottish estates is also indicated indirectly by the fact that in November 1303 he sold the manor of Benington, the centre of his Hertfordshire estates, and other lands and rights elsewhere in Hertfordshire and Essex, the purchaser being John de Benstede (or Binsted), controller of the wardrobe under Edward I. The balance was tilted even further towards Scotland as a result of one of Alexander's last recorded acts, in March 1310, by which he resigned his curtesy tenure of the barony of Chilham. There is little doubt that the events in Scotland in 1306 threw Balliol firmly onto the English side, and there is record of his military involvement against Robert I between 1307 and 1309. 
The final recorded reference to Alexander de Balliol occurs in April 1310, and he probably died in that year. His second son, Thomas, appeared in possession of the lordship of Cavers later in 1310, and was married in early 1313. His eldest son, Alexander, was evidently released by Edward II from almost nine years' imprisonment in March 1310, following his father's resignation of Chilham. His stepson, John Strathbogie, earl of Atholl, followed an entirely divergent political course, marrying into the Mar family and becoming a firm and militant adherent of the Brus family as early as 1290. The extent of Alexander de Balliol's progeny is otherwise uncertain, but may have included a third son, William, and a daughter, Margaret. There is no evidence to support the suggestion that he may have married more than once. 


@@@@@


doc= 1204


Balliol, Bernard de (d. 1154x62), baron, was the leading member of the second generation of his family in England, having succeeded to the estates of his uncle Guy by 1130-33. He is referred to as 'senior' in the Durham 'Liber vitae'. Guy de Balliol had been established in England in the 1090s by William II on lands partly carved out of the forfeited earldom of Northumbria and almost certainly in return for support rendered in William's campaigns on the eastern frontier of Normandy in 1091 and 1094. Of the several families of the Balliol name (or its derivative forms) in medieval Britain and France, Guy and his successors originated from Bailleul-en-Vimeu near Abbeville in the county of Ponthieu, outside the boundary of the duchy of Normandy, in an area which later became part of the 'departement' of the Somme. Their Picard associations remained strong throughout the eight generations of the family's history down to the death of Edward Balliol in 1364. 
A somewhat less shadowy figure than his uncle, Bernard de Balliol was one of the two barons -- the other was Robert (I) de Brus -- sent from the English royal camp to negotiate with David I, king of Scots, before the battle of the Standard in 1138. Having failed to dissuade David from crossing the River Tees into Yorkshire, Balliol publicly renounced the personal oath of fealty he had sworn to David on an earlier occasion, possibly in 1135, while Brus retracted the homage he owed the king for lands held of him in Scotland. Unlike the Brus family the Balliols did not at that date have any possessions in the northern kingdom. As a continuing supporter of King Stephen, Bernard de Balliol shared in his defeat at Lincoln in 1141, and suffered depredations at the hands of William Cumin, the pretender and usurper of the see of Durham, from 1141 to 1144. 
Four of Bernard de Balliol's charters provide the earliest evidence of the family's Picard origins. His name is commemorated in the castle and 'new town' of Barnard Castle ('Castrum Bernardi'), co. Durham, although a ringwork fortification probably already existed there before 1130 and the actual date of his eponymous foundation of the borough is not known. The eldest of at least four other brothers -- Ralph, Ingram, Hugh, and Joscelin -- Balliol himself had four sons and a daughter with his wife, Maud: Ingram, Guy, Eustace, Bernard, and Hawise. But the third generation of the family came to be represented in the male line in Britain by Bernard de Balliol 'junior' (d. c.1190) alone. Ingram predeceased his father, who was succeeded, probably fairly briefly, for a period between 1152-3 and 1161 by his second son, Guy. 


@@@@@


doc= 1205


Balliol, Bernard de (d. c.1190), baron, referred to as 'junior' in the Durham 'Liber vitae', was probably the fourth son of Bernard de Balliol 'senior', and succeeded his elder brother, Guy, in the early 1160s, certainly by 1167. He is best known for his part in the events surrounding the capture of William the Lion, king of Scots, at Alnwick in 1174, an action for which he was singled out for praise by some chroniclers. He was 'vir nobilis atque magnanimus' ('an honorable and magnanimous man') according to William of Newburgh, and a 'seur chevalier' ('trustworthy knight') to Jordan Fantosme, conventional terms of praise perhaps but sufficient to delineate a strength of character in this, one of the few ascertainable details of his public life. 
Balliol's wife was Agnes de Picquigny, who was probably of the family of the 'vidames' of that name, French royal officials and territorial lords of Picquigny, which was no great distance from Bailleul-en-Vimeu. There is, however, no evidence to connect her and her family with the Pinkenys, 'Domesday' tenants on the honour of Huntingdon who also originated from Picquigny. Despite unfounded statements to the contrary, Bernard de Balliol had no children, certainly none that survived long enough to find their way into written record. His last datable act was a final concord with the bishop of Durham in the court of Richard I at Dover in early December 1189, and he was succeeded during 1190 by his cousin, Eustace de Helicourt, who assumed the Balliol patronymic and remarried in that year. His sons, also listed in the 'Liber vitae', were Hugh, Ingram (or Ingelram), Bernard, and Henry: Ingram and Henry de Balliol established cadet branches in Scotland at Inverkeilor and Cavers respectively; Hugh, who had probably succeeded his father about 1209, and Bernard were conspicuous members of the group of northern English barons who were staunch supporters of King John. Hugh's own son, John de Balliol, possibly even named after the king, acquired Scottish interests through marriage to Dervorguilla de Balliol, and his grandson, John (c.1248x50-1314), became king of Scots (1292-6). 


@@@@@


doc= 1206


Balliol, Edward (b. in or after 1281, d. 1364), claimant to the Scottish throne, was the eldest son of John (John Balliol), king of Scots (c.1248x50-1314), and Isabel, daughter of John de Warenne, sixth earl of Surrey (died 1304). He was probably born soon after their marriage, which took place before February 1281. He had a younger brother, Henry, who died in 1332. 
Little is known of Edward Balliol's early life. When in 1296 his father was forced to resign the throne of Scotland and was taken to England, Edward was taken with him; he was lodged at times in the household of the future Edward II and at times in the Tower. When, however, John was transferred in 1299 to papal custody in France, Edward was retained in England, though now in the care of his cousin John de Warenne, seventh earl of Surrey (died 1347). He was still being held honourably in custody in 1310, when he was removed from his cousin's household to that of Thomas and Edmund, the brothers of Edward II. After his father's death he was allowed to take possession of the Balliol estates in France, and he appears to have stayed there, except for occasional visits to England. Although according to the Franco-Scottish treaty of 1295 he was to have married a niece of Philippe IV of France, nothing had come of this; nor was he ever to marry, probably because he never again enjoyed the secure status which alone could have commanded a bride of the rank to which he aspired. 
It is possible that the obscure Soulis conspiracy against Robert I which was uncovered in 1320 was made on Balliol's behalf. Be that as it may, it is certain that in the late 1320s there were signs of interest being taken in England of the exile. 
In 1325 Edward II's alienated queen, Isabella, and their son the future Edward III came to France, allegedly on diplomatic business. Already there were some nobles, notably Sir Henry de Beaumont, who had been 'disinherited' by the Scots for their failure to follow Robert I and who were anxious to recover the Scottish lands to which they had a claim. They joined in Isabella's and Mortimer's successful invasion of England in 1326, and supported the campaign made in response to the Scottish invasion of the north of England in July and August of 1327. Balliol may have been there: he was expected in England in the middle of July, when a safe conduct was issued for him. But after the Scots escaped from the English attempt to entrap them it became clear that Isabella and Mortimer were contemplating a final peace, which became a reality in 1328. 
This suited neither Balliol nor the 'disinherited', and some of the latter, now back in France, became involved in the resistance to the queen and her lover. When the rule of Isabella and Mortimer was ended by the coup of 1330 and power was taken by the young Edward III, Balliol's prospects rose. Robert I had died in 1329, and Scotland was now governed by Thomas Randolph, earl of Moray, as regent for the infant David II. Several visits to England are recorded at this period; ultimately, though Edward III was not prepared to intervene directly, he was prepared to tolerate an invasion of Scotland by Balliol and the 'disinherited', who were now committed to an attempt to establish Balliol as king of Scots. This was launched just after the death of the Scottish regent on 20 July 1332. The invasion found the Scots in some disarray and resulted in a remarkable and decisive victory at the battle of Dupplin Moor on 11 August. Balliol was crowned at Perth on 24 September; styling himself king of Scots, he proceeded to try to establish his authority. 
At this stage Edward III had not finally decided upon his attitude towards the new king. If Balliol were king of Scots, Edward clearly assumed that he would hold Scotland as an English fief, and Balliol himself made proposals in November 1332 under which he was to do homage for Scotland and convey a large portion of the southern part of the country to direct English rule. He even suggested that he might marry Edward's sister Joan, who was still of an age to repudiate her marriage to David II. But Edward III also had in mind the possibility of taking direct control of Scotland himself, to which he believed he might be entitled, and this idea was put to a parliament at York, where it was coolly received. Events for the moment overtook any such schemes. After a successful skirmish at Roxburgh, in which the newly appointed guardian of Scotland, Sir Andrew Murray, was captured, Balliol retired to spend Christmas in what he thought of as security at Annan, near the ancestral Balliol lands in Galloway. Here he was surprised by a party headed by Sir Archibald Douglas and John Randolph, earl of Moray, and forced ignominiously to flee to England in total disarray. His brother Henry was killed in the fray. 
Edward III was left with the choice of supporting the campaign in Scotland openly or of giving up any hopes he had of asserting his overlordship. Given his desire to make his own reputation after the failures of his father, there was no doubt which he would choose. His response was a full-scale invasion and siege of Berwick, originally taken by Edward I, but recovered by Robert I in 1318. This resulted in the crushing Scottish defeat at Halidon Hill on 19 July 1333 and the re-establishment of Balliol as king of Scots. He rapidly set about rewarding his supporters, who included some English nobles to whom he gave estates in Scotland. He also began to put together an administration, appointing William Bullock chamberlain and custodian of the castle of Cupar in Fife and at least one sheriff, Alan Lisle, who held office in Bute and Cowal. In the absence of records of its operations we have only scattered references to Balliol's officials, but it is clear that his government had great difficulty in functioning. He was able to hold a parliament at Holyrood in February 1334, in which he obtained confirmation of his arrangements with Edward III. This was followed by his formal performance of homage to the English king at Newcastle on 19 June; a week earlier he had ceded the sheriffdoms of Berwick, Roxburgh, Selkirk, Peebles, Dumfries, and the three parts of Lothian to Edward III. In the mean time the young David II and his queen had taken sanctuary in France, and they spent the next seven years at Chateau Gaillard in Normandy. 
Despite Balliol's apparent success, his position remained uncertain. There were quarrels among the 'disinherited', whom he had restored to the estates they claimed in Scotland; and supporters of David II, particularly Robert the Steward in Ayrshire and Sir William Douglas in the south-west, were already mounting resistance. In August 1334 Balliol had to flee to Berwick, whence he sought further support from Edward III. It rapidly became clear that his regime could survive only with substantial English support, which for a time was forthcoming. Over Christmas 1334-5 Edward III joined Balliol in a campaign to recover control of Roxburgh. For the moment it achieved little else, but plans were in hand for a larger effort the next summer, including, at Balliol's suggestion, an attack on the western seaboard from Ireland. 
This followed in June 1335. Balliol, now at Newcastle, advanced without opposition up the east coast while Edward III, starting from Carlisle, marched through Nithsdale. The pincer movement was planned to close at Glasgow, which it did at the end of July. From there the two Edwards marched to Perth. In addition to Roxburgh and Lochmaben, garrisons were established at Stirling and Perth. The areas ceded in southern Scotland by the agreement of 1334 were taken into English control, and sheriffs established at Berwick, Edinburgh, and Dumfries. Many of those who had deserted Balliol the previous year returned to his allegiance, and even Robert the Steward is reported to have made his peace. The autumn of 1335 was the high water mark of Balliol's fortunes. Even so, he did not remain in Scotland. Instead he appointed one of the 'disinherited', David Strathbogie, titular earl of Atholl, as guardian on his behalf and, rather surprisingly in the circumstances, retired to spend the winter at Holy Island in Northumberland. Perhaps age was already taking its toll. 
Resistance to Balliol continued, led chiefly by Sir Andrew Murray and Sir William Douglas, and on 30 November 1335 Murray defeated and killed Strathbogie at the battle of Culblean in south-west Aberdeenshire. This brought Edward III to Scotland in the autumn of 1336 on yet another campaign, in which he recovered and repaired Bothwell Castle in Lanarkshire, refortified Perth and left it with an English garrison, and sacked Aberdeen. 
It was, however, to be Edward's last campaign in Scotland; his concerns now centred on France, and he left Scotland to others. Balliol's prospects consequently declined. In 1337 Andrew Murray campaigned successfully in Angus and Fife, recovering the castles of St Andrews and Leuchars, though not Cupar, and also recapturing and slighting Bothwell. English attempts to besiege Dunbar Castle in 1337 and 1338 failed. Balliol last appears at Perth in August 1338; thereafter he seems to have retired to the north of England, where in 1339 he was appointed commander of an English army against Scots who were invading the marches. Balliol's effective presence in Scotland had ended, and supporters of David II were left to get on with the task of removing the remaining English garrisons: Perth fell in 1339, Edinburgh in 1341, and Roxburgh and Stirling in 1342. In June 1341 David and his queen were able to return to their kingdom amid general rejoicing. 
Balliol's impact on the history of Scotland after that time was limited. He stayed mainly in the north of England, receiving payment for his services from Edward III. In October 1339 a warrant was issued to pay the wages of 1264 men from Cumberland and Westmorland who were going to Scotland under the command of Balliol and others to raise the siege of Perth, but Perth had in fact surrendered on 17 August. Although at several points in the 1340s Balliol was appointed to command armies directed against the Scots, there is little evidence of his achievements. More is known about his impact on Galloway, where lay his ancestral lands. In August 1339 several important Galloway landowners had returned to the peace of Edward III, and Balliol, though unable to occupy his ancestral castle of Buittle at this point, seems to have been able to fortify Hestan Island off the coast of Kirkcudbrightshire. He left a garrison there under Duncan MacDowell, to which supplies were on several occasions ordered to be sent by Edward III. After the English victory at Nevilles Cross on 17 October 1346 Balliol again acted as commander of English armies reoccupying the south of Scotland; texts exist of documents granted by Balliol at Hestan Island in 1348 and at Buittle in 1352. 
Balliol's usefulness to Edward III was declining. The latter came to recognize the desirability of reaching some arrangement with his captive, David II, if only terms could be agreed that suited Edward. To these negotiations, Balliol's insistence on his own rights in Scotland was an obstruction, and an obscure and partially coded memorandum, probably belonging to 1350, suggests that pressure was being brought on him to be more accommodating. By 1351 there was at least the prospect of an agreement between David and Edward III, and David was temporarily released to see if the Scots would agree to Edward's demands. At this point they would not, and David returned to captivity, but it was clear that Edward III was prepared to abandon any support for Balliol. 
In 1356 Balliol was brought, on the plea of age and infirmity, to resign to Edward III all rights he had in the crown and kingdom of Scotland. He is said by Andrew Wyntoun to have called the Scotsmen 'ill and wicked', perhaps remembering his father's similar invective against his former subjects after he resigned the Scottish throne. In return for his surrender Balliol received an annuity of $2000, on which he lived in retirement at Wheatley, near Doncaster, in Yorkshire. 
Edward Balliol has generally been dismissed by Scottish historians as of little significance, but he showed considerable persistence and on occasions, as in his tactical advice to Edward III in 1336, also revealed some military capacity. His pension continued to be paid until he died, probably at Wheatley, in January 1364. The exact day is uncertain, but it must have been between the 1st and 24th of the month. 


@@@@@


doc= 1207


Balliol, Henry de (d. 1246), nobleman and administrator, was the youngest brother of Hugh de Balliol (died 1229) of Barnard Castle; together with another of his elder brothers, Ingelram or Ingram (died 'c'.1244), he was the first of his family to acquire lands and interests in Scotland. These interests came through marriage and drew him into Scottish royal service during the reign of Alexander II. He served as chamberlain of Scotland for two terms, from 1223 to 1230 and again from 1241 to his death in 1246, and occasionally acted as the king of Scots's representative or envoy to the English court. In 1237, for example, he was one of the sureties sworn to keep the terms of the treaty of York on behalf of Alexander II, and in 1244 was one of the four barons who swore by Alexander's soul to observe his promise of non-hostility to England. Henry's identity and career are, however, often confused with a Nottinghamshire baron of the same name, active in the reign of King John, and with his own nephew and nephew's son in the Inverkeilor-Urr branch of the family. 
Balliol's wife, Lora, whom he had married by 1233, was eldest daughter and coheir of William de Valognes, through whom Henry succeeded to a share of the extensive Valognes estates in England and Scotland, including those subsequently inherited from Lora's cousin, Christiana, countess of Essex. His holdings came to be centred on the baronies of Benington (Hertfordshire) and Cavers (Roxburghshire). The office of chamberlain of Scotland may have been associated, though not strictly hereditably, with tenure of the lordship of Cavers, which had originally been Scottish royal demesne. William de Valognes, and his father, Philip, before him, had both been chamberlains, while Henry's second son, Alexander de Balliol, later served in this capacity for the guardians and for his cousin, John, king of Scots. Henry de Balliol died shortly before 15 October 1246 and, also like his Valognes predecessors, he received the signal honour of burial in the chapter house of Melrose Abbey, where certainly his daughter Ada, and possibly also his widow, who died before April 1272, were interred. In addition to Alexander and Ada, Henry's children included another daughter, Lora, who married Gilbert de Gaunt (or Gant), and two other sons. Guy de Balliol, his eldest son, was killed fighting on the baronial side at Evesham in 1265, and William de Balliol, his third son, became a clerk, later working as agent for his brother, Alexander, when the latter was chamberlain of Scotland. 


@@@@@


doc= 1208


Balliol, John de (b. before 1208, d. 1268), magnate and benefactor, was the eldest son and heir of Hugh de Balliol (died 1229), lord of Barnard Castle in co. Durham and of Bailleul-en-Vimeu in Picardy. Probably named after King John, to whom his father, exceptionally among the baronage of the north of England, had remained loyal, John was born some time before 1208, and succeeded to his patrimony on his father's death in 1229. Probably the single most decisive event in his long career, however, was his marriage in 1233 to Dervorguilla (died 1290) ['see 'Balliol, Dervorguilla de], third daughter of Alan, lord of Galloway, and the second daughter of his second marriage, to Margaret, daughter of David, earl of Huntingdon (died 1219). In 1234 Dervorguilla's father died, and she and John inherited a third share of the Galloway lordship. Further substantial inheritances followed upon the deaths of Dervorguilla's maternal uncle, John (le Scot), earl of Huntingdon and Chester, and his widow, Helen, in 1237 and 'c'.1253 respectively, and of her own elder sister, Christina (or Christiana), in 1246. By the middle of the thirteenth century Dervorguilla had thus brought considerable material wealth to her husband; hence Matthew Paris's contemporary reference to John de Balliol as 'rich and powerful', and to the 'money which he had in abundance' (Paris, 'Chron'., 5.507, 528), a fact which did not escape Henry III's notice. This dramatic increase in wealth is particularly clearly expressed in the impressive architecture of mid- and later thirteenth-century date at Barnard Castle, the principal Balliol residence and stronghold in England, and at Buittle in Kirkcudbrightshire. 
Judging by the frequency of his appearances in English government record from the mid-1240s onwards, this wealth also gave John de Balliol a platform for involvement in public life far beyond that of his predecessors. He was the first member of the family to be appointed as a sheriff, serving as sheriff of Cumberland and constable of Carlisle Castle between 1248 and 1255, and as sheriff of Nottingham and Derby between 1260 and 1264. In 1251 he assumed a prominent role on behalf of Henry III as joint protector of the young king of Scots, Alexander III, and his wife, Margaret, Henry's daughter; his role may have been largely nominal, however, and was certainly subordinate to that of his colleague, Robert de Ros (died 'c'.1270) of Wark and Sanquhar, with whom he was removed from office in 1255. Between 1258 and 1265, throughout the course of the barons' wars, Balliol was usually to be found among Henry III's select group of counsellors, temporarily suffering forfeiture in 1263 and the effects of the king's defeat at Lewes in 1264. His cross-border landed interests led to his becoming a trusted envoy to Scotland and to France, where, remarkably, he retained possession of the Balliol patrimony, principally because his lands lay in the counties of Vimeu and Ponthieu in Picardy, outside the duchy of Normandy and thus not confiscated by the king of France in 1204. 
Notwithstanding his international responsibilities, it was a local problem which brought John de Balliol into conflict with his powerful neighbour, the bishop of Durham, and which led to his foundation of Balliol College, Oxford, the best-known memorial to the family name. The origins of the dispute lay in the homage and service for five and a quarter knights' fees held by the Balliols within the wapentake of Sadberge, especially their holdings in the vill of Long Newton. Sadberge, which incorporated part of the Balliol barony of Gainford, held in chief of the king since about 1093, had been purchased by Bishop Hugh du Puiset from Richard I, and since the last decade of the twelfth century had thus effectively become absorbed within the bishopric. In an agreement drawn up in 1231 John de Balliol acknowledged that the homage and service previously due to the king would be transferred to the bishop, but he evidently found difficulty in observing these terms. 
A series of royal writs culminated in a letter of August 1255, in which Balliol was charged with the capture of the church of Long Newton, and with physical assault on the men of Bishop Walter Kirkham (died 1260) by a group which included John's brothers Eustace and Jocelin; four of the bishop's men had been imprisoned at Barnard Castle. On this occasion agreement and redemption were secured. In an account in the 'Chronicle of Lanercost', John de Balliol is clearly identifiable as the anonymous baron of the bishopric of Durham who, having transgressed against the church, submitted himself to a public whipping by the bishop in front of the cathedral church door, and undertook to maintain scholars studying at Oxford. Some provision for the support of a house of scholars was made before his death in 1268, and further endowments were made in accordance with the terms of his will; these were brought together and the statutes of what became Balliol College were formulated in 1282 by his widow, Dervorguilla. The latter's uncommonly strong and romantic attachment to her husband was reflected in her foundation, in 1273, of the Cistercian abbey of Dulce Cor, or Sweetheart, in Galloway in memory of him. During her widowhood, she also had his embalmed heart set within an ivory casket always by her side, and, according to Andrew Wyntoun, she instructed that on her death it should be laid 'betwene hyr pappys twa' (Andrew of Wyntoun). 
John de Balliol was the head of a family which was evidently both widely ramified and closely knit, acting in concert when occasion demanded, as the Long Newton episode in 1255 shows. The career of his second brother, Eustace, closely shadowed his own, including regular performance of royal service overseas, and a crucial period in office between 1261 and 1265 as sheriff of Cumberland and constable of Carlisle Castle. Married to an important Cumbrian heiress, Helewise of Levington, Eustace may also have been party to unrealized Balliol ambitions in north-western England, bridging the geographical gap between the lordships of Barnard Castle and Galloway. Of John's other brothers, Jocelin and Bernard were also in English royal service in the 1250s and early 1260s, and both benefited from John's marriage by acquiring lands in Scotland, in the Garioch and Berwickshire respectively. A fourth brother, Hugh, also appears fleetingly in Scotland, in Irvine on John's Cunningham estates in 1260, but is much more closely associated with the family's possessions in Picardy. John's only known sister was Ada, who married John Fitzrobert of Warkworth. One of their younger sons, Hugh de Eure or Iver, was executor, possibly principal executor, of John de Balliol's will, later serving as an envoy for his cousin, John, king of Scots. 
John de Balliol died shortly before 27 October 1268. He and Dervorguilla had at least eight children. Three of their four sons survived to maturity and married within the social milieu of English earls and the English royal court -- a measure of the family's considerably expanded horizons. Hugh (died 1271), the eldest son, married Agnes de Valence, daughter of the earl of Pembroke and niece of King Henry III; Alexander (died 1278), the third son, married Alienor de Genoure, a kinswoman of Queen Eleanor; while John, the youngest son, later John, king of Scots, married Isabel, second daughter of John de Warenne, earl of Surrey (died 1304). The names and sequence of John and Dervorguilla's four daughters are uncertain, but they were probably Margaret, Cecily, Ada, and Eleanor, in that order. Margaret may have married into the Cumbrian family of Moulton; Cecily certainly married John de Burgh, grandson of the famous justiciar Hubert de Burgh (died 1243); Ada married William de Lindsay, heir to the lordships of Kendal and Lamberton (Berwickshire); and Eleanor married John Comyn (d. c.1302), lord of Badenoch, justiciar of Galloway, and one of the guardians of Scotland. Through her, one of the most powerful political figures in Scotland became brother-in-law to the future King John. 


@@@@@


doc= 1209


John (c.1248x50-1314), king of Scots, was the fourth and youngest son of John de Balliol (d. 1268), lord of Barnard Castle, and his wife, Dervorguilla de Balliol, lady of Galloway (d. 1290). His successful claim to the Scottish throne in 1291-2 was based on the fact that his mother was the second daughter of Margaret, eldest daughter of David, earl of Huntingdon (died 1219), the younger brother of William (the Lion), king of Scots (died 1214) ['see also 'Competitors for the throne of Scotland]. 
Information on John's early life and career is slight. Born between about 1248 and 1250, possibly in Picardy, he succeeded to the Balliol family estates in 1278, following the deaths of his father, in 1268, and of his three elder brothers, Hugh (1271), Alan (date not known), and Alexander (1278). It was a much reduced patrimony, centred mainly upon Barnard Castle, in co. Durham, to which he succeeded. Other Balliol estates had been extensively used as dowers for his mother and two high-ranking sisters-in-law, Agnes de Valence and Alienor de Genoure, widows respectively of Hugh and Alexander; his mother also retained possession of her own inheritance. 
Upon his succession to the Balliol estates, homage was demanded of John by both King Edward I and Robert Stichill, bishop of Durham. Despite official acknowledgement of John's rights as heir, almost a year elapsed between Alexander's death and John's succession. During that period, Balliol lands in Northumberland were taken into royal custody, and a contemporary chronicler, Thomas Wykes, recorded that John himself was also in royal custody at about this time. According to Wykes, Balliol needed Edward's consent for his proposed marriage to Isabel, second daughter of John de Warenne, earl of Surrey (d. 1304); he describes John as a youth, 'adolescens', and Isabel, a young girl, 'adolescentula'. In fact, at the date of their marriage, which probably took place in February 1281, John was about thirty years of age and Isabel was at least in her mid-twenties. Clearly, Edward could not have been exercising rights of wardship in a minority but the true reasons for his heavy-handed intervention are not clear. 
Like two of his elder brothers, John de Balliol did not marry until he had attained headship of the family. But unlike his brothers, he had not already been pursuing a career in English royal service -- military, crusading, or diplomatic. As the youngest son of an especially devout mother, he may well have been destined for a monastic career. According to an account by the Durham chronicler Robert Greystones, in September 1290 there was a dispute between Ranulf de Neville, lord of Raby, and the prior of Durham concerning custom and protocol to be observed within Durham Cathedral priory at the feast of St Cuthbert. Balliol was evidently present at this dispute, since he rebutted Neville's claims for precedence and privileges, declaring that he had for a long time attended the schools of Durham but had not heard of the privileges which the lord of Raby claimed. This may well have been the novices' school, which, as described in the later rites of Durham, provided education for intending monks, though it is also possible that he was taught in the Durham almonry school. The benefits of an education were certainly manifest in Balliol's case; a record of 1294, for example, testifies to his ability to read out a written petition in public ('ore proprio publice fecit'), a level of literacy that may have been fairly widespread but is actually attestable among relatively few contemporary members of the secular nobility. 
John's wife and two sisters-in-law were of English comital families or closely associated with the English royal court, and one of his four sisters married into the celebrated de Burgh family. Another sister, Ada, married into the Anglo-Scottish baronage, her husband, William de Lindsay, being heir to the lordships of Kendal and Lamberton (Berwickshire). The only member of his generation to effect a significant Scottish connection was his sister Eleanor, who married John Comyn (d. c.1302), lord of Badenoch, justiciar of Galloway, and one of the guardians of Scotland between 1286 and 1292. 
In fact, before the sudden death of Alexander III, king of Scots, in March 1286, Scotland played little part in Balliol's business affairs. However, he does appear to have begun negotiations with King Alexander concerning the release from imprisonment in Barnard Castle of his mother's half-brother, Thomas of Galloway. Upon Alexander's death, the issue was dropped and it was not until after John's abdication in 1296 that old Thomas was finally released from over sixty years' imprisonment. In contrast, John appears to have been much more active in the management of family interests in northern France. For parts of 1283, 1284, and 1289 -- and possibly also 1282 and 1285 -- he was evidently resident on his Picard estates. 
Within a month of Alexander III's death, according to Walter Bower, 'bitter pleading' between Robert (V) de Brus (died 1295) and John de Balliol is alleged to have broken out in a 'colloquium' or parliament. John otherwise remained comparatively uninvolved in Scottish affairs during this phase of the guardianship, but in the uncertain atmosphere surrounding the Scottish royal succession the lineage of John's mother is likely to have become a matter of common knowledge. 
Upon the death of the aged Dervorguilla in January 1290, Balliol gained a rich inheritance in both England and Scotland. By early March he had been granted seisin of her considerable English lands; details of his succession to her equally extensive Scottish lands and his assumption of the title of lord of Galloway are not recorded, but three years later Edward I 'pardoned' him $3000 of the $3289 14's'. 11/2died allegedly due as relief payment. John was now wealthy, and thus, like his father before him, an object of intense royal cupidity. It is no coincidence that in May 1291, on the eve of the Great Cause, Edward I issued writs of distraint against John's goods and chattels for alleged debts of over $1235. A small amount was levied and then the matter was suspended, only to be raised again, with an equally nice sense of timing, two years later. 
Politically, too, 1290 marked a watershed in Balliol's career. In September, the death of Alexander's recognized heir, his granddaughter, Margaret, the young 'Maid of Norway', made Balliol a leading claimant for the vacant Scottish throne, and drew him more actively into the process of faction forming. The possibility that he might seek an audience with the king of England was referred to in a letter to Edward I from Bishop William Fraser of St Andrews, but the so-called 'appeal of the seven earls', which is ascribable to late 1290 or early 1291, warned against any action on John's part which might lead 'to the prejudice and injury of the right and liberty of the seven earls of Scotland' (Stones, 'Anglo-Scottish Relations', 45). In a document issued in November 1290 in favour of Antony (I) Bek, bishop of Durham, Balliol even went so far as to style himself 'heir of the kingdom of Scotland' (Fraser, 22-3), a presumption that was probably as much a reflection of the ambition of the beneficiary, as of his own. 
By common consent a court was set up by King Edward I of England to determine the Scottish succession, the proceedings of which later became known as the 'Great Cause'. After an adjournment, on 2 June Edward first demanded acceptance of his lordship. Having evidently mistaken the day, Balliol arrived on the following day, and a notary was careful to record John's personal acknowledgement of Edward's lordship and jurisdiction. In early June also auditors were appointed to hear the adjudication. It was politically significant that John Comyn of Badenoch and John de Balliol together agreed to supply forty (out of 104) nominees, their list of lay sponsors bearing a distinctively Comyn 'party' appearance. Comyn's own petition also specifically sought to avoid prejudicing Balliol's claim, which was presented to the court on 3 August 1291. 
The records of the closing stages of the proceedings in October-November 1292 reflected the opposed legal viewpoints of seniority (Balliol) as against nearness of degree (Brus) in the transmission of the Scottish kingdom. The fact that Balliol's maternal grandmother was an eldest daughter was adjudged to give him a stronger right to the kingship over his mother's cousin, Robert (V) de Brus, son of their grandmother Margaret's second sister, Isabel. The court's award of the sasine of the kingdom in favour of Balliol was confirmed by Edward I, who finally awarded that kingdom to him on 17 November 1292. During these final sessions John de Balliol reached agreement -- possibly involving money payments -- with at least three of his fellow claimants, William de Ros (died 1317), William de Vescy (died 1297), and Florence (V), count of Holland (died 1296). 
On 30 November 1292, when he was about forty-two or forty-four years of age, John was enthroned as king of Scots in an inauguration ceremony at Scone. His first written act as king was sealed with his personal seal, on the grounds that he had not as yet had one made bearing his regal style, an omission that was made good shortly afterwards. Throughout his reign, in fact, private family issues merged with public matters of state. The parliament of August 1293, for example, acknowledged his rights of inheritance to his uncle's lands in Berwickshire. But, although as king of Scots he had authority over episcopal appointments, and as lord of Galloway he had special authority over the see of Whithorn, in 1294 he was forced to accept a Brus nominee, Master Thomas of Dalton, as bishop of Galloway, an indication of lingering hostility and defiance from the Brus camp. 
During his reign, Balliol family links with Picardy emerged particularly clearly. In 1293, for example, he issued a letter of protection in favour of the merchants of Amiens coming to or staying in Scotland, almost certainly promoting their lucrative trade in woad-dye. In Scotland they obviously took advantage of the exalted position of someone they could regard as a compatriot. As recently as June 1289, John had been in Amiens itself, confirming a sale of tithes by Gauthier de Grandsart to the college of Amiens. Also, by the terms of the Franco-Scottish treaty of 1295-6, part of the money for the dower of the infant Isabeau de Valois, to be married to John's elder son, Edward, was to be raised from Balliol's own private estates in Picardy. 
John's royal councillors and officials included many trusted associates of the Balliols. Drawn mainly from the Comyn group that had formed the joint body of auditors, his councillors included two former guardians, Bishop Fraser and John Comyn of Badenoch, who, like Gilbert and Ingram de Umfraville, was related to Balliol by marriage. Royal officials included kinsmen such as Alexander de Balliol of Cavers (died 1310), chamberlain or associate chamberlain since 1287, and his cousin, Hugh de Eure, or Iver, executor of his father's will, who served as royal envoy. Master Thomas of Hunsingore, a Yorkshireman with Balliol connections, became chancellor in 1294, and other minor royal officials who had been associated with the Balliol family included Walter of Cambo, sheriff of Northumberland, and William of Silksworth, the king's sergeant. Similar associations are observable at a more modest level in persons such as Walter of Darlington, a clerk whom Balliol presented to the church of Parton. Antony Bek, bishop of Durham, and John de Lisle, a tenant of the Balliols at East Newton in Northumberland, also took advantage of John's exalted position to press claims in Scotland. 
Administratively, John's reign was distinguished. It is likely, for example, that the authoritative treatise on the government of the kingdom, known as 'The King's Household', was prepared for his benefit and guidance about 1292. His reign also saw a significant assertion of royal authority through parliament, no less than four sessions of which were held between February 1293 and May 1294. In one unprecedented session, 'everyone with a complaint [was summoned before king and council]... to show the injuries and trespass done to them by whatsoever ill-doers' (Duncan, 43). Equally constructive was the ordinance of early 1293 creating three sheriffdoms in the west highlands: Skye under William, earl of Ross (died 1323), Lorn under Alexander MacDougall, lord of Argyll (died 1310), and Kintyre under James Stewart (died 1309). MacDougall, a loyal supporter of King John and the Comyns -- like Balliol, he was a brother-in-law of John Comyn of Badenoch -- appears to have been granted wider powers over all three sheriffdoms. King John had clearly grasped the crucial importance of establishing royal authority in the west, and conducting government through royal agents at strategic regional centres, presaging later Stewart policy. 
Politically, however, John's reign was dominated by a series of appeals from Scottish courts to those of Edward I of England. The eleven known cases involved nine separate appellants, of whom three were English subjects and three were clearly political malcontents. Of the remaining appeals, that of Master Roger Bartholomew of Berwick was used by Edward I as a test case inherited from the period of the guardianship, while Macduff of Fife, who claimed he had not been allowed to succeed to lands in northern Fife and had been imprisoned by Balliol, was a man with questionable grievances. 
Initially defying Edward, King John in the autumn of 1293 eventually appeared before the English parliament, protesting against the alleged right to hear appeals. Under threat, he withdrew his protest and renewed his submission and homage to the English king. The episode revealed Balliol's personal weakness when confronted, not for the first time in his career, with Edward I's uncompromising attitude. In the words of Professor Barrow, Balliol found himself: 'ground between the upper and nether millstones of an overlord who demanded humble obedience and a community of the realm whose leaders insisted that he stand up manfully for their independence. A contemporary English writer [the Rishanger chronicler], conflating Saint Luke and Isaiah, compared him to a lamb among the wolves, who dared not open his mouth. (Barrow, 86-7)' A further step towards the break with England -- and the end of John's reign -- was taken when the king of Scots and twenty-six of his magnates tacitly defied Edward I's summons, issued in June 1294, to undertake personal military overseas service against the king of France. Indeed, by May 1295, Philippe IV, king of France ('r'. 1285-1314), was able to view the Scots 'not as enemies but rather as our friends' (Stevenson, vol. 2, no. 335), and at a parliament in Stirling in early July four Scots commissioners were appointed to negotiate a French treaty. Drawn up in October and ratified by the Scottish king and parliament on 23 February 1296, this treaty set out the terms of a military alliance between the two kingdoms; it also made provision for the marriage of John's elder son, Edward, 'future king of Scotland', to King Philippe's niece. So, although the council of twelve guardians elected at the Stirling parliament may have taken the direction of Scottish government out of John's hands, either because of his unfitness or untrustworthiness, they remained firmly committed to the maintenance of the Balliol dynasty. 
War with England, which had long been threatening, finally broke out when the Scots, fortified by their military alliance with France, refused Edward's demand that certain Scottish towns and castles be granted as sureties for the answering of appeals. The war itself began on the eastern border at the end of March 1296, and the first and last decisive battle of this campaign, at Dunbar on 27 April, resulted in a clear victory for the English under King John's father-in-law, John de Warenne, earl of Surrey. Balliol himself retreated northwards through Angus, and in late June sent envoys to Edward, then at Perth, seeking peace. 
At first Edward, probably having newly discovered the terms of the Franco-Scottish treaty, was prepared to offer Balliol favourable terms of surrender, including possibly the offer of an English earldom, in return for a voluntary submission. But in the event Edward's plenipotentiary, Antony Bek, bishop of Durham, required John to surrender the kingdom, formally break the seal, and submit himself unconditionally to the king of England's will. The formal surrender proceedings are recorded in three documents: at Kincardine on 2 July Balliol confessed his rebellion; at Stracathro on 7 July he renounced the French treaty; and at Brechin Castle on 10 July he resigned his kingdom and royal dignity. Chronicle accounts also record that John was taken to Montrose Castle where he appears to have been publicly cashiered, possibly even paraded as a penitent, the removal of the royal blazon from his surcoat or tabard giving rise to his undying nickname of Toom Tabard, meaning 'empty surcoat'. 
Escorted by the sons of Edmund, earl of Lancaster (died 1296), John de Balliol was taken from Montrose to Canterbury. From early August he was detained at the Tower of London, Hertford, and elsewhere, remaining at Hertford, where he was allowed hunting privileges, until August 1297. Thereafter, until July 1299 he was kept at the Tower of London, although on one occasion at least, on 1 April 1298, he was in the lodging of the bishop of Durham 'outside London' where, in the presence of the bishop, he denounced his former subjects, alleging that they had tried to poison him; whether that denunciation of the Scots was authentic and unforced remains unclear. 
In accordance with the terms of an Anglo-French truce concluded in June 1299, Edward accepted French and papal demands for John's transfer into papal custody. Transported from Dover, Balliol found himself at Wissant-sur-Mer on 18 July where, in the presence of the papal legate, the bishop of Vicenza, and the envoys of the king of France, he swore to keep residence where the bishop or other papal mandatory consigned him. Four days later he was handed over to the representatives of the bishop of Cambrai and was later transferred to the abbot of Cluny's castle of Gevrey-Chambertin. News that the officers of the king of France had removed Balliol from the place assigned by the pope and had established him at 'his castle of Bailleul in Picardy' reached English officials in early October 1301. The letter containing this news also referred to a rumour that Philippe IV might be preparing to send John de Balliol back to Scotland 'with great strength' (Stones, 'Submission', 132-4). 
Ever since his enforced abdication in 1296, Scots leaders had continued to treat John as their lawful king. With his transfer to papal custody and a strong affirmation of French and papal support, a realistic prospect of his restoration, or the succession of his elder son, Edward, began to grow, and diplomatic efforts to restore him to his throne were intensified. Indeed, Scottish royal acts began to be issued again in his name, not just on his behalf, and in 1301 he may have had a direct hand in the appointment of John Soulis (died 1318) as sole guardian. By early 1302 even Edward I was contemplating the possibility that Balliol might return, though he was not prepared to accept him as king. 
All expectations of French support for such a scheme, however, were dashed by the devastating defeat of the French army by the Flemings at Courtrai in Flanders in July 1302. An Anglo-French truce was followed in May 1303 by a peace treaty which, despite strenuous efforts by Scottish ambassadors, excluded Scottish interests. Balliol himself may well have compromised the effective representation of Scottish interests in this crucial treaty. In a letter from Bailleul in November 1302, he had authorized Philippe IV to undertake and conclude negotiations on his behalf against the king of England. He probably had little choice, either as king of Scots or lord of Bailleul. The 1303 treaty permitted Edward to concentrate his efforts against Scotland, where by 1304 he appeared to have secured almost total military and political domination. Although John de Balliol's claim to the Scottish throne was never relinquished in his lifetime, any realistic prospect of his restoration -- and hence his political significance -- was greatly reduced after 1304. 
The county of Ponthieu, where John's ancestral home and his continental exile now lay, had been inherited by Edward I's wife, Eleanor, in 1279, at about the time that Balliol himself inherited his family estates there. Subject to French overlordship, Ponthieu had been confiscated on the outbreak of Anglo-French hostilities in 1294, but had been restored to Edward by the terms of the same 1299 truce that had involved Balliol's transfer into papal custody. Once again, Balliol was in no position to escape the controlling hand of the English king; as he later acknowledged to Edward II in his last recorded act (dated March 1314), 'we hold our land of Helicourt and its appurtenances in Vimeu in fee of our excellent prince, Edward by the grace of God, king of England and count of Ponthieu' (Belleval, 102-4). 
To the end, John retained the style of 'king of Scots', although to Robert I he was merely John de Balliol. His death occurred shortly before 4 January 1315, when Louis X of France ('r'. 1314-16) was notified of the fact and was asked to accept the fealty of Edward, John's elder son, for the Balliol estates in Picardy. John lived long enough to have learned of the outcome of the battle of Bannockburn in June 1314, and possibly even of the Cambuskenneth parliament in the following November. Of his two sons, Edward Balliol survived until early 1364, while Henry was killed at Annan in 1332; both died childless. 
Issues and events surrounding John's short reign as king of Scots were catalysts of the first importance in converting Anglo-Scottish relations to a centuries-long course of conflict and in the firm re-establishment of Scotland as an independent kingdom. However, outside the relative limelight of his short reign, John de Balliol himself has remained among the least known kings in Britain of the high and later middle ages. Historical judgements on him have focused mainly on his handling of the appeals to Edward I and on the circumstances of his abdication. When John Stewart, earl of Carrick, succeeded to the Scottish throne in 1390, he had himself crowned as Robert III, largely in order to avoid association with the failure and shame brought upon his baptismal name by the reign of the Scottish King John. Posterity's general conclusion, which cannot easily be gainsaid, is that John's personal qualities were insufficient to cope with a difficult political situation and with an exceptionally difficult English king; there was little in the discredited figure of Toom Tabard to overcome the taint of Englishness and to endear him to later generations of Scots. 


@@@@@


doc= 1210


Ball, Sir Alexander John, baronet (1756-1809), naval officer and politician in Malta, was born on 22 July 1756 at Ebworth Park, Painswick, Gloucestershire, the son of Robert Ball (1714/15-1766), high sheriff of that county, and Mary, 'nee' Dickinson. He attended Market House School in Stroud and entered the navy on completion of his education. From the late 1770s Ball served, initially as a lieutenant, on the North American and Newfoundland stations, and then in the West Indies in the flagships of Sir George Rodney. He was with Rodney in the 'Formidable' at the battle of the Saints (1782), which secured British control of the West Indies. Ball received his commander's commission and thereafter served in other stations, including the Newfoundland for a second time. In 1783 in order to learn French he spent time on half pay in France which is where, at St Omer, he first came to the attention of Horatio Nelson. 
Having returned to Gloucester in 1784, Ball remained on half pay until July 1790 when he was appointed to the frigate 'Nemesis' (28 guns) in which he remained until moving to the 'Cleopatra' (32 guns) in 1793 and serving on the Newfoundland station under Vice-Admiral Sir Richard King. In May 1798, two years after he had been appointed to the 'Alexander' (74 guns) and after short stints off Brest and Cadiz, Ball was sent into the Mediterranean under Nelson's orders. Later that month, after sailing from Gibraltar, the 'Alexander' came to the rescue of Nelson's flagship, 'Vanguard', which had been dismasted in a violent gale (21 May). It is clear from Nelson's dispatches that Ball's action may have saved the rear-admiral's life; certainly it earned Ball Nelson's lifelong friendship and also made possible the continuation of Nelson's command of the British fleet at a crucial time, two months before the battle of Abu Qir Bay on 1 August 1798 ['see 'Nelson's band of brothers]. 
Ball's association with Malta, for which he is now best known, began in October 1798 when he was ordered to the island to institute a naval blockade to support the islanders' recent insurrection against French rule. His involvement in Maltese affairs may be divided into three phases. The first dates from the start of the blockade which soon led to his coming ashore and his assumption of the presidency of the Maltese 'national congress' until the French capitulation in September 1800. In this role he acted as a go-between for the sometimes feuding Maltese leaders and military commanders. He also pleaded for reinforcements and ensured that foodstuffs, especially grain, reached islanders simultaneously engaged in anti-French resistance and afflicted with epidemic. However, when after a bitter two-year struggle the French surrendered they did so not to Ball, who was left out of negotiations, but to a newly arrived British army and naval officer. Ball, who had hoped to become the island's governor and who described himself as the 'father' of the Maltese, was rightly aggrieved at Britain's handling of the transfer and left the island in April 1801. 
Ball's second period in Malta began in June 1802 when he returned to the island as the minister-plenipotentiary to the order of St John. Ball's return followed the signing of the peace of Amiens with the French in which Malta was to be returned to the order and would thereafter remain neutral, her independence being guaranteed through the agreement of Britain, France, Austria, Spain, Russia, and Prussia. Ball, along with the Maltese leadership, remained highly doubtful as to whether the provisions of the treaty could be enforced and sceptical of the merits of restoring the order of St John. Ball was secretly advised to play for time and to delay welcoming back the order's grand master, a tactic which ended with Britain's decision to retain the island and their signing of the third coalition against Napoleon. 
Ball's final, and longest, period of involvement in Maltese affairs centred on his work as the island's civil commissioner and 'de facto' governor from 1803 until his death. If his powers in this office were considerable then so too were the problems he faced. Discontent quickly arose over the lack of financial assistance for members of the disbanded Maltese 'congresso', and was exacerbated by the arrival of large numbers of Sicilians, Albanians, Genoese, and Jewish Gibraltarians -- prompting demonstrations in 1805. The situation was eased during the period of the continental blockade, with Malta prominent in the Mediterranean contraband trade. Ball's period of rule also witnessed the establishment of a civil service and banking and insurance systems, together with significant improvements to the island's infrastructure. One of his final initiatives was the appointment of the first Maltese bishop, Ferdinando Mattei, a move which confirmed British control while ensuring good relations with the Vatican and the Sicilian monarchy. Ball was not only a fine seaman and an efficient captain but (what was rarer in his profession) a man of wide culture, humanity, and judgement: qualities he fully displayed in his demanding position in Malta and for which he was praised by Samuel Taylor Coleridge, his one-time secretary on the island. 
In 1800 Ball had been created a baronet following the British take-over of the island. In 1805 he was made a rear-admiral, though he did not hoist his flag. He died at Sant' Anton Palace, Attard, Malta, on 25 October 1809 and was buried on 31 October at Fort St Elmo, Valletta. He was survived by his wife, Mary, who died on 27 September 1832. Following his death the Maltese readily subscribed to a monument to Ball which still stands in Valletta's Lower Barracca Gardens. 


@@@@@


doc= 1211


Ball, Andrew (d. 1653), naval officer, is believed to have been a native of Bristol, but of his family and early life there is no certain account. The first official mention of his name is in early 1648 when he replaced Thomas Bedell as captain of the 'Adventure', an appointment which suggests he was already an experienced shipmaster. He was soon in action, capturing the Irish frigate 'Angel'. When a large part of the parliamentarian fleet revolted to the king in the second civil war he supported parliament. He secured Holy Island, while Sir Arthur Hesilrige reported that 'Captain Ball doth great service at Berwick' (Powell and Timings, 326). He then joined the earl of Warwick's fleet in the Thames and later sailed to Goree in pursuit of the royalists. He was appointed commander at Walmer Castle, in the Downs, in 1648 and may at some time have served ashore in a military capacity; he would later be described as 'that noble and approved soldier' (Gardiner and Atkinson, 4.101). During 1649 he was employed in the channel, cruising off the Lizard or Land's End protecting commerce. Later in that year he was with Blake's squadron off Kinsale, and in 1650 sailed with Blake to Portugal in pursuit of Prince Rupert's squadron. In November 1650, still in the 'Adventure', he was selected to accompany Captain Penn to the Mediterranean, and continued absent on that voyage for nearly sixteen months, arriving in the Downs on 1 April 1652 just as the First Anglo-Dutch War was beginning. During the following summer he was engaged in fitting out the 'Antelope', a new ship only just launched, missing all the summer's action, but in September was sent to Copenhagen in command of a squadron of eighteen ships. The king of Denmark, in collusion with the Dutch, had embargoed twenty English ships in Danish harbours for allegedly failing to pay their sound dues, and it was hoped that the appearance of Ball's force would lead to a more conciliatory attitude. They sailed from Yarmouth on 9 September, and on the 20th anchored a few miles below Elsinore. Ball's negotiating position was weakened by instructions which prevented him from using force, as the king of Denmark was probably aware. They were still hoping that the ships might be released, when, on 30 September, they were caught in the open roadstead in a violent storm; the cables parted, the 'Antelope' was hurled on shore, the other ships, more or less damaged, were swept out to sea. It was not until 2 October that they could get back and take up the survivors from the wreck. Further negotiations being pointless, given the weakened state of his ships, he set sail for England, and arrived in Bridlington Bay on 14 October, from where they went to Harwich and the Thames to refit. After the severe check which Blake received off Dungeness, on 30 November, Ball was appointed to the 'Lion' (50 guns) in place of Captain Saltonstall, whose conduct in the battle had been called in question. In December 1652 and January 1653 he was occupied in refitting the 'Lion', and he joined the fleet off Queenborough at the beginning of February. There he was promoted to command General Blake's own ship, the 'Triumph'. General Richard Deane, recently arrived from Scotland, may have been responsible for this signal honour. Like Ball, he came from the Bristol area, and both men seem to have been religious Independents; the like-minded Captain John Woolters referred to Ball as his 'dear brother in the fellowship of the Gospel' (Gardiner and Atkinson, 3.422). The fleet sailed down the channel to intercept the Dutch who were escorting home merchantmen from western France. The two fleets met off Portland on 18 February 1653. The fight lasted with great fury throughout the day, and during the whole time the enemy's chief efforts were directed against the 'Triumph', which suffered heavily in hull, in rigging, and in men. 'that precious soul Capt. Ball' being one of those killed (ibid., 4.172). In acknowledgement of his services, the state assigned a gratuity of $1000 to his widow; no mention is made of any children, but the Andrew Ball who commanded the 'Orange Tree' in the Mediterranean, under Sir Thomas Allin, in 1668, and was then accidentally drowned, may have been a son. 


@@@@@


doc= 1212


Ball, Frances (1794-1861), Roman Catholic nun, was the fifth and youngest child of John Ball of Dublin (died 1804), a wealthy merchant, and his second wife, Mabel Clare Bennett (died 1831). She was born on 9 January 1794 at 47 Eccles Street, Dublin, and baptized the same day. At the age of nine she was sent to England to be educated at the Bar Convent, a branch of the Institute of the Blessed Virgin Mary (IBVM), or the Sisters of Loreto, outside Micklegate Bar, York; she remained there until the death of her father. Then she returned to Dublin, where she met Daniel Murray, afterwards archbishop of Dublin, who became her close friend and spiritual director. She became active in the charitable circle of her eldest sister, Anna Maria O'Brien, but about 1812, the conflicting demands of her social activities and her spiritual expectations led to a crisis, which convinced her that she was called to the religious life. Murray directed her to establish a female teaching order in Ireland and, after the opposition of her mother had been overcome, Frances Ball entered the Bar Convent as a novice on 11 June 1814. 
Here Frances Ball spent seven years, preparing to return to Ireland to found a new branch of the IBVM. She received the white veil in September 1814, and was professed on 9 September 1816, when she took the name of Mary Teresa. While at the Bar Convent her preference seems to have been for the contemplative life: she found teaching a distraction from her devotions, and is said to have spoken of her projected return to Ireland as if she were to be sent to Russia. She remained at York for longer than had originally been envisaged by Murray, because several postulants who were to accompany her to open the Irish branch of the order died prematurely. In 1821, however, Murray purchased a suitable house at Rathfarnham, near Dublin, and Mother Frances Mary Teresa and two companions, Anne Therry and Eleanor Arthur, travelled to Dublin. They took up residence at Rathfarnham on 4 November 1822 with a dozen pupils. 
The early days of the foundation were not easy, and were marked by the deaths of several hard-worked nuns. But as early as September 1823 Rathfarnham had two novices, and many friends, relatives, and pupils of the first members were professed there. In addition to the boarding-school for young ladies, Mother Frances Mary Teresa opened a poor school in an outbuilding; such dual establishments became characteristic of her foundations. She worked tirelessly, assisting with such mundane activities as wall-papering and fruit-picking, as well as composing a martyrology for use in the houses and designing the plans for the abbey church at Rathfarnham, the first stone of which was laid in 1838. 
The first filiation of the Loreto at Rathfarnham was established at Navan in 1833; it was followed by the establishment of a boarding-school and a poor school in Harcourt Street, Dublin (later 53 St Stephen's Green), in 1833, and a Loreto house at 43 North Great George's Street in 1837. In 1842 Mother Frances Mary Teresa purchased property at Dalkey on the east coast of Ireland, where she established a health resort for the nuns and arranged for the construction of a swimming pool. In 1841 she was asked to found a sister house in Calcutta and, after some hesitation, she agreed. Seven sisters were sent out, and a school was opened in 1842; other filiations in India followed. In 1845 the mission in Canada opened in Toronto; several daughter houses were founded, including one at Niagara Falls in 1861. Meanwhile the order expanded in Ireland, with the establishment of houses at Gorey in Wexford (1843), Fermoy (1845), and elsewhere. Mother Frances Mary Teresa's last foundation was at Killarney in 1860. 
In the October of that year Mother Frances Mary Teresa fell and fractured her hip, probably also incurring some internal injuries. She did not recover, and in May 1861 she went to Dalkey, where she died on the 19th. Her body was taken back to Rathfarnham Abbey and buried there. 


@@@@@


doc= 1213


Ball, Hannah (1734-1792), follower of Wesleyan Methodism and diarist, was born on 13 March 1734, probably in Buckinghamshire. Nothing is known of her family other than that she was one of a family of twelve children and that her mother died in 1779, aged seventy-nine. At the age of nine she went to live with an uncle in High Wycombe, before spending five years in Hertfordshire. In 1750 she resided with her brother, a widower, looking after his four children. Initially against the Methodists, she was influenced by reading the sermons of Thomas Walsh ('c'.1730-1759), a Wesleyan Methodist itinerant, and became attracted to their teaching. Over the years John Wesley and other Methodist preachers had visited High Wycombe, but it was probably on his visit in January 1765 that Hannah Ball first met him and was converted. She began to keep a diary in 1766, later published, along with some of her letters, as her memoirs in 1796. She was a regular correspondent of John Wesley, who on several occasions entrusted her with the delicate task of ensuring that some of his preachers were spiritually and pastorally adequate. In 1779 he seems to have encouraged and advised her about the building programme for a chapel at High Wycombe, which he opened on 11 November 1779. However, these letters and her diary contain little personal information, being chiefly concerned with her spiritual development. Her letter-book of 19 May to 6 December 1776, comprising about thirty letters, three written to John Wesley and the rest to women friends, concentrates on giving advice on spiritual growth and recounting her own religious experiences. 
Hannah Ball was an assiduous visitor of the sick, both women and men, catering in particular for their spiritual, rather than physical, welfare. Her ministrations also extended to family and friends. John Wesley encouraged her to visit and counsel 'back-sliders' in the hope of bringing them back to faith. She also continued the Methodist tradition of prison visiting. 
In August 1776 Hannah Ball travelled to London, spending nine days there during the Methodist conference. Here she attended fourteen preaching services, at six of which Wesley preached, and also holy communion services. She herself was involved in fourteen meetings, testifying and counselling. Some were band meetings, some class meetings, and others personal interviews. Hannah Ball was not preaching or exhorting in the formal sense, which was officially forbidden to women in Wesleyan Methodism, but nevertheless she was exercising a considerable and effective ministry and John Wesley encouraged her in her travels. 
Hannah Ball is chiefly remembered as a precursor of the Sunday school movement. Robert Raikes (1725-1811) of Gloucester is credited with founding the first Sunday school in 1780; however, Hannah Ball had started a school in High Wycombe in 1769, meeting the children regularly each Sunday and Monday. She reported in a letter, dated 16 December 1770, to John Wesley that they were 'a wild little company, but seem willing to be instructed' ('Letters of the Rev. John Wesley', 5.218). Samuel Wells, a Wesleyan Methodist preacher, supported her work. Her sister Ann continued the school after Hannah died, unmarried, at High Wycombe on 16 August 1792. 


@@@@@


doc= 1214


Ball, John (d. 1381), chaplain and leader of the peasants' revolt, was of obscure origins. He had been an itinerant radical preacher for nearly twenty years before the revolt. He described himself, in letters circulated during the rising, as 'seynte marye prist' and 'som tyme seynte marie prest of 3ork. and now of Colchestre' (Justice, 14), suggesting that he had at one time been a chantry priest in York and afterwards moved to Colchester. At least three men called John Ball are mentioned in Colchester records of the late fourteenth century, but none can be firmly identified with the rebel leader. A suggestion that he was the son of William and Joan Ball of Peldon, a few miles south of Colchester, born 'c'.1329, appears to be without foundation. 
On 25 February 1364 Edward III issued a letter patent describing how he had granted Ball protection in response to a complaint by him that he feared injury from his enemies while pursuing his business. The king had heard, however, that Ball was instead wandering from place to place preaching articles contrary to the faith of the church, and withdrew the protection. Six months later Bishop Simon Sudbury of London requested Ball's arrest as an obdurate excommunicate. In 1366 the dean of Bocking was ordered to cite Ball to appear before Archbishop Simon Langham (died 1376). Over the next fourteen years repeated attempts were made to silence Ball by excommunication and arrest, without effect. In April 1381 Sudbury, now archbishop of Canterbury, excommunicated Ball yet again, and on 29 April the sheriff of Kent was ordered to arrest him. 
At the end of May 1381 attempts to enforce payment of the third poll tax led to riots in Essex, which spread to Kent. Knighton states that one of the first acts of the Kentish rebels was to free Ball from the archbishop's prison at Maidstone. In fact Ball would have been in the royal prison there, which was not stormed by the Kentish rebels under Wat Tyler until 11 June, when the rising was well advanced. Having already caused mayhem across northern Kent from Dartford to Canterbury, Tyler's men were by the time they attacked Maidstone gaol making a concerted move towards London. Froissart also antedates Ball's release from prison, wrongly stating that he was with Tyler at Canterbury. The claim in an Essex indictment that Ball was not in Maidstone at all, but was released by Essex rebels from the bishop of London's gaol at Bishop's Stortford on 11 June, is difficult to reconcile with the other evidence, and probably mistaken. 
On 12 June the Kentish insurgents assembled on Blackheath and remained there until the following day. Ball preached to the rebels while they were at Blackheath, taking as his text the words: '
Whanne Adam dalfe and Eve span, 

Who was panne a gentil man? 

' Although this couplet has become associated with Ball's name, it was a popular proverb which is recorded from at least the early fourteenth century. According to Walsingham, Ball used his text to demonstrate that 'all men were created equal by nature, and that servitude has been introduced by the unjust and evil oppression of men, against the will of God' (Walsingham, 'Chronicon Angliae', 321). Walsingham and others alleged that Ball was a follower of John Wyclif (died 1384). This was not the case, but as R. B. Dobson has observed: 'In their understandable reaction from the deliberately propagated legend that John Ball was John Wycliffe's disciple, historians... have sometimes unduly discounted a not unimportant connection between these two ideologues -- that the audience for their respective messages must certainly have sometimes overlapped. (Dobson, xxxvii)' During the morning of 13 June Richard II and his ministers attempted unsuccessfully to talk to the rebels at Rotherhithe. Following the failure of this meeting the rebels entered London where, among many acts of destruction and bloodshed, they burnt the Savoy Palace of John of Gaunt, duke of Lancaster, destroyed the headquarters of the hospitallers at Clerkenwell Priory, and executed Simon Sudbury, the archbishop of Canterbury, and Robert Hales, the treasurer of England and prior of the hospitallers. Ball's role in these events is not clear. The chroniclers mention him, if at all, only in general terms as a leader and chief counsellor of the rebels. After the killing of Wat Tyler during an interview with the king at Smithfield on 15 June Ball fled. He was eventually arrested at Coventry and was tried by Robert Tresilian (died 1388) at St Albans on 12 July. The anti-Wycliffite compilation 'Fasciculi zizaniorum' contains a confession supposedly made by Ball at this time, in which he states that he was an agent of Wyclif, but this document is a fabrication. Ball was hanged, drawn, and quartered at St Albans on 15 July 1381. 
Knighton and Walsingham reproduce six letters in English urging on the rebels. Ball is named as the author of three of these, and it has usually been assumed that he wrote them all, but their language suggests that the other three are by different hands. These letters have been chiefly celebrated for their early mention of Piers Plowman. But they should also be valued, along with Ball's famous couplet and his reported preaching, for the unique insight they provide into the radical Christian egalitarianism that constituted much of the ideology of the rebels. 


@@@@@


doc= 1215


Ball, John (1585-1640), Church of England clergyman and religious writer, was born at Cassington, Oxfordshire, in early October 1585, the son of William Ball and his wife, Agnes Mabet. Although in humble circumstances, his parents sent him to a private school in the neighbouring village of Yarnton. Such were his 'scholastical gifts' (Clarke, 152) that in his fifteenth year he obtained a place as a servitor at Brasenose College, Oxford, where he matriculated on 24 October 1600. He subsequently transferred to St Mary Hall and graduated BA on 24 January 1604. 
Lacking the means to continue his university studies, however, Ball became tutor to the children of Lady Cholmondeley in Cheshire, a formative experience, since he now came into contact with a group of 'severe Puritans' (Clarke, 152) who made such a deep impression on him through their fervent prayers, fasting, and 'Bible' readings that he felt increasingly called to the ministry. Determined to obtain Anglican ordination without subscription to the 'Thirty-Nine Articles', in 1610 he and his lifelong friend Julines Herring succeeded, owing to the compliance of an Irish bishop. Ball now settled at Whitmore, a chapel of ease in the parish of Stoke-on-Trent, Staffordshire, where he served as the curate for the next thirty years. His stipend was only $20 per annum, and although he also kept a school, at which he was apparently successful, he remained poor. He bore this with great fortitude, despite lacking even a house of his own when he first moved to Whitmore. For 'many years' (Clarke, 148) he lived at Whitmore Hall as a guest of the patron of the living, Edward Mainwaring, until the latter built a small cottage for him in the village. On 4 August 1612, at Whitmore Chapel, Ball married Ellen Buckenhall, with whom he had six sons and a daughter. 
According to Simeon Ashe's dedication to Ball's 'The Power of Godliness' (1657), the latter led an obscure if conscientious life in his parish, but eventually such were 'his high parts' and 'eminent piety' that he was 'owned, approved and honoured' throughout the land. Towards the end of his life Ball moved in fairly exalted circles, having contacts with puritan peers like Edward Montagu, Viscount Kimbolton, and Lord Saye and Sele. He is also known to have preached sermons before Lady Margaret Bromley at Sheriff Hales in Shropshire; to have attended a conference of puritan clergy in Warwick Castle at the invitation of Lord Brooke; and to have engaged in theological disputation at Fawsley, Northamptonshire, with a clerical colleague of a sectarian persuasion in the presence of Richard Knightley, John Pym, and others. 
As a known nonconformist Ball suffered from 'prelatical persecution' (Clarke, 150) throughout his ministry; indeed, he was reputedly deprived of a living in Cheshire before securing that at Whitmore as well as suffering two periods of confinement, and in the late 1630s he seriously considered emigration to New England but was dissuaded by John Dod, a fellow clergyman. With the summoning of the Short Parliament in the spring of 1640 Ball travelled to London with his clerical associate Thomas Langley, to lobby 'some Parliament men' (ibid., 153) against the Laudian harassment of men of their religious ilk. But though Ball entertained hopes of 'further Reformation of things woefully out of order' (ibid.) in the established church, his hopes were dashed with the premature dissolution of that assembly and he was forced to return home with a heavy heart. Ball now fell seriously ill and after a 'languishing sicknesse' (ibid., 155) died at his house at Stoke Whitmore, Staffordshire, on 20 October 1640. He was buried in Whitmore Chapel. A man of 'a sweet, humble, peaceable spirit' (ibid., 154), Ball was eulogized by diverse contemporaries, but perhaps the most eloquent tribute came from Richard Baxter, who declared that Ball merited 'as high esteem and honour as the best bishop in England' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 2.671). 
Ball was a prolific author, though few of his works saw the light of day before 1640. At least five of his manuscript treatises were published posthumously by his 'bosom friend' (Clarke, 152) and literary executor, Simeon Ashe. Of his eight major works, the most popular was the first, 'A Short Treatise Containing All the Principal Grounds of Christian Religion', which went through fourteen editions before 1632 and was even translated into Turkish. Its dialogic form epitomized Ball's 'plaine and naturall style' (preface). Ball's 'Treatise of Faith' (1631) was commended to the reader by Richard Sibbes who thought its author 'deserved well of the church' (foreword). Undoubtedly the most substantive work was his 'A Friendly Triall of the Grounds Tending to Separation' (1640). Written in the first instance 'for (the) satisfaction of Mr Richard Knightley' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 2.671), this expressed the disquiet felt by Ball for the growing sectarian tendencies within puritanism. By robustly championing the legitimacy of 'a stinted liturgy' and set forms of prayer in church services Ball incurred the wrath of his stricter brethren who accused him of 'deserting the non-conformist cause' (ibid.), a charge which surfaced again after the publication in 1642 of his refutation of the ideas of the separatist leader John Canne. Entitled 'An Answer to Two Treatises of Mr John Can', this sought to demonstrate that, for all its imperfections, nothing justified outright separation from the Church of England. 'A Tryall of the New-Church Way in New England and in Old' (1644) was inspired by the theological controversies which arose in the wake of nine queries submitted by Ball on behalf of the English puritan clergy to their counterparts in the Bay Colony about 1637. In this dispute Ball took exception to those 'tenets' in New England puritanism which 'drew men to seperation' (p. 8) and again insisted that there were no possible grounds for deserting the English church whose institutional failings he attributed to 'human fraility' (p. 13). 'Treatise of the Covenant of Grace' (1645), 'The Power of Godliness' (1657), and 'Treatise of Divine Meditation' (1660) were typical products of Ball's pen, possessing 'more of solidity than lustre, of use than show' ('Treatise of Divine Meditation', second preface). Ball's religious outlook is difficult to categorize: paradoxically he was labelled by one contemporary 'the Presbyterians' Champion' and by another as belonging to the 'tribe' of Independents, a confusion caused by his own writings, a careful reading of which suggests that he was a 'non-separating Puritan' whose ideal church was a 'congregational presbytery' (Schneider, 171, 173, 179-180). 


@@@@@


doc= 1216


Ball, John (1654-1745), Presbyterian minister, was born in November 1654, the eldest of five children of William Ball (1624-1670), presbyterian minister, who was ejected from Winsham, Somerset, in 1662, and his wife, Susanna. He studied with Henry Hickman (died 1692) at his school at Dunthorp, near Bromsgrove, Worcestershire, and Ames Short (1617-1697) at Lyme Regis, Dorset, before conducting his own academy for conformists and nonconformists in Dorset. Following Monmouth's rebellion in 1685 he fled to the Netherlands as tutor to two young men, Colonel Henley and Colonel Trenchard, and studied medicine at Utrecht. He settled in Honiton some time before his ordination on 20 January 1696, and in 1705 he reunited the Presbyterians with the Baptists at the Bridge Meeting. He regularly attended the Exeter assembly from 1696, serving five times as moderator. He was fluent in French and Dutch and had facility in Greek and Hebrew, while 'Latin flow'd from him as Water in a Pipe' (Walrond, 16). He regularly preached from the Hebrew psalter. 
Ball was one of the leaders of the orthodox dissenters in the dispute with James Peirce (1674-1726) in the Exeter controversy which occurred between 1716 and 1719, and he insisted all ministers make an orthodox declaration concerning the Trinity. He published 'Arius Detected and Confuted' (1719), as part of the debate, to which Peirce replied in 'Plain Christianity Defended' (1719). 'An Answer to some Common Objections' (1727) evoked an eirenic response by Joseph Hallett (1691-1744), 'The Reconciler' (1727). His last works were 'The Importance of Right Apprehensions of God with Respect to Religion and Virtue' (1736) and a sermon preached in 1730, 'Some Remarks on a New Way of Preaching' (1737). In the latter he defended revealed truth and rejected Locke's advocacy of reason. This provoked a response from Henry Grove in 1737. 
Ball, who was married, died at Honiton on 6 May 1745 in his ninety-first year, supported by his granddaughter, a daughter of John Lavington (1690?-1759); he left his family well provided for. Walrond had stressed his disregard for money and his puritanism in dress and diet, which prompted a deist opponent to comment 'that Man is what a Minister should be' (Walrond, 19). 


@@@@@


doc= 1217


Ball, John (1818-1889), glaciologist and politician, was born in Dublin on 20 August 1818, the eldest child of Nicholas Ball (1791-1865), judge and politician, and his wife, Jane ('nee' Sherlock) of Butlerstown Castle in co. Waterford. Until the age of eleven he received little formal education, but from his earliest years he displayed a precocious interest in science. In his seventh year he was taken to Switzerland, where he was deeply affected by the view of the Alps from the Jura. Indeed, he later wrote that 'for long years that scene remained impressed on my mind, whether asleep or awake, and perhaps nothing has had so great an influence on my entire life' ('DNB'). The following year he began to measure the heights of hills barometrically and to construct geological sections, and before his twelfth year he had completed the manuscript of what he termed his 'Elements of chemistry'. 
Ball's parents were Roman Catholics, and in 1831 he was sent to St Mary's College at Oscott near Birmingham, whence he was admitted into Christ's College, Cambridge, on 23 June 1835. That summer he participated in the Dublin meeting of the British Association for the Advancement of Science (he attended many of the association's subsequent meetings), and in Cambridge, over the next four years, he joined the classes of John Stevens Henslow in botany, and Adam Sedgwick in geology. With Henslow's family the charming Irishman became extremely popular as a chess player, at the piano, and as a vocalist. Strangely, in 1839 he achieved no higher standing than that of forty-first and last wrangler, while his religious convictions prevented his being conferred with a degree. However, Roman Catholics had since 1793 been eligible to receive degrees in the University of Dublin, and on 8 February 1840 he therefore came on to the books of Trinity College, Dublin, 'from Cambridge', although in the event he never took a Dublin degree. 
On 13 April 1840 Ball was elected a member of the Royal Irish Academy, and in Trinity term 1843 he was called to the Irish bar at the King's Inns. He never practised at the bar, and between 1840 and 1845 can have spent little time in Ireland. For much of that period he travelled in Europe, visiting the mountain regions (for which he felt a deep affinity), botanizing, and communing with kindred scientific spirits. During 1845 he was at Zermatt seeking to develop the glaciological studies pioneered by James David Forbes, but that was the year when a failure of the Irish potato crop marked the beginning of the great Irish famine, and Ball felt duty-bound to return to his distressed homeland. 
In April 1846 Ball became an assistant with the commissioners for administering the laws for the relief of the poor in Ireland, but ill health brought on by overwork forced his resignation in November 1847. A period of continental travel restored his constitution, and he returned to Ireland during 1849 to assume the more senior office of second poor law commissioner, a post which remained his until 1 July 1852. His substantial pamphlet 'What is to be done for Ireland?' drew attention to the 'utter ruin which is impending over entire provinces', and appeared in two editions (1847 and 1849). 
While in the Dingle peninsula, co. Kerry, during 1846, Ball recognized that many of the landforms were analogous to features which he had seen being shaped by modern glacial processes within the Alps. Clearly, he reasoned, there must once have been glaciers in Ireland, and the paper on this subject which he presented to the Geological Society of Dublin on 14 November 1849 is the earliest published study of Pleistocene events within any region of Ireland. 
In July 1848 Ball stood, without success, as a parliamentary candidate for Sligo borough, but on 26 July 1852 he was returned (by a majority of only two votes) as the member for Carlow County. In the Commons he spoke only briefly and somewhat infrequently, but he did make his mark, and in February 1855 the prime minister, Lord Palmerston, named him as assistant under-secretary of state in the colonial department. In this office he took the opportunity to further the cause of science in several ways. His energetic representations were largely responsible for ensuring the adequate financing of the expedition led by John Palliser for the exploration of western Canada, and he was instrumental in inducing the home government to support the efforts of Sir William Jackson Hooker towards the publication of colonial floras. 
At the election on 11 April 1857 he was heavily defeated when he stood for Sligo County, and on 15 February in the following year he was again defeated when he contested Limerick City. His rejection in 1858 was attributed to an unpopularity among Limerick's Roman Catholic clergy arising from his friendship with such Italian liberals as Count Camillo Benso di Cavour and Quintino Sella. Although subsequently offered several parliamentary seats, he resolved henceforth, as a man of independent financial means, to devote himself exclusively to travel and to natural history. 
Following the foundation of the Alpine Club in December 1857 he served as its first president (1858-60), and he edited 'Peaks, Passes, and Glaciers', the club's earliest publication (two editions in 1859). The three volumes of his 'Alpine Guide' (first editions 1863, 1864, 1868) are classics among the literature of mountain travel. In 1856 he married Eliza Parolini, daughter of the naturalist and traveller Count Alberto Parolini (there were two sons of the marriage), and between 1861 and 1869 he lived much in Italy, where, on his wife's death about 1867, he inherited an estate near to Bassano and at the foot of the Venetian Alps. By 1863 he had crossed the main chain of the Alps forty-eight times by thirty-two different routes, being accompanied upon some of his journeys by his close friend William Edward Forster. In 1869 Ball married Julia O'Beirne, the youngest child of Francis and Winefred O'Beirne of Jamestown, co. Leitrim. 
Ball was fluent in several European languages and published extensively in the periodical literature of science. In the company of Joseph Dalton Hooker he visited Morocco and the Atlas Mountains between April and June 1871, and their joint work descriptive of the excursion was published in 1878. Between March and August 1882 he sailed to the Caribbean, crossed the isthmus of Panama, and completed a circumnavigation of South America via the Strait of Magellan, his account of this journey being published in 1887. During the 1880s trouble with his throat caused him to winter abroad in places such as Algeria, Tunisia, and the Canary Islands. 
While in the Engadine during the autumn of 1889 Ball was stricken with illness. He was taken home to London where, shortly after an operation and somewhat unexpectedly, he died at midnight on 21 October 1889 at his home, 10 Southwell Gardens, South Kensington. He was buried in the churchyard of St Thomas's at Walham Green on 25 October. Among his distinctions were the Italian order of SS Maurizio e Lazzaro (1865), fellowship of the Linnean Society (2 December 1856), fellowship of the Royal Society (4 June 1868), and honorary fellowship of Christ's College, Cambridge (3 October 1888). 


@@@@@


doc= 1218


Ball, John Thomas (1815-1898), judge, born in Dublin on 24 July 1815, was the eldest son of Major Benjamin Marcus Ball (1789-1841) and Elizabeth (1789-1838), daughter of Cuthbert Feltus of Hollybrook, co. Carlow. His father was an officer who served with distinction in the 40th regiment of foot during the peninsular campaign. He was educated at Dr Smith's school in Rutland Square, Dublin, and entered Trinity College in 1831 at an unusually early age. Ball won a classical scholarship in 1833 and in 1835 graduated as senior moderator and gold medallist in ethics and logic. In 1836 he graduated BA. While at Trinity, Ball made friends with Isaac Butt (1813-1879), Samuel O'Sullivan (1790-1851), Mortimer O'Sullivan (1791-1859), Joseph Sheridan le Fanu (1814-1873), and other eminent men of his generation; he was also a frequent contributor to the 'Dublin University Magazine', and was president of the college historical society in 1837. Ball's articles were mostly on historical and biographical subjects, but he also wrote verse. In 1844 he graduated LLD. 
Ball had been called to the Irish bar in 1840. He quickly rose to an eminent position, and in 1854 he took silk. In 1852 he married Catherine Elrington (died 1887), daughter of the Revd Charles Richard Elrington, regius professor of divinity in the University of Dublin. They had three children, the youngest of whom, Francis Elrington Ball, is noted for his authorship of 'The Judges in Ireland, 1221-1921'. As a queen's counsel Ball's practice lay mainly in the ecclesiastical courts, and later in the Probate and Matrimonial Division, where his knowledge of civil law and his subtlety in argument led to his rapid promotion to a senior position. In 1862 the primate, Marcus Beresford, appointed him vicar-general of the province of Armagh. This appointment marked the beginning of Ball's active interest in the affairs of the Church of Ireland, of which he was a devout member. In 1863 he was elected a bencher of the King's Inns, and in 1865 he was made queen's advocate in Ireland. 
In the same year Ball first entered politics and stood in the general election as an independent candidate for the University of Dublin. He was a proponent of legislation for ecclesiastical reform; his policy involved the admission of deficiencies within the church structure and he was defeated at the polls. In 1867 Ball was nominated as a member of the royal commission appointed by Disraeli to inquire into the state of the Church of Ireland, and in the following year he became a member of the Conservative administration as solicitor-general for Ireland. Later in the same year he was promoted to the position of attorney-general for Ireland. In the meantime Gladstone's declarations had raised the issue of disestablishment in a direct form, and Ball's abilities and knowledge of ecclesiastical affairs meant that at the general election of 1868 he was returned to parliament as member for the university. 
Ball played a leading role in opposing the 'Irish Church Act', a measure aimed at the disestablishment of all churches in Ireland. His speech on the second reading was a remarkable oratorical triumph, placing him in the front rank of parliamentary speakers and winning him the approbation of Disraeli. Ball's efforts were sustained throughout the long struggle over the details of the bill. Early in 1870, when the marquess of Salisbury was installed as chancellor of the University of Oxford, his services were acknowledged by the conferral of the honorary degree of DCL. Subsequently he helped to frame the future constitution of the disestablished Church of Ireland, not only devising and drafting that constitution but acting as assessor to the primate in the often stormy meetings of the general synod. 
From 1869 to 1874 Ball remained a vigorous member of the Conservative opposition and took an active part in the debates on Gladstone's 'Irish Land Bill' of 1870 and the 'Irish University Bill' of 1873. His opposition to the 'Land Bill' was confined to effective criticism of its details; but his objections to Gladstone's university scheme (involving the closure of some Irish third-level institutions and the opening of a new university) attacked the bill in principle. Ball's parliamentary activity was not confined solely to Irish questions; one of his finest speeches dealt with the 'Ballot Act' and evinced his opposition to the extension of the franchise. 
In 1874, on the formation of Disraeli's second administration, Ball's position and services made him a clear contender for the highest office in the law in Ireland; but the prime minister wished to keep him in the House of Commons so that he could work on the 'Irish Judicature Bill', and he was reappointed attorney-general. Therefore it was not until 1875 that he became lord chancellor of Ireland, where he remained until the fall of the Disraeli government in April 1880. During that time he earned a reputation as a judge whose appeals from the Probate Division were especially distinguished by legal learning, argumentative power, and literary form. 
On his retirement from the chancellorship, Ball became less involved in public life, though in 1880 he accepted the nomination by Earl Cairns to the office of vice-chancellor of the University of Dublin. In 1881 he presided over the section of jurisprudence at the meeting of the social science congress at Dublin, and delivered an address on jurisprudence and the amendment of the law. 
On the return of his party to office under Lord Salisbury in 1885, Ball did not feel that he was in strong enough health to resume the Irish chancellorship, and he spent his time in writing. In 1886 he published 'The Reformed Church of Ireland', a work in which he traced the history of the church from the Reformation to his own time. The book won praise from churchmen of the day for its even-handedness, and a second, enlarged edition appeared in 1890. In the year after his wife's death, Ball's work of church history was followed by his 'Historical Review of the Legislative Systems Operative in Ireland from the Invasion of Henry the Second to the Union' (1888, second edn 1889), in which he sought 'to trace the succession of these systems to each other, the forms they respectively assumed, and their distinctive peculiarities, and at the same time to consider the controversies connected with the claim made by the English parliament to legislate for Ireland. (Author's preface)' The author's objective and balanced approach to contentious topics won him praise from Gladstone, Smith, and Lecky, who emphasized the judicial impartiality with which the book was written. 
From 1890 old age confined Ball more to his home at Dundrum, co. Dublin. However, he retained until 1895 his office of vice-chancellor of the university. Subsequently his declining health compelled him gradually to divest himself of numerous honorary offices such as those of chancellor of the archdioceses of Armagh and Dublin, assessor to the general synod of the Church of Ireland, senator of the Royal University, and chairman of the board of intermediate education. He died at Dundrum on St Patrick's day, 17 March 1898, and was buried at Mount Jerome cemetery, Dublin. 
Ball was remembered as an impressive orator and as one of the few nineteenth-century Irishmen who were able to persuade the Commons. A portrait of him was left to the hall of the King's Inns, Dublin; there is also a woodcut in the National Portrait Gallery, London, and a photograph, reproduced in W. Ball-Wright's 'Records of the Anglo-Irish Families of Ball'. 


@@@@@


doc= 1219


Ball, Nathanael (c.1623-1681), clergyman and ejected minister, was born at Pitminster, near Taunton Dean, Somerset, and later attended the school there. From Pitminster he went to Cambridge University, matriculating as a sizar from King's College at Easter 1644. He cannot, therefore, be the Nathanael Ball of St Mary Hill registered as a student at Merchant Taylors' School in 1645. Ball graduated BA in 1648 (listed under the name Balls) and proceeded MA of Pembroke College in 1660. At Cambridge he built a high scholarly reputation, especially for his facility for languages; he is reputed to have spoken French almost as a native, and according to Calamy won the respect and affection of Tillotson, the future archbishop. 
On 1 March 1650 Ball was approved as a minister by the Westminster assembly and in the same year the commission charged to survey church livings in Hertfordshire reported that the vicarage of Furneaux Pelham 'is worth $35 per annum, and that Nathanael Ball is minister and pays one fifth to the wife of Dr [Henry] Hancock', the sequestered incumbent (Urwick, 763). By 1652, Ball had settled at Barley in Hertfordshire, a vicarage earlier sequestered from Herbert Thorndike, and married Mary, daughter of Philip Parr, a neighbouring clergyman. Of their ten sons and three daughters, the first of five appearing in the Barley parish register is Nathaniel, on 17 December 1652. During the 1650s Ball is alleged to have helped in the preparation of Bishop Brian Walton's London polyglot 'Bible' of 1657. 
In 1660 Thorndike recovered his living, and Ball was ejected from Barley. For some time he continued to live in the parish but later that year he left for Royston, 'a market town of great profaneness and but little religion', apparently on the invitation of a group of its parishioners; here he 'set up a lecture on the market day, which was blessed with great success. The trade of wickedness was spoiled there...' (Calamy, 'Abridgement', 2.363). It seems probable that he acted as curate at Royston, resigning after the 'Act of Uniformity' in 1662, but remaining for some time in the town and preaching when occasion arose. He then lived for more than seven years at Little Chishill, of which parish his brother-in-law, Robert Parr, became the rector in 1662. There he acted as an evangelist, preaching also at Epping, Bayford, and Cambridge. In 1668 he was reported at Hardwick, Cambridgeshire, and on 20 January and 1 July 1669 he took part with the presbyterian Stephen Scanderet and others in two public disputes (of which the second seems to have been extremely bad tempered) with the Quaker George Whitehead. In the same year Archbishop Sheldon was informed that Ball was a teacher to a conventicle at Thaxted. On the issuing of the declaration of indulgence of 1672, Ball was described as of Nether Chishill, but he was licensed (25 May) as a 'general Presbyterian teacher in any allowed place' (Davids, 598). By June 1672 he was living at premises at Epping, licensed in that month as a presbyterian meeting-place, and in August was himself licensed to teach there. Calamy records that Ball lived 'in a small cottage of forty shillings a year rent', stressing his great labours and poverty in his last years (Calamy, 'Abridgement', 2.365); he died of consumption on 8 September 1681, aged fifty-seven or fifty-eight, probably at Epping. 
At his death Ball entrusted his manuscripts to the keeping of Thomas Gouge, of St Sepulchre's, London, on whose early death they passed to another ejected minister, John Faldo. In 1683, Faldo published Ball's 'Spiritual Bondage and Freedom', dedicated to Ball's friend 'the right honourable and truly virtuous the Lady Archer, of Coopersail, in Essex', who 'did so bountifully minister to the reverend author's subsistence in his greatest straits' (sig. A3). The epistle to the reader supplies information on which Calamy based much of his own account. It describes Ball's role in his house: 'When it was a convenient time for the whole house to meet together, he came from his study, and summoning them to duty, he expounded one or two chapters, and examined his children and servants what they did remember, encouraging the diligent, reproving the negligent; which being done he called on God for them, and with them.... Duty being ended, he retired shortly upon it into his study, where he commonly abode till dinner. At every meal he preached as it were a short sermon; and thanks being returned unto God, he hastened again into his study; allowing himself no recreation, but what arose from reading, praying and instructing others. (Ball, foreword)' As to his younger children, Ball 'would not indulge any of them in a sinful action. T'was his judgement that a father might wink at anything, saving sin against God. Therefore in his use of the rod he designed their good', explaining that neither he nor God took pleasure in the punishment, but 'that sin being bound up in the heart of the child, t'was the Lord's ordinance to drive it out, and therefore he always accompanied the rod with prayer, that... correction might be seconded with conversion, and crowned with universal reformation' (ibid.). In 1885 Alexander Gordon found it 'greatly to be deplored that his biblical and oriental manuscripts -- the laborious occupation of a lifelong student -- and his extensive correspondence are now lost. They are known to have been in existence in comparatively recent times' ('DNB'). 


@@@@@


doc= 1220


Ball, Nicholas (1791-1865), judge and politician, was born in Dublin, the son of John Ball (1728-1804), silk mercer of Dublin, and his wife, Mabel Clare, 'nee' Bennett. Ball, a Catholic, was educated at Stonyhurst College, Lancashire, and at Trinity College, Dublin (1808-12), where his contemporaries included Richard Sheil and W. H. Curran. Ball was called to the Irish bar in 1814, and afterwards spent two winters in Rome with his contemporary Thomas Wyse. Both young men saw a good deal of Cardinal Gonsalvi, secretary of state, and these visits were the subject of much controversy. It was alleged that the young men had sought to influence and support a scheme for the appointment of Irish Catholic bishops, subject to the veto of the English government. At a time when religious tensions were running high over Catholic emancipation, the visits fuelled the fires of suspicion. Ball took silk in 1830, and was admitted a bencher of the King's Inns in 1836. Valued as an equity lawyer, he obtained a lucrative practice in the rolls court and in the court of chancery, where his reputation was that of an acute, clear, and ready advocate. In 1836 Ball was elected member of parliament for Clonmel; in 1837 he was appointed attorney-general and in 1838 privy councillor for Ireland. He disliked parliamentary life, and was famous for his 'devotion to supper and silence in debate' (Ball, 261). He was glad to take refuge in a judgeship of the common pleas (Ireland), to which he was preferred in 1839, and which he held until his death. He was the second Roman Catholic barrister promoted to a judgeship after the passing of the 'Emancipation Act'. 
In 1817 Ball married Jane Sherlock of Butlerstown Castle, co. Waterford. They had seven children, the eldest of whom, John Ball (1818-1889), became under-secretary of state for the colonies under Lord Palmerston's administration. Their son Thomas was a captain in the Dublin militia, and Nicholas and Alex Francis followed their father into the law. Of the three daughters, Jane married, and Anna and Mary became nuns. Their mother died in 1863. 
As a judge, Ball was renowned for his sense of humour in court and there are many anecdotes of his quips and his imitations of witnesses. Ball was a sound and able lawyer, as well as being a sincere Roman Catholic, Liberal in his politics, and committed to the cause of Catholic emancipation. He held the office of judge of the common pleas until his death; he died at his home, 85 St Stephen's Green, Dublin, in January 1865, and was buried in the family vault under the pro-cathedral of Dublin. 


@@@@@


doc= 1221


Ball, Peter (c.1638-1675), physician, was the third son and one of the seventeen children of Sir Peter Ball (bap. 1598, d. 1680), lawyer, and his wife, Ann, daughter of Sir William Cooke, of Gloucestershire. The astronomer William Ball was his elder brother. Peter was admitted to the Middle Temple, London, in 1652 and called to the bar in 1657. In 1659, at the age of twenty, he was entered as a medical student at Leiden, but proceeded to Padua, where he took the degree of doctor of philosophy and physic in 1660. To celebrate this feat, a series of laudatory verses entitled 'Apollinare sacrum' (1660) was published in Padua. 
Ball was admitted as an honorary fellow of the College of Physicians in London in December 1664. He was elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1663, and was one of the council in 1664, 1666, and 1669. In 1667 he became a member of the committee charged with producing a catalogue of the library and manuscripts of Arundel House. While at his father's residence, Mamhead House in Devon, in October 1665, Ball, together with his brother William, made the observation of Saturn mentioned under William Ball. Ball died in July 1675; he was buried on the 20th of that month in the round of the Temple Church. 


@@@@@


doc= 1222


Ball, Robert (1802-1857), naturalist, was born at Cobh, co. Cork, on 1 April 1802, the elder son of Robert Stawell Ball (1768-1841), a customs official, and Mary, 'nee' Green, of Youghal. His younger sisters were Anne Elizabeth Ball and Mary Ball ['see below']; he also had a younger brother, Bent. He was educated at the notable Quaker school at Ballitore, co. Kildare, where James White encouraged his zoological studies. Leaving school at sixteen, Robert soon moved with his family to Youghal and, with his sisters, actively observed and recorded local flora and fauna. Having taken much interest in public and charitable institutions, he became a local magistrate about 1823. His desire to study medicine was precluded by family finances and he moved to Dublin, where, from 1827 to 1852, he was employed as assistant librarian and keeper of records in the under-secretary's office. In 1837 he married Amelia Gresley Hellicar of Bristol; among their seven children was Robert Stawell Ball, astronomer. Although highly praised for his exemplary work in Dublin, Ball's interest in science was an obvious distraction, and in 1852 he was retired owing to the fact that he had 'devoted much attention to scientific pursuits, and that it was not expedient that public servants should be thus occupied' ('DNB'). Nevertheless, he received a pension of $800 per annum which allowed the family to live in moderate comfort. 
Ball's spare time indeed had been devoted to natural history pursuits. His holidays were zoological expeditions, frequently with William Thompson of Belfast, to whose publications, especially 'The Natural History of Ireland', he added numerous details. Highly respected in Dublin's scientific life, Ball became a council member of the Royal Irish Academy and other societies and president of both the Geological Society of Ireland and Dublin University Zoological Association. As secretary of the Zoological Society of Ireland he put forward ingenious ideas which developed its exhibits, gardens, and programmes in innovative directions. He introduced the penny admission for the working classes and 'zoo breakfasts' for members in 1844. In the same year he was appointed director of Trinity College Museum to which his large natural history collection of mainly Irish specimens was donated; he was awarded an honorary LLD in 1850. Further appointments came as secretary of the Queen's University in Ireland (1851), secretary to the joint committee of lectures (1854), and assistant examiner to the civil service commission (1855). However, other accolades were to come in 1857 when he was proposed as a fellow of the Royal Society, as 'the Inventor or Improver of the Naturalists' Dredge. Distinguished for his acquaintance with the science of Practical Zoology, Eminent as a Promoter of Natural Science'. That same year he was appointed president elect of the British Association's natural history section for the Dublin meeting, but on 30 March 1857 he died, probably of a heart attack, at his home, 3 Granby Row, Rutland Square, Dublin, and both honours were denied him. He was buried at Mount Jerome cemetery, Dublin. In private life Ball's social qualities and honourable nature were highly esteemed, and he enlivened many a children's party. His scientific papers on Irish zoology, ranging from seals and cephalopods to fossil Irish elk, bear, and oxen remains, were published mainly in the 'Proceedings' and 'Transactions' of the Royal Irish Academy, the 'Proceedings of the Zoological Society', the 'Annals of Natural History', and the 'Natural History Review'. 


Anne Ball became a most successful algologist. As was then customary, her work was published by male naturalists such as William Henry Harvey, James Mackay, and others. As the elder sister she was conventionally cited in publications as Miss Ball, as distinct from her sister who was cited as Miss M. Ball. Although not a member of the Dublin scientific societies, Anne Ball benefited greatly from Robert's support and his friendship with many notable naturalists. William Harvey assisted and encouraged Anne and dedicated to her several new species that she had first collected, such as 'Ballia callitricha' and 'Cladophora balliana'. She contributed records of hydroids to William Thompson, published in volume four of 'The Natural History of Ireland' (1856). Anne died at home in Belmont Avenue, Dublin, in 1872. She did not marry and her extant collections were later housed in the herbaria at University College, Cork, and at the Royal (later National) Botanic Gardens, Glasnevin, which acquired her drawings of seaweeds and fungi. 




@@@@@


doc= 1223


Ball, Thomas (1590-1659), hagiographer and Church of England clergyman, was born at Alberbury, Shropshire, of unknown parents. In 1613 he was appointed usher of a Mr Puller's school at Epping, Essex, and it was his employer's letter of recommendation which introduced him to John Preston of Queens' College, Cambridge. Ball entered the college in 1615, graduated BA in 1622, and was one of the 'twelve disciples' (Ball, 86) who followed Preston to Emmanuel College when he became master. Proceeding to MA in 1625, Ball was elected a fellow, and ordained a priest at Peterborough on 19 May 1627. In 1628 Preston, on his deathbed, bequeathed to Ball his pupils -- Lord Saye and Sele's brother and the sons of the earl of Warwick and Sir John Pickering. Ball wrote the life of his mentor, later included in Samuel Clarke's collection of godly lives, and collaborated with Richard Sibbes and Thomas Goodwin to produce a posthumous edition of Preston's sermons. On 11 November 1629 he acceded to a request from the corporation of Northampton to become vicar of its church of All Saints. With his first wife, Dorothy (died 1631), he had a daughter, Elizabeth. 
Ball was a prominent member of a self-consciously godly community centred on Northampton and an active organizer of local opposition to crown policies of the 1620s and 1630s. Through Preston he was associated with national opponents of the regime, especially Christopher Sherland, who described him as his 'reverend and pious friend' (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/161/10), and Lord Saye. On 5 June 1633 Ball married Sherland's widow, Jane, 'nee' Oglethorpe (died 1635): Ruth was their only child. Ball regarded Preston and himself as guardians of a Calvinist orthodoxy which by 1626 had been abandoned by the crown in favour of an anti-Calvinist 'prelaticall' (Ball, 101) party -- 'several of the Bishops... were Arminians' (ibid., 123) -- which sought to replace the authority of scripture with 'unwritten Traditions' (ibid., 124) while marginalizing orthodox Calvinists as treasonous puritans. His public opposition began in 1627 when he defaulted over payment of the forced loan at Northampton (before becoming vicar), and in 1633 he omitted to read the anti-sabbatarian 'Book of Sports'. He was repeatedly harassed by the church courts for not administering the communion in the Laudian fashion -- only to those who kneeled at the altar rails -- and for not bowing at the mention of Jesus's name. In turn, godly backsliders who conformed were condemned by Ball and Saye. Despite pressure from the courts (which discouraged afternoon sermons) Ball preached twice on Sundays and invited an impressive range of visiting ministers to read the Thursday lecture in contravention of royal instructions of 1633. The next year he was suspended for preaching controversial doctrine. The Northampton pulpit was used to sound a clarion call against 'Idolatry' and its sponsors, the 'p[er]secutors of [Christ]ians' (Woodford's diary, 135), while Ball and Saye attended a public fast in support of Laudianism's opponents, Henry Burton, John Bastwick, and William Prynne. During the 1630s Ball also acted as the intermediary between Northamptonshire puritans and John Durie, who planned to establish a pan-protestant union against Catholicism; Ball worked with William Twisse on the project. 
In November 1637 Ball married his third wife, Jane (died 1660), the widow of a Mr Hatch. They had eight children, Thomas, Jane, Samuel, Nathaniel, Martha, Dorothy, Timothy, and Joseph. Ball canvassed for the godly candidate, Sir Gilbert Pickering (his former pupil), in the shire contest for the Short Parliament. He had omitted to pay the clerical tax to fund the bishops' wars, was prominent at the clerical conference at Kettering in August 1640 which supported the aims of the invading Scots, and refused to take the 'etcetera oath' legitimizing the new ecclesiastical canons. 
During the civil war Ball acted as adviser to the local committee for plundered ministers, which was dominated by Pickering. In 1648 he subscribed to the Northamptonshire agreement with the London testimony in support of presbyterian church government and in 1656 published 'Pastorum propugnaculum' in defence of a national ordained ministry against the attacks of the sectaries. He died at Northampton in 1659 and was buried in All Saints' Church on 21 June; the funeral oration was preached by the Presbyterian John Howes. 


@@@@@


doc= 1224


Ball, William (c.1631-1690), astronomer, was the son of Sir Peter Ball (bap. 1598, d. 1680), a barrister of the Middle Temple, and his wife, Ann, daughter of Sir William Cooke of Highnam, Gloucestershire. He was the eldest of seventeen children in a legal and mercantile family of minor Devon gentry, whose estate was centred on the hamlet of Mamhead on the eastern escarpment of the Haldon hills. His father was knighted at Oxford in 1643 for his services to the king's cause, and was appointed attorney-general to Henrietta Maria, having served as her solicitor since at least 1636; he was then evicted from the Middle Temple and reportedly imprisoned, and his estate was sequestered. The whereabouts and fortune of his son and heir at this time are not known. 
In 1646 William Ball was registered at the Middle Temple, a few months after commons and exercises were restored; there is no record of his subsequently being called to the bar. His family began to recover their fortunes somewhat in 1653. Ball first enters the historian's line of vision two years later, as one of a group of virtuosi who were actively engaged in observing the puzzling changes in the appearance of the planet Saturn. Their work was generally conducted around the observatories in the tower of Wadham College, Oxford, at Gresham College, in the City of London, and at Sir Paul Neile's residence at White Waltham. Ball's observations seem to have been conducted independently, though other astronomers were kept informed of his progress, in particular Christopher Wren (1632-1723) in Oxford and London, and Christiaan Huygens (1629-1695) at The Hague. 
The location from which Ball made his observations is not recorded but it was probably in the vicinity of London rather than in Devon, as Wren writes that Ball's important observation of a faint shadowy belt on the surface of Saturn was shown to him 'immediately' upon its discovery in 1655 ('OEuvres completes', 3.422). The instrument with which Ball made this discovery is recorded: according to John Wallis it was a 12 foot telescope made in Rome by Eustachio Divini (1610-1685) (ibid., 2.305). Ball's observations played an important role in the formation of Wren's hypothesis that Saturn was surrounded by a thin elliptical 'corona' of uneven width, and they were also extensively used by Huygens in support of his theory that the planet was surrounded by a solid circular ring. Huygens's theory, made public in 1659, gained the broad acceptance of the astronomical community during the 1660s. 
It is not known how Ball first became acquainted with the group of astronomers interested in Saturn. It is possible that he was associated with the displaced royalists who assembled at the London home of Charles Scarburgh between 1646 and 1649. Both Seth Ward, who was at the centre of the Wadham and Gresham astronomical groups in the 1650s, and the young Christopher Wren, of Ball's own generation, were among their number. Alternatively he may have come into contact with astronomy through attending lectures at Gresham College. Thomas Sprat, in a report replete with inaccuracies, writes that Ball was one of the virtuosi who met regularly at Gresham College during the 1650s ('History of the Royal Society', 1667, 57). 
In the Michaelmas term following the Restoration, Ball was one of the twelve virtuosi who met after Christopher Wren's Gresham lecture and discussed a 'designe of founding a Colledge for the promoting of Physico-Mathematicall Experimentall Learning' ('Record of the Royal Society', 7), agreeing to formalize their proceedings to this end. Ball's 'chamber in the Temple' (ibid.) was initially designated as one of the society's meeting places and he was appointed its treasurer. This new society subsequently gained royal approval and support. Ball was nominated a member of the governing council of the Royal Society in its charters of 1662 and 1663, and his appointment as treasurer was confirmed in May 1663 ['see 'Founder members of the Royal Society]. At the first annual election in November 1663 he was elected to the council but not to the office of treasurer, which went to Abraham Hill. The detailed accounts that Ball drew up during his tenure as treasurer survive, and form the core of the society's earliest administrative records. 
Ball continued as an active member of the Royal Society for another two years. He was a regular participant in a number of the committees responsible for arranging a collective experimental programme, and he had particular responsibility for experiments relating to magnetic phenomena. In the plague year of 1665 he withdrew to Mamhead, where he continued his astronomical observations intermittently. In September and October of that year he observed Saturn's ring in an elongated condition and indented towards its centre, so that it appeared to touch the planet on either side. The report of this observation reached London at the height of the plague, when the Royal Society was in recess. Sir Robert Moray thought that it 'will puzzle anew Mr Hugens his conceit of a circle' and saw it as evidence that Saturn's ring actually touched the planet's body, as it did in Wren's hypothesis ('Correspondence of Henry Oldenburg', 2.608-9). The claim made by some nineteenth-century historians that Ball discovered the principal division in Saturn's ring in 1665 is, however, false. 
Ball suffered from continual ill health, which he attributed to his having fallen 30 feet onto hard ground in 1660. Informing the secretary of the Royal Society in 1666 that 'I intend not to see London a great while if I can help itt' ('Correspondence of Henry Oldenburg', 3.89), he denied lacking philosophical ambitions. Rather, 'my desires being as large as any but my body by soe long a disorder hath beene a great obstruction to that designe of pleasure' (ibid., 3.93). For a brief period in 1667 and 1668 he returned to London, where he married Mary Posthuma Hussey, daughter of Thomas Hussey of Honnington, Lincolnshire, at St Paul's in Covent Garden on 10 July 1668, after which he returned to Mamhead permanently. The Balls had five sons and one daughter, of whom four sons survived into adulthood. William Ball's engagement in managing the family's estate in Devon left him little time for scientific pursuits. He wrote to Huygens in 1675 that he was 'very unhappy wanting leisure from the troublesome incumbrances of a country life, usually esteemed retirement... having the care of much husbandry for my father as well as myselfe' (ibid., 11.223). 
The Balls were a disappointed family, not having received the preferment they felt was their due on the return of the monarchy, as William Ball frankly recorded on the memorial that he erected to his father in Mamhead church. The improvements that were planned for the house and park at Mamhead had to wait until the eighteenth century. William Ball died in 1690, ten years after inheriting the estate, and was buried on 22 October in the round of the Temple Church, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 1225


Ballance, John (1839-1893), newspaper proprietor and premier of New Zealand, was born on 27 March 1839 at Ballypitmave, near Glenavy, co. Antrim, Ireland, the eldest of the eleven children of Samuel Ballance (1800-1879), a tenant farmer, and his wife, Mary McNiece, the daughter of Conway McNiece. He was educated at the local national school and Wilson's academy in Belfast. By the age of sixteen he was helping his father, an evangelical protestant who was active in local politics, to write his speeches. He left school early and took a job with a Belfast hardware firm. In 1857 he left Belfast for Birmingham to work as a travelling salesman, and enrolled in evening classes at the Birmingham and Midland Institute to study politics, biography, and history. He married Fanny Taylor, the daughter of a licensed victualler, at the church of St Peter and St Paul, Aston, on 17 June 1863. Not long afterwards, owing in part to Fanny's ill health, they decided to emigrate to New Zealand, where Fanny had a brother living in Wanganui. In April 1866 they left London on the 'Ruahine' bound for Melbourne, and after a short stay continued to New Zealand on the 'Albion'. They arrived at Wellington on 11 August, and a few days later travelled to Wanganui. 
In Wanganui, Ballance opened a jewellery store as a temporary expedient, but it did not prosper. In 1867 he established the 'Evening Herald' (later the 'Wanganui Herald') and its weekly edition, the 'Weekly Herald' (later 'The Yeoman'). An able and innovative journalist, he ran the paper with considerable success. During the war against Titokowaru in 1868-9, when Wanganui felt itself under immediate threat, the 'Herald' was outspoken in criticizing the performance of the British forces and Titokowaru. Regarded by the authorities as a maverick troublemaker, Ballance spent a night in gaol after refusing to join the local militia, the compulsion having offended his liberal beliefs. However, he later saw limited action with the Wanganui cavalry volunteers, when he combined the roles of soldier and war correspondent. In March 1868 Fanny Ballance died, at the age of twenty-four. On 19 May 1870, in Wellington, Ballance married Ellen Anderson, the daughter of the Wellington merchant David Anderson and his wife, Ann Thompson. There were no children from either marriage, but in 1886 Ellen and John adopted Ellen's four-year-old niece. 
Increasingly involved in Wanganui affairs, Ballance in 1875 narrowly won the Rangitikei parliamentary seat on a platform stressing abolition of the provincial system and support for state education. He joined George Grey's ministry in January 1878 as commissioner of customs, commissioner of stamp duties, and minister of education. Shortly afterwards he became colonial treasurer -- high office for a politically inexperienced man. His budget of 6 August 1878 was arguably the most significant since Julius Vogel's public works announcement eight years earlier; he reformed the tariff and introduced a modest but symbolically important land tax. Ballance won the Wanganui seat in 1879 but two years later suffered his only electoral defeat. Out of parliament he continued to advocate closer land settlement, writing a series of articles (collected in 1887 as 'A National Land Policy Based on the Principle of State Ownership') on land reform and nationalization. A convinced secularist, he formed the Wanganui Freethought Association in 1883 and brought out the monthly 'Freethought Review' (1883-5). 
Returned at the 1884 general election by a sizable majority, Ballance joined the Stout-Vogel ministry and held the lands and immigration, native affairs, and defence portfolios. His important 'Land Act' of 1885 aimed to place as many people as possible on the land by encouraging leasehold tenure and establishing government-assisted special settlement schemes. As native minister he pursued an enlightened, if somewhat paternalistic, policy aimed at protecting Maori land from private sale. The government was defeated in 1887, and two years later Ballance was elected leader of the opposition. A radical land policy was the dominant theme of his campaign at the December 1890 election, which took place against a background of strikes and economic depression. Liberals and their trade unions fared well at the polls, and in January 1891 Ballance formed the country's first Liberal government. 
Having surrounded himself with talented cabinet colleagues, Ballance steered his government through two difficult years before his death in 1893, and in doing so laid the foundation for a long period of Liberal rule. A major problem was opposition to his legislation from the legislative council. The defeated premier, Harry Atkinson, had arranged for the appointment of seven councillors in an attempt to block the new government. The council subsequently rejected key measures passed in the lower house. Ballance failed to persuade the governor to redress Atkinson's actions by appointing Ballance nominees. The matter was passed to the Colonial Office in London, which in 1892 ruled in Ballance's favour, thus securing the passage of Liberal legislation and marking a major step in New Zealand's path to independence. 
During his premiership Ballance established the Liberal Federation, the first attempt in New Zealand to form a nationwide party organization. As colonial treasurer he introduced land and income taxes to replace the property tax. Other legislation included the 'Land Act' 1892 and the 'Land for Settlements Act' 1892. The new taxes were much criticized at home and overseas, but critics were largely silenced when Ballance announced a record budget surplus in 1892. In his last months in office he supported moves to enfranchise women, a reform he had long advocated. In this he was strongly influenced by his wife, Ellen, who was prominent in the growing feminist movement in New Zealand and vice-president of the Women's Progressive Society. 
Ballance was not charismatic, nor was he a great public speaker. He was kind, courteous, considerate, and honest, and attracted extraordinary loyalty among his cabinet. Many viewed his mild temperament as a sign of weakness. W. P. Reeves described him as 'absolutely the most unassuming and unpretentious' of all the successful men he had known. But, he added, 'as a Premier -- and I say it emphatically -- he knew how to be master in his own house' ('The Yeoman', 10 June 1893). 
Ballance died of cancer at Premier House, Wellington, on 27 April 1893. After a state funeral he was buried at Wanganui three days later. Death in office helped serve his positive popular reputation, although over the following long premiership of Richard Seddon, Ballance's major contribution to Liberalism tended to disappear from view. Ellen Ballance survived her husband and remained active in community organizations in Wanganui, where she died on 14 June 1935. 


@@@@@


doc= 1226


Ballantine, James (1807/8-1877), stained-glass artist and writer, was born in Edinburgh, the son of James Ballantine, a brewer, and his wife, Margaret Anderson. He served an apprenticeship with David Roberts, then working as an Edinburgh house decorator and theatrical scenery painter, and also studied draughtsmanship at the Trustees' Academy in Edinburgh. His specialization in the neglected art of glass staining was almost certainly the result of time spent at an English studio -- perhaps in Newcastle upon Tyne -- and clearly gave him sufficient confidence in his mastery of the medium to set up his own company in Edinburgh in 1837 and publish 'A Treatise on Painted Glass' in 1845. Despite advocating domestic use of stained glass and criticizing 'antiquing' of new glass, this work was conservative in approach and did not advocate any radical departures in terms of subject matter or technique. 
Early successes included a number of windows for the House of Lords (1843), a set of armorial windows based on David Roberts's designs for the Scott monument, Edinburgh (1847), and an extensive scheme for St John's Episcopal Church, Edinburgh (1850s). The 1850s also brought controversy when Ballantine's scheme for Glasgow Cathedral was overruled by a committee which favoured the enamelled glass produced by the royal Bavarian glassworks in Munich. Pompously declaring the Munich glass superior to any native product, the committee ensured a national outcry and a consequent flurry of commissions to salve the injured pride of Ballantine. Notable later work included windows for Ibrox parish church, Glasgow ('c'.1863), the choir of St Giles's Cathedral, Edinburgh (1874-7), and Dunfermline Abbey (from 1873). The last two, based on designs by Robert Herdman and Joseph Noel Paton respectively, are of particular note and did much to vindicate the quality of indigenous glass staining. 
In parallel with his business career, Ballantine enjoyed a considerable reputation as a poet and writer. Recognized as an authority on Robert Burns, he wrote songs and verses of his own which owe much to Burns's idiom. These appeared periodically in 'The Scotsman' and were then collected and published from 1843 in a series of monthly parts as 'The Gaberlunzie's Wallet'. Songs such as 'Bonnie Bonaly', 'Ilka Blade o'Grass', and 'Castles in the Air' were among the most popular songs of their time, but seem to have enjoyed no enduring success. Other notable publications include the 'Miller of Deanhaugh' (1845) and 'Lilias Lee' (1871), a tale in Spenserian verse. His 'Life of David Roberts, R.A.' (1866) is a fulsome eulogy of the man whose brushes he had once cleaned and who set him on the path to become the chief revivalist of Scottish ecclesiastical stained glass. Ballantine died at Harrender Lodge, Edinburgh, on 18 December 1877, aged sixty-nine; he was survived by his wife, Henrietta, 'nee' Miller; his legacy was sustained by his son Alexander and grandson, James, both successful stained-glass artists. Another son, James, was a house painter. 


@@@@@


doc= 1227


Ballantine, William (1812-1887), serjeant-at-law, was born in Howland Street, Tottenham Court Road, London, on 3 January 1812, the eldest son of 
Ballantine was educated at St Paul's School, London, and at Ashburnham House, Blackheath. He was admitted to the Inner Temple on 28 May 1829, and was called to the bar on 6 June 1834, and occupied rooms in Inner Temple Lane. He joined the Middlesex sessions, where his father occasionally presided, and there he made the valuable acquaintance of John Huddleston. He subsequently joined the central criminal court, and for convenience chose the home circuit. As a young man Ballantine was an assiduous haunter of the old literary taverns in Covent Garden, and he later recorded a number of interesting reminiscences of literary figures from Harrison Ainsworth to Dickens and Trollope. On 4 December 1841 he married Eliza, daughter of Henry Gyles, of London. His first notable brief was in May 1843, when he was sole defence counsel for Giuseppe Azzopardi, a Maltese sailor tried and sentenced to death at the central criminal court under the 'Murders Abroad Act' for the murder of a Dutch woman in Smyrna. A murder trial at Chelmsford assizes in 1847 was another of many in which his client's life was involved, and the trial gave Ballantine his 'first lesson in the art of silent cross-examination'. 
Ballantine was engaged in a suit in the House of Lords in 1848 to annul the marriage of an heiress, Esther Field, on the grounds of coercion and fraud. Sir Fitzroy Kelly, Sir John Bayley, and other distinguished counsel were in favour of the bill. Ballantine alone opposed it, but his cross-examination was so able and searching that the earl of Devon, who was the chairman of the court, declined to move the further progress of the bill. 
On 3 November 1856 Ballantine received the coif of a serjeant-at-law, but he had to wait until 1863 to obtain from Lord Westbury his patent of precedence, which was required to place serjeants on the same level as queen's counsel. In 1863 he was engaged in the Woolley arson case, and in the following year he received through the marchese d'Azeglio the thanks of the Sardinian government for his exertions on behalf of Pellizzioni, a Sardinian subject. During 1867, the last year in which the House of Commons enjoyed jurisdiction in the case of contested elections, he practised before parliamentary committees in work of this kind. In 1868 he lost an action in which he defended the 'Daily Telegraph' on a charge of libel, against his frequent rival and opponent, Serjeant John Humffreys Parry. He was, however, specially appointed by the House of Commons in 1869 to prosecute the mayor of Cork for eulogizing the attempt of O'Farrell to assassinate the duke of Edinburgh (the action was subsequently dropped), and he was no less distinguished by the tact which he displayed in the Mordaunt divorce case of 1870, when the prince of Wales was subpoenaed in the court. 
The three forensic performances with which Ballantine's name is mainly associated are his prosecution with Sir Robert Collier, the solicitor-general, of Franz Muller for the murder of Mr Briggs in 1864, in which the crown secured a conviction despite the brilliant defence of Serjeant Parry; his advocacy on behalf of the Tichborne claimant in his ejectment action in 1871; and his defence of Malhar Rao, the Maharaja Gaikwar of Baroda, arraigned for the crime of attempting to poison the British resident. The result in this case, which was tried at Baroda in February 1875, was an acquittal, but the British and native commissioners were divided as to the guilt of the Gaikwar, who was deposed on the grounds of incapacity and misconduct. Ballantine had extricated himself with skill from his position in the Tichborne case before matters became utterly desperate for his client, and in the trial of the Gaikwar his cross-examination of Colonel Robert Phayre was considered a masterpiece. His honorarium of $10,000 was among the largest paid to counsel at that time. 
Ballantine was made an honorary bencher of the Inner Temple on 22 November 1878, and retired from active work as an advocate some three years later. 'Some Experiences of a Barrister's Life', which he published in 1882, was an amusing miscellany of gossip and reminiscence, literary and legal, which sold very well and remains of value, especially to literary historians. In November 1882 Ballantine went to America hoping -- as it transpired wrongly -- to make money by public readings; he recorded his experiences in 'The Old World and the New' (1884). Ballantine died at Margate on 9 January 1887. His son, (William Henry) Walter Ballantine (1847-1911), was Liberal MP for Coventry from 1887 to 1895. 
Ballantine moved easily in the hinterland between legal and theatrical society. He understood the criminal mind, and much of his success flowed from this. He was generally credited with being the original of Chaffanbrass in Anthony Trollope's 'Orley Farm'. According to the 'Law Times', 'he died very poor indeed' and 'left behind him scarcely any lesson, even in his own poor biography, which the rising generation of lawyers could profitably learn' ('Law Times', 15 Jan 1887). 


@@@@@


doc= 1228


Ballantyne, James (1772-1833), printer and newspaper editor, was born at Kelso, Roxburghshire, Scotland, on 15 January 1772, the eldest child of John Ballantyne (1743-1817), general merchant, and Jean (1745?-1818), daughter of James Barclay, rector of Dalkeith high school, and his wife, Elizabeth. His early education was at Kelso grammar school, where in 1783 he first met Walter Scott, who briefly attended the school while staying at Kelso. From 1785 to 1786 Ballantyne attended Edinburgh University, and subsequently was apprenticed to a Kelso solicitor. He returned to Edinburgh University to complete his legal training, and renewed his acquaintance with Scott (both were members of the Teviotdale Club). 
Ballantyne returned to Kelso in 1795 to practise as a lawyer. His first involvement with editing and printing came as a result of being asked in 1796 to be editor of a proposed anti-radical weekly newspaper, the 'Kelso Mail'. The first number of the 'Mail' appeared on 13 April 1797. Ballantyne embraced his new role, travelling to London to make literary and business contacts and to Glasgow to purchase new type. In 1799 Scott proposed that Ballantyne should undertake to print some of his ballads, and twelve copies of a small volume entitled 'Apology for Tales of Terror' were prepared. Scott's recognition of Ballantyne's potential led him to recommend a move to Edinburgh, and to entrust him with the first two volumes of 'The Minstrelsy of the Scottish Border', published in 1802 under the Kelso imprint. These books demanded a complex layout and typography, which even at that early stage Ballantyne was able to provide. 
In November 1802 Ballantyne moved to Edinburgh, and at Abbey Hill opened a shop with the designation 'The Border Press' and equipped with 'two presses and a proof one' (Lockhart, 'Memoirs', 1.378). In 1805 he moved to larger premises, at Paul's Work, and lived nearby, at 10 St John Street. When Scott's 'The Lay of the Last Minstrel' was published to acclaim in January 1805 the quality of the printing was widely acknowledged. A consequent increase in orders meant a need for more capital, and Scott entered into a formal partnership with Ballantyne. The deed of co-partnery of 14 March 1805 noted the mutual advantages to be derived from the agreement and formalized the existing financial arrangement. For the move to Edinburgh Scott had advanced a loan of $500; in order to become an equal but secret partner this became a portion of his investment, with the addition of $1508. Ballantyne's contribution consisted of his property in the printing house, estimated at $2090. For managing the business he was to receive a third of the profits, with the remainder to be divided equally between the partners. Ballantyne became 'celebrated for his improvements in the art of printing' ('GM', 94). In his negotiations with publishers Scott stipulated that his works were to be printed by James Ballantyne & Co. and that he depended on the printer's attentive eye for detail and careful corrections of his manuscripts and proofs. The connection with Ballantyne became even more important when in 1814 Scott began writing the Waverley novels and strove to keep secret his identity as their author. 
The success of the printing company did not mean that it was always conducted in a financially prudent manner, and much of the continued expansion was based on borrowings against Scott's future publications. In 1809 another partnership was formed, to establish a bookseller's business under the care of Ballantyne's younger brother John Ballantyne (1774-1821). James Ballantyne was to receive one fourth of the profits, and works issued by the company were to be printed by his firm. When the resulting dilution of capital funds put the printing business at risk the publishing concern was gradually wound up. In October 1815 Ballantyne's negotiations to marry Christian (died 1829), daughter of the prosperous Carfrae farmer Robert Hogarth, required his release from partnership in the printing company and any responsibility for its liabilities. Scott became sole owner early in 1816 and Ballantyne was manager at a salary of $400. He married Christian on 1 February 1816. Their son, John Alexander, was born on 29 November 1816, followed by four daughters, one of whom, Mary Scott, died in infancy. 
In April 1817, in partnership with Scott and with his brother-in-law George Hogarth, writer to the signet, Ballantyne acquired the 'Edinburgh Weekly Journal', for which he was to serve as editor and drama critic. His editorials were written in an engaging but prolix style. Their content became the subject of dispute between Scott and Ballantyne during the political unrest of 1819 and 1820. Scott particularly objected to the editorial position criticizing the magistrates' actions in the Peterloo affair. However, when Scott hinted at withdrawing from the journal Ballantyne modified his position. The disagreement did not have a lasting effect on their relationship, and in May 1822 Ballantyne was readmitted as a partner in the printing business; he remained a part-owner with Scott until 1826. When a financial crisis affecting the entire publishing industry resulted in the bankruptcy of Scott's publishers, Archibald Constable & Co., publisher and printer were entangled in a web of mutual obligations and bills. The resulting failure of James Ballantyne & Co. meant that Scott's affairs and those of the printing house were placed in the trust whose debts were eventually paid by Scott's heroic productivity over the final years of his life. Ballantyne reverted to his role as salaried manager of the company. Lockhart attributed the failure to Ballantyne's lack of expertise in financial management and to his excessive personal drawings from the company. This was not, however, Scott's opinion, and his high regard for Ballantyne and for his considerable abilities as a first-rate printer never diminished. 
After the financial disaster of 1826 Ballantyne suffered a further blow: the death of his wife, on 17 February 1829. He experienced a severe and prolonged depression. Subsequently he and Scott again quarrelled about politics, this time over Ballantyne's support for the 'Reform Bill', and although the two continued to communicate about business matters they never resumed their former friendship. Both men were in declining health. Ballantyne, who had always been short and stout, became increasingly corpulent and pompous in later life; in recognition of this Scott called him Aldiborontiphoscophornio. After Scott died, in September 1832, a meeting of his creditors provided Ballantyne with a discharge from his obligation for the printing company's debts. On his sickbed Ballantyne wrote the poignant memorandum of his association with Scott that was later employed by Lockhart in his unfairly critical portrayal. Ballantyne died at his home, in Hill Street, Edinburgh, on 17 January 1833. 


@@@@@


doc= 1229


Ballantyne, James Robert (1813-1864), orientalist, was born on 13 December 1813 in Kelso, Roxburghshire, the eldest son of Alexander Thomson Ballantyne (1776-1847), newspaper owner, editor, and printer in Edinburgh, and his wife, (Anne) Randall Grant ('c'.1786-1855). Alexander Ballantyne was a younger brother of James Ballantyne (1772-1833), Sir Walter Scott's publisher. One of James Robert's brothers was the author Robert Michael Ballantyne. 
Ballantyne was educated at Kelso grammar school, Edinburgh (New) Academy (1824-7), and Edinburgh College, where he began to study oriental languages. He continued this at the East India College, Haileybury (1829-32), under his uncle, Major James Michael, professor of Hindu literature, and Francis Johnson, professor of Sanskrit. Ballantyne published his first book, 'A Grammar of the Hindustani Language', in 1838, and the following year he was appointed to teach Hindi and Sanskrit at the Scottish Naval and Military Academy, Edinburgh. In 1845 he was made an LLD by Glasgow University. 
Meanwhile, the government of the North-Western Provinces of India had decided to add English literature and science to the Sanskrit syllabus of the Government College, Benares. On the recommendation of Horace Hayman Wilson, Boden professor of Sanskrit at Oxford and librarian to the East India Company, the company's court of directors appointed Ballantyne principal of the college in 1845 to supervise the reorganization. As principal (from 1856 also professor of moral philosophy), his task was to bring the Sanskrit students to appreciate European thought and ways without losing the influence among their countrymen which was based on their mastery of the traditional learning of India. His tact, broad-mindedness, and genuine respect for the best in Hindu thought enabled him to succeed by winning their trust; he described his methods and approach to Indian traditions in the introductions to his 'Synopsis of Science in Sanskrit and English' (1852) and 'The Bible for the Pandits' (1860). These were the two most notable of a number of works, designed primarily for his Benares pupils, in which he aimed to adapt the Sanskrit philosophical vocabulary so that it could express European concepts, and which also included a version (1852) of Francis Bacon's 'Novum organum'. 
Ballantyne published several English translations of Hindu philosophy (especially the aphorisms of the Nyaya, Sankhya, and Vedanta schools) and of Indian linguistics (notably the 'Mahabhashya' (1856), Patanjali's 'great commentary' on the classic grammar of Panini), besides European-style grammars of Sanskrit, Hindi, Maratha, and Persian. These were intended to make Indian thought more accessible to Europeans, whom he hoped to dissuade from their tendency to scorn or distrust Indian achievements. 
Ballantyne's first wife was Violet Roberton (1811-1847), like him a native of Roxburghshire. They married in Edinburgh on 20 November 1844, and had two children: Alexander John Ballantyne (1845-1878), who was born at sea on the voyage to India and later became a lieutenant in the Royal Navy, and Elizabeth Roberton Ballantyne (1847-1916), born at Benares, who became a teacher of languages. His second wife was Annabella Georgiana Monck Mason (1830/31-1915), daughter of Captain Thomas Monck Mason RN, of Enniskerry, co. Wicklow, and his wife, Mary, 'nee' Grey. The political agent in India, George Henry Monck Mason of the Bengal army, was her elder brother. She and Ballantyne married at Keroby, Rajputana, on 9 February 1854, and had three children: Violet Annabel Ballantyne ('b'. 1855 in Benares), Katherine Gordon Ballantyne (1857-1907), born in Calcutta, and George Monck Mason Ballantyne (1859-1889), born in Edinburgh. Ballantyne's health began to fail in India, and in 1861 he resigned from the college and returned to Britain. He served as librarian to the India Office until his death on 16 February 1864, at his London home, 14 Bessborough Street, Pimlico. He was buried at Kensal Green. The following year his widow, Annabella, married Edward George Jenkinson (1835-1919), deputy collector of Benares. They had several children in India and returned to Britain in 1879; after serving as assistant under-secretary for police in Ireland he was knighted in 1888. 


@@@@@


doc= 1230


Ballantyne, John (1774-1821), publisher and literary agent, was born at Kelso, Roxburghshire, Scotland, on 13 May 1774, the second of three children of John Ballantyne (1743-1817), general merchant, and Jean (1745?-1818), daughter of James Barclay, rector of Dalkeith high school, and his wife, Elizabeth. The younger brother of James Ballantyne (1772-1833), he was educated at Kelso grammar school, which Walter Scott attended in 1783. He went to London in 1794 and worked as a clerk in the banking firm of Messrs Currie. On returning to Kelso in 1795 he became a partner in his father's business. In June 1797 he married Hermione Parker (died 1854), stepdaughter of the Revd William Rutherford, assistant minister at Kelso. Soon afterwards the partnership with his father was dissolved, but Ballantyne carried on the business until, as a consequence of financial difficulties, he moved to Edinburgh in January 1805. There he was employed in James Ballantyne's printing business, as a clerk at $200 per year. Small, slight, and dark-haired, he was a talented storyteller, mimic, and singer. His cheerful optimism and good humour led to Scott's enduring affection for a man he called Jocund Johnnie ('Letters of Sir Walter Scott', 7.127) and Rigdumfunnidos. 
When, in January 1809, it was decided to establish a publishing house with Scott as secret partner John Ballantyne was appointed manager, at a salary of $300 and one-fourth of the profits. In preparation he went to London to meet John Murray and made arrangements to be the Edinburgh publisher of the 'Quarterly Review'. John Ballantyne & Co. was established on Hanover Street, Edinburgh, in March 1809 and later held the designation 'bookseller to the regent'. Ballantyne's two-volume novel, 'The Widow's Lodgings', was probably written at the beginning of his career as a publisher; the second edition is dated 1813. According to James Ballantyne he also contributed ballads for the 'Edinburgh Annual Register', which the company began issuing in 1810. Though the publishing house enjoyed some initial success it was hampered by lack of capital. The 'Register' project lost money from the beginning, and the company's financial problems were further exacerbated when Ballantyne impulsively bought up stock that later proved unsaleable. By 1813 it was apparent that the business could not continue, and Scott re-entered negotiations with Archibald Constable & Co. The stock was gradually sold off at reduced rates, with Constable taking the bulk of it, and the partnership was finally dissolved on 1 February 1816. 
Though Scott's letters to Ballantyne during this period reflect a sense of exasperation his continued regard is evident from his decision to hire him as literary agent. This arrangement proved financially advantageous for Ballantyne, since it came to include a share in the profits from the 'Waverley' novels. Ballantyne made the Hanover Street premises into a saleroom for literature and art, and his lively character and sociability ensured him success in his capacity as auctioneer. In 1816 he purchased Trinity Grove, at 70 Trinity Road, on the Firth of Forth. The house had earlier belonged to the bookseller William Creech; renamed Harmony Hall, it became the site of lavish parties attended by theatrical, musical, and literary people. From 4 January to 12 July 1817 Ballantyne published a weekly periodical, 'The Sale-Room', which was designed to draw attention to the auction house. In November 1820 he proposed a series of reprinted novels, to be entitled 'Ballantyne's Novelists' Library', and Scott agreed to provide prefatory biographical essays. The first volume was published by Hurst & Co. in February 1821. 
Ballantyne's health began to decline in 1819, and in December 1820 he retired. He moved back to Roxburghshire -- to Kirklands, near Earlston -- and in April 1821 took Walton Hall, at Kelso, with a view to settling there. However, in early June, when he was at his brother's Edinburgh residence -- 10 St John Street -- he became acutely ill. On the morning of 16 June 1821 he died, probably of tuberculosis. Though Lockhart was severely critical of Ballantyne, he recorded that on attending the burial at Canongate churchyard, on 20 June, Scott turned away to say 'I feel as if there would be less sunshine for me from this day forth' (Lockhart, 'Memoirs', 5.76). Scott was a trustee of the will, by whose terms he was designated to receive $2000. In the event Ballantyne had died almost penniless, and the executors had difficulty finding any money for his widow. His mistress, Hermione Robertson, of Friars, near Kelso, may possibly have received her $100. Scott continued to contribute additional biographies to the 'Novelists' Library' project, for the benefit of Ballantyne's widow. 


@@@@@


doc= 1231


Ballantyne, John (1778-1830), United Secession minister, was born in the parish of Kinghorn in Fife on 8 May 1778. After being educated in the village school at Lochgelly, he entered the University of Edinburgh in 1795, and joined the Burgher branch of the Secession church, although his parents belonged to the established Church of Scotland. He taught at schools in Lochgelly and Colinsburgh before being ordained minister of Stonehaven in Kincardineshire in 1805. In 1824 he published 'A Comparison of Established and Dissenting Churches, by a Dissenter'. In 1830 this pamphlet, which had failed to excite notice, was republished with additions during the voluntary church controversy of the period. Ballantyne's partisanship in the controversy is said to have injured the reception of his 'Examination of the Human Mind', the first part of which appeared in 1828; two further parts were planned, but never appeared. The failure, however, may be accounted for without the influence of party spirit: the 'Examination' was a substantially unoriginal work, drawing largely on the work of Thomas Reid (1710-1796) and Dugald Stewart (1753-1828), although offering some criticism of Thomas Brown (1778-1820). Ballantyne apparently managed to pay for publication out of his own savings, handing over $200 which he had received from a patron. Reputedly suffering from indigestion brought on by overwork, Ballantyne died on 5 November 1830 at Stonehaven. He was buried in the parish church of Fetteresso, where a marble monument was erected to his memory. 


@@@@@


doc= 1232


Ballantyne, Robert Michael (1825-1894), author, was born on 24 April 1825 at 25 Ann Street, Edinburgh, the ninth of ten children of Alexander Thomson Ballantyne (1776-1847), newspaper editor and printer, and his wife, Anne, known by her second name, Randall ('c'.1786-1855), daughter of Dr Robert Grant and his wife, Mary. Ballantyne's father transcribed the manuscripts of Walter Scott's novels to preserve the author's anonymity when they were printed at the Ballantyne press of Ballantyne's uncle, James Ballantyne (1772-1833), and the family's fortunes fell with Scott's financial crisis in 1826. Ballantyne's only formal schooling was a brief period (1835-7) at Edinburgh Academy, his education being completed by his mother and sisters in the bosom of a musical and artistic family. His eldest brother, James Robert Ballantyne (1813-1864), attended East India College, Haileybury, on a scholarship and subsequently edited and translated many works of oriental religion and philosophy; his other brother, John Ballantyne (1815-1897), an artist, painted the portrait of him which is in the National Portrait Gallery. 
At sixteen Robert Ballantyne, the youngest son, signed on for five years with the Hudson's Bay Company, which he served in Rupert's Land and Canada (the modern Canadian provinces of Manitoba, Ontario, and Quebec), travelling extensively by canoe and sleigh and trading with Indians for furs, experiences he described in a journal and in letters home. On return to Edinburgh he took employment as a clerk and only at the suggestion of a family friend revised his journal and letters for publication, with his own illustrations, as 'Hudson's Bay, or, Every-Day Life in the Wilds of North America' (1848). Some years later, again at the suggestion of another (the publisher William Nelson), Ballantyne used his knowledge of Canada to provide the setting for a story for boys, 'Snowflakes and Sunbeams, or, The Young Fur Traders' (1856), establishing a pattern for his career as author of boys' adventures set in authentic backgrounds. When he had exhausted his personal experience, he turned to published accounts of travel as sources, most successfully with 'The Coral Island: a Tale of the Pacific Ocean' (1858), which is the only one of his many tales still read and remembered. He set other works in places he had not visited, such as Brazil ('Martin Rattler', 1858) and equatorial Africa ('The Gorilla Hunters', 1861), but he preferred to write from experience. According to his own autobiographical account, a 'blunder' in 'The Coral Island', in which he described coconuts growing without husks, 'in the same form as that in which they are usually presented to us in grocers' windows', led him 'to visit -- when possible -- the scenes in which my stories were laid' (Ballantyne, 13, 15). Many of his later books were indeed based on personal research, which took him 12 miles off the Scottish coast to the Bell Rock for 'The Lighthouse' (1865) and to the bottom of the Thames in a diving suit for 'Under the Waves' (1876). 
After the death of a sister in 1848 Ballantyne became a regular churchgoer and at twenty-four was elected an elder of the Free Church of Scotland, his firm faith pervading his writing as well as his life. His social conscience and commercial sense were successfully combined in works like 'The Lifeboat' (1864) and 'Fighting the Flames' (1867), which simultaneously inspired and thrilled, and in public lectures in which Ballantyne, well built and hirsute, singing in a fine baritone or shooting a stuffed eagle, publicized good causes and his own books. A Scottish lifeboat was gratefully named in his honour, but his principal achievement was his corpus of tales of manly boys in exotic locations, tales which opened to young readers the imperial prospect of a wide world to explore and exploit. Following the lead of Marryat and other previous writers, Ballantyne adapted the 'Robinson Crusoe' model for Victorian boys and influenced subsequent Scottish writers such as R. L. Stevenson, who admired as a boy Ballantyne's works and their author, 'an exceedingly good-looking, dark, full-bearded man' (Stevenson, 226) he later acknowledged in the verses prefacing 'Treasure Island' (1883). William Golding's 'Lord of the Flies' (1954) was a twentieth-century reaction to this whole tradition, and to 'The Coral Island' in particular. 
Ballantyne's boy heroes were not distracted by girls and his own adventures in researching fire brigades and railway trains were not disrupted when he married on 31 July 1866 a minister's daughter, Jane Grant ('c'.1845- 'c'.1924), with whom he had three sons and three daughters. Control of his copyrights and continuing success afforded Ballantyne the opportunity to move in 1873, for the health of his family, from Edinburgh to Europe, from where he returned to England for his children's education, settling at Harrow in 1879. The vertigo symptomatic of (undiagnosed) Meniere's disease began to trouble him in 1890 and when this worsened he was unable to complete his autobiography, which was published nevertheless, entitled 'Personal Reminiscences', in 1893. He travelled to Italy for an unsuccessful cure in October 1893, died at via del Corso 7, Rome, on 8 February 1894, and was buried there in the protestant cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 1233


Ballantyne, Thomas (1806-1871), newspaper editor, was born in Paisley, where his first employment was as a weaver. He then became editor of the 'Bolton Free Press', and was active in promoting radical causes. He became closely associated with Richard Cobden and John Bright in their agitation against the corn laws, and in 1841 he published the 'Corn Law Repealer's Handbook'. In 1841 he joined the staff of the 'Manchester Guardian', but his path to promotion was blocked by Russell Scott Taylor. Accordingly, in 1845 he joined Bright and two others to found the 'Manchester Examiner' as a more radical paper than the 'Guardian'; he edited it for nearly three years. After the fusion of the 'Examiner' with the 'Manchester Times' in 1848, he became editor of the 'Liverpool Journal', and later of the 'Liverpool Mercury'. Subsequently he moved to London to edit 'The Leader', and was for a time associated with Charles Mackay in the editorial department of the 'Illustrated London News'. He also started 'The Statesman', which he edited until its close, when he became editor of the 'St James's Chronicle'. 
In addition to this rather unsettled editorial career, Ballantyne wrote papers for various periodicals and published several books, including 'Passages Selected from the Writings of Thomas Carlyle, with a Biographical Memoir' (1855), 'Prophecy for 1855, Selected from Carlyle's Latter-Day Pamphlets' (1855), 'Ideas, Opinions, and Facts' (1865), and 'Essays in Mosaic' (1870). Carlyle recognized Ballantyne's skill as a compiler; he had, he wrote, 'a real talent for excerpting significant passages from books, magazines, newspapers (that contain 'any' such), and for presenting them in lucid arrangement, and in their most interesting and readable form'. Ballantyne died at Tufnell Park, Holloway, London, on 30 August 1871. 


@@@@@


doc= 1234


Ballard, Edward George (1791-1860), writer, was born on 29 April 1791 in Salisbury, Wiltshire, the only child of Edward Ballard, an alderman of Salisbury, and Elizabeth, daughter of George Fowles Benson, also of Salisbury; his parents were married on 18 August 1788. Because of early ill health his education was much neglected, though he was schooled a little in Salisbury, and in Pimlico when his parents moved to London. He obtained employment in the Stamp Office in 1809 and, upon resigning this appointment, entered the Excise Office, which he also left of his own accord in 1817 to apply himself vigorously to study. In 1817 he became a contributor to Wooller's 'Reasoner'. In 1818 he married Mary Ann Shadgett, and wrote several criticisms and verses for the 'Weekly Review', then edited by his brother-in-law, William Shadgett. He also received a reader's ticket for the British Library in 1818, which he frequented. In 1820 his wife died, leaving him a widower with a son and a daughter. He contributed to the 'Literary Chronicle' and the 'Imperial Magazine' under the signature E. G. B., and to the 'Literary Magnet' and the 'World of Fashion' under the sign of greekLetterGamma. In 1825 he published a volume entitled 'A New Series of Original Poems', and in 1829 another entitled 'Microscopic Amusements'. He was exceedingly fond of research. Robert Benson, his cousin, and Henry Hatcher received considerable help from him in writing their 'History of Salisbury' (1843), which formed part of Richard Colt Hoare's 'Wiltshire'. He helped John Gough Nichols in the works undertaken for the Camden Society. For many years he was a member of the Russell Institute and later the Islington Literary and Scientific Association. In 1848 he brought out some parts of a continuation of John Strype's 'Ecclesiastical Memorials' in a publication called 'The Surplice', but this paper and Ballard's scheme soon came to an end. He also occasionally contributed to the 'Gentleman's Magazine' and 'Notes and Queries'. Ballard died at Compton Terrace, Islington, London, on 14 February 1860. He was survived by his son, Edward Ballard MD, author of several medical works, and a daughter. He was buried in Brookwood cemetery, Woking, Surrey, on 18 February 1860. 


@@@@@


doc= 1235


Ballard, George (1705/6-1755), antiquary, was baptized on 14 February 1706 at Chipping Campden, Gloucestershire, one of five sons and three daughters of Samuel Ballard ('bap'. 1663, died 1710), a chandler, and his wife, Elizabeth Willis (died 1744), a midwife. His father died, aged forty-six, in July 1710, when George was only four years old, but his mother lived for another thirty-four years, and died on 10 July 1744 at the age of seventy-three. Ballard was a sickly child, deemed unsuited for any trade which involved bodily strength. He was, as a consequence, apprenticed as a maker of female clothing and was thereafter referred to variously as a staymaker, tailor, habit-maker, or mantua-maker. Thomas Hearne, to whom Ballard was introduced in 1726 by Richard Graves, reported that his antiquarian interests were first aroused by 'the little historical twelve-penny pieces put out under the name of Richard Burton [Nathaniel Crouch], in which are abundance of pretty diverting delightfull stories, which have made the books to be in great vogue among the Vulgar' ('Remarks', 11.219). Both Ballard and his elder sister, Elizabeth (who, like their mother, was a midwife), developed early in life an absorbing interest in coins and books, and Ballard, 'stealing a few hours from sleep, after the business of the day was over' (Walker, 2.93), taught himself Old English. He further recorded that before reaching the age of fourteen he had read many of the polemical writers on religion who 'gave me the greatest abhorrence to Popery' and 'almost as bad an opinion of the Dissenters' (ibid., 2.143-4). He subsequently learned Latin and, according to Hearne, was by 1729 spending much of his time travelling about on foot, collecting coins, and, forsaking his trade, living 'chiefly upon his mother' ('Remarks', 10.118). 
Ballard gradually built up a wide circle of correspondents including many of the foremost antiquaries of the day, and was admitted to read in the Bodleian Library on 9 December 1747. Three years later on the recommendation of the Revd William Talbot of Kineton, Warwickshire, and of Browne Willis, he was admitted to Magdalen College, Oxford, as one of the clerks on 1 November 1750 and was matriculated by the university on 15 December at the age of forty-four. Finances were provided by an annuity of $100 offered by Lord Chedworth and the members of his hunt at Chipping Campden, though this was reduced to $60 at Ballard's request. 
Ballard wrote a historical account of Campden church in 1731 which was read to the Society of Antiquaries in 1771, but his principal literary work was his 'Memoirs of Several Ladies of Great Britain, who have been Celebrated for their Writings or Skill in the Learned Languages, Arts and Sciences' (1752). The preface is dated at Magdalen College on 23 November 1752 and Edward Gibbon, who was there at that time, was one of the book's 400 subscribers, 143 of whom were women. The section of the work which covers the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries is dedicated to the wife of the Revd William Talbot 'as a small testimony of gratitude for extraordinary favours' conferred on Ballard by herself and her husband; the section covering later centuries is dedicated to Mrs Mary Delany, 'the truest judge and brightest pattern of all the accomplishments which adorn her sex'. 
Perhaps because of the nature of his trade Ballard was acquainted with many women in the Chipping Campden area, and he is credited with rescuing his fellow Saxonist Elizabeth Elstob from penury in Evesham by introducing her to another Gloucestershire acquaintance, Sarah Chapone, who succeeded in raising an annuity for her. 
Ballard never married. He died on 24 June 1755 owing, according to John Nichols (Nichols, 'Lit. anecdotes', 2.470), to 'too intense application to his studies', though William Talbot in a letter to John Loveday on 2 July reported that 'the stone' was the cause of his painful death (Markham, 395). He was buried at Chipping Campden on 27 June. Nichols gives the text of a memorial in Latin, but bearing the date 1740, said to be from a monument erected in the church there. No other evidence survives, however, that this monument ever existed. Under his will of April 1754 the Bodleian received coins, as well as manuscripts and correspondence (MSS Ballard 1-73) including forty-four volumes of letters chiefly addressed to Dr Arthur Charlett, master of University College, Oxford. Many of the letters were published by the Revd John Walker in 'Letters Written by Eminent Persons in the Seventeenth and Eighteenth Centuries' (1813). 


@@@@@


doc= 1236


Ballard, John (d. 1586), Roman Catholic priest, was the son of William Ballard of Wratting, probably in Cambridgeshire, since he was said to be of the Ely diocese. He was educated at Elmdon, Essex, and Cambridge University. After matriculation at St Catharine's College at Michaelmas 1569 he was admitted to Gonville and Caius College on 18 January 1570 and proceeded BA from King's College in 1574-5. He went to Rheims on 29 November 1579, was ordained priest at Chalons on 4 March 1581, and was sent to England on 29 March. 
To protect his identity in England, Ballard used the aliases of Thompson, Turner, and Captain Foscue or Fortescue. At the Red Lion, Holborn, over Christmas 1582 he converted John Hambley. He also visited the Gatehouse prison at this time and befriended Anthony Tyrrell, an association which was to lead him to notoriety and execution for involvement in the alleged Babington conspiracy against Elizabeth. Tyrrell escaped from the Gatehouse before 5 January 1582 and was in Ballard's company in several counties until 1584, when they left England for Rome, arriving on 7 September 1584. At Christmas 1584 they crossed together from Rouen to Southampton. 
From now the story becomes complex. Catholics who were taken to be in sympathy with Spain were closely pursued by the government. English Catholic priests fell into various categories. The majority eschewed politics and avoided contact with a government which they suspected to be interested only in their extermination. On the continent some, especially the Jesuits, accepted the support of Spain to the point where they actively supported attempts at invasion from 1582 onwards. A small minority abandoned Catholicism and became undercover agents of the government, co-operating actively in the persecution of former brethren. Another group of priests, rather larger, became convinced as the 1580s advanced that any attempt at a forceful answer to their plight was doomed to failure. The only hope for papists was to throw themselves on the mercy of government, proving their loyalty to the regime by informing on their brethren. Ballard and Tyrrell belonged to this group. Theirs was a dangerous game since, while the government was prepared to use them, it was also prepared to destroy them if 'raison d'etat' demanded it. 
The key man in the story of the 1586 Babington plot was a renegade cleric, Gilbert Gifford. He served Francis Walsingham, who held in his hand all the threads of a conspiracy which was supposed to have been hatched in Rome by Ballard and Tyrrell. They had gone there in 1584 with the express purpose of getting Pope Gregory XIII's approval for a plot to assassinate Elizabeth. Gregory might have been willing, but the Jesuit Alfonso Agazzari, rector of the English College, was not. While political theory since the days of John of Salisbury allowed tyrannicide as a last resort, the Jesuits, including Persons, rejected it as practical politics. In any case, the only 'evidence' was a confession made by Tyrrell which he afterwards repudiated as a fabrication: extracted from him no doubt under the threat of torture. 
Tyrrell was arrested in London on 4 July 1586 and put in the Counter, Wood Street, where he made the confession implicating Ballard and other Catholics. In May 1586 Ballard went to Paris to contact Charles Paget, the Spanish ambassador, and other friends of Mary, queen of Scots. Hoping, no doubt, to become her regular channel of communication, he brought back with him letters for the queen. He was arrested on his return from France and sent to join Tyrrell in his prison on 4 August 1586. On 15 August he was put in the Tower and severely racked. Only a confession of guilt in a general way was obtained, no doubt for the good reason that he knew nothing himself of anything more specific that he was supposed to have done. The trial of Ballard, Babington, and five more took place on 13 and 14 September 1586. They were all found guilty. Fourteen were executed by hanging, drawing, and quartering at Tyburn; Ballard was the first of the first batch who died more barbarously on 20 September. The queen allegedly insisted on special cruelty, which, proving counter-productive, was mitigated for the second contingent. So ended the life of a man who 'came in a grey cloak laid on with gold lace, in velvet hose, a cut satin doublet, a fair hat of the newest fashion, the band being set with silver buttons; a man and a boy after him, and his name, Captain Fortescue. ('State trials', 1.1150)' 



@@@@@


doc= 1237


Ballard, John Archibald (1829-1880), army officer, was born at Portbury, Somerset, on 20 June 1829, the son of George and Eliza Ballard of Portbury. He was educated at the East India Company's military college, Addiscombe, near Croydon, 1847-8, and in 1850 was commissioned into the Bengal Engineers. In the spring of 1854 he went on sick leave. 
Attracted by news from the Danubian provinces, Ballard travelled to Bulgaria. At Omar Pasha's camp at Shumla, Omar invested him with the rank of lieutenant-colonel in the Turkish army, and deputed him to Silistria as a member of the council of war in that fortress, then besieged by the Russians. Before Ballard's arrival, on 13 June, two other British officers, Captain Butler of the Ceylon Rifles and Lieutenant Nasmyth of the Bombay artillery, had been aiding the garrison, but Butler had been killed and Nasmyth was called away to Omar's camp a few days after Ballard's arrival. During the remainder of the siege, which was raised by the Russians on 23 June, Ballard was the only British officer in the fortress, and it was mainly owing to his exertions, and his influence over the garrison, that the defence was successfully maintained. 
At the attack and capture of the Russian position at Giurgevo, Ballard commanded the skirmishers and kept back the enemy until the Turks could entrench themselves. He received the thanks of the British government and, from the Turkish government, a gold medal and a sword of honour. 
After serving with the Turkish troops at Eupatoria and in the expedition to Kerch, Ballard commanded a brigade in Omar Pasha's Transcaucasian campaign for the relief of Kars. At the battle of the Inguri River, Ballard and his brigade were for several hours hotly engaged with the Russians, and he was again notable for his coolness under fire. He was also concerned for the well-being of his troops. 
Ballard returned to India in 1856, still a subaltern of engineers, but with the CB and order of the Mejidiye. He served as assistant quartermaster-general in the Persian campaign, and afterwards in the Indian mutiny with the Rajputana field force, taking part in the pursuit and rout of Tantia Topi's forces. His promotion was singularly rapid, advancing in 1858 from lieutenant to lieutenant-colonel. He was subsequently mint-master at Bombay. Having attained the rank of lieutenant-general, he retired in 1879. He received an Edinburgh honorary LLD in 1868. He married a daughter of Robert Scott-Moncrieff of Fossaway, Perth; Admiral George Alexander Ballard (1862-1948) was their son. Ballard died suddenly on 2 April 1880 near Livadia, in Greece, when visiting the pass of Thermopylae. 


@@@@@


doc= 1238


Ballard, Samuel James (1764?-1829), naval officer, was the son of Samuel Ballard -- a subordinate officer in the navy, who had retired without promotion after the peace of 1763 and had engaged in business at Portsmouth -- and his wife, whose maiden name was Flint. Samuel James Ballard entered the navy in December 1776, under the patronage of John Leveson-Gower, then captain of the 'Valiant' in the Grand Fleet under Admiral Keppel during the summer of 1778. In October 1779 he was transferred to the 'Shrewsbury' (Captain Mark Robinson), and in her was present when Sir George Rodney defeated the Spanish fleet off Cape St Vincent, on 16 January 1780. In the following July the 'Shrewsbury' rejoined Rodney's flag in the West Indies, was present off Martinique on 29 April 1781, and led the van in the strategic defeat off the Chesapeake on 5 September 1781. On this fatal day the brunt of the fight fell on the 'Shrewsbury', of whose men fourteen were killed and fifty-two wounded, including Captain Robinson who lost a leg. The ship afterwards returned to the West Indies with Sir Samuel Hood, and was with him in the operations at St Kitts in January 1782, after which she had to be sent to Jamaica for repairs. On 10 February 1783, while still at Jamaica, Ballard was made a lieutenant by Admiral Rowley, and was actively employed in different ships during the ten years of peace. When war broke out again he was a lieutenant of the 'Queen', which carried Rear-Admiral Gardiner's flag through the last days of May and 1 June 1794. This great victory won for Ballard his commander's rank (5 July), and on 1 August 1795 he was further advanced to the rank of captain. 
Early in 1796 Ballard was appointed to the frigate 'Pearl', and during the next two years was continuously and happily employed in convoying the trade for the Baltic or for Newfoundland and Quebec. In March 1798 he accompanied Commodore Cornwallis to the coast of Africa and to Barbados, from which station he returned in June of the following year. In October he carried out General Fox to Minorca, and remained attached to the Mediterranean Fleet for the next two years. The 'Pearl' was paid off on 14 March 1802, after a commission of upwards of six years, during which time she had taken, destroyed, or recaptured about eighty vessels, privateers and merchantmen. 
Captain Ballard then commanded a district of sea fencibles for more than seven years. It was not until October 1809 that he was appointed to the 'Sceptre' (74 guns); he sailed shortly afterwards for the West Indies. Here he flew a commodore's broad pennant, and on 18 December 1809 commanded the squadron which captured the two heavily armed French frigates 'Loire' and 'Seine', and destroyed the protecting batteries at Anse-la-Barque off Guadeloupe. At the capture of Guadeloupe in January and February 1810 he escorted one division of the army and commanded the naval brigade which, however, was not engaged. He returned to England with the 'Sceptre' in the following September, and was for the next two years attached to the fleet in the channel and Bay of Biscay, but without being engaged in any active operations. His service at sea closed with the paying off of the 'Sceptre' in January 1813, although in course of seniority he attained the rank of rear-admiral, on 4 June 1814, and of vice-admiral, on 27 May 1825. 
Ballard married first his cousin Maria, only daughter of James Flint of Feversham; they had eight children of whom only a son and two daughters survived him. On 2 December 1822 he married Catharine, daughter of Sir Thomas Crawley Boevey, bt, of Flaxley Abbey, Gloucestershire. He resided for several years at Bath, and died at Exmouth on 11 October 1829. 


@@@@@


doc= 1239


Ballard, Volant Vashon (1774?-1832), naval officer, a nephew of Admiral James Vashon, served as a midshipman with George Vancouver in his voyage to the north-west coast of America. Shortly after his return to England he was made a lieutenant, on 6 June 1795; and on 25 December 1798, while commanding the sloop 'Hobart', on the East India station, was posted into the frigate 'Carysfort'. He subsequently commanded the frigate 'Jason', the 'De Ruyter' (68 guns), and the 'Beschermer' (50 guns), but without opportunity of distinction. In 1807, while commanding the 32-gun frigate 'Blonde', he cruised with great success against privateers, capturing seven in a few months. In 1809-10, still in the 'Blonde', he served under the command of his namesake, Commodore Ballard of the 'Sceptre', at the capture of the French frigates in Anse-la-Barque and the capture of Guadeloupe for which he was honourably mentioned by both the naval and the military commanders-in-chief. On 18 September 1811 he married Isabella Sarah, eldest daughter of James Crabb of Shidfield Lodge, Hampshire. He obtained his flag rank on 27 May 1825. He died at Bath on 12 October 1832, and was buried at the church of St Saviour, Walcot, Wiltshire. 


@@@@@


doc= 1240


Ballantine, William (1617/18-1661), Roman Catholic priest, was probably born at North Berwick, Haddingtonshire, the second son of Thomas Ballantine 
(or Bannatyne; 'b'. 'c'.1574, died in or before 1639)
, Church of Scotland minister, and Margaret Cockburn, his wife. From 1621 his father was minister of Douglas, Lanarkshire, where William had his schooling until in 1635 he matriculated at Edinburgh University. He did not graduate but travelled on the continent and became a Catholic in Paris. Having been a student at the Scots College there, he entered the Scots College, Rome, in 1641. He completed his studies with distinction, was ordained priest on 3 December 1645 and in March 1646 went to Paris to prepare for missionary work. After arriving in Scotland in January 1649, he quickly realized the need for some co-ordination among the secular priests, who were few in number and lacking in cohesion compared with the Jesuits. After only a short stay he went to Paris, where he conferred with five other secular priests. It was decided to petition the congregation of Propaganda in Rome to provide a superior and financial help, with William Leslie (one of them) acting as their Roman agent. Ballantine returned to Scotland in February 1650 and was appointed prefect of the Scottish secular priests on 13 October 1653. He lived with the marquess of Huntly. 
About this time Ballantine journeyed to France and back. When he went again in the summer of 1656 he was arrested on his return to England in September and held in confinement in London for twenty-two months. He apparently established friendly relations with the secretary of state, John Thurloe, while Cromwell seemed interested in using his services and indeed paid for his journey to France when he was banished in July 1658. 
Ballantine was then prefect of studies in the Scots College, Paris, and during this time he compiled a spiritual work, 'A Preparation for Death' (1672, reprinted 1715) from the writings of a French Jesuit, Jean Suffren. In May 1660, having written a full report for Propaganda, he returned to Scotland and lived in Elgin with the widowed marchioness of Huntly. He fell ill in July 1661 and died, at Elgin, six weeks later on 2 September aged forty-three. After funeral rites in the house the body was taken in a torchlight procession to Elgin Cathedral and buried in the Huntly aisle. Quite remarkably, the Elgin magistrates and a large gathering attended the funeral. 
Though described as tall and comely, Ballantine was apparently not robust and he never recovered from his confinement in London. He comes across as a spiritual man as well as being liked and respected. Although he made a number of notable converts while in Scotland, he realized that the greatest need was to build up an organized body of priests and accordingly he made journeys to Paris for business and sent students there. The editor of his book declared that 'his Memory ought to be in perpetual Benediction, amongst all good Catholicks of this Kingdom' (preface to W. Ballantine, 'A Preparation for Death', 1715, x). 


@@@@@


doc= 1241


Ballingall, Sir George (1780-1855), military surgeon and medical writer, was born on 2 May 1780 at Forglen, Banffshire, the son of the Revd Robert Ballingall, and his wife, a daughter of J. Simson of Edinshead. His education began at the Falkland parish school in Fife. Afterwards he attended the University of St Andrews, in which town he was also apprenticed to a Dr Melville, before moving on in 1803 to the University of Edinburgh, where he became an assistant to the anatomy lecturer John Barclay. Ballingall later compiled Barclay's lectures into a book ('Introductory Lectures to a Course of Anatomy, Delivered by the Late John Barclay', 1827), and in 1813 honoured Barclay with the gift of a preserved skeleton of an elephant which was later displayed in the museum of the Royal College of Physicians of Edinburgh. 
In 1806 Ballingall joined the 2nd battalion of the 1st Royals as an assistant surgeon; soon after he departed for India, where he remained until 1814. The duke of Kent was then colonel of the regiment, and he became one of Ballingall's principal patrons. Aside from volunteering to join the expedition to Java in 1811, Ballingall did not see much action in India. However, he had to contend with the high mortality and morbidity rates which beset British regiments there. Conditions in India confirmed his belief that most diseases and illnesses could be avoided or at least ameliorated through preventive measures. India itself was not inherently unhealthy; rather, it was the lifestyles of the European residents that were at fault. In 1815 Ballingall was promoted to full surgeon following his transfer to the 33rd foot, which corps comprised part of the army of occupation in Paris. In 1817, shortly after his return to Edinburgh, he married a daughter of his distant cousin, James Ballingall of Perth. He retired on half pay in 1818. 
Ballingall next set up practice in Edinburgh. There he also began to write, beginning with 'Practical Observations on Fever, Dysentery and Liver Complaints, as they occur amongst the European Troops in India' (1818), followed shortly by 'Essay on Syphilis' (1820). He was appointed lecturer of military surgery at the University of Edinburgh in 1823, and despite considerable opposition from the medical community at Edinburgh, who wished to dispense with the chair altogether, or at least convert it to a professorship of general surgery (in 1823 Ballingall attracted only four pupils on top of the thirty-three from the services), he was appointed professor of military surgery in 1825. Ballingall quickly proved to be one of the more popular lecturers; in 1839 he had eighty students. This professorship, partly subsidized by the government, was then the only position in Britain which specifically addressed military medicine; a similar chair was established in Dublin in 1846. 
Even after his appointment to the University of Edinburgh Ballingall continued to travel extensively on the continent, where he observed developments in military medicine and built up a network of medical and military contacts. Consequently, ideas and practices which were developing in Europe featured in his lectures and writings. His lectures in Edinburgh formed the basis of his two best-known works: 'Introductory Lectures to a Course of Military Surgery' (1830), and 'Outlines of Military Surgery' (1833), which became a standard reference and instructional work for military and naval surgeons. He also wrote several pamphlets on military and medical matters, including 'Remarks on Schools of Instruction for Military and Naval Surgeons' (1843), 'On Schools of Naval and Military Surgery' (1844), 'Extract of a Lecture on Corporal Punishment' (1847), and 'Observations on the Site and Construction of Hospitals' (1851), as well as articles for the medical press, chiefly the 'Edinburgh Medical Journal'. 
Ballingall made no significant advances in medical theory. His early writings on diseases of hot climates were soon eclipsed by others, partly because his belief in the ability of Europeans to acclimatize to Indian conditions was becoming less popular as the century wore on. He was, however, an early critic of the extensive use of mercurials in treating venereal diseases and dysentery, and he made some headway in limiting army surgeons' use of mercury on venereal cases. His real importance lay in his efforts to persuade the army to take preventive medicine more seriously. Despite his title of professor of military surgery, most of his writings and lectures dealt with what he termed military hygiene. He stressed the need for sanitary reforms, and pressed for increased attention to the placing of barracks, diet, discipline (especially corporal punishment), and arrangements for wholesome leisure activities to counteract the 'ruinous consequences of excesses amongst the soldiery' (G. Ballingall, 'Outlines of Military Surgery', 1833, 41). 
Contemporaries described Ballingall as tall and slender, and quiet and even-tempered. He was elected FRSE in 1820, and in 1830 he was knighted by William IV. Recurring bouts of bronchitis so incapacitated Ballingall in the last years of his life that he was forced to limit his lectures to the summer months. Complications arising from his bronchitis led to his death on 4 December 1855 at his country house of Altamont, Blairgowrie, Perthshire. Two sons and a daughter survived him: William, the eldest son, joined the Indian army; George, the second son, joined the medical service of the East India Company and eventually became professor of surgery at Grant Medical College in Bombay; and his daughter travelled to Bombay, where she married John Stuart. 


@@@@@


doc= 1242


Ballow, Henry (1704?-1782), legal writer, was probably born on 3 May 1704 in the parish of St Martin-in-the-Fields, Westminster, the son of Henry Ballow and his wife, Dorothy. He was admitted a pensioner at Magdalene College, Cambridge, on 15 October 1720, and admitted to Lincoln's Inn on 27 January 1721. Ballow was called to the bar on 6 November 1728. By 9 July 1731 he held the post of deputy chamberlain of the exchequer, subsequently rising to be senior deputy chamberlain. He is said to have obtained his position in the exchequer, which relieved him of the necessity to practise, through the influence of the Townshends 'to whom he had been a kind of law tutor' (Hawkins, 244), but his father may himself have been deputy chamberlain of the exchequer between 1688 and 1713. 
Ballow's legal learning was deep and extensive, and Samuel Johnson attributed his own knowledge of the law chiefly to Ballow's teaching, regarding him as a 'very able man' (Boswell, 2.294). Ballow's legal learning appears to have manifested itself in permanent form in 'A Treatise upon Equity', published anonymously in 1737, which appeared in 1793-4 with references and substantial notes by John Fonblanque, and reached its fifth edition in 1820. The treatise provided, in six short books, a systematic explanation of equity in terms of contract theory. The author regarded the specific enforcement of contracts as the core of equity, and his work represents for later generations the state of equity in the period between the times of the great lord chancellors Lord Nottingham and Lord Hardwicke. The treatise was founded upon the cases, the results of which it stated accurately, though the author cited very few authorities and gave no references to the cases, which rendered the book less valuable to the student than it might have been. Ballow's authorship, though generally accepted, is not certain. Fonblanque pointed out that if Ballow were the author he had produced the work while still of less than ten years' standing at the bar. Further doubt may arise from the apparent influence of Roman law training upon the book's method. However, Francis Hargrave's copy contains a note by Hargrave that the book was written by Mr Bellewe, and one of the manuscripts which passed to Lord Camden as Ballow's literary executor contained a large portion of the work, revised and corrected apparently for publication. 
Beyond his legal learning, though possessed of 'vulgar manners', and described as 'a little deformed man' (Hawkins, 244), Ballow was said to be an accomplished Greek scholar and to have been famous for his knowledge of old philosophy. At one time he frequented Tom's Coffee House in Devereux Court, London, where his splenetic temper led him into a quarrel with the poet and physician Mark Akenside, whom Ballow envied for his eloquence and hated for his republican principles. Akenside's consequent challenge went unanswered, the difference being made up by friends, and the antagonists adhering to their respective resolutions that one would not fight in the morning and the other would not fight in the afternoon. Ballow died suddenly in Parliament Street, London, on 26 July 1782. He did not marry. 


@@@@@


doc= 1243


Balmer, George (1805-1846), landscape painter, was born at North Shields, Northumberland, on 3 November 1805, and baptized on 5 January 1806 at Tynemouth, Northumberland, the second son of George Balmer ('c'.1767-1829), house and ship painter, and Ann Reed (died 1835), of Stannington, Northumberland. At the age of fourteen he decided to follow his father's trade and after serving an apprenticeship with the firm joined former Newcastle housepainter Thomas Coulson's decorating business in Edinburgh. Here he became acquainted with the work of fellow Coulson employee John Wilson Ewbank, and, inspired to try his own hand as a professional artist, returned to North Shields. In 1826 he sent his first work for exhibition, showing 'A View of North Shields', at the Northumberland Institution for the Promotion of the Fine Arts, Newcastle upon Tyne. He again exhibited at this institution in the following year, and showed no fewer than seven works at the first exhibition of Newcastle's newly opened Northern Academy, in 1828. He continued to exhibit at Newcastle for several years, and in 1830 sent his first work to the British Institution: 'Fishing Lodge Near Inch Islay on the Tay -- Moonlight'. In 1831 he moved from North Shields to Newcastle, and in this year showed at the town's exhibition of watercolours one of his best known works, 'The Juicy Tree Bit', and collaborated in the production of another, 'The heroic exploit of Lord Collingwood, when captain of the Excellent at the Battle of Cape St Vincent' (Trinity House, Newcastle), with his close friend John Wilson Carmichael. As far as can be determined he remained at Newcastle until late in 1833, when he decided to move to London. In 1834 he sent his first work for exhibition at the Suffolk Street Gallery of the Society of British Artists, London, and also exhibited at Newcastle. He then set off on a tour of Holland, thereafter proceeding up the Rhine, and travelling through Switzerland, making several studies of the Alps 'en route'. He next went to Paris, where he spent several months studying at the Louvre, and copied the work of Cuyp, Claude Lorrain, Paul Potter, and Ruisdael. Back in London by 1835 he called on his friend and fellow artist John Wykeham Archer, and announced his intention of practising there. He remained in London until 1842, during which period he continued to exhibit at the British Institution and the Suffolk Street Gallery showing scenes of the continent and north-east England; among the former were 'Scene Near Dordrecht' and 'Haarlem Mere -- Moonlight', and among the latter 'Entrance to the Port of Sunderland' and 'The Salmon Leap at Bywell'. Several of these works were bought by wealthy collectors, notably Harrison of Liverpool. In 1836 Balmer suggested to the engraver and publisher brothers Edward and William Finden a publication on 'The Ports, Harbours, Watering-Places and Picturesque Scenery of Great Britain'. They accepted his proposal and many of his views of parts of north-eastern England appeared in a volume published in 1842. A short time after its publication Balmer inherited some property at Gateshead, co. Durham, and retired there without exhibiting again. He died at Bensham Grove, Bensham, Gateshead, on 10 April 1846 following an illness, and was buried in Jesmond old cemetery, Newcastle. He was predeceased by his wife, Mary Ann Cook (died 1843), and survived by his only son, George. Balmer's reputation as a coastal painter was considerable in his day; his friend Archer observed in a long obituary in the 'Art Union' of October 1846: 'My old friend was never so much in his element as when painting a stranded ship, an old lighthouse, or the rippling of the waves on a shingly coast'. 


@@@@@


doc= 1244


Balmer, Robert (1787-1844), United Secession minister and theologian, was born at Ormiston Mains, in the parish of Eckford, Roxburghshire, on 22 November 1787, the eldest of four children of Thomas Balmer and Margaret Biggar (died 1839). Sickly as a child, he later enjoyed tolerably good health apart from problems with his eyesight. His parents were both seceders although they adhered, quite amicably, to different congregations. His father, a land steward, died when Robert was about ten. He attended school, latterly at Morebattle and Kelso, before entering Edinburgh University in 1802. In 1806 he continued his studies at the Associate Synod Divinity Hall at Selkirk, under George Lawson (1749-1820), while also attending divinity classes at Edinburgh University. Thus qualified, he could have opted for the ministry of the established church, and the delay after completing his studies caused some to think that he was contemplating this course. However, he was eventually licensed in August 1812. Ordained minister at Berwick upon Tweed in March 1814, he remained with the congregation at Golden Square for the rest of his ministry. He married Jane, daughter of Alexander Scott of Aberdeen, in 1826. 
In 1834 Balmer became professor of pastoral theology to the United Secession church, rapidly exchanging this chair for that of systematic theology. His duties required him to be absent from his congregation for two months each year. In 1840 he was awarded a DD by St Andrews University. A man of liberal instincts both in church and secular affairs, Balmer latterly came under attack from a fellow minister and controversialist, Andrew Marshall (1779-1854). In the course of the atonement controversy, occasioned by James Morison's suspension and deposition for arguing a universalist position, Marshall had formed the view that the church's professors were not only sympathetic to Morison but the very source of his views. Balmer's particular offence was to contribute a recommendatory preface to an unfortunately timed edition of Edward Polhill's 'Essay on the Extent of the Death of Christ' (1842). Balmer patiently and reasonably explained his position to the satisfaction of his church, though he did not live to see the final resolution of the controversy. In 1843 he distinguished himself at a meeting in Edinburgh to mark the bicentenary of the Westminster assembly, at which he made a powerful speech on Christian union. Beset by a brief but painful illness, he died on 1 July 1844 at Berwick upon Tweed. His funeral there on 9 July attracted some 5000 mourners. 
Scrupulous, thoughtful, and unsectarian, Balmer was a man of mild nature and modest bearing. An effective teacher rather than a brilliant scholar, 'His views... were more comprehensive than acute' (Henderson, 66), as one colleague put it. He published little in his lifetime, but a two-volume 'Academical Lectures and Pulpit Discourses' (1845) appeared posthumously. 


@@@@@


doc= 1245


Balmford, James (b. c.1556, d. after 1623), Church of England clergyman, is first recorded in 1594, the year in which he published 'A Short and Plaine Dialogue Concerning the Unlawfulness of Playing at Cards'. This pamphlet of eight leaves is dedicated to his patrons, the mayor, aldermen, and burgesses of Newcastle upon Tyne; according to Hazlitt's 'Hand-Book' the work also appeared as a broadside. In 1623 Balmford reprinted his 'Dialogue', prefacing it with an address to the reader, dated 14 September 1620, in which Balmford describes himself as 'a man of 64 yeares compleate', and adding to it a lengthy criticism of Thomas Gataker's 'Of the Nature and Use of Lots' (1618), which was itself a response to Balmford's tract. Gataker quickly responded with 'A Just Defence of... a Treatise Concerning the Nature and Use of Lots', in which he followed contemporary practice by reproducing the whole of Balmford's work in his own, answering its objections point by point. Balmford's arguments rest on an analogy between cards and dice: that whereas lots depend wholly on chance, and are thus evil in that they are a denial of God's providence, cards depend somewhat on chance, and by analogy are somewhat evil. This is not to say that lots may not be used for the settling of controversies that otherwise could not be resolved -- and for this biblical precedent is cited; but since they depend on chance, they, and by analogy cards, are strictly forbidden as a source of amusement. 
By 1603 Balmford was rector of St Olave's, Southwark. In that year, which saw a major outbreak of plague, he published 'A Short Dialogue Concerning the Plagues Infection', dedicated to his parishioners; he also published two different editions of a catechism (1597 and 1607). He also published in 1607 'Carpenter's Chippes, or, Simple Tokens of Unfeined Good Will to the Christian Friends of J. B., the Poor Carpenter's Sonne'. Dedicated to Margaret Clifford, countess of Cumberland, it reproduces an earlier work by Balmford dedicated to the third earl of Huntingdon on the lawfulness of executing Catholic priests, not on religious grounds but for treason, in that they had sworn fealty to a foreign potentate, namely the pope, and for seditiously teaching disobedience to the queen. He makes a comparison between priests and Anabaptists, asserting that the latter are justly condemned for denying the divine prerogative of the magistrate and not for their denial of the incarnation, however impious that may be. And likewise priests are not executed for believing damnable things, like the efficacy of prayers to the saints, but for denying the sovereignty of Elizabeth, whom the pope has excommunicated and thus separated from any obedience owed her by her subjects. Also included in 'Carpenter's Chippes' is a treatise on the proper observance of Sunday, 'Three Positions Concerning the Lord's Day', first published earlier in 1607. The dedications of 'Carpenter's Chippes' and 'A Short and Plaine Dialogue' may indicate that Balmford had northern connections. No reference to him has been found after 1623, and it is not known when he died. He may have been the father of the Church of England clergyman Samuel Bamford (d. 1657). 


@@@@@


doc= 1246


Bamford, Samuel (d. 1657), Church of England clergyman, was born in the parish of St Edmund, King and Martyr, Lombard Street, London, a first cousin of Lambert Osbaldeston (1594-1659). Since he mentions in his will that he was 'for divers yeares bredd upp' in the parish of St Olave, Southwark, he may have been the son of James Balmford (b. c.1556, d. after 1623), vicar there in 1603. He was admitted a pensioner at Emmanuel College, Cambridge, on 24 April 1612, and was subsequently elected a scholar. He graduated BA early in 1616 and proceeded MA in 1619. 
Like other godly preachers Bamford benefited from the patronage of Mary, Lady Vere. By the later 1620s he was chaplain to Lady Vere and her husband Sir Horace at their residence in The Hague, and through their influence was elected minister of the English congregation which met within the Church of the Sacrament Gasthuis in the Noordeinde; he was installed on 24 February 1630. The same year he married Dorothy Bennet. For the next two decades he pursued a vigorous ministry, taking an increasingly defiant line against those who, in shifting contexts, sought conformity to the prayer book. At first he associated with congregationalists like John Forbes, John Davenport, and Thomas Hooker (whom he had encountered at Emmanuel College), but he had parted company with them by 1632, when Hooker's supporters campaigned against Bamford's becoming assistant minister (and, they feared, over-quiescent partner) to the more moderate John Paget at the English church in Amsterdam. As it was, suspecting a plot by the episcopal establishment to oust him and undo his work at The Hague, Bamford declined that call, and remained to face the hostility of the new English ambassador, William (soon to be Sir William) Boswell. Bamford, complained Boswell, tended to 'mangle, pare and purge' the liturgy 'most pittifully' (Sprunger, 330). To the ambassador's fury, in 1634 the minister sought, and gained, the protection of the Dutch Reformed church in the shape of the classis of The Hague; this allowed him to fight successfully any 'innovation' emanating from England. 
The following year, while on a visit to England to see his elderly mother and the newly widowed Lady Vere, Bamford was arrested, detained for several weeks, and brought before the court of high commission. Here he pleaded his obligation, as a subject of the Dutch government and recipient of pay from it, to abide by the regulation of the classis. He then skipped bail and returned to the Netherlands. Thanks to the continued support of the Hague classis, subsequent attempts to dislodge him from his church made by Archbishop William Laud, Boswell, and Elizabeth of Bohemia's chaplain, Sampson Johnson, failed. Perhaps the lingering respect of Elizabeth herself, an occasional member of his congregation, also helped: in his will Bamford bequeathed a 'faire silver and gilt cupp which the Queene of Bohemia was pleased to bestowe upon me'. 
The fall of Laud brought no relief for Bamford, however. As his congregation swelled with English exiles his attempts to adopt the liturgical practices of the Westminster assembly met resistance. In 1645 Bamford suspended the lord's supper and once again appealed to the local classis, but Boswell, still present as a royalist agent, took a leaf out of Bamford's book and invoked the support of the states general and the states of Holland against innovation. Boswell's appeal was ultimately unsuccessful, but although the authorities pronounced themselves satisfied with the regulation of the English church Bamford's position remained uncomfortable. In April 1650 he obtained leave to visit England, where he soon accepted an invitation to minister in the relatively poor London parish of St Alban, Wood Street, which had been a stronghold of presbyterianism in the 1640s. By this time a widower, he married Elizabeth, daughter of Nicholas Byfield (1578/9-1622) and sister of Adoniram Byfield (died 1658x60), whose family had longstanding links to the Veres. By November 1650 the church in The Hague received confirmation that he would not return. 
In London Bamford gained a reputation among the godly for orthodoxy, humility, studiousness, and good teaching, and worked on 'many excellent pieces intended for the presse' (Balmford, A3). When he drew up his will on 17 March 1655 he had a library of Latin and English books, and his own 'narrative papers of English and forreine Eclesiasticall and Civill affaires'. He was able to leave his only child, Elizabeth, not yet eighteen years old, a portion of $400. He died in 1657; his will was proved on 1 September by his widow and executor. Two years later 'Balmford's' only publication, 'Habakkuk's Prayer Applyed to the Churches' (1659), two sermons preached before the provincial assembly of London, was printed for his brother-in-law Adoniram. Accompanied by testimonials to Bamford's character and talents from Thomas Parsons and Edmund Calamy, these mourn the current state of the divided church and exhort ministers not to falter in the quest for revival. 


@@@@@


doc= 1247


Balmyle, Nicholas (d. 1319/20), administrator and bishop of Dunblane, first appears on record, described as master, in 1259. Balmyle may be derived from one of two places in Perthshire. Neither his date of birth nor his place of study is known. He is rarely mentioned before the 1280s and 1290s, during which time he is variously recorded as official of the archdeacon of St Andrews, vicar of Haddington, and, when he did homage to Edward I in 1296, parson of Calder-Comitis, Edinburghshire. In 1297, as the bishop's official, he was appointed by the chapter to administer the diocese during its vacancy following the death that year of Bishop William Fraser, and probably continued to do so until the new bishop, William Lamberton (died 1328), returned from the continent in 1299. 
In the latter part of 1292 Balmyle joined the auditors for John Balliol in the Great Cause, and in 1293 he attended the king's first parliament. By 31 January 1301 he had become chancellor of Scotland, perhaps through the influence of Bishop Lamberton, who was a guardian in 1299-1300. His appointment coincided with a change in the diplomatic and seal of acts of the government to re-emphasize the authority of King John: acts were again issued in John's name, not those of the guardians, and the obverse of the seal bore the king's name and title. In 1301 Balmyle was one of a delegation to Canterbury to discuss peace terms with English and French representatives; he may also have helped to draw up the brief for Baldred Bisset's diplomatic mission that year to Boniface VIII ('r'. 1294-1303), two members of which were known to him as St Andrews clerics. He may have remained chancellor until 1305. 
When Balmyle was elected bishop of Dunblane, between January 1306 and December 1307, he was already a canon, perhaps appointed by Bishop Alpin, a former St Andrews cleric who had been auditor for King John and treasurer in his government. Robert I may have favoured the election of Balmyle as a patriot, but one of the electors, William Eaglesham, may have been acting on behalf of Lamberton, and would have known Balmyle from St Andrews. Balmyle was subsequently consecrated at the papal court at Poitiers by the bishop of Ostia. 
Balmyle's career illustrates the influence of St Andrews clergy in Scottish affairs. His importance lies in the key role which he played in the patriotic cause during the struggle against the English crown. His support for King John continued after 1296, when he acted as chancellor and diplomat. With the guardian John Soulis (died 1321) (perhaps appointed directly by the king) and Lamberton, he constituted a government which saw the national cause as bound up with the restoration of the rightful king, and hoped to achieve it by diplomacy with papal support. Like Lamberton, Balmyle may have found it difficult to change allegiance to Robert I: although he put his seal to ecclesiastical declarations of support for Robert (in 1310 and between 1314 and 1316) and may have attended the parliament of 1309, he witnessed only six royal acts before his death, which occurred between 8 February 1319 and 30 January 1320. He and the other bishops probably saw Robert as the only man who could secure and maintain independence. 


@@@@@


doc= 1248


Balnaves, Henry (d. 1570), diplomat and religious reformer, is said by Calderwood to have come from Kirkcaldy and studied in Cologne. He returned to St Andrews, appearing on the rolls of St Salvator's College in 1527 as 'magister', the title by which he is usually designated, though where he received his MA degree is uncertain. He worked as a procurator in St Andrews for several years subsequently, his clients including David Beaton, then abbot of Arbroath. By 1537 he was an advocate in the court of session in Edinburgh, and on 29 July 1538 he was promoted as a lord of session. In the following year he bought Halhill, in Fife, with his wife, Christine Scheves. By 1539 Balnaves's friendship with John Melville of Raith had helped him to secure the position of clerk to the treasurer, Sir James Kirkcaldy of Grange. In January 1540 he first acted as a diplomat, going to Coldstream where he and Thomas Bellenden met with Sir William Evers to arrange mutual extraditions. At this meeting Bellenden raised the possibility that James V might follow Henry VIII's lead in ecclesiastical affairs; given Balnaves's reformist associations, he probably approved. 
As treasurer's clerk, Balnaves was a regular attender at parliament in the late 1530s and early 1540s. After James's death in 1542, Balnaves and Kirkcaldy supported the second earl of Arran in his bid to become governor, 'as he apperit to be a trew gospeller' ('Memoirs of His Own Life', 71); Arran in turn appointed Balnaves as secretary on 28 February 1543. In the following month Balnaves was among those who argued in parliament in favour of the act which allowed 'Bible' reading in the vernacular, and shortly afterwards he went to England to negotiate a marriage treaty between the infant Mary, queen of Scots, and the future Edward VI. By November, however, Arran's English policy having changed, Balnaves had been removed from office and imprisoned in Blackness Castle, where he remained until the following spring. Cardinal Beaton, who instigated this purge, targeted his former advocate along with the fourth earl of Rothes and Patrick, Lord Gray, as 'he loved him worst of all' ('LP Henry VIII', 18/2, no. 425). However, Balnaves was back in parliament by November 1544, and sitting in court by June 1545. 
Whether or not Balnaves was aware of Henry VIII's plots against Beaton, he was not implicated when the cardinal was assassinated on 29 May 1546; in fact he continues to appear on privy council sederunts until 3 August, and was present when the murder was declared treasonous and a summons issued for the conspirators. By the middle of August, however, he was no longer appearing at council; during the autumn he entered St Andrews Castle, where the assassins were holding out, and in November he and Norman Lesley boarded an English ship under heavy fire. After arriving in London, Balnaves and Lesley were awarded $100 and they briefed the English privy council. Balnaves offered to gain 'assurances' of support for English intervention from many Scottish nobles, and obtained promises of financial support for the castilians and a pension for himself. By 9 March 1547 he had returned to Scotland and he began compiling a list of assurances for Edward VI which was thought to contain 200 signatures. Having made another secret trip to England in April, Balnaves and others encouraged John Knox to preach, probably in May. At the end of July the castle fell to the French, and Balnaves, who had assisted in burning churches in St Andrews, was taken prisoner with the rest of the castilians. 
Balnaves was imprisoned in the castle of Rouen, where, 'becaus he was judged learned... learned men war appointed to trawall with him', evidently concerning religious issues ('Works of John Knox', 1.226). Perhaps in conjunction with these debates, Balnaves wrote a treatise in prison on justification by faith, 'The Confession of Faith, Conteining how the Troubled Man should Seeke Refuge at his God'. This treatise displays Balnaves's theological understanding and biblical knowledge; it is a thorough exposition of the doctrine of justification by faith alone, and is based on a sweeping array of scriptural material. Balnaves was strongly influenced by Luther, and was clearly familiar with Luther's commentary on 'Galatians'. He discusses vocation, in the sense of the call made to each Christian to lead a godly life, in Lutheran terms, and consequently follows the German reformer in conceding authority to the prince to restore true religion where it has become corrupted. Balnaves sent his treatise to Knox, who annotated it, added a precis, and sent it to Scotland; it was lost there, temporarily, and not published until 1584. 
While in prison Balnaves was forfeited, but he was released by the early 1550s and remained in France until 1556, when Mary of Guise reversed his forfeiture. Back in Scotland, by 1559 Balnaves was again involved in secret diplomacy, between the Scottish reformist lords of the congregation and the English agents Ralph Sadler and James Croft at Berwick. Balnaves's primary goal was English funding for the lords, and in this he generally succeeded; he was also a signatory to the Anglo-Scottish treaty of Berwick on 27 February 1560. Following the establishment of the reformed kirk by parliament, Balnaves eventually returned to his old occupation, being readmitted to the bench in 1563. Later that year he was chosen by the general assembly to help revise the first 'Book of Discipline', a project which came to nothing. 
Balnaves's final diplomatic commission came in autumn 1568, when he acted as an assistant to Regent Moray in the latter's bringing charges against Mary, queen of Scots, at conferences at York and Westminster. Balnaves was a regular attender at council in 1568 and 1569, and during this time he helped James Melville, his eventual heir, to meet the regent. Balnaves died in Leith in February 1570, leaving chattels valued at $333 11's'. 2diedScots. He bequeathed most of his estate to Melville, but a few items to another long-term associate, Alexander Clerk. Respected for his learning and diplomatic skills, Balnaves occupied an important role in the promotion of the reformed kirk, both in securing English support and in advising the protestant nobles. Moreover, in his treatise he shows a grasp of basic protestant theology remarkable in a layman. 


@@@@@


doc= 1249


Balnea, Henry (supp. fl. early 15th cent.), supposed religious writer, was stated by Thomas Tanner (1674-1735) to be the author of the 'Speculum spiritualium', an anonymous early fifteenth-century devotional and mystical miscellany associated with the Bridgettines and Carthusians which survives in at least eleven manuscripts as well as in an early edition printed in Paris and published in London in 1510. Balnea's name appears to stem from a misreading of the contracted form of 'Henricus domus Cartusiensis de Bethleem' ('Henry of the Carthusian house of Bethlehem of Sheen'), with whom the 'Speculum spiritualium' is associated in an ambiguous entry in the early sixteenth-century catalogue of the brothers' library of the Bridgettine abbey of Syon. There were two monks named Henry at Sheen in the early fifteenth century. Both were Germans, but although Tanner supposed its compiler to have been English, there is in fact nothing in the 'Speculum spiritualium' to make this essential; indeed, many of its sources are foreign, and such as might have appealed to, or been brought to England by, monks from Germany. In any event, it is possible that the author of the catalogue was identifying 'Henricus' as the compiler not of the 'Speculum spiritualium' but of the indexes to it. 


@@@@@


doc= 1250


Balsham, Hugh of (d. 1286), bishop of Ely and benefactor, took his name from Balsham, Cambridgeshire, one of Ely Priory's manors. Nothing is known of his background, except that during the controversy aroused by his election as bishop it was alleged that he was of servile origins. He became a monk at Ely, and rose to be sub-prior of the monastery. Following the death of Bishop William of Kilkenny, on 21 September 1256, Balsham was elected bishop by the monks. Matthew Paris, characteristically anxious to speak up for monastic liberties and to present Henry III in a bad light, gives a misleading account of the controversy that followed, presenting the king and Archbishop Boniface of Canterbury as working together to thwart the Ely monks and persecute their chosen bishop. Ely was a wealthy see, commonly reserved for one of the king's leading administrators, and Henry was undeniably offended by the convent's action. But the monks themselves declared that they would not resort to litigation if the king objected to their choice. It was Archbishop Boniface who did most to stir up discord, when he tried to bring the election under his own jurisdiction by announcing that he would examine the bishop-elect's suitability. The king's proctors appealed to Rome against the archbishop's action, while the monks asked the pope to investigate Balsham's fitness for office and confirm his election. But Boniface ignored them, and proceeded to declare the election invalid -- his purpose in doing so was to promote the career of the celebrated Franciscan theologian Adam Marsh, whom he provided to the see. 
At Rome Pope Alexander IV ('r'. 1254-61), faced with the problem of defining the extent of his own jurisdiction, in an area where it had hitherto been imprecise, decided that any appeal would suffice to bring a disputed episcopal election before the curia; by making this decision Alexander was also ruling that Boniface's actions since the election had been invalid, and thereby secured Balsham in his see. He confirmed Balsham as bishop of Ely on 6 October 1257, and consecrated him on the 14th. Balsham promised that he would in future visit Rome every three years (a pledge from which he was released in 1278) and returned to England. His diocese had meanwhile been extortionately administered by royal agents, and although Henry III accepted the pope's action, and restored the temporalities on 15 January 1258, Balsham subsequently complained that during its vacancy the bishopric had suffered 'immense trespasses and damages' ('CPR', '1258-66', 48). It is arguable that he never truly recovered the king's goodwill; he accompanied Henry III to France in October 1259, but enjoyed none of those gifts of timber and venison that marked out those who stood within the magic circle of royal favour. 
Between 1259 and 1262 Balsham seems to have been much abroad, perhaps in part because of his promise to make triennial visits to Rome. During the barons' wars his diocese suffered severely, especially after 1265, when the Isle of Ely was occupied by die-hard rebels; in September 1266 he was granted the money he owed for military service 'in aid of the recovery of the Isle of Ely and the pursuit and arrest of the king's enemies who hold out there and destroy the country' ('CPR', '1258-66', 675). Five years later Balsham's own losses were described as 'innumerable'. Even so, he was more than once suspected of a lukewarm attitude to the king's cause. In April 1264 it was ordered that his barony be confiscated because of his failure to send the knights he owed to the army mustered to oppose Llewelyn. In the following year he was summoned to Montfort's parliament, and probably attended, since he was subsequently prosecuted in king's bench for 'offences against the peace and other transgressions against the king' (Jacob, 293). He was only occasionally engaged in public affairs thereafter: in 1274 he was ordered to take steps for the defence of Ely, after rumours circulated of an impending attempt by unnamed enemies to occupy it, and he was present in parliament in November 1276 when the king and his councillors resolved to attack Llewelyn. In May of the latter year he was licensed to crenellate his manor of Fen Ditton, suggesting that he enjoyed easier relations with Edward I than with Henry III. 
During the twenty-eight years of his episcopate Balsham proved to be an active and determined administrator. At least once he issued synodal statutes. Their chronology is rendered uncertain by the fact of their surviving among three basic recensions of Ely statutes, the earliest of them heavily dependent on statutes issued by Bishop Robert Grosseteste of Lincoln in or about 1239. Balsham was certainly responsible for the third recension, datable to between 1268 and 1276, and very possibly for the second, issued between 1254 and 1268. The relatively small number of statutes unquestionably his record Balsham as dealing with such issues as clerical ignorance and the promotion of the cult of St Etheldreda. In his dealings with his cathedral priory Balsham showed himself concerned to promote up-to-date administrative practices, through the injunctions he issued after a visitation in 1261. The convent had earlier entrusted the management of its finances to two monks, who were charged with submitting an annual account, but Balsham clearly found this inadequate, since he ordered that treasurers be appointed, who were to receive all manorial revenues, and who were henceforth to have overall control of the house's expenditure. He also implemented Archbishop Robert Kilwardby's decree concerning the customary gifts of candles made by the sacrist to all the inhabitants of Ely at Christmas. The growth of the town's population made this a serious burden on the convent's finances, and could no longer be tolerated. 
Balsham was meticulous about ordaining vicarages in churches appropriated to religious houses in his diocese, such as the nunneries of Denny and Chatteris. He also licensed the foundation of a chapel at Brame, near Ely, on recently cleared land which would eventually form part of the sacrist's endowment. Direct gifts to the Ely monks included the churches of Foxton and Wisbech St Mary, intended to augment the resources of the monastery's almonry and refectory respectively, and a site for a brewery near the bishop's own fish pond, between the queen's chamber and the monastic bakery. The building of the queen's chamber itself seems to have been provided for in 1277, by a gift of money that was to be paid when the monks built their own stone house; it now survives as the house occupied by the headmaster of Ely School. Nor did Balsham neglect his own episcopal interests. Soon after his consecration he re-established his rights in his see's lodging in the Temple, London. To compensate for his grants to Ely Priory and others he acquired the manor of Tydd St Giles, north of Wisbech, and the advowsons of the churches of Bexwell in Norfolk and of Cherry Hinton and Conington in Cambridgeshire. 
Balsham was closely involved in the development of the University of Cambridge. By the mid-thirteenth century there was a studium in the town headed by a chancellor, and functioning under the protection and direction of the bishop, many of whose clerks were masters in the schools. It is not surprising, therefore, that in 1276 a dispute about the statutes, and about the claim of the archdeacon of Ely to control the rector of the local grammar schools, should have been referred to Balsham's arbitration. But of greater long-term significance was the licence that Balsham obtained from Edward I in December 1280 for the foundation of a college of 'scholars of the bishop of Ely in Cambridge', modelled on Merton College, Oxford. The scholars were at first lodged in the hospital of St John, which was staffed by Augustinian canons, but the scholars and canons quarrelled, and on 31 March 1284 Balsham transferred the former to two hostels outside the town's Trumpington Gate, and appropriated to the scholars alone the church of St Peter (now Little St Mary's) previously held by the hospital, which was compensated elsewhere. From this grant the college took its name of Peterhouse. Balsham also appropriated to the college the church of Thriplow, and later in the year increased the value of the vicarage by 4 marks. Nevertheless the new college -- Cambridge's first -- was poor at first. It is likely that Balsham intended to make further endowments; as it was, on his deathbed he bequeathed $200 to Peterhouse, specifically to enable the scholars to build on their site. They are said to have used the bequest to build a new hall. 
In the heat of the controversy over his election to Ely Balsham was described by Henry III as 'a man inadequate and entirely useless' ('Close Rolls', 10.108-9). He may have been a somewhat colourless personality, though he showed a degree of humanity in granting the Ely monks permission to wear the copes appropriate to their order so as to protect themselves against the coldness of their church, but of his competence and concern for order there can be little doubt. When he made his will, in July 1279, he procured its sealing at the provincial council held at Reading in the same month. Balsham died at his manor of Dodington, in the Isle of Ely, on 13 June 1286, and was buried on the 24th before the high altar of the cathedral. A brass now in Balsham church is said to represent the bishop. 


@@@@@


doc= 1251


Baldred (d. 608?), bishop, who was a follower of St Kentigern, and later writers falsely attributed details of the life of the hermit Balthere to that of the bishop Baldred. 


@@@@@


doc= 1252


Baltroddi, Walter of (d. 1270), bishop of Caithness, succeeded to that see in 1261. His name probably derives from Baltroddi in Gowrie, Perthshire, now represented by Pitroddie, but his family affiliations are unknown. He was styled master by 1259, but it is not known which university he attended. He held an Aberdeen canonry and a Caithness canonry at the time of his election by the Caithness chapter. The papal mandate for his installation expressed some doubts about his legitimacy, but ordered three bishops to examine him, and promote and consecrate him if suitable. Nothing is known of his time as bishop, although his see would have been disturbed during the 1263-4 expedition to the north and west of Scotland by the king of Norway, Haakon IV Haakonsson, which affected Caithness, as did the Scottish king's response during the following years. There is a tradition in clan Mackay history that Iye Mor Mackay married a daughter of Bishop Walter, and thus acquired the twelve davachs (units of land) which formed the episcopal estate in Durness (the most north-westerly headland of the Scottish mainland, comprising, unusually, fertile limestone pasture). Bishop Baltroddi died in 1270, according to Walter Bower, who describes him as 'discreet in counsel and commendable in the holiness of his life' (Bower, 5.379). He was mentioned in 1275 as having been involved in disputes, as had his predecessors Gilbert and William, with the earl of Sutherland over lands and rights in south-east Sutherland. These presumably stemmed from the endowments of the cathedral church at Dornoch, founded by Bishop Gilbert earlier in the thirteenth century. 


