@@@@@


doc= 17316


Lytton, Rosina Anne Doyle Bulwer, Lady Lytton (1802-1882), novelist, was born on 4 November 1802 in co. Limerick, Ireland, the younger of the two surviving children of Francis Massy Wheeler (1781-1820), grandson of Hugh, first Baron Massy of Duntrileague, and his wife, Anna Wheeler (1785?-1848), advocate of women's rights and daughter of Nicholas Doyle, protestant archbishop of Cashel. Rosina Wheeler was brought up with her sister Henrietta (1801-1826) at the Wheeler family home, Ballywife, Kilross, on the border of the counties of Limerick and Tipperary. In August 1812 her mother deserted her father and, assisted by her brother John, left Ireland with her sister Bessie and two daughters. The fugitives embarked on a voyage to Guernsey aboard the 'Ocean Pearl', which belonged to Anna Wheeler's uncle General Sir John Doyle, who presided as governor of this Channel Island. Here Rosina entered into a more affluent lifestyle, developing her wit and talent for mimicry, and mingling with aristocrats who had fled the French Revolution. Between 1816 and 1820 she received an inadequate education at a private school in Kensington in London, which is dramatized as Miss James's school for young ladies in her fictional autobiography: 'Miriam Sedley, or, The Tares and the Wheat: a Tale of Real Life' (1851). 
As a dark-haired beauty with cupid-bow lips, Rosina entered into society, where she attracted the attentions of Edward George Earle Lytton Bulwer Lytton (1803-1873), who, in April 1826, proposed marriage. Edward's mother opposed the match, and when the wedding went ahead on 29 August 1827 carried out her threat of putting a stop to her son's income. Since this forced him to support his wife by writing novels, a considerable pressure was placed on the marriage. Tensions arising from financial strains and Edward's marital infidelities even erupted into domestic violence against Rosina. Not one placidly to accept this situation, Rosina on a trip to Naples retaliated against her husband's adultery by flirting with a Neapolitan prince. Her action prompted Bulwer Lytton, in 1836, after nine years of marriage, to draw up an agreement to separate. The most painful repercussion was that Rosina was parted from her children. Except for four months in 1858, she never saw her son Edward Robert from 1838 to the time of her death in 1882. She was also denied access to her daughter Emily, and had to be granted a special dispensation by her husband in order to visit Emily, who was then dying of typhoid fever, in 1848. 
The annuity of $400 that Rosina received as a separated wife from Bulwer Lytton was inadequate for her needs. This reduced income forced her to leave the metropolis for less expensive parts of the country such as Llangollen in north Wales and then Taunton in the west country. Pursued by creditors, she supplemented her income by publishing novels, and also used her writing to exact revenge on her husband for his desertion. Many of her works set out to attack him, as did the satiric best-seller 'Cheveley, or, The Man of Honour' (1839) and 'The Budget of the Bubble Family' (1840), the latter of which ridiculed Bulwer Lytton's family and their ancestral seat, Knebworth House in Hertfordshire. Other fictional exposes of her marriage and the plight of separated wives include: 'The School for Husbands, or, Moliere's Life and Times' (1852), 'Behind the Scenes: a Novel' (1854), and 'The World and his Wife, or, A Person of Consequence: a Photographic Novel' (1858). Even novels more removed in setting, such as 'Bianca Cappello: an Historical Romance' (1843), contain fierce polemical passages protesting the ill treatment of women by their husbands. Other novels containing unconventional heroines include: 'The Peer's Daughters: a Novel' (1849) and 'Very Successful!' (1856), the latter of which was particularly well received. 
Rosina drew attention to her reduced state in the newspapers and even made an appeal for funds from the public in her 'Appeal to the Justice and Charity of the English Public' (1857). The sparring between husband and wife became more intense when Rosina launched a public and vicious verbal attack on Bulwer Lytton from the hustings while, as colonial secretary in Lord Derby's administration, he was canvassing in Hertford for re-election as a tory MP. The result was that her husband, angry and mortified by this very public humiliation, had Rosina confined in a private lunatic asylum in Inverness Lodge in Brentford. As a result of the public protest spearheaded by her women friends, she won her freedom after three weeks. 
A scandalous autobiographical revelation of Rosina's ill treatment at the hands of her husband written in 1866 appeared in book form in 1880 entitled 'A Blighted Life'. Bulwer Lytton had died in 1873, but the memoir aroused the disapproval of their son, Edward Robert Bulwer-Lytton (1831-1891), who had remained loyal to his father's memory. Rosina denied that she had intended it for publication, and wrote the appropriately entitled pamphlet: 'Refutation of an audacious forgery of the Dowager Lady Lytton's name to a book of the publication of which she was totally ignorant' (1880). 
Towards the end of her life Rosina adopted the pseudonym of George Gordon Scott for her historical novel 'Clumber Chase, or, Love's Riddle Solved by a Royal Sphinx: a Tale of the Restoration' (1871). Under her own name she published a collection of essays called 'Shells from the Sands of Time' (1876). Retaining vestiges of her legendary beauty in old age, she died at her home, Glenomera, 77 Longton Grove, Upper Sydenham, Kent, on 12 March 1882, plagued by physical pain, sorrow, and debt. She was buried in the churchyard of St John the Evangelist at Shirley in Surrey, but her grave was unmarked until 12 March 1995, when her great-great-grandson David Lytton Cobbold, second Baron Cobbold of Knebworth, arranged for a tombstone to be erected on her grave with the inscription she had requested: 'The Lord will give thee rest from thy sorrow, and from thy fear, and from the hard bondage wherein thou wast made to serve.' 
Rosina had brought about her 'hard bondage' through her refusal to conform to the duties of a Victorian wife, which required women to 'suffer and be silent'. By drawing attention to the plight of married women and separated wives through her novels, pamphlets, and journalism, Rosina contributed towards the mounting pressure that eventually brought about legislation designed to protect the interests of women. Rosina Bulwer Lytton represents far more than a case history of a hysteric or an unorthodox minor Victorian novelist. For her undoubted talent and extraordinary courage in speaking out against injustice she deserves a permanent place in women's history, as she has provided an often unrecognized source of inspiration to those who have followed. Her most immediate legacy was passed to her granddaughter Lady Constance Georgina Bulwer-Lytton (1869-1923), who became one of the heroines of the Edwardian women's suffrage movement. 


@@@@@


doc= 17317


Lyzard, Nicholas (d. 1571), painter, was born in France to unknown parents. He entered the service of Henry VIII in the late 1520s or early 1530s, and is possibly identical with the 'Master Nykolas' who worked with Hans Holbein the younger at Greenwich Palace in 1527, or with Nicholas Lasora, one of the painters working in 1531 on the 'Coronation' picture for Whitehall Palace. The painter is first securely referred to in a list of foreigners resident in Westminster in 1540 when he was assessed at $30 in goods. Lyzard successively worked for Henry VIII, Edward VI, Mary I, and Elizabeth I, and acted as assistant to the serjeant painter Anthony Toto, to whose post he succeeded on 1 November 1554. His salary, however, seems to have fallen into arrears and a document of 10 April 1556 restates his position at court and awards him outstanding back pay. Lyzard seems to have been primarily a decorative painter, in 1550 producing costumes and visors for women in masques, and between 1556 and 1571 painting and gilding beds, banners, a carriage, and a barge for the royal wardrobe. He also worked on revels at court between 1544 and 1568 and is documented as producing heraldic painting for the obsequies of Maria of Portugal, queen of Spain, in 1555; for John III of Portugal in 1557; for Emperor Charles V in 1558; Henry II of France in 1559; and for Emperor Ferdinand I in 1564. On special occasions Lyzard also produced religious art, as is shown by his new year's gifts to Mary I and Elizabeth I respectively of a 'table painted with the Maundy' (Auerbach, 146) in 1556, and 'a table painted of the history of Ahasuerus' (Nichols, 45) in 1558. In this last year he worked on the funeral effigy of Mary I, and in 1559 he contributed to the decorations for the coronation of Elizabeth I. Between 1564 and 1568 he also worked on architectural painting at Whitehall and Strand palaces. With his wife, Margaret, he had five sons, four of whom were decorative painters employed by the office of revels, and four daughters. From 1540 or earlier Lyzard was a parishioner of St Martin-in-the-Fields, London, and was buried there on 5 April 1571. 


@@@@@


doc= 17318


Maas, Joseph (1847-1886), singer, was born on 30 January 1847 at Dartford, Kent, the son of Joseph Maas, descended from an old Dutch family. At the age of ten he became a chorister at Rochester Cathedral, and was soloist there for five years. He studied with the cathedral organist, and with a Mrs Galton, eldest sister of Louisa Bodda-Pyne, who engaged him to sing as a boy treble at her concerts in the provinces. When he left the cathedral he became a clerk in Chatham Dockyard, but continued his musical studies with Louisa Bodda-Pyne in London. In 1869, financed by a Mr Wood of Rochester, he went to Milan, where he had singing lessons for two years under San Giovanni. 
In February 1871 Maas replaced Sims Reeves at a concert given by Henry Leslie's choir at London's St James's Hall with great success, and on 29 August 1872 made his stage debut at Covent Garden as Prince Babil in Dion Boucicault's 'Babil and Bijou'. In 1872 he went to the United States as a member of Clara Kellogg's English Opera Company. He returned to England in 1877, and the following year sang Gontrau in the first English performance of Ignaz Brull's 'The Golden Cross' at the Adelphi Theatre under Carl Rosa. As a result of this he was engaged as principal tenor in the Carl Rosa company. During the three seasons 1878-80 his main roles were the title part in Wagner's 'Rienzi', Wilhelm Meister in Ambroise Thomas's 'Mignon', and Radames in Verdi's 'Aida', all of these being performed in English for the first time. Maas also sang for the Italian Opera at Her Majesty's Theatre in 1880, and in 1883 he made a memorable appearance in Wagner's 'Lohengrin' at Covent Garden. At the 1884 Norwich festival he performed 'Apollo's Invocation', written for him by Massenet, and in May 1885 he created the part of the Chevalier des Grieux in the first London performance of Massenet's 'Manon' at Drury Lane. He was an indifferent actor, but he had a pure tenor voice, of considerable power and compass, which he managed with ease and feeling. 
Maas was popular in the concert room as well as on the stage, and in Handel's oratorios and in English ballads he was almost without a rival. His first oratorio appearance was at the Sacred Harmonic Society in 'Messiah' on 4 April 1879. He had many engagements in London and the provinces and sang in Paris in 1884 and in Brussels at the Bach and Handel festival in 1885. His last important performance was at the Birmingham festival in 1885, where he sang in the first English performances of Dvorak's 'The Spectre's Bride' and Stanford's 'Three Holy Children'. 
Maas married Catherine, daughter of J. H. Ball JP, of Stroud, Gloucestershire. They had one daughter. He died of a rheumatic affliction at his home, 21 Marlborough Hill, St John's Wood, London, on 16 January 1886, and was buried at Child's Hill cemetery, West Hampstead. His grave is marked by a marble monument with a carved portrait. A Maas memorial prize was founded in 1887 for the encouragement of tenor singers and is competed for annually at one of the British music colleges in turn. 


@@@@@


doc= 17319


Mabbe, James (1571/2-1642?), translator, was born in Surrey, in the diocese of Winchester, one of the eleven children of John Mabbe and Martha, daughter of William Denham of London. His grandfather, also named John Mabbe, was a well-known member of the Goldsmiths' Company who served as chamberlain of London in 1577. James's father, who was also a goldsmith, was outlawed for debt some time before March 1589 ('CPR', '1588-9', 57). Mabbe matriculated aged sixteen at Magdalen College, Oxford, on 9 February 1588, received his BA on 8 February 1594, was elected to a perpetual fellowship in 1595, and received his MA on 17 October 1598. He was a scholar of the Goldsmiths' Company, but in August 1602 the company voted to turn Mabbe's scholarship over to someone else. Mabbe had already been granted leave the previous April to spend a year in France, and presumably he took the opportunity to travel before embarking on the study of civil law in 1603. 
To this period belong Mabbe's first modest literary efforts. In 1598 he dedicated a treatise entitled 'The Dyet of Healthe' (now lost) to the Goldsmiths' Company, and in 1600 he wrote a Latin commendation for fellow Magdalen scholar Charles Butler's 'Rhetoricae libri duo'. He contributed one Latin and one Italian poem to Oxford's volume in honour of James I, 'Academiae Oxoniensis pietas' (1603); in 1605 he presented a Latin oration when the royal family visited Magdalen; and in 1611 he wrote an anagram and Latin verses for John Florio's 'Queen Anna's New World of Wordes'. An autograph poem addressed by Mabbe to 'Sir G. T. K.' (probably Sir George Trenchard, knight) survives in the Bodleian Library (MS Add. 29419, fols. 56'v'-57). Meanwhile, he served as junior proctor of Oxford in 1606, senior dean of arts in 1606-7, and junior dean of arts in 1609-10. 
On 4 July 1609 Mabbe supplicated for the degree of doctor of civil law, but his thirst for travel soon led him in a different direction. In April 1611 he accompanied his former Magdalen classmate Sir John Digby on a mission to Madrid to negotiate a marriage between Prince Henry and Ana, daughter of Philip III. According to Wood, Mabbe spent several years as Digby's secretary in Spain, improving himself 'in various sorts of learning, and in the customs and manners of that and other countries' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 3.53), a statement confirmed by a letter Mabbe wrote from Madrid in 1612 describing various Spanish wonders. In 1613 he was made prebendary of Wanstrow, Wells, but he was absent in July 1615, perhaps travelling again. About this time he sent a copy of the 1613 edition of Lope de Vega's 'Rimas' (now Balliol 700 a.14) to his Oxford friend Will Baker via fellow Hispanist Leonard Digges, who wrote an inscription on the flyleaf comparing Lope de Vega to Shakespeare. 
For about the next fifteen years Mabbe taught at Magdalen (where he served as bursar six times between 1617 and 1630), suffered from gout, occasionally travelled to the continent, and translated various Spanish works. In 1622 his close friend Edward Blount published an elaborate folio edition of 'The Rogue', Mabbe's translation of Matheo Aleman's picaresque novel 'Guzman de Alfarache'. This translation, made partly from Barezzo Barezzi's Italian version and partly from the original Spanish, was popular and influential enough to go through four editions by 1656; Mabbe's modern editor calls it a 'triumph' which 'might very well pass for a piece of masterly English prose' (Fitzmaurice-Kelly, xxiii). Mabbe dedicated the volume to his friend Sir John Strangeways of Dorset, and included many marginal notes explaining Spanish customs. In 1623, under the initials I. M., Mabbe contributed a short poem to the Shakespeare first folio, of which Blount was co-publisher; two other poems in the volume were by Ben Jonson and Leonard Digges, both of whom had commended Mabbe's book the year before. 
Mabbe's next translations were of a religious nature. His folio manuscript 'Advertisements Touching Festivall Dayes' (BL, Harleian MS 5077) is dated 27 December 1626. In the dedication to his 'worthy friend' John Browne of Frampton Court, Dorset, Mabbe says that this translation (the original of which is unknown) has been delayed by illness, and is an appendix to an earlier work. Secord tentatively suggests that this earlier work may have been Cristobal de Fonseca's 'Devout Contemplations', of which Mabbe published his translation in 1629, dedicated to Strangeways and Sir Lewis Dyves and their wives. Secord also demonstrates that Mabbe was the translator of 'Christian Policie, or, The Christian Common-Wealth', from the Spanish of Juan de Santa Maria, first printed in 1632 with a dedication to James Hay, earl of Carlisle, and mistakenly attributed by earlier commentators to Edward Blount. 
In 1631, under the pseudonym Don Diego Puede-ser (James May-be), Mabbe published 'The Spanish Bawd', a lively and thorough translation of Fernando de Rojas's well-known play 'La celestina' (partly via Alfonso Ordonez's Italian translation and Jacques de Lavardin's French version). He had originally done the translation many years earlier, in a manuscript dedicated to his old patron Strangeways (now Alnwick Castle, MS 510), but the printed version, considerably revised, was dedicated to Sir Thomas Richardson, newly appointed chief justice of the king's bench. 'The Spanish Bawd' was considerably less successful than 'The Rogue' in its day, but it has similarly impressed modern critics with its fluency and verbal inventiveness. 
In 1633 Mabbe left Oxford and eventually went to live with Strangeways at Abbotsbury, Dorset. There he did his last translation (again as Don Diego Puede-ser), consisting of six novellas of Cervantes printed in 1640 under the title 'Exemplarie Novells', with a dedication to Susanna Strangeways, daughter-in-law of Sir John. A second edition, published in 1654 under the title 'Delight in Severall Shapes', omits Mabbe's name and his original dedication, and a third edition in 1742 wrongly ascribes the translation to Thomas Shelton. Mabbe was succeeded as prebendary of Wanstrow on 7 December 1642, and presumably died that year. Although the relevant records are lost, Wood says that he was buried at Abbotsbury. He never married. 


@@@@@


doc= 17320


Mabb, John (c.1515-1582), goldsmith, was the eldest son of John Mabb of Clayton in Sussex and Joane Goble. He was apprenticed to Thomas Jones and became free of the Goldsmiths' Company in April 1539. From 1558 (and probably from 1540) he resided in Goldsmiths' Row in the parish of St Matthew, Friday Street, where he practised as a goldsmith. He followed a conventional company career, entering the livery in 1552, serving as renter in 1561-2, as warden in 1563-4, 1567-8, and 1571-2, and as prime warden in 1577-8. In parallel with his ascent of the company hierarchy he served the 'cursus honorum' in parish and ward: he was churchwarden of St Matthew's, Friday Street, in 1559-60, and common councillor for the ward of Farringdon Within from 1560 to 1577. He was briefly a governor of Christ's Hospital in 1560-62, but seems to have been more engaged with Bridewell Hospital, of which he was a governor from 1570 to 1577, becoming associated with the determined and controversial moralism of the regime of Robert Winch, the treasurer from 1576. 
Mabb never scaled the heights of the city plutocracy, but his subsidy assessments in the 1570s ($120) place him among the top 5 per cent of the citizenry. His financial acumen was widely appreciated -- he had served as the treasurer of Bridewell in 1572-3 and as a city auditor in 1574 -- and on the dismissal of George Heaton he was elected on 13 December 1577 to the highly demanding position of chamberlain of the city. His skill was sufficient to see off a challenge from Matthew Colclough, a candidate backed by Sir Christopher Hatton, in August 1579, and he retained the office until his death in 1582. Mabb's civic activism was characteristic of a man who adopted a forward protestant position. Leaving money for twelve sermons after his death, he requested his favoured preachers: Toby Matthew, then vice-chancellor of Oxford University, Edwin Sandys, archbishop of York, John Aylmer, bishop of London, Alexander Nowell, dean of St Paul's, Adam Squire, archdeacon of Essex, and Richard Lewes. All were conformist, but all were noted for their commitment to preaching. 
Mabb was the author of the 'Remembrances faithfullie printed out of his own hand writing; the true copie whereof was found carefullie wrapped up with his last will and testament, and other writings of great weight; and by himself thus entituled, A declaration of my Faithe; mine opinion of religion; a thanksgiving to God for all his benefits; an exhortation to my children, wherein all such are to learn a good lesson, as the Lord hath crowned with any kind of blessing and especially with bodily issue. (Arber, 'Regs. Stationers', 3.418)' He was doubtless thinking of the blessings of his own marriage to Isabella, daughter of Richard Colley of Shropshire, for there were five sons and three daughters alive when he drew up his will in 1578, of whom three of the boys and two of the girls had reached majority. His will carefully divided the moveable goods among them and provided for his widow according to the custom of London. His properties in Hertfordshire, Sussex, Southwark, and London were to go to his widow during her life, and then were to be divided among the five sons. The pattern of his charitable giving was conventional, but spread widely: there were bequests to the poor in the London parishes, for poor maidens' marriages, among the goldsmiths, and in his birthplace, to the London prisons, to Christ's Hospital, for highway repair in Sussex, and for poor scholars studying theology at the universities. But in the spirit of the civic moralism with which he had been associated, he was careful to ensure that 'no notorious swearer, adulterer, or drunckerd shall have annye parte of this my legacie in annye wise' (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/65, fol. 7). He died in 1582 and was buried on 28 December in the parish church of St Matthew, Friday Street. 


@@@@@


doc= 17321


Catherine Charlotte Maberly (1805-1875) was herself an author, who between 1840 and 1856 published nine novels and works of non-fiction, including 'The Present State of Ireland and its Remedy'. 


@@@@@


doc= 17322


Maberly, Frederick Herbert (1781-1860), politician and Church of England clergyman, born on 18 April 1781, was the son of Stephen Maberly of Reading and London. Educated at Westminster School, he entered Trinity College, Cambridge, on 23 April 1802, graduating BA in 1806 and MA in 1809. He was ordained to the curacy of Bourn, near Caxton, and in 1807 married, at Bourn, Ann Kimpton. He soon began to display the eccentricity for which he later became notorious. At Chesterton, near Cambridge, he erected, for no declared reason and at great expense, a large dwelling, of which all the rooms were on one floor. In politics he was at this time a whig, but his anti-popish zeal was so fanatical that he resisted the movement for Catholic emancipation with the utmost determination, and increasingly represented ultra-tory views. About 1812 he travelled all over England in a van distributing tons of protestant tracts. His pamphlet 'The Melancholy and Awful Death of Lawrence Dundas, Esq., an Undergraduate of Trinity College' (1818) was hyperbolic in tone and denounced the Fitzwilliam Museum for exhibiting 'disgraceful and licentious pictures' which would lead undergraduates 'to the commission of fornication'. None the less, it called attention to the lax supervision of undergraduates in lodgings in the town of Cambridge, and led to the introduction of a system of licences on 27 March 1818. 
In 1826 Maberly took an active part in the opposition to Lord John Russell's re-election for the county of Huntingdon. In 1829, when the sheriff of Cambridgeshire declined a requisition to call a meeting to oppose the 'Catholic Relief Bill', Maberly issued a manifesto, dated 2 April (Cooper, 4.560), declaring that on 11 April, the occasion of the execution of a criminal then under sentence of death, he would address the crowd and move a resolution in favour of a petition for the impeachment of Wellington and Peel. Under pressure from the county magistracy he abandoned his intention on 9 April, but he subsequently appeared at the bar of the House of Lords to impeach the duke of Wellington and was summarily ejected. In 1834 he strenuously opposed the 'Poor Law Amendment Act', and on 11 June 1836 assembled a large meeting of labourers, principally from outlying villages, on Parker's Piece in Cambridge, to protest against the act and the way it was being implemented. On 26 July 1837 he was charged with assaulting a constable. In the meantime, during the brief tory government of 1834-5, he received from the bishop of Ely the rectory of Finborough in Suffolk, effectively a reward for his staunch support of the tory party. There his political activities diminished and he gave away much of his salary to the poor, so that when he died at Stowmarket on 24 January 1860 he left his family much impoverished. 


@@@@@


doc= 17323


Maberly, William Leader (1798-1885), army officer and civil servant, was born on 7 May 1798, probably at Shirley House, Surrey, the son of John Maberly (died 'c'.1832) and Mary Rose, daughter of William Leader, coachmaker to the prince of Wales. His father was a manufacturer and army contractor, and also MP for Rye in 1816-18, and for Abingdon in 1818-32. Educated at Eton College and at Brasenose College, Oxford, on 11 November 1830 Maberly married Catherine, who was the elder daughter of the Hon. Francis Prittie of Corville, co. Tipperary. 
Like many men of his social background, Maberly found positions and advancement in government service. In the army he entered the 7th dragoons as a lieutenant in 1815, and subsequently served in the 9th dragoons in 1817-18. He was a captain from 1818 to 1825 in the 100th foot and the 84th foot, a major in the 72nd highlanders in 1825-6, a lieutenant-colonel in the 96th foot in 1826-7, and in the 76th foot from 1827 to 1832, when he went on half-pay. He did not retire from the army until 1881. In the House of Commons, Maberly was MP for Westbury, 1819-20, Northampton, 1820-30, Shaftesbury, 1831-2, and Chatham, 1832-4. Maberly's parliamentary career was characterized by a tendency to follow his father's political outlook (the elder Maberly turned against the tories in 1819), and by an oratorical style which was said to be indefatigable but ineffective. 
Yet it was as a senior civil servant that Maberly came to occupy a position of public prominence. After serving as surveyor-general of the ordnance in 1831-2, clerk of the ordnance in 1833-4, and commissioner of customs in 1834-6, Maberly became secretary of the Post Office in 1836. There he quickly encountered challenges, and some difficulty because of three complicating situations. The first arose from the fact that he had succeeded an extremely able administrator, Sir Francis Freeling, who had led the Post Office with distinction for thirty-eight years. The second was the result of the changing economic environment in which the department was functioning in the mid-nineteenth century. Increasing demands for service from the business community, and complex questions involving the new contractual relationships with railways and steamships, increased the strain on the Post Office and Maberly. The third, and most vexing, entanglement grew out of the campaign of Rowland Hill (1795-1879) for postal reform, launched in 1837. Hill criticized the Post Office on a number of levels, but his most important claim was that a simplified system of postage prepaid on the basis of weight would not only better serve the public, but would within five years regain the net revenue (profit) levels achieved earlier under a system which had put the taxing function of the Post Office before its social and economic functions. Hill's proposal bore fruit in 1840 with the implementation of the penny post. 
For the rest of Maberly's career at the Post Office he contended with Hill and his reforms. Hill later claimed that any difficulties and shortcomings of penny post (it was not until 1873 that revenue recovered to maintain consistently pre-reform levels) were the responsibility of time-serving insiders such as Maberly. Such a judgement does not do justice to the complexity of the situation. Maberly did at times evidence a relaxed approach to administration, as his attention was often focused on the management of family land in Ireland. But he was not incompetent. He had a clearer understanding of the economics of the postal service, and a better grasp of the nuances of administering a large bureaucracy, than did Hill. Maberly also worked harder to implement penny post than Hill recognized. 
It was to no avail. After Hill was installed in 1846 as secretary to the postmaster general to promote his ideas from within, friction between the two increased. Hill emerged the victor, when, in 1854, he replaced Maberly as the senior civil servant in the Post Office. Maberly was transferred to the board of audit, where he served until 1866. Catherine Maberly died on 7 February 1875. Enjoying a pension of over $1700 per year, Maberly lived in retirement until 6 February 1885, when he died at his home, 23 Gloucester Place, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 17324


Macadam, John (1827-1865), chemist and politician in Australia, was born at Northbank, near Glasgow, in May 1827, the second son of William Macadam and his wife, Helen Stevenson. After being privately educated in Glasgow, he studied chemistry at the Andersonian Institution (1842-5) and became assistant to Frederick Penny. After two years of advanced study with William Gregory at the University of Edinburgh, he became a medical student at the University of Glasgow in 1848, and graduated MD in 1854. 
In 1855 Macadam went to Melbourne to fill the post of lecturer on chemistry and natural science at the Scotch College, and on 18 September of the following year he married Elizabeth Clark; they had one son, Kirkland Macadam, who later became the first professor of chemistry of the University of Melbourne. Macadam was one of the earliest members of the Philosophical Institute (from 1859 the Royal Society) of Victoria. He edited the first five volumes of the society's 'Transactions', and held the post of secretary from 1857 until his election as vice-president in 1863. 
Macadam was active in Australian public affairs. He was elected to the legislative assembly of Victoria in 1859, representing the district of Castlemaine, and he served as secretary of the exploration committee of the Burke and Wills expedition. As an MP he was instrumental in the passing of laws on medical practitioners and adulteration of food in 1862 and 1863, but resigned his seat in 1864. 
Macadam was appointed lecturer in theoretical and practical chemistry at the University of Melbourne in 1862, and also held the posts of government analytical chemist (1858-65) and health officer to the city of Melbourne (1860-65). In May 1865 he fractured his ribs and then developed pleurisy, but sailed in the autumn for New Zealand, to give evidence at a murder trial. Severe weather aggravated his condition, and he died on board the 'Alhambra' on 2 September 1865. He was buried in Melbourne general cemetery on 28 September 1865. 
Macadam was a talented analytical chemist, and published his work in Glasgow and Melbourne. He contributed two papers to the Royal Society, Victoria: 'On kerosene' ('Transactions', 6, 1914), and 'On Dalton's atomic theory' (not printed). He wrote several reports, including one on the resources of the colony of Victoria, presented to the Royal Society of Victoria in 1860. 


@@@@@


doc= 17325


McAdam, John Loudon (1756-1836), builder and administrator of roads, was born in the west-coast town of Ayr, at 22 Sandgate, on 21 September 1756, the youngest child and second son of James McAdam of Waterhead ('c'.1718-1770), and his wife, Susannah Cochrane ('b'. 'c'.1717). His father was a minor laird and his mother a niece of the seventh earl of Dundonald, while his middle name records his paternal great-grandmother's links with the Loudoun family; but despite these advantages McAdam's early life was unsettled. Ancestral lands at Waterhead were sold off, the family's home in the parish of Carsphairn was destroyed by fire, and they were obliged to move to a rented house, Blairquhan near Straiton. This misfortune was compounded by an ill-advised investment in a bank in Ayr which failed two years after James McAdam's death in 1770. The family was left straitened but not impoverished, and in this difficult situation the fourteen-year-old John Loudon had to find a way to make a living. His origins and background had prepared him well for this task: he had benefited from the Scottish parish school system, having attended classes in Maybole where he is reputed to have made a model cross-section of the nearby road; as part of the Scottish diaspora he had relatives overseas to whom he could look for openings; and he had an instinctive belief in his own worth as a gentleman. 
In 1770 the young McAdam left home for New York, where his father's brother William had already established himself in trade and society as a prosperous merchant with a well-connected wife. McAdam was taken into the home of this childless couple and came to work closely with his uncle in ventures such as the sale of naval prizes. The antagonism of the American colonies to British rule, leading to the outbreak of hostilities in 1775, created difficulties for the McAdams as it did for other 'loyalists', but while his uncle retired to the country John Loudon continued in business. By 1778 he was sufficiently well established to propose marriage to Gloriana Margaretta Nicoll (died 1825), the daughter of a wealthy lawyer whose family had long held positions of responsibility in the colony. When in 1783 the former colonies achieved independence, McAdam and his wife sailed from America with their two children, Ann and William, and such fortune as they had been able to secure. This proved sufficient for the purchase of a house and estate at Sauchrie, between Ayr and Maybole. 
John Loudon McAdam's enforced return propelled his career into its second phase, as a Scottish country gentleman and business entrepreneur. He became a magistrate; a trustee of the Ayrshire turnpike roads; deputy lieutenant of the county; and the officer in charge of a volunteer artillery corps when in 1794 a French invasion seemed imminent. His business interests came to prejudice this settled life, for the Sauchrie estate had to be sold when bankruptcy threatened as a result of his association with the British Tar Company, established in Muirkirk in 1782 by his kinsman Archibald Cochrane, ninth earl of Dundonald. McAdam realized the importance of this pioneering venture, the first to produce commercially profitable coal tar, and from the mid-1780s he was successively agent, manager, and owner of the rights to the patent and the works. However, difficulties in establishing sales of coal tar for the bottoming of ships, and in maintaining supplies of coke of the right quality and quantity for the nearby Muirkirk Iron Works, led to severe legal and financial problems which were only resolved in the later 1790s by the sale of McAdam's estate and his second departure from Scotland. Despite these upheavals he retained an interest in the company and associated coalworks, and his eldest son William became manager there. For many years McAdam received an income from this source which provided some degree of financial independence, and in 1931 a cairn was built in his honour, to mark 'the site of his tar kilns 1786-1827'. 
In 1798 the family moved south, spending a few months in Kingsdown, Bristol, where a fourth son (their seventh child) was born. He was named John Loudon junior, and like his surviving brothers William and James he was to become a road surveyor. Further sisters Gloriana and Georgina had been born in Scotland in the late 1780s. They moved on to Falmouth where McAdam found work as a prize master, a role that had proved profitable in wartime New York, but when the peace of Amiens of 1801 put an end to the taking of prize ships the family was again adrift. They returned to Bristol, but although this was to be a more permanent move the city's directories suggest a reluctance to settle, for between 1802 and 1826 they rented five houses on the slopes of Brandon Hill -- two in Park Street, two in Berkeley Square, and one in Dowry Parade, all genteel dwellings which would have offered comfort rather than the grandeur of the houses of the merchant princes in Clifton. 
The reasons for settling in Bristol have never been explained, except in terms of the opportunities provided by this second city and major port. Entries in the directories from 1807 for 'McAdam, James & Co., Manufacturers of Lampblack, Mineral Paints, Oils etc, near the Glass-house, Limekiln Lane', suggest that Bristol may have offered McAdam a chance to resume his interest in the chemical industry through his second son, James, while maintaining the connection with the British Tar Company. McAdam established himself in Bristol civic life as successfully as he had in his native Ayrshire. The incorrect 'Lowdin' was replaced by 'Loudon' in the directories and 'Esq.' was added as a sign of status. McAdam never attained membership of the select Society of Merchant Venturers, but he was made a freeman of the city by the common council in 1805. In 1811 he helped to establish the Bristol Commercial Rooms, becoming the first president, and between 1815 and 1820 he played a leading part in the campaign for a new gaol in the city. Such activities were peripheral to his main interest, however -- the improvement of the roads that were so vital for the growing economy -- and it was to this end that he became a trustee of the large and important Bristol Turnpike Trust. 
By the early nineteenth century the fact that the methods of road construction were haphazard, and the surveyors largely untrained and of low esteem, was causing official as well as private concern. Sir John Sinclair, chairman of the board of agriculture, supported a series of parliamentary committees which reported regularly from 1806. Evidence was invited, and in 1810 Sir John received an impressive memorandum from McAdam which was edited and published as an appendix to a report of the following year ('Select committee on... turnpike roads and highways', 'Parl. papers', 1810-11, 3). Extracts were included in McAdam's first book, 'Remarks on the Present System of Road Making' (1816), which was so influential that it had reached nine editions by 1827. McAdam's views were based on a study of the conditions found on extensive travels, covering, he claimed, 30,000 miles between 1798 and 1814 ('Select committee on... turnpike roads and highways', 'Parl. papers', 1820, 2). These led him to conclude that the main legislative efforts of the time were misdirected, for they were concerned with the regulation of traffic (especially in respect to wheels and weights) in order to preserve the roads, rather than with methods of construction that would accommodate the traffic. 
McAdam's recommended system of road construction involved the careful preparation of a well-drained subsoil, levelled, but with a slight fall from the centre of 1 inch to the yard. The roadstone was to be broken by seated workers with small-handled hammers into rough pieces weighing no more than 6 oz that would fit into the mouth. McAdam had observed that large stones were likely to be cracked by passing vehicles and sent flying, but that smaller, angular ones, applied to a depth of 10 inches and compressed by workmen, were consolidated by traffic to produce a resilient and impermeable surface which improved over time. These techniques were simple, effective, and economical. The substantial foundations which were such a feature of the roads built by his contemporary Thomas Telford, often at government cost, played no part of McAdam's system, and further economies came from the fact that the roads were no longer to be overburdened with stone, and that much of that already heaped upon them could be stripped off, reworked, and reused. 
McAdam's advice extended to the organization of roads, which were to be controlled by the trustees with the assistance of an 'executive officer' -- preferably a trained surveyor of good social standing in receipt of a salary which would place him beyond corruption. In December 1815 McAdam was offered the chance to put his theories into practice by his fellow Bristol Turnpike trustees, who invited him to become their general surveyor of roads at a salary of $400 per year. The challenge was accepted and over the following years the Bristol Trust was managed with great skill and economy. By 1819 it controlled 178 miles, and McAdam's salary had risen to $500 per annum, out of which he supported his office and family, and kept a carriage, horses, and servants. His work on the road from Bristol towards Shepton Mallet was noted by Sir John Coxe Hippisley, whose recommendation to the postmaster-general provided McAdam with further opportunities for public activity, since good roads were vital to the speedy delivery of mail. 
As his reputation grew McAdam was able to extend his influence further by becoming, with the support of his family, a surveyor or consultant to other trusts. By 1819 he, James, and William worked for twenty-five trusts, and over the whole period to the death of his grandson in 1861 the family were surveyors to almost 150 trusts (Reader, appendix 1). The support of the Post Office and the board of agriculture remained firm, and parliamentary committees continued to provide a platform for McAdam's views. His claim for financial compensation for the country-wide work undertaken on behalf of the road system, mostly at his own cost, was recognized, and between 1820 and 1825 McAdam received $6000 from public funds ('Select committee on the petition'). However, his fame on the national stage produced little joy in Bristol, where the turnpike trustees felt themselves neglected, despite the appointment in April 1824 of McAdam's son John Loudon jun. as joint general surveyor. McAdam's absences provoked a vote of censure and he chose to resign; nevertheless, he agreed to return on his own terms when invited to do so, perhaps because the surveyorship of the adjoining Bath Trust was then in view, offering the chance of managing the two important trusts side by side. McAdam was appointed to the Bath roads in 1826 and maintained his connection with both until his death in 1836. He conducted the business of the Bristol Trust with his son John Loudon, and that of the Bath Trust with his grandson William. 
At the same time as his difficulties with the Bristol trustees, McAdam's links with the city were further weakened by the death of his wife in 1825. Two years later he moved to Hoddesdon in the Hertfordshire countryside and married her younger relative, Anne Charlotte Delancey (1786-1862), who was born in Bath but who had American connections. They lived amiably, with summer visits to Scotland where McAdam delighted in places connected with his boyhood. His surveyorships increased at this time, perhaps in association with these journeys, for they came to include seven in northern England and six in Scotland. Most were held until his death, and it was while returning from a visit to Scotland in 1836 that the eighty-year-old McAdam died on 26 November in Moffat, the former home of his grandmother in whose grave he was buried on 2 December. The tombstone still stands, but an attempt by his son James to raise a public monument failed and the fund was closed in 1849. It had been supported by many eminent people, but the public who had so recently shown great enthusiasm for the 'macadamizing' of the roads had failed to respond, perhaps reflecting the downturn in the fortunes of the roads in the face of railway competition. 
The first systematic builder and administrator of roads in Britain since Roman times, McAdam was one of that select band whose achievements have led to their names becoming part of the common language. From the 1820s the term 'macadam' or 'macadamized' came to mean a good road surface, achieved by the judicious use of stone over which horse-drawn vehicles could travel quickly and smoothly within a well-planned and organized network which approached something of a national system. The survival of the term was ensured by the arrival of the motor car with its accompanying clouds of dust, for the control of this nuisance by the application of tar to road surfaces gave rise to its evolution into 'tarmacadam' and 'tarmac'. 
McAdam deserves to be remembered for his ability to create and seize opportunities, and to overcome failure. His greatest achievement lay in devising a simple and economical system of construction which brought speed, efficiency, and comfort to the roads. With his strong sense of his own worth he conferred distinction upon the work of the road surveyor, elevating into a profession what had previously been considered a humble task. He was not an engineer on a grand scale like his rival Thomas Telford or the early railway builders, but by his tireless advocacy of the cause of good roads he effected great changes in the transport system of the country. His emphasis on good management inspired the wish to consolidate the trusts into fewer but larger ones, with higher and less variable standards. This aspiration was never given legislative reality, but because McAdam's three sons and four grandsons followed him into the profession he came close to achieving this aim through his family connections. The warmth of feeling within this circle is shown by surviving letters and accounts, which recall McAdam's 'eyes of remarkable brightness' (Devereux, 146). McAdam may have refused the knighthood later accepted by his son James (Webb and Webb, 184), but he could not deny the immortality gained by having his name pass into the language. 
McAdam's second surviving son, 
Sir James McAdam's activities were curbed by the growth of the railways from the 1830s onwards. Local trusts which employed him as surveyor had difficulty raising enough income to pay his salary, and the Metropolis Trust came under increased pressure from critics who depicted it as unaccountable to the public from which it enjoyed sums presented as exorbitant. Before the latter body was dissolved McAdam died at his London home, 17 Finchley Road, St John's Wood, on 30 June 1852; his death notice in 'The Times' also referred to his country residence of Tindon End, Great Sampford, Essex. 


@@@@@


doc= 17326


Macalister, Arthur (1818-1883), politician in Australia, was born in Glasgow, the son of John Macalister, a cabinet-maker, and his wife, Mary, 'nee' Scoullar. Trained as a solicitor, in 1839 he emigrated to Australia with his newly wed wife, Elizabeth Wallace Tassie. After holding a couple of minor government posts and running a Sydney store, he began working for a solicitor in Sydney and in 1850 was admitted to practice. He then moved to Ipswich (near Brisbane) and soon entered local politics. He twice failed to win a seat in the New South Wales parliament, but he was a supporter of the separation of Queensland from New South Wales and when this was effected he was elected for Ipswich in the first Queensland parliament in 1860, and quickly became one of the most prominent public men in the colony. 
Appointed secretary for lands and works in Robert Herbert's government in 1862, from February to July 1866 Macalister succeeded Herbert as premier. During the next ten years he held various ministerial positions, was premier twice more (1866-7 and 1874-6) and speaker in 1870-71. In 1863 he was largely responsible for establishing the narrow gauge (3 feet 6 inches) for Queensland's railways, with the construction of the line to Toowoomba. He always backed railway extension, but his land policy was more variable. His land act of 1863 allowed pastoralists longer leases on easier terms but, when he was premier in 1875, his ministry's land act restricted pastoral leases in settled areas and encouraged agricultural settlement by resuming much pastoral land. As a liberal, he was critical of cheap imported labour, supporting measures to control both Pacific islanders and Asians. As a Presbyterian, a mason, and chairman of the Board of Education from 1862 to 1867, he opposed sectarian schools, his ministry being responsible for introducing the 'secular' 'State Education Act' in 1875. 
Meanwhile Macalister's health was failing and, after an 'apoplectic' (or 'epileptic') fit in 1875, he visited England, ostensibly to enquire into the selection of immigrants. While there he was appointed CMG, but in June 1876, three months after his return to Queensland, he resigned as premier. He was then appointed agent-general, based in London, acting as Queensland commissioner at the Philadelphia International Exhibition on the way over. He resigned this post in November 1881 and returned to the neighbourhood of Glasgow where he died, bankrupt, on 23 March 1883. Known as Slippery Mac, he often broke his promises and changed his attitudes and allegiances, but he was an able administrator as well as an astute politician and his tergiversations were no greater than those of many others. His wife died in Brisbane on 14 September 1894, survived by two sons and three daughters out of their nine children. 


@@@@@


doc= 17327


McAll, Robert Stephens (1792-1838), Congregational minister, the eldest son of the Revd Robert McAll and his wife, Jane, 'nee' Lea, was born at Plymouth on 4 August 1792 and received his earliest education in Gloucester and Cornwall. He was sent at the age of thirteen to the Congregational academy at Axminster, then to Hordle's academy at Harwich, and finally to Hoxton Academy in 1809. Here his liveliness, independence of spirit, and 'over-due propensity to disputation' led to his expulsion. He lived for eighteen months with Dr W. B. Collyer, and then studied medicine at Edinburgh University. His undergraduate career was outstanding and in his second year he was offered, but declined, the office of president of the Royal Medical Society. In 1814 he was appointed chaplain of the Undenominational Sunday School at Macclesfield, Cheshire, and in 1823 St George's Chapel, Sutton, Macclesfield, was built for him. He stayed there until 1827, when he accepted the pastorate of Mosley Street Independent Chapel, Manchester. McAll's preaching was of a florid, prolix nature, but gripped his hearers; sometimes his addresses lasted for nearly two hours. Contemporaries were fascinated by him: to Dr Raffles he was 'wonderful', to Robert Hall 'miraculous', and to Dr Collyer 'a seraphic spirit'. Aberdeen conferred on him an LLD. In Manchester he was a prominent force within the powerful evangelical leadership of the town. He served on the committee of the Naval and Military Bible Society, the Manchester Female Penitentiary, and the Manchester branch of the Anti-Slavery Society. He produced a number of printed sermons and poems, as well as 'Discourses on Special Occasions', published in 1840 with a memoir by Dr Ralph Wardlaw. Another collection, with a preface by 'T. H.', appeared in 1843. McAll died on 27 July 1838 at Swinton and was buried in Rochdale Road cemetery, Manchester. His only daughter predeceased him; his son, Dr R. W. McAll (1821-1893), promoted in 1872 the Independent Protestant Mission in Paris. 


@@@@@


doc= 17328


Macallum, Hamilton (1841-1896), landscape painter, was born at Kames, Argyll, on 21 May 1841, the second son of John Macallum JP, proprietor of the Kames gunpowder works, and his wife, Janet Hamilton. He was christened John Thomas but elected to use his mother's maiden name instead. As a boy he showed an interest in art, but this was opposed by his father who insisted on his entering a merchant's office in Glasgow, in preparation for a commercial career in India. Eventually, 'c'.1864, with his father's permission, he travelled to London and entered the Royal Academy Schools. He first exhibited at the Royal Academy in 1869 and remained a regular exhibitor there and elsewhere in London for the rest of his life. Throughout his career, Hamilton Macallum divided his life between London and his various painting grounds. For some years he had a base at Loch Fyne, Argyll, with fellow painters of the sea Colin Hunter and William McTaggart. He also sailed extensively around the edges of the western highlands of Scotland in his yacht, visited Heligoland, toured south Italy and visited Capri in 1887, and also worked extensively in south Devon from his studio at Beer. 
Macallum enjoyed working in full daylight either in the open air or in the glass studio he erected at his home on Haverstock Hill, Hampstead. Seascapes and other water- or light-filled landscapes were his favourite subjects, for example 'Haymaking in the Highlands' (1878; Glasgow Art Gallery and Museum). He made a particular study of the effect of sunlight on water and achieved an extraordinary luminosity. However, his contemporaries criticized his colour as false or metallic, and at times his paintings suffered from weaknesses of composition and drawing and Macallum's overtly sentimental treatment of his figures. In 1896 Macallum exhibited 'The Crofter's Team' (Tate collection) at the Royal Academy and it was acquired for the nation through the Chantrey bequest. Hamilton Macallum died suddenly of heart disease at Beer in Devon on 23 June 1896. He was survived by his widow, Euphemia Hill, daughter of John Stewart of Glasgow, and one son. She subsequently (13 March 1900) received a civil-list pension of $100 per annum in consideration of her husband's merits as an artist. 


@@@@@


doc= 17329


Macalpine, John (d. 1557), Dominican friar and protestant reformer, also known as John Machabeus, was born in Scotland of well-to-do parents according to John Bale. After studying at the University of Cologne he was licensed as BTh by the Dominican order in 1525. At Cologne he had been a classmate of John McDowell and possibly Henry Balnaves. Macalpine served as prior of the Dominican convent at Perth from 1532 to 1534. By August in the latter year he had adopted protestant tenets, and was cited with others to appear at Holyrood by James Hay, bishop of Ross, acting as a commissioner for Archbishop James Beaton of St Andrews. Instead of complying Macalpine fled to England, prompting the tribunal to condemn him in his absence. In England Macalpine was befriended by Nicholas Shaxton, the evangelical bishop of Salisbury, whose chaplain he had become by May 1535, and who on 12 July 1538 collated him to the prebend of Bishopstone in Salisbury Cathedral. Macalpine married Agnes Matthewson (or Macheson), another Scottish exile, whose sister Elizabeth wed Miles Coverdale about 1540. 
By 1540 Macalpine had left England for Saxony, where he matriculated at the University of Wittenberg and associated closely with Philip Melanchthon. With Luther presiding, Macalpine engaged in a scholastic disputation at Wittenberg in 1541. Inclined toward the humanists, Macalpine (who Latinized his own name as Machabeus) was widely read in patristics and scholastics as well as in canon law and the proceedings of church councils. After receiving his DTh degree at Wittenberg, in 1542 Macalpine became professor of theology at the University of Copenhagen, which he served as chancellor in 1544 and 1549, and also chaplain to King Christian III ('r'. 1534-59). At Copenhagen, Macalpine initiated the Melanchthonian tradition in Danish theology which reached its zenith in his younger contemporary Niels Hemmingsen. Macalpine also found time to assist Scottish students who came to Denmark, including James Erskine of Dun, whose tutor Richard Melville of Baldovie brought Erskine to Copenhagen to study with Macalpine. The latter maintained his contacts with Melanchthon, recommending one James (possibly James Balfour, who would soon join John Knox), to both Melanchthon and Alesius. After Sir David Lindsay visited Macalpine at Copenhagen in 1548, the latter reportedly provided funds for the publication of Lindsay's 'Ane Dialog Betuix Experience and ane Courteour' (1553); the claim is made on the title-page, but is probably spurious. While visiting Denmark as an ambassador in the spring of 1550, the earl of Rothes took some documents to Macalpine. The same year saw the publication of a folio edition of the 'Bible' in Danish, translated from Luther's German version, a project to which Macalpine contributed. 
Although Macalpine was a Lutheran, his outlook toward Calvinists was eirenic. This was evident in 1553 when John a Lasco brought a group of Calvinist exiles to Denmark in search of refuge, only to be denied. Whereas Peder Palladius, superintendent of Zealand, opposed their request for asylum, Macalpine refused to follow suit. The following year Macalpine twice prevailed on Christian III to intervene with Mary Tudor on behalf of Coverdale, whom she finally permitted to go into exile in February 1555. Macalpine wrote a commentary on 'Deuteronomy', which was published posthumously, and a treatise, 'De conjugio sacerdotum', which Archbishop Matthew Parker subsequently bequeathed to Corpus Christi College, Cambridge. Following Macalpine's death in Copenhagen on 5 December 1557, his body was buried there, in Our Lady's Church, with Christian III in attendance at the funeral. Macalpine's son, Christian Machabaeus (1541-1598), a professor at Copenhagen from 1565 to 1567 and a friend of Hemmingsen, went on two embassies to Russia and was ennobled in 1580. 


@@@@@


doc= 17330


Ward, Hugh (1592-1635), Franciscan friar and historian, a native of co. Donegal, was a member of the Mac an Bhaird family, hereditary poets to the O'Donnells of Tirconaill. His parents were Eugenius Wardeus (possibly to be identified as Eoghan Ruadh Mac an Bhaird ['see under 'Mac an Bhaird family]) and Maria Ni Chlery. His early education was obtained within his own family circle. He left Ireland in 1612 to study at the Irish College in Salamanca, Spain, and joined the Franciscan order there in 1616 -- a career not untypical of his learned contemporaries for whom traditional sources of patronage had significantly diminished after 1603. On 22 March 1622 Ward was appointed to teach philosophy at the Irish Franciscan college of St Anthony in Louvain and travelled from Salamanca to Louvain, via Paris, Rouen, and Nantes, early in 1623. He never returned to Ireland. 
Ward was in Paris in March 1623 serving as companion to Francis de Arriba, confessor of the queen of France. There he came into contact with fellow Franciscans Patrick Fleming and Hugh MacCaughwell and the secular priest Thomas Messingham. The group discussed their shared interest in researching the lives of Irish saints and agreed to collaborate on publishing their findings. The association with Messingham was not long-lived, but Fleming and Ward continued to work together until Fleming's death in 1631. Ward subsequently collaborated with John Colgan and other Louvain-based Irish Franciscans. One of the first hagiographical publications to emerge from Louvain was Robert Rochford's 'Life of the glorious bishop St Patrick... together with the lives of the holy Virgin, St Brigid, and of the glorious Abbot St Columb, patrons of Ireland', published at St Omer in 1625. It provides evidence that Ward's interest in Irish saints' lives was shared by others in his community also. In Louvain, Ward's fellow Franciscans included Thomas Fleming, Florence Conry, Robert Chamberlain, John Colgan, Micheal O Cleirigh, and his own brother, Ferdinand Ward. He also received encouragement in his historical researches from Luke Wadding in Rome. 
Ward was elected guardian of St Anthony's three years after his arrival there, the appointment being confirmed on 22 April 1626. The following day he was authorized to conduct research in German and French libraries on the lives of Irish saints, but was probably away for a relatively short time. In addition to his administrative duties at the college he also taught theology. Ward became a prominent figure in the Catholic church in the diocese of Malines (Mechelen) and his work on behalf of the Franciscan order was not confined to the world of the college of St Anthony. A proposal that he be transferred to the new Irish Franciscan college at Prague in 1630 was not implemented. 
From his Louvain base Ward directed Micheal O Cleirigh's researches in Ireland on the early history of Ireland and her saints and kings. He particularly welcomed the compilation of the martyrology of Donegal, completed in 1630. In 1631, at the request of the archbishop of Malines (Mechelen), Ward was himself researching the life of St Romuald, patron of the diocese of Malines (Mechelen), drawing on the earlier lives already in circulation. This work, 'Sancti Rumoldi... acta', completed in 1631, was published posthumously, edited by Thomas Sirinus (Sheeran) in 1662, 'least he should be forgotten who had begun these studies, or least it should be supposed that nothing had been achieved by all his toil' (Jennings, 'Michael O Cleirigh', 105, citing preface to 'Sancti Rumoldi... acta'). Ward co-operated with the Bollandists in their hagiographical researches, contributing lives of saints Mochua, Maedoc, and Fechin to their 'Acta sanctorum', and preparing material for subsequent volumes. 
Although Ward worked indefatigably on researching Irish saints' lives, administrative responsibilities and poor health prevented his research being published in his lifetime. John Colgan's 'Acta sanctorum... Hiberniae' (1645) owed much to his efforts. Colgan's preface reveals that Ward would have seen the project through to publication but for his early death. He died on 8 November 1635, of dropsy, at the early age of forty-three. Throughout his life he had devoted much time to the study of the works of the philosopher John Duns Scotus and rejoiced at dying on his feast day. He was buried in Louvain. 


@@@@@


doc= 17331


Macardell, James (1727/8-1765), mezzotint engraver, was born in Cow Lane, Dublin, in 1727 or 1728, possibly the son of Patrick Macardell. He learnt engraving in John Brooks's workshop, probably from Brooks's assistant Andrew Miller. His earliest work appears to be a head of Archbishop Boulter in an engraving altered from one by Brooks of Bishop Robert Howard. Brooks moved to London early in 1746, accompanied by his ablest assistants, where Macardell almost immediately sought to establish himself as an independent artist. He very soon supplanted the ageing John Faber as the engraver employed by the two leading portrait painters Thomas Hudson and Allan Ramsay, eventually scraping twenty-one mezzotints after Hudson and fourteen after Ramsay. He was also employed by the circle of George Knapton, Arthur Pond, and Rhoda Astley, and by various printsellers, for whom he produced designs as well as engravings. It was probably through Pond that Macardell was introduced to David Garrick. He engraved portraits of the actor and his leading lady Peg Woffington in 1748 for Pond, but before 1754 he had scraped three more portraits of Garrick, keeping the plates. In his early years in London Macardell was much drawn to the theatre, producing portraits of 'Mr Woodward in the Character of the Fine Gentleman in Lethe' ('c'.1750), 'Mr Quin in the Character of Sir John Falstaff' ('c'.1750), 'Mr Blakes in the Character of M. le Medecin' ('c'.1750), 'Mr Lowe and Mrs Chambers in the Characters of Captain Macheath and Polly' (1752), Beard ('c'.1752), and Hannah Pritchard ('c'.1750). Three of these reproduced his own drawings. All this substantiates the claim made in 1825 that Macardell 'was a jolly companion at the artists' clubs, and well known in the Green Room. Quin and he were sworn brothers' (Elmes, 1.14). The finest of these early portraits was 'Mr Garrick in Hamlet' (1754), after a painting by Benjamin Wilson, showing the expression of terror on seeing the ghost of Old Hamlet, for which Garrick was famous. 
By 1754 Macardell had established himself at the Golden Head on the corner of Henrietta Street and Southampton Street, Covent Garden, a few doors away from Garrick's home in Southampton Street. Now he was able to publish and sell his own work, secure in his reputation as the best mezzotint engraver in London. 1754 was also the year in which Joshua Reynolds published 'Lady Charlotte Fitzwilliam', the first print after one of his paintings, selecting Macardell to engrave it. It was the beginning of a fruitful association, driven by Reynolds's appreciation of Macardell's ability to promote him: 'by this man I shall be immortalized', he once said (Strickland, 45). Macardell scraped thirty-eight of Reynolds's portraits with accuracy and sensitivity, often in the large full-length format employed for one of his finest portraits, that of Frances Ann Greville and her brother as Psyche and Cupid, exhibited in 1762. Reynolds painted Macardell's portrait in the late 1750s. 
During the 1750s Macardell engraved several paintings by Rembrandt, and more particularly by Rubens and Van Dyck, demonstrating his virtuosity through his tonal interpretation of the luxuriant flesh and fabric of the Flemish school. He began to engrave the series of portraits by Peter Lely known as the 'Windsor Beauties', but completed only three. Macardell's success was a magnet for other talented Irishmen. Both Edward Fisher and James Watson seem to have spent time working with Macardell on their arrival in London from Dublin, Watson probably as a pupil. Macardell joined the Society for the Encouragement of Arts, Manufactures and Commerce in 1760, and exhibited from the first exhibition. In recognition of his eminence he was made an original director of the Society of Artists upon its incorporation in 1765. Although he avoided the perils of drink to which several of the Irish engravers succumbed, he died at the age of thirty-seven on 1 June 1765. Macardell loved to take the country air of Hampstead and his friends arranged for his burial at St John's, Hampstead, where a memorial stone in the churchyard rightly declared him to be 'the most eminent in his art in his time'. He was unmarried, his estate being administered by his brother Philip Macardell of Dublin. 


@@@@@


doc= 17332


Macarius (supp. d. in or before 1153), supposed abbot of St James's, Wurzburg, was an Irish monk about whom little certain is known. As in several other south German episcopal towns, there was a group of Irish monks in Wurzburg by the 1130s; by about 1140 this embryonic foundation had become the monastery of St James, dedicated by Bishop Embricho following his pilgrimage to Santiago in 1138. Later traditions, beginning with the 'Vita Mariani Scoti' (composed between 1180 and 1185) claimed that Macarius had come from Ireland (in the tradition preserved at Regensburg he had come via that city) to be St James's first abbot, a man distinguished for his asceticism -- ordered by Bishop Embricho to drink wine at a feast, he prayed to God, who turned the wine into water -- and monastic rigour. However, Embricho's 'foundation charter' for Macarius of 1140 is a forgery of the 1220s, and the first documented abbot is Christian (recorded between 1153 and 1177). If Macarius preceded Christian in office he was therefore dead by 1153; the Regensburg necrology records his death date as 6 January, while his feast day is kept on 23 January in Wurzburg. 
Macarius's reputation took off in the sixteenth century. Johann Tritheim, abbot of St James's from 1506 to 1516, had his tomb opened and wrote a life of Macarius, now lost, and a largely legendary account of the early history of St James's. From the late sixteenth century Macarius was given a new prominence by exiled Scottish Catholics, who were attempting to reclaim the eleventh- and twelfth-century Irish Benedictine monastic foundations for themselves, on the grounds that they had originally been founded by Scotsmen (a misreading of the 'Scoti' of the Latin sources). His relics were translated in 1615, and he was gradually provided by such authors as Wilhelm Eysengrein and Thomas Dempster with a legendary history as a writer, associate and correspondent of Pope Eugenius III, and worker of miracles. Allegedly, it was Macarius's relics which saved the sight of the Old Pretender when still a small child. A local cult survived into the twentieth century, though the relics were lost or destroyed in bombing in 1945. His tombstone, dating from about 1615, is preserved in the Marienkapelle at Wurzburg. 


@@@@@


doc= 17333


Macarthur, Sir Edward (1789-1872), army officer, was born on 16 March 1789 at the White Hart inn, Bath, the first of the nine children of Captain John Macarthur (1766-1834) and his wife, Elizabeth Macarthur (1766-1850) ['see under 'Macarthur, John], the daughter of Richard Veale, a landowner, of Lodgeworthy, Devon. He was the brother of James Macarthur, William Macarthur ['see under 'Macarthur, James], and John Macarthur ['see under 'Macarthur, John]. The family emigrated to New South Wales on the Second Fleet in 1790, and John and Elizabeth became noted sheep-farming pioneers in the new colony. Edward spent his childhood at the family's Elizabeth Farm in Parramatta, Sydney, before being sent in 1799 to England for his education. He attended Dr James Lindsay's school, Grove Hall, Bow, London, and returned to Australia in 1806. 
Finding some of the jobs around the family estate 'distasteful' (King, 'Sir Edward Macarthur', 315), Macarthur decided to pursue his interest in a military career, and in 1808 he returned to England; in December of that year he joined the 60th regiment and he saw service at Corunna and Sicily before receiving promotion to the rank of lieutenant in the 39th regiment. He fought in a number of campaigns of the Napoleonic wars and in the Anglo-American War of 1812-14, and served with occupation forces in France and Ireland in the following years. In 1821 he purchased a captain's commission in the 19th regiment, and in 1824 he returned to Australia on leave. He sought appointment to an official position in the colony, but was unsuccessful. He achieved the rank of major in 1826. 
In 1830 Macarthur was appointed to the post of secretary to the lord chamberlain, in which role he continued until 1837, after which he became assistant adjutant-general in Ireland. He achieved promotion to lieutenant-colonel, and in 1851 was made deputy adjutant-general in the Australian military command, based in Sydney. 
In 1854 Macarthur was promoted colonel and the command headquarters moved to Melbourne. The following year he succeeded to the post of commander-in-chief of the forces. On the death of the governor of Victoria in December that year Macarthur, as senior military officer in the colony, assumed the post of acting governor until a successor was appointed twelve months later. Macarthur saw it as a central part of his role to maintain stability in the colony, and the popularity of the crown, by exhibiting 'cheerfulness, hospitality and truthfulness toward all with whom... I can have relations' (King, 'Sir Edward Macarthur', 324). In this he was very successful. One resident warmly praised him as 'an industrious, kind-hearted, Christian gentleman' (Hill). 
Macarthur resumed his role as commander of the military forces, a post he held until his retirement in 1860. He then returned to England, and on 18 November 1862 he married Sarah (died 1889), the third daughter of Lieutenant-Colonel W. Smith Neill, of Ayrshire. They had no children. In that year Macarthur was also made a KCB, and in 1866 he was promoted lieutenant-general. He died at his London home -- 27 Princes Gardens, Kensington -- on 4 January 1872 and was buried at Brompton cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 17334


Hannibal Hawkins Macarthur (1788-1861), entrepreneur and politician, was born on 16 January 1788 at Plymouth, Devon, son of James Macarthur, draper, and his wife, Catherine, 'nee' Hawkins. Hannibal accompanied his uncle John to Sydney in 1805, becoming his general factotum, and between 1812 and 1817 he managed Macarthur's flocks, wool processing, and export. In 1812 he married Anna Maria King, daughter of the ex-governor. A director of the Australian Agricultural Company, Hannibal Macarthur was chairman of the Bank of Australia and a member (1830-48) of the legislative council. His trading and extensive pastoral interests collapsed in the depression of the 1840s, and he was declared insolvent in 1848. In 1853 he returned to England, where he died on 26 October 1861, at Upper Norwood, Surrey. 


@@@@@


doc= 17335


Macarthur, James (1798-1867), politician, was born on 15 December 1798 at his parents' home, Elizabeth Farm, near Parramatta, New South Wales, the fifth of the seven surviving children of John Macarthur (1766-1834) and his wife, Elizabeth Macarthur, nee Veale (1766-1850) ['see under 'Macarthur, John]. His parents had arrived in the colony in 1790, his father being then an officer in the New South Wales Corps. James and his younger brother, William ['see below'], his life-long companion, were taught at home until 1809, when they went with their father to England. Their education was completed at Dr James Lindsay's school, Grove Hall, Bow, London. Another brother was Edward Macarthur. 
In 1815-16 James and William travelled with their father through France and Switzerland, and in 1817 all three returned to Australia. Thereafter the brothers lived at the family estate, Camden Park, 40 miles south-west of Sydney. A new house was completed there in 1834, and they formed a substantial tenant-farming community, with a village well positioned on the Sydney-Melbourne road. They were energetic and popular landlords, and Camden became the foundation for their wider authority. 
During his second visit to England (1828-31), James Macarthur offered to the Colonial Office a paper on crown land policy in New South Wales, a sketchy but significant argument for more ambitious management. His optimistic understanding of the colonial penal system led him always to believe in the ramifying duties of government. At the same time he hoped to refine and strengthen local opinion. In 1831, following his return, he brought together various parties with the hope of influencing imperial land policy, and in 1833 he tried to do the same for constitutional reform. In 1836 he went again to England, where he consulted frequently with the Colonial Office, and where he published his 'New South Wales: its Present State and Future Prospects' (1837). In London, on 14 June 1838, he married Emily Stone (1806-1880), the daughter of a City banker. Macarthur called himself a liberal conservative, and the liberal aspects of his thinking were due partly to his wife. They had one daughter, Elizabeth, born in 1840 (later Mrs Macarthur-Onslow). 
From June 1840 Macarthur was a member of the original legislature of New South Wales, a nominated body. He failed to be chosen for the first partly elected legislative council (1843), but his membership of the two subsequent councils (1849-55) allowed him to achieve numerous ambitions for the colony. Convict transportation had ended in 1840, and he had a central part in several projects for political, social, and economic reform, designed to establish a self-governing community free of the stigma of convictism. He was one of the founders of the University of Sydney (1850) and of the non-sectarian (or national) system of elementary education. 
Macarthur's main contribution to Australian public life arose from his inspired interest in political and administrative process. He had a powerful understanding of the idea of public morality, and of the role which a visionary conscience might play in government. His achievements are therefore to be found as much in the minutiae of debate and legislation as in major items of reform. 
In 1851-3 council devised a new bicameral constitution (for enactment by the British parliament), with Macarthur once again playing a leading role. He sat in the lower house of the first two colonial parliaments (1856-9) and he was a member, without portfolio, of the short-lived first cabinet under responsible government (April-August 1856). In 1859 he was offered a knighthood, but his complex attitude to honours for Australians led him to decline it. 
With his wife and daughter Macarthur was in Europe from 1860 to 1864, and on his return he was given a seat in the nominated upper house (October 1866). However, he died on 21 April 1867, at Camden Park, of heart failure. After a service on 28 April at St John's Church, Camden, he was buried in the family graveyard at Camden Park. 
The younger brother of James Macarthur, 


@@@@@


doc= 17336


John Macarthur (1794-1831), their second son, was born on 10 May 1794, at Elizabeth Farm, Parramatta. In 1801 his father took him to Britain, where he was educated at a private academy in London, and then at Glasgow University and Caius College, Cambridge (BA, 1817; MA, 1823). He was called to the English bar in 1818, and he gave evidence before the parliamentary select committee on gaols in 1819. His father's favourite, he was groomed to be the family's personal agent, to supervise wool sales, and to cultivate officials and strategic social contacts. The architect of the Australian Agricultural Company, he guided its charter and was a director from 1824 to 1830. In 1827 he was appointed a commissioner in bankruptcy. Having played a vital role in the foundation and progress of the family's interests, he died in London, unmarried, in a fit of apoplexy, on 19 April 1831, and was buried at St Martin's Church, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 17337


Macarthur, John (1766-1834), merchant and wool-grower, was probably born on 18 August 1766 and was baptized on 3 September 1767 at Stoke Damerel, near Plymouth, Devon, one of three known children of the expatriate Scot Alexander Macarthur (1720?-1790), mercer and draper, and his wife, Katherine (died 1777). Another son believed him self-educated, 'having been cast upon the world at 14 years old' ('Memorandum of William Macarthur', [n.d.], Macarthur MSS, A2897, 263), though in December 1782 John Macarthur became an ensign in a minor defence body (Fish's corps). The corps was disbanded in April 1783 and he remained on half-pay until April 1788, when he exchanged into the 68th (Durham) regiment of foot. At Bridgerule, Devon, on 6 October 1788 he married Elizabeth Veale, the stepdaughter of a local farmer. Macarthur joined the New South Wales Corps in June 1789, and the following June he arrived at Botany Bay with Elizabeth and their son, Edward Macarthur. 
Like other officers, Lieutenant Macarthur readily engaged in trafficking, and while regimental paymaster from 1792 he ordered military slops from his brother at Plymouth. He was one of the first to cultivate land (Elizabeth Farm) at Parramatta, where he was inspector of public works from 1793. In 1795 he was promoted captain. A leading landholder by 1800 -- when he contemplated a return to England -- he estimated his worth at $4000. This enviable progress had been punctuated by jarring feuds, carried on particularly, but not exclusively, with every governor since Arthur Phillip. Governor Hunter complained of Macarthur's 'restless, ambitious and litigious disposition' (Hunter to the duke of Portland, 25 July 1798, HRA, 1st ser., 2, 1914, 160) and, following a duel with his commanding officer in 1801, the 'Perturbator' was ordered to England for court martial by Governor King, who trenchantly condemned his 'art, cunning, impudence and... baselisk eyes' (Governor King to Under-Secretary King, 8 Nov 1801, HRA, 1st ser., 3, 1915, 322). During the voyage Macarthur befriended the son of the royal physician Sir Walter Farquhar, who generously supported Macarthur's interest after he reached London. When it was eventually decided that his offence required to be tried in New South Wales, Macarthur prudently resigned his commission, in 1804. 
In the search for exportable colonial resources, specimens of wool from Spanish merino sheep brought to Sydney in 1797 had been sent to Sir Joseph Banks for appraisal. Macarthur owned several of these sheep and had taken similar samples to London. The favourable reaction of some English cloth manufacturers, concerned about wartime supplies, stimulated Macarthur into presenting a 'scheme' for the production of fine wool in New South Wales. His memorandum reached the committee for trade and plantations and was considered by Lord Camden. In 1805 Macarthur returned to Sydney with merinos from the royal flock and authority to select 5000 acres (which he named Camden Park) to aid his development of fine wool. He also returned with partnership interests in trade and in the Pacific fisheries. 
Very shortly Macarthur ran foul of Governor Bligh and, in particular, his efforts to control the colony's notorious rum trade. Macarthur's importation of spirit stills and his flouting of certain obligations as a shipowner brought him to trial in January 1808. When Bligh refused Macarthur bail, Major George Johnston of the New South Wales Corps ordered his release and deposed the governor. Macarthur then arbitrarily administered the colony as 'colonial secretary' until July. He sailed for England in March 1809, and attended Johnston's court martial in 1811. Despite a 'deep-rooted prejudice' against him at the Colonial Office (John Macarthur to Elizabeth Macarthur, 8 Dec 1814, Macarthur MSS, A2898, 277), Macarthur, as a civilian, escaped trial for treason, but was advised that he would be liable to arrest in New South Wales as the 'leading Promoter and Instigator' of the rebellion (Castlereagh to Macquarie, 14 May 1809, HRA, 1st ser., 7.81). 
Stranded and hoping to do something in the mercantile way, Macarthur found the times 'frightfully hazardous'. Rising wool prices revived him, and his wife and nephew were instructed to transform the wool from his flocks into a commercial commodity. Although he occupied himself in investigating wool processing and marketing, he fretted over a cramped exile (shared with his younger sons, James and William), in which 'Our only beverage is water and our most sumptuous fare a mutton chop and a potato' (John Macarthur to Elizabeth Macarthur, 26 July 1814, Macarthur MSS, A2898, 212). As a result of the persistent diplomacy of his son John, he was allowed to return to New South Wales in 1817 on condition that he avoid public affairs. He was thus conveniently reinstated in time delicately to court and impress Commissioner Bigge, whose crucial recommendation for the future direction of the colony ultimately coincided with Macarthur's: it endorsed a wool-based pastoralism of large estates, serviced by convict labourers, that would create a resource for British industry while reducing government penal expenditure. 
Privately, Macarthur was aware that his own promotion of fine wool 'still creeps on almost unheeded' (John Macarthur to Davidson, 3 Sept 1818, Macarthur MSS, A2897, 22B). However, some of his wool brought high prices in London in 1821, and he acquired medals from the Society of Arts in 1822 and 1824 for its quantity and quality. In 1824 the richly subscribed and chartered Australian Agricultural Company was launched -- a cherished objective shepherded to completion by his son John in London. But in New South Wales, Macarthur remained deeply unpopular and was often baited in the local press. His nomination in December 1825 to the legislative council brought serious public protest. Yet he continued to fuel controversy, agitating against the chief justice, Francis Forbes, and showing hostility towards Governor Darling. In 1828 he seized local control of the Australian Agricultural Company and caused its shares to collapse. His mental instability accelerated and he was declared insane in 1832. He died on 11 April 1834, survived by his wife, three sons (his son John had died in 1731), and three daughters, and was buried at his Camden Park estate. Complex, tortured, and ruthless, Macarthur achieved his essential ambition to be a landed esquire. His insistence on the potential of a colonial wool staple -- a vision neither unique nor original -- was secondary to that ambition but a testimony to his abilities and to his skill as a publicist. 
His wife, 






@@@@@


doc= 17338


McArthur, John (1755-1840), seaman and author, details of whose upbringing and parents are unknown, entered the navy in 1778 as assistant clerk on the 'Eagle' on the North American station. On her return McArthur was moved into the cutter 'Rattlesnake', and on 22 March 1779 was promoted purser for his gallantry in boarding a French privateer in an engagement off Le Havre on 14 March. In November the 'Rattlesnake' assisted the 'Tartar' in capturing the Spanish frigate 'Santa Margarita', and McArthur was promoted purser of the prize when she was commissioned in the British navy. During the American War of Independence he was often stationed to observe signals, and was confronted with the many defects of the current system. In order to address them he prepared a revised signal book which Admiral Robert Digby issued on 5 October 1782, and which was used experimentally by a small cruiser squadron for three months (MOD, NM/76 and NMM, KE 1/S/9). 
McArthur followed these lines of study during the peace, while still purser of the 'Santa Margarita', and in 1790, according to his own statement, laid a new code of signals before the Admiralty. In his publication of 1782 he had sought to clarify the existing system by which individual flags flown in particular places in the rigging indicated an intention to execute particular tactical movements described in the book of fighting instructions. By contrast this new code employed a system developed by the Chevalier du Pavillon for the French navy, by which a two-flag hoist of flags, flown where they could best be seen, directed the recipient to look in the appropriate line and column of a chart which in turn referred to the fighting instructions. This procedure was a definite improvement on the older system, but it was unnecessarily complicated, and its capacity was more limited than that ultimately adopted by the navy, which used hoists of three numeric flags in conjunction with a numbered signal book. McArthur's system was somewhat incoherent as it had four different code charts with overlapping applications, but the provision he made for changing the meaning of signals for security purposes, while technically unsatisfactory, was ahead of his time. 
McArthur's signals caught the attention of Lord Hood, then first sea lord, who, in the Russian armament of 1791, made McArthur his secretary. Hood was eager to try McArthur's signals; but the Admiralty preferred to retain Lord Howe's. McArthur was employed to simplify his system in line with Howe's, but only succeeded in adding to its complexity. However, after approval by Howe, it was tested and used in the experimental cruise of 1792. In 1807 McArthur wrote that 'from that period it has been universally adopted in the service, and is, it is believed, continued with little or no variation in form or substance at the present day'. But in this McArthur was certainly wrong, for Sir Home Popham's code had been generally adopted some years before. As early as 1799 McArthur claimed (in 'Thoughts on several plans combining a system of universal signals', 'Naval Chronicle', 1.509, 2.70) to be the real author of the code known by the name of Lord Howe; it appears probable, however, that his contribution was reserved to seeing it through the press. 
McArthur was again Hood's secretary when the admiral went out as commander-in-chief in the Mediterranean in 1793. He was also appointed purser of the flagship 'Victory'. McArthur's duties at this time were onerous and important. In addition to the ordinary work of secretary, the occupation of Toulon and the intimate association of the Spanish and Italian forces required him to undertake a correspondence in three languages, without, he says, any assistance. He had also acted as Hood's interpreter, and as his representative in the disbursements of public money, both to the British forces and to those of the allies. For some time there was no British commissary-general, a role he also fulfilled. In addition, he was prize agent for the fleet; and though his duties as purser of the 'Victory' were performed by a deputy, the responsibility, pecuniary and otherwise, rested on him. When Hood, after returning to England, was ordered to strike his flag, McArthur went back to the Mediterranean solely as the 'Victory's' purser. As soon as the ship joined the fleet Rear-Admiral Man hoisted his flag on her, and in the action of 14 July 1795 McArthur volunteered to observe the signals. He was afterwards secretary to Sir Hyde Parker (1739-1807), and returned to England with him early in 1796. 
In 1803 Lord Nelson offered to take McArthur as his secretary to the Mediterranean. McArthur, however, declined, 'as Lord Hood's accounts with the treasury were then pending before the auditors'. This was the official reason, but he was probably more directly influenced by his literary engagements. As a young man McArthur had published 'The army and navy gentleman's companion, or, A new and complete treatise on the theory and practice of fencing' (1781). In 1792, while secretary to Lord Hood, he brought out 'A Treatise of the Principles and Practice of Naval Courts-Martial' which, in the second edition, appeared as 'Principles and Practice of Naval and Military Courts-Martial' (1805); in this form it ran through many editions, and was long the standard work on the subject. McArthur may also have been one of the 'Literary and professional men' who assisted with the 'Naval Chronicle' under its first editor, James Stanier Clarke. He certainly collaborated with Clarke in the preparation of a 'Life of Lord Nelson' which set a new standard in the use of primary sources. This was published in 1809 and was extensively used by later editors of the 'Naval Chronicle' in the preparation of biographical memorials. 
In 1801 McArthur published an octavo volume of 'Financial and Political Facts of the Eighteenth Century' which, with a change of 'century' into 'and present centuries', ran through several editions; he followed this in 1806 with 'A translation from the Italian of the Abbe Cesarotti's historical and critical dissertation respecting the controversy on the authenticity of Ossian's poems', in which he described himself as a member of the committee of the Highland Society of London employed to superintend the publication of Ossian in Gaelic. On 22 July 1806 McArthur received the degree of LLD from the University of Edinburgh. He was at this time living in York Place, Portman Square, London, but afterwards he settled down at Hayfield in Hampshire, where he died on 29 July 1840. He left a widow and, apparently, one daughter, Mrs Conway. 


@@@@@


doc= 17339


Sir William Macarthur (1800-1882), pastoralist and scientist, was born at Elizabeth Farm, near Parramatta, on 15 December 1800. The main concerns of his life were centred on Camden Park, where his experimental vineyard, orchard, and gardens were a source of plants for others throughout Australia. He made a remarkable collection of indigenous trees and was among the first in Australia to attempt photography. He was an elected member of the legislative council (1849-55) and he sat in the upper house of the colonial parliament (1864-82). He was a commissioner for the colony at the Universal Exhibition in Paris in 1855, and was afterwards awarded a knighthood and the Legion d'honneur. He died, unmarried, at Camden Park on 29 October 1882 of embolism of the cerebral artery and, after a service at St John's Church, Camden, was buried in the family graveyard in Camden Park on 31 October 1882. 


@@@@@


doc= 17340


McArthur, Sir William (1809-1887), woollen merchant and politician, was born at Malin, Donegal, Ireland, on 6 July 1809, the fifth child and second son of John McArthur (died 1840) and Sarah, 'nee' Finlay (died 1861). His father was a poor Scots-Irish farmer who had converted to Methodism in the 1790s and turned to itinerant preaching in the 'linen triangle' of Ulster. William attended schools in Stranorlar and Newtownstewart, but at the age of twelve he was sent away from home to be apprenticed to a Methodist woollen draper in Enniskillen. Subsequently he worked as a clerk for a Methodist tobacco and spirit merchant in Lurgan, and briefly as a travelling agent for a Dublin woollen draper, before he and a partner of about his own age set up a woollens export business in Londonderry in 1831. The firm prospered and acquired new suppliers in the north of England, and when his partner, John Cather, emigrated to Canada in 1835 McArthur assumed control. 
A modest if solid provincial enterprise was transformed into a major commercial house in consequence of a visit made to New South Wales in 1841 by one of McArthur's younger brothers. By the late 1840s Alexander McArthur (1814-1909) had established branches of the firm in Sydney, Melbourne, Adelaide, and Auckland, to deal in McArthur textiles and Australasian exports. When the 'gold rush' happened in 1851 McArthur Brothers was well placed to profit enormously from both the great demand for durable woollens and from the high profits to be made in gold exporting. Australian success led the firm to open a London office in 1854. Three years later William McArthur himself moved to London and subsequently became a City figure of great wealth and some influence. By the mid-1860s the two brothers (Alexander moved to London in 1863) had extended their activity into banking and insurance, and they sat on the boards of a number of other firms dealing in colonial and foreign investments. 
McArthur had deferred matrimony until his business was soundly established, and in 1843 he married Marianne (1819?-1889), the only child of Archibald McElwaine, an Ulster businessman and a Methodist. They had no children and from the 1850s Marianne was a semi-invalid; for reasons of health she often lived apart from her husband. 
McArthur was elected to the Londonderry town council in 1841 as a Conservative, though his politics were more Methodist Connexional than tory partisan. When he moved toward the Liberals in the 1850s, he was driven in large measure by the protestant issues of sectarian education and anti-Catholicism. It was not until 1865, however, that he became interested in a parliamentary seat. By this time he was well established in the City of London, had become a prominent benefactor of Methodist educational and charitable institutions, and lived in a south London suburb, Brixton Hill, among a community of wealthy nonconformist professionals and businessmen like himself. Following an invitation from the Methodists of the West Riding borough of Pontefract, McArthur contested the seat as a moderate Liberal but was narrowly defeated. He subsequently took a larger role in City affairs, served a term as sheriff for London and Middlesex in 1867, hired a political agent, and stood successfully in 1868 for the south London (Surrey) borough of Lambeth. He held this constituency, which included his own residence in Brixton Hill, until 1885, though with increasing challenge from the radical wing of metropolitan Liberalism. 
Although many of McArthur's philanthropic and evangelical interests cut across partisan lines in the House of Commons, he was, like the other Methodist MPs, a generally loyal Gladstonian, and embraced most of the domestic reforms of the first and second Gladstone governments. As one of the most prominent (and wealthy) Methodist laymen of the time, he was not merely a spokesman for Connexion in parliament but played a considerable role in shaping the Methodist political agenda. For McArthur, the most compelling item on this agenda was the furtherance of Methodist missionary enterprise, especially in the south Pacific. Here he was strongly influenced by his brother Alexander and his Australian Methodist friends and relatives. 
McArthur's persistent campaign in parliament and at Whitehall in the early 1870s for the annexation of the Fiji Islands, where there was a well-developed Methodist missionary presence, was vigorously resisted by Gladstone, but it ultimately triumphed when Disraeli's government accepted the sovereignty of the islands in 1874. Earlier McArthur had helped to promote, as did many nonconformist Liberals, causes which were often critical of colonial administration (the British and Foreign Anti-Slave Society, the Aborigines Protection Society, the Anglo-Oriental Society for Suppression of the Opium Trade, and J. S. Mill's Jamaica Committee to prosecute Governor Eyre). The Fiji success, however, and the alliances he made in achieving it, encouraged in McArthur an enthusiasm for the empire (in 1884 he was ardent in his support for W. E. Forster's Imperial Federation League), and helped to widen the rift between McArthur and Liberal radicalism in his later years. 
McArthur was elected alderman for the Coleman Street ward of the City in 1872, and he served on committees concerned with sewerage, the police, gas and water, and various charities, and lent his name and resources to a number of civic and philanthropic organizations. He was a founding member of the London chamber of commerce in 1881, and he supported the campaigns of the Metropolitan Free Bridges Association and the Public Museums and Free Libraries Association. In his mind civic reform was inextricably tied to moral reform, a conviction reflected in his support for the Central Association for Stopping the Sale of Intoxicating Liquors on Sundays and the National Association for Repeal of the Contagious Diseases Acts. Primacy of place was, however, always reserved for explicitly Methodist demands on his time and money: the Wesleyan Methodist Missionary Society, the Methodist Chapel Building Fund, and the Methodist college at Belfast. From 1872 until his death he was a lay representative to both the English and Irish Wesleyan conferences. 
McArthur's turn as lord mayor of London came in 1880, and the pious tone he set at Mansion House -- no wine, card playing, or dancing, and prayer meetings for the Evangelical Alliance -- drew sarcastic comment from some quarters about his parvenu religiosity and lack of sophistication. After the end of his year in office Gladstone created him KCMG (an award commonly associated with colonial service), rather than bestow the baronetcy which many former lord mayors received, an apparent slight which McArthur and his friends resented. 
McArthur had relished the robes of office, which he wore to chapel services in Brixton, and the dignity of his position, feeling that they honoured, through him, both provincial nonconformity and self-made men of commerce. He added a considerable amount of aldermanic flesh to his large frame, and a growing sense of his importance in the City and in the Wesleyan community led him to take a large, elegant house at 79 Holland Park, appropriate to the style of the merchant prince he considered himself to be. However, his removal to west London, the grandness of his style, his foreign travel, his increasing absence from the House of Commons, and his lack of interest in the 'low' radicalism of the left of the Liberal Party made McArthur vulnerable in Lambeth. Although he endorsed land reform and extension of the franchise, there were limits to his ability to accommodate the radical programme, and his failure in 1883 to vote for the 'Affirmation Bill' which would have allowed the atheist Charles Bradlaugh to take his seat in the Commons resulted in a deputation from his constituents demanding that he resign his seat. McArthur -- heavy, elderly, and never a very confident orator -- saw a parliamentary seat as a reward rather than a battleground, and, rather than struggle against a coming generation in a large, demanding metropolitan constituency, he chose not to contest Lambeth in the general election of 1885. Nonconformists in the newly created east Kent district of Newington West invited him to stand, but here too there was a radical challenge which split the Liberal vote and gave the seat to a tory -- with McArthur trailing a distant third. 
The humiliation of his loss embittered McArthur in his last years. Like his protege Hugh Price Hughes he abandoned Gladstone over home rule, and he turned to the satisfying and complicated business of arranging and rearranging the many charitable legacies in his will. McArthur remained in robust health until his sudden death from heart failure on 16 November 1887, 'en route' on the London Underground to a City board meeting. Survived by his wife and also by his brother Alexander, McArthur was buried at Norwood cemetery. He left a considerable fortune, amounting almost to $0.5 million, more than $150,000 of which was left to Methodist charities. 
Rising from an obscure apprenticeship to dignity, honour, and a mercantile fortune, McArthur's life fitted the pattern described by Samuel Smiles. He attributed his success to simple virtues, inscribing his stationery with the motto 'Fide et opera'. The recognized spokesman for the Wesleyan Methodist laity, an avid promoter of missionary imperialism, and a minor pillar of nonconformist support for Gladstonian Liberalism, McArthur remained a confirmed back-bencher, alternately useful and embarrassing to the Liberal leadership. He was a great man to many of his Methodist contemporaries, but in London, in the larger world, regard for his money was inevitably tempered by condescension. McArthur's girth and broad, coarse features belied his character, which was not particularly expansive or gregarious. His strict evangelical and sectarian approach to all aspects of his public and commercial life -- the very means by which he struggled out of a narrow Ulster poverty -- also worked to prevent him from developing larger sympathies with either the world of high politics or that of his working-class constituents, and so limited the influence which his wealth might have commanded. 


@@@@@


doc= 17341


Macartney, George, Earl Macartney (1737-1806), diplomatist and colonial governor, was born in co. Antrim or Dublin on 3 May 1737, the only son of the three children of George Macartney (died 1779), a landowner, of Lisanoure, co. Antrim, and his wife, Elizabeth (died 1755), the youngest daughter of the Revd John Winder, prebend of Kilroot and rector of Carmony, Antrim. His paternal grandfather, another George Macartney, had represented Belfast in the Irish parliament. After attending Dr Thompson's school in Leixlip from 1745, he studied at Trinity College, Dublin, from 1750 to 1754, whence he proceeded MA in 1759. The Revd William Dennis, a friend of Edmund Burke, was also his tutor until 1757, when he entered Lincoln's Inn; he migrated to the Middle Temple the following year. Macartney inherited $150 from his grandfather in 1757 and property from his uncle in 1759. On the grand tour he lingered in Italy in 1760 and wintered in Geneva, where he met Stephen Fox, Lord Holland's heir, with whom he returned to London. He frequented Holland House, his host trusting him to curb Stephen's gambling. From December 1761 he was Stephen's minder in Geneva, and while there he met and became friends with Rousseau and Voltaire. In 1763 he and Stephen were met in Paris by the Hollands, and together they toured France and the Netherlands; Macartney later went on to Germany with Stephen's younger brother Charles James Fox. On their return Lord Holland made him an interest-free loan (unrepaid) and tried unsuccessfully to get him into parliament for Midhurst; however, he did secure him an envoyship-extraordinary to Russia. Macartney was appointed on 4 October 1764, was knighted on 19 October, had his portrait painted by Reynolds, and reached St Petersburg on 27 December. 
Commended in London for his good looks, social accomplishments, and ready mind, Macartney was expected to impress the Empress Catherine, but he omitted to produce his credentials on meeting her. He then fell ill, thereby delaying negotiation of a fresh commercial treaty and consideration of any Anglo-Russian alliance proposals. A commercial treaty he signed without authority in August 1765 maintained Britain's preferential status in Russia and permitted merchants to settle anywhere, but it failed to unlock the transit trade with Persia. Macartney received a rebuke from London, and after renegotiation the treaty was concluded in 1766. By then Lord Chatham, who was premier, craved a Russian alliance, which involved the substitution of Hans Stanley for Macartney (whose diplomacy had faltered over the Turkish question). Stanley never went, but Macartney left St Petersburg on 3 April 1767 and returned via Copenhagen in August. He was decorated with the White Eagle of Poland and published privately an 'Account of the Russian Empire' (1767). On 20 November 1767 he was named ambassador to Russia, but he withdrew, having damaged his prospects by seducing two Russian court ladies. Soon afterwards, on 1 February 1768, he married Lady Jane Stuart (1742-1828), the daughter of the former prime minister John Stuart, third earl of Bute (1713-1792), and his wife, Mary Wortley Montagu, Baroness Mount Stuart of Wortley; his mother-in-law vetoed any move to Russia. A mission to Turin was talked of as an alternative posting, as was the secretaryship at war. As Macartney needed to be in parliament, Lord Holland offered him the resources to contest Stockbridge, but he still feared the expense. A bid to win a peerage failed, but Bute secured his return for Cockermouth on Sir James Lowther's interest in 1768. There he was soon pressurized by Lowther to vacate, and he reluctantly accepted the chief secretaryship to Lord Townshend, the Irish viceroy, on 1 January 1769; he gave up Cockermouth in March. 
Macartney owed his appointment to Bute, whose oldest political friend was Townshend. His initial misgivings about his new position grew when Townshend added to his administrative duties the management of the Irish Commons; he had already been voted member for Armagh in absentia in 1768. He was sworn of the Irish privy council on 30 March 1769 and visited Dublin to meet the Dublin Castle undertakers or parliamentary managers, but soon returned to represent Townshend in London. In September, lacking cabinet consent to viceregal reforms, he returned to Dublin. His wish to become ambassador to Spain was frustrated, but Townshend promised recompense. In October he opened proceedings in the Irish Commons, promoting a money bill, which had been rejected in 1768, to augment the military. He was heckled and the bill failed again, so parliament was prorogued. An Irish peerage, as Lord Balmaine, for which Townshend applied in vain, would have released him from his duties. In 1770 he lobbied London for Townshend's scheme to sidestep parliament by raising indirect revenues, but he still hankered after the diplomatic posting to Spain, whereby he hoped to settle the Falklands dispute and to augment his salary of $3000 per annum. When the Irish Commons convened in 1771, Townshend, who despaired of Macartney's management, requested a pension of $2000 for him, but the king disliked creating a precedent. Foregoing an alternative appointment as muster-master-general, he was finally assured his pension and also obtained a second knighthood, this time of the Bath (29 May 1772). Although this honour allowed him to castellate and improve his property at Lisanoure, he stayed on unwillingly, suffering caricature in the Irish patriot publication 'Baratariana', until November 1772. He urged in vain that his replacement be spared the vexing duties of parliamentary management. Despite his unhappy experience of Irish politics, his 'Account of Ireland in 1773' showed his firm grasp of Irish economics and his commitment to imperial government. He continued to sit for Armagh, nominally, until 1776. 
Disqualified from membership at Westminster by his pension, Macartney was allowed to substitute the governorship of Toome Castle, which he subsequently sold to pay debts contracted during his time in Russia. Bute secured his return for Ayr burghs in 1774. One speech availed him: he opposed the London merchants' petition against the trade embargo on the American colonies in January 1775. In November he was appointed governor of Grenada, Tobago, and the Grenadines. He vacated his seat in January, and he and Lady Jane reached St George on 3 May 1776. On 19 July he became Baron Macartney in the Irish peerage. Enjoying an income of $6000 a year, he admired the islands' beauty and racial variety but found the principal residents riven by bigotry, and he dissolved the Tobago assembly. While investigating economic problems, he feared French retaliation during the American war and projected a militia. This came too late, as the French invaded Grenada in 1779 and transported him a prisoner to Limoges that July. His wife escaped, but his property was looted. Macartney returned to London in November through an exchange of prisoners of war, and early the following year Lord North sent him on a confidential mission to Dublin; however, his advocacy of Anglo-Irish union fell on deaf ears. 
Macartney next canvassed for the governorship of Madras, then worth $15,000 per annum. Regarded as an interloper in Indian politics, he emphasized his commercial acumen and local impartiality. Backed by Lord Sandwich at the Admiralty, he won over the East India Company directors and court and succeeded in being the first non-company servant to be appointed. He vacated his parliamentary seat of Berealston, for which he had just been elected, on the Northumberland interest and sailed for India on 21 February 1781. He was accompanied by his secretary in Grenada, George Staunton, but not his wife, who suffered increasingly from deafness. His first mission was to seize the Dutch settlements, in order to counter the Franco-Dutch alliance in support of American independence. Negapatam was duly taken on 12 November 1781 and Trincomali in January 1782, despite his quarrel with the commander-in-chief in India, General Sir Eyre Coote, who had defeated Haidar Ali of Mysore, invader of the Carnatic, at the battle of Porto Novo in July 1781. Warren Hastings, governor-general in Calcutta, halted Macartney's initiatives by making Coote military supremo in Madras. To counter the French and Haidar, Macartney needed to finance the East India Company's military forces, and did so by taking over the revenue collection of the debt-ridden nawab of the Carnatic. This policy created a rift with Hastings, who upheld the nawab's objection to Macartney's appointment of revenue collectors, but Hastings gave way, subject to the nawab's approval, on 2 December 1781. Macartney had set up a committee of assigned revenue, headed by Paul Benfield, to whom he owed $6000 for his passage to India, but, alerted to Benfield's graft, he replaced him. When Benfield subsequently intrigued against him, he repaid his personal debt in 1782 and urged the company to boycott him. Meanwhile, the French naval threat having materialized, Macartney commandeered the nawab's revenue. This action was then approved by Hastings, but by May 1783 he had turned against Macartney, who refused to rehabilitate the nawab. In October, having prevented Macartney from negotiating with Haidar, Hastings tried unsuccessfully to suspend him in council. Even when the French made peace in 1783 Hastings continued to veto any negotiation and yielded only when Haidar's heir, Tipu Sultan, made overtures. Tipu renounced all claim to the Carnatic by treaty on 11 March 1784. The nawab's omission from this treaty rankled in Calcutta, but Macartney stuck to his guns, risking suspension from office. The company directors, backed by the newly established government, the Board of Control for India, annulled his revenue takeover on 15 October 1784. Macartney sent his secretary, Staunton, to London to plead his cause, which led to Edmund Burke's exposure in a speech to the Commons on 28 February 1785 of the corruption enmeshing the nawab's affairs. By this point Hastings had resigned as governor-general, and Macartney was chosen as his successor on 17 February 1785. Unaware of his new appointment, Macartney resigned the governorship of Madras on 7 June 1785, 'en route' for Calcutta, where the council, headed by Benfield's crony Sir John Macpherson, rebuffed him. He left India to argue his case in London on 13 August, and reached London in December. Addressing the company on 13 January 1786, he stated his terms and argued that both the military under the commander-in-chief, and the council in Calcutta, should be made subordinate to the governor-general; he also recommended Macpherson's dismissal. He met Pitt and Henry Dundas on 20 January, and their failure to mention a British peerage, while accepting his manifesto, probably clinched matters; he declined the governor-generalship, which was awarded instead to Lord Cornwallis. The company rewarded Macartney for his service with plate worth $1600 and a pension of $1500, commending him for rejecting the customary bribes in India. 
Macartney had made several enemies in India and had fought a duel with Anthony Sadleir in September 1784, in which he had been wounded. His dispute with Coote's successor as commander-in-chief in India, Major-General James Stuart, whom he had dismissed in favour of Sir John Burgoyne, was played out in a duel in Hyde Park on 8 June 1786. This time Macartney was seriously wounded, and only the king's intervention in the quarrel prevented another duel between the two men. Disillusioned with India, Macartney withdrew from the political limelight. With his savings of over $30,000 he purchased a house in Curzon Street, Mayfair, and an estate in Surrey at Parkhurst. He also renovated his house at Lisanoure. He took his seat in the Irish Lords on 12 March 1788. Macartney served as 'custos rotulorum' of Antrim, as a trustee of linen manufacture, and as a colonel in the yeomanry in Ulster. He became president of the Literary Club and was elected FRS in 1792 and FSA in 1795. 
Macartney's next posting was dictated to some extent by his old masters, the East India Company. The company, together with the government, was anxious to ameliorate conditions for trade with China and sent Macartney on an embassy to Peking (Beijing). He was sworn of the privy council on 2 May 1792, awarded a salary of $10,000 and an allowance of $5000, and created Viscount Macartney on 28 June 1792. His party, which numbered ninety-four, including Staunton and a galaxy of experts, embarked in the 'Lion' on 26 September 1792. Samples of the best British manufactures, with mechanical toys to entertain the octogenarian emperor Qianlong, were shipped. After enjoying the customary spectacles enjoined by Chinese hospitality, Macartney was presented to Qianlong at Jehol on 14 September 1793. The event, in which Macartney alone was able to avoid making the ceremonial 'kowtow' to the emperor, was caricatured by Gillray. Thereafter he barely glimpsed the emperor. The premier Heshan refused to negotiate a treaty of trade and friendship, and Macartney was handed his dismissal on 3 October, a week after reaching Peking. His journals, which display ample appreciation of China, were later published in Barrow's life of Macartney (1807); Staunton published an acclaimed account of their mission in 1797. Macartney concluded that China could easily be bombarded, but accepted that the potential for commercial expansion by British traders was thwarted by the Chinese refusal to allow a resident minister in Peking. He returned home via Canton (Guangzhou), where he held talks about improving conditions for the British merchants, but he made no progress on reforming the unsatisfactory system then in operation. 
Following his return, Macartney was raised to an earldom in the Irish peerage on 1 March 1794, but he was still ambitious for a British barony. He accordingly undertook another mission, on 10 July 1795, this time to Verona, to the exiled French king, Louis XVIII. Lord Grenville, as foreign secretary, wished to moderate French royalist aspirations. Louis accepted a personal grant of $10,000, but he had already dictated a defiant restoration manifesto and objected to leaving Verona; he wanted British recognition to promote rebellion in France against the revolutionary regime. By February 1796 Macartney had given up; he proceeded to Naples and was received at court. In April he returned to London, where the offer of the post of governor of the Cape awaited him, together with a British barony (granted on 8 June). He took his seat in the Lords on 27 September. 
Macartney was enticed to accept the governorship of the Cape with a salary of $10,000 a year, an annual allowance and pension of $2000, and permission to leave peremptorily if his health failed; gout had long plagued him. He was appointed on 30 December 1796 and reached Cape Town on 4 May. In Lady Macartney's absence Lady Anne, the wife of his official secretary, Andrew Barnard, acted as first lady. His brief was to conciliate the Dutch, which he affably attempted, by concession and reform; military intimidation was seldom necessary, and he prevented clashes between the Boers and tribal pastoralists by halting the latter across the Great Fish River. The burghers were made to swear allegiance to George III. John Barrow, one of two private secretaries with him in China, mapped the colony for Macartney, who was confined to his Cape Town residence. He checked a naval mutiny at Simonstown, discouraged the slave trade, on which he had given evidence to the Lords in 1792, and abolished judicial torture. Surveying its resources, he concluded that retention of the Cape was advantageous merely to safeguard India and suggested that the East India Company should manage the colony. He left for England on 21 November 1798, eschewing half pay until he was replaced, after making a declaration of administrative integrity. It was his last office: he declined Addington's offer of the chair of the Board of Control in 1801. 
Latterly Macartney seldom attended parliament and instead consolidated his Antrim estate; he established a market town at Dervock. He was a trustee of the British Museum from 1801. After selling his Parkhurst estate in 1799, he rented Corney House in Chiswick. He died at Curzon Street on 31 March 1806 and was buried privately at Chiswick, as he wished, on 9 April. Childless, he left his widow handsomely provided for, and he bequeathed his realty to his niece Mrs Elizabeth Hume, whose heir was to assume the surname Macartney. She erected a cenotaph to his memory in Lisanoure church. His well-stocked library was sold in 1854 together with a first batch of his papers, which, after subsequent sales, have travelled even farther than he. 


@@@@@


doc= 17342


Macartney, James (1770-1843), anatomist, was born on 8 March 1770 at Armagh, the youngest of the six surviving children of James Macartney (died 1790), gentleman farmer of Ballyrea, co. Armagh, and Mary (died 1788), the eldest of the five children of John Maxwell, a Presbyterian minister in Armagh, and former moderator of the Presbyterian synod, and Rose Carson of Strabane. Macartney was educated privately and at the classical school, Armagh, but had an inability to remember lessons, retain information derived from books, or to master Euclid and maths (Thornton, 164). He was a radical Presbyterian and may have inherited his unitarian beliefs from his mother. Macartney's father, though nominally a Presbyterian, associated himself with no particular church and rarely attended service. 
Macartney served as a clerk to his cousins' linen business in Newry but on the death of his father in 1790 he returned home to farm the family property with his brothers until he moved to Dublin to study surgery. In March 1794 he was apprenticed to William Hartigan, professor of anatomy in the Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland, and on 10 August 1795 he married Mary Ekenhead of Newry. He also studied chemistry at Trinity College. In 1796, with Hartigan's consent, Macartney moved to London to continue his professional education and during the next three years attended several of the London hospital schools, as well as the Great Windmill Street school. In 1798, the final year of his apprenticeship, Macartney was appointed demonstrator in anatomy to Abernethy at St Bartholomew's Hospital at a salary of $50 per year. He dissected so much during the summer of 1799 that his health became weakened, so that he was unable to walk without the aid of a stick. On 6 February 1800 Macartney became a member of the Royal College of Surgeons of London and immediately afterwards was appointed lecturer in comparative anatomy at St Bartholomew's medical school, commencing his first course of lectures in March 1800. He continued to lecture there until his resignation in 1811. Macartney had illustrated his lectures with anatomical specimens made partly at his own expense. The hospital then claimed these as their own property, forcing Macartney to pay for a duplicate set. It was this, plus further disputes, which caused Macartney to resign his post. Macartney combined his lecturing duties rather improbably with the position of surgeon to the Radnor militia, to which he was appointed early in 1803. Macartney also supervised William Ross's 'Lectures on Comparative Anatomy' (1802), a translation of Georges Cuvier's 'Lecons d'anatomie comparee'. In March 1811 Macartney was elected a fellow of the Royal Society and in August of that year he returned to Ireland with his regiment. 
On the termination of his military duties in 1812 Macartney determined to remain in Ireland and to seek the chair of anatomy and surgery in Trinity College -- given that its holder, his old master, Hartigan, was seriously ill. Hartigan died in December 1812 and on 21 June of the following year Macartney was appointed in his place. He had obtained the degree of MD from the University of St Andrews a month earlier. On 3 July 1813 he was given an honorary MD degree by Trinity College. 
As professor of anatomy Macartney was obliged to deliver a course of twelve public lectures, open to all students of the university, as well as a course of systematic lectures on five days of the week, and to superintend the work of the dissecting room. The professorship carried with it the office of clinical physician to Sir Patrick Dun's Hospital and Macartney had to deliver clinical lectures in the hospital to the students of the medical school. The theme of his introductory lecture, delivered to 'an overflowing house' (Crosse, 59), on 1 November 1813 was the importance of anatomy in medical study. It appears that Macartney also took part in body snatching and in February 1814 was arrested by soldiers but subsequently released (Crosse, 64). In Macartney's first year fifty-three students entered for the systematic course and twenty-one for dissections. In the following year he and Arthur Jacob established the National Eye Dispensary in North Cumberland Street. He obtained leave from the board of the university for Jacob to lecture in the medical school on the anatomy and diseases of the eye, and for John Pentland, afterwards master of the Rotunda Hospital, to lecture on midwifery, a subject that was not at the time taught in Trinity College. The number of students increased rapidly, reaching 303 in 1820. It would be incorrect to attribute the entire expansion in medical student numbers to Macartney -- the numbers in arts were also rising at the time -- but his reputation, his acknowledged ability in general science, physiology, surgery, and comparative anatomy attracted many Irish students who would otherwise have gone to Edinburgh, and even a few from England and Scotland. William Stokes later referred to the Trinity medical school of 1820 as 'a grammar school of anatomy and book medicine and little more' but, according to R. B. McDowell and D. A. Webb, it was this very programme as taught by Macartney that drew in the students who were later to benefit from the clinical teaching of Stokes and his equally renowned colleague, Robert James Graves (McDowell and Webb, 89). On 16 August 1824 he was elected to an honorary fellowship of the King and Queen's College of Physicians in Ireland and on 25 October 1824 he was admitted a licentiate. On 21 August 1833 an honorary MD from the University of Cambridge was conferred on him. 
Macartney resigned his chair on 11 July 1837 after a protracted and bitter dispute with his faculty colleagues and the board of the university over the time of his lectures. Alexander Macalister claimed in his memoir that 'by their own act, and by a continuous course of petty annoyances and persecutions, the University of Dublin lost the services of the greatest teacher, the best anatomist, the most philosophic surgeon that Ireland has ever produced'. This was typical Macalister hagiography. Macartney's resignation owed more to his own disputatious and truculent nature than to intransigence on the university's part. He was an able and progressive teacher, conscientious and hard-working, and committed to the cause of educational and medical reform. He was, in the eyes of his contemporaries, the finest anatomist and physiologist that Ireland had produced. But he was also egotistical, quarrelsome, hot-tempered, outspoken, difficult, obdurate, and unpopular with his medical and academic colleagues. His obituarist in the 'Dublin Medical Press' (8 March 1843, 160) -- possibly his old associate, Arthur Jacob, who was one of the joint owners and editors -- in a balanced appraisal, wrote: 'Dr Macartney had, like every other man, his faults and his failings, which, unlike the majority of men, he neither concealed nor varnished; but, on the other hand, he had his perfections and his merits. He nurtured in his breast a spirit of independence rarely to be met with, and a conscientious respect and regard for truth and honour not often found among persons making greater professions.' However, in his diary Macartney claimed that he had been wrongly seen as: 'supposed unrelenting to solicitation -- devoid of compassion, more tenacious of my own opinion than desirous to find the truth -- penurious & even miserly, harsh & tyrannical to those in my power... I have also been considered by some people as unsteady in carrying my purposes into effect & of being indolent & changeable & I have been told that I have no predilection for the fair sex, nor love for children by Le Deville the phrenologist. If I was to name any person whom I have ever known as possessing the opposite qualities in the greatest degree that person would be myself. (Thornton, 164-5)' In politics Macartney was an active member of The Society of United Irishmen and while in Newry 'formed a similar organization at Armagh' (Thornton, 167). 
In 1836 Macartney sold the museum of anatomical and pathological preparations that he had collected in Dublin to Cambridge University for an annual payment of $100 for ten years. He died at his residence, 31 Upper Merrion Street, Dublin, on 6 March 1843, probably from apoplexy. He was buried at Mount Jerome cemetery three days later. 


@@@@@


doc= 17343


Macaulay, Aulay (1758-1819), Church of England clergyman and writer, was born at Lismore, Argyll, on 20 October 1758, the eldest son of John Macaulay (1720-1789) ['see under 'Macaulay, Zachary], Church of Scotland minister, and his second wife, Margaret Campbell (died 1790). Zachary Macaulay was his brother and Thomas Babington Macaulay was his nephew. He was educated at home and then at Glasgow University, whence he graduated MA in 1778. While in residence he contributed to 'Ruddiman's Magazine' under the pseudonym Academicus. After acting for three years as tutor to the sons of Joseph Foster Barham at Bedford he took holy orders in the Church of England and obtained a curacy at Claybrooke, Leicestershire, in 1781. He remained there until 1789, when he was appointed rector of Frolesworth, in the same county, but he resigned that living in 1790. In 1785 he had been admitted at Sidney Sussex College, Cambridge, to study divinity but, although he completed the course, he decided against the expense of graduation. 
In 1793 Macaulay went on a tour in Holland and Belgium, writing an account of his travels for the 'Gentleman's Magazine' (1793-4). In 1794, as travelling tutor to one of the sons of Sir Walter Farquhar, he visited the court of the duke of Brunswick and gave English lessons to his daughter, afterwards Queen Caroline, in the course of which he gained the regard of her mother, the duchess. In 1796, after his return, Macaulay was presented by his brother-in-law Thomas Babington MP to the living of Rothley in Leicestershire. He married Ann Heyrick ('bap'. 1774), daughter of John Heyrick, town clerk of Leicester, and his wife, Mary, at St Margaret's, Leicester, on 19 September 1797. In 1815 he made another tour on the continent, again publishing accounts in the 'Gentleman's Magazine' (1815-17). 
Macaulay spent over thirty years working on a life of Melancthon but this massive project was never published. He also considered editing an abridged version of Alexander Pope's works. His own published works include 'Essays' (1780), 'The History and Antiquities of Claybrooke', which was published separately as well as in John Nichols's 'Queries Proposed to the Nobility, Gentry, and Clergy, of Leicestershire' (1787?), and sermons recommending the Anglican liturgy and Sunday schools. He died of apoplexy on 24 February 1819 and was survived by his wife and eight sons. He should not be confused with Aulay Macaulay (1673-1758), father of Kenneth Macaulay. 
Macaulay's second son, 


@@@@@


doc= 17344


Macaulay, Catharine (1731-1791), historian and political polemicist, was born on 2 April 1731 at Olantigh in the parish of Wye, Kent, second daughter of John Sawbridge (1699-1762), landowner, and his second wife, Dorothy Wanley (1713-1733), daughter of London banker George Wanley of Tottenham, Middlesex. As well as her elder sister, Mary, she had two brothers, Wanley and John Sawbridge, who made a name for himself in radical politics. 
The family's origins were among Warwickshire yeomanry, and when some of the family moved south in the early seventeenth century one branch gravitated towards Kent. Catharine's great-grandfather Isaac Sawbridge was in business in London and her grandfather Jacob, banker and stockbroker, was born in Canterbury. The Sawbridge family had already acquired some notoriety long before Catharine Macaulay was born, when Jacob Sawbridge became involved in the South Sea Bubble. Believing that an extension of credit was essential to the prosperity of the country, and resenting the monopoly position enjoyed by the Bank of England and its close relation to government, Jacob and his partners, 'the three capital sharpers of Britain', as Defoe called them, set out to exploit the South Sea scheme. When the crash came Sawbridge was deeply implicated. Despite the expropriation of a large part of his assets, he nevertheless managed to emerge a rich man. When half a century later Catharine Macaulay sought to vindicate her grandfather's memory, she argued that many from both houses of parliament were involved but managed to escape all punishment, and that Sawbridge was merely the unfortunate scapegoat. 
Family fortunes, however, did not suffer long as Catharine's father was fortunate in marrying as his second wife an heiress, Dorothy Wanley, on 21 November 1728 at All Hallows, Tottenham. On Dorothy's death in childbirth in 1733 he inherited her fortune, which he used to improve the family estate at Olantigh. Devastated by his wife's death, Sawbridge tended to cut himself off from society, and played little part in his daughters' education. In consequence Catharine had much time to herself. She and her sister were privately educated, and were left in the care of an antiquated and ignorant governess. Some have suggested her education was the result of daily foraging in her father's well-stocked library. Others insist her education was 'by no means distinguished from that of other young ladies of the same rank' ('European Magazine and London Review', 4, 1783, 330). What is certain is that Catharine was a prolific reader, particularly in her twenties. She read Greek and Roman history, probably in translation, and later claimed that this had been the source of her republicanism and the inspiration to her turning historian. Her upbringing without parental direction was undoubtedly lonely and may well have made for a 'wayward, headstrong, young woman' but it gave her a rare independence and intellectual self-sufficiency (Peach, 117n.). Elizabeth Carter, meeting her in 1757 at a Canterbury assembly, was impressed by this 'fine, fashionable, well-dressed lady whose train was longer than anybody's train' and who 'took her mightily by way of conversation' ('Series of Letters', 2.260-61). 
On 18 June 1760, at Wye, Kent, Catharine married Dr George Macaulay (1716-1766), a man-midwife, son of Archibald Macaulay ('c'.1686-1760), sometime lord provost of Edinburgh, and his wife, Carola Macaulay, nee Young (b. 1682), milliner. He had been physician of the British Lying-in Hospital at Brownlow Street since 1751. Richard Baron was a close friend and he and Thomas Hollis were regular visitors at the Macaulays' house in Jermyn Street. Baron described George Macaulay as 'a most worthy and benevolent man' ('Diary of Sylas Neville', 20). From all accounts the marriage was a happy one. Baron was fascinated and more than a little frightened by Catharine Macaulay. He described her as 'quite a phenomenon -- a woman without passions', and thought her face 'as abstract as the print of Mr Locke' (Hollis, diary, entries for 6 and 13 Dec 1766). On 16 September 1766 George Macaulay died, aged forty-nine, leaving his widow with their only child, Catherine Sophia. 
It was in the brief period of her first marriage that Catharine Macaulay embarked on her eight-volume 'History of England'. For a woman to have conceived of such a project in the eighteenth century was extraordinary. That her husband actively encouraged her was equally remarkable. When her first volume was published in 1763 it was greeted with acclaim. Overnight she became 'the celebrated Mrs Macaulay'. But behind the praise she received there was condescension and the belief that the writing of history was not for women. On her first volume, for instance, the 'Monthly Review' concentrated not on the nature of the history but on the fact that she was a woman. She was referred to as 'the fair Macaulay', 'our fair Historian'. After mild praise the 'Review' expressed the wish that 'the same degree of genius and application had been exerted 'in more suitable pursuits'', for the writing of history was not recommended 'to the practice of our lovely countrywomen' ('Monthly Review', 29, 1763, 373). 
The whigs welcomed the first volumes as a timely answer to what was seen as David Hume's tory interpretation of events. As the 'History' proceeded, however, it became increasingly clear that Macaulay was no mere whig. It was when she reached her fourth volume in 1768, that dealt with the trial and execution of Charles I, that the gulf between her views and those of the whigs was revealed. It was in this volume that she talked for the first time of 'the rise of the republicans' who 'looked forward to the reformation of the principles, as well as the executive, of the government' (C. Macaulay, 'History of England', 4.160). The Commonwealth she saw as 'the brightest age that ever adorned the page of history' (ibid., 5.382). For her the events of the seventeenth century remained vividly alive, and they were in the process of being re-enacted in the present. Such views caused the Rockingham whigs to virtually abandon her, and such freely expressed republican ideas were an increasing embarrassment, as was her warmly expressed sympathy with the American colonists. 
Catharine Macaulay further expounded her political views in two polemical pamphlets, 'Loose remarks on certain positions to be found in Mr Hobbes's 'Philosophical rudiments of government and society'' (1767) and 'Observations on a pamphlet entitled 'Thoughts on the cause of the present discontents'' (1770). Her 'Observations' threw into relief her differences with the Rockingham whigs and emphasized her own startlingly radical politics. Burke and Macaulay differed fundamentally in their views of the causes of the political corruption which both believed threatened liberty. Burke believed in the perfection of the constitution established by the revolution settlement of 1688-9 and thought that the causes of the 'present discontents' lay in the recent resurgence of the power of the crown from which only strong and principled government of the Rockingham whigs could save the country. Macaulay thought that the revolution settlement itself had been the work of those who called themselves whigs but were in reality the 'enemies of public liberty' (Macaulay, 'Observations', 6-7, 10-11) and had diverted the revolution from its original radical course. Her proposed cures involved reactivating their radical programme by introducing shorter parliaments, a system of rotation of office, a place bill, and a more extended and equal power of election. For Americans the pamphlets had the effect of undermining their earlier conviction that the British constitution was the very best form of government and helped them to abandon constitutional monarchy as a model for a free government. 
In this period Catharine Macaulay moved in at least two social circles in London. The first had originally been formed around John Wilkes and the Society of the Supporters of the Bill of Rights. Her brother John Sawbridge played a central role in the campaign organized by London radicals on Wilkes's behalf and for a time Catharine Macaulay frequently entertained John Wilkes and his daughter Polly. The second circle was a group of dissenters who tended to share her republican views, namely Thomas and Timothy Hollis, Richard Baron, and Sylas Neville. The growing hostility of the Rockingham whigs, combined with the criticisms levelled at the 'History', may have contributed to her decision to leave London for Bath in 1774 to improve her health that had been badly affected by the effort of completing volume 5 of the 'History'. 
Catharine Macaulay's 'History' has been attacked as a 'masterly example of how not to write history' and it has been claimed that she was no scholar (Peardon, 60). But research into the contents of her library, revealed by her 'Catalogue of Tracts' of 1790, and careful examination of the sources she used in her 'History' reveal a meticulous scholar. The 'Catalogue of Tracts' (her purpose in publishing the catalogue remains obscure) consisted of 200 pages listing nearly 5000 tracts and sermons, mostly from the seventeenth century. Its range of tracts from the period 1640-50 is remarkable -- even by present standards. She made good use of manuscripts in her 'History' (seven are referred to in volume 1 alone). If it had not been for her public expressing impatience with the footnotes in her early volumes we might have had even more evidence of the sources she used and the care she took over them. The 'Monthly Review' in assessing her first volume described it as 'collecting and digesting the political fragments which have escaped the researches of so many learned and ingenious men' ('Monthly Review', 29, 1763, 373). It also suggests her originality in using sources others had passed over. She made extensive use of the 'Parliamentary History', and made constant reference to standard works such as Rushworth, Clarendon, Burnet, Ludlow, the state papers of John Thurloe, 'Commons Journals', Carte, and Whitelocke. She frequently cited Clarendon and Hume with whom she fundamentally disagreed, and her work reveals a familiarity with other historians, her friend William Harris, Rapin-Thoyras, James Ralph, and William Guthrie. It is no longer possible to dismiss her 'History' as 'the clumsy old volumes' -- as Lucy Donnelly described it. Remarkably, given the frequency with which her first four volumes appeared, no further volumes of the 'History' were published during the following four years. She may well have found it difficult to resume without the facilities she enjoyed in London. Instead she produced in 1778 one volume of 'The history of England from the revolution to the present time in a series of letters to a friend [the Revd Thomas Wilson]'. 
On arriving in Bath, Catharine Macaulay had taken a house in St James's Parade. She had been a widow for eight years and her daughter was still a child. She must have missed the social life of London and the involvement in London politics. Without the British Museum it was more difficult to work on her 'History'. It was in these circumstances that the offer of a former acquaintance, an elderly member of the Society of the Supporters of the Bill of Rights, the Revd Thomas Wilson (1703-1784), a friend of both Wilkes and her brother, to share his house in Bath was irresistible. She was promised the free run of his library. She and her daughter were soon settled into Alfred House. Wilson at the time was seventy-three, a widower, and a lonely man much in need of company. He was reputed to give generously to charity but he was well able to afford it. His generosity extended to Catharine Macaulay. Shortly after her arrival in Alfred House, David Hume wrote to Hugh Blair: 'There is one Dr. Wilson, a man zealous for Liberty, who has made her a free and full Present of a house of $2,000 Value, has adopted her Daughter by all the Rites of Roman Jurisprudence, and intends to leave her all his Fortune, which is considerable. ('Letters of David Hume', 2.321)' A cultured man, Wilson had an extensive library and was something of a book collector. He was a fervent Wilkite and remained loyal to Wilkes until his death. 
Catharine Macaulay's decision to move into Alfred House proved a serious mistake. Wilson, increasingly senile, was clearly besotted with her. To celebrate her forty-sixth birthday, he seated her on a throne, so that she could attend to six odes of little poetic merit, written in her honour, and numerous adulatory addresses. The occasion did little to enhance her reputation. For all Wilson's devotion, her residence at Alfred House was not a happy one, and her health suffered. 
In 1777 for reasons of health Macaulay decided to make a visit to Nice. Constant illness meant she got no further than Paris. There she began to recover her strength and eventually to entertain a very select group -- the chevalier de Rigemont, the abbe de Colbert, the duc de Harcourt, the ducs de La Rochefoucauld-Liancourt, and the count of Sarsfield, as well as Madame Bocage and Madame Geoffrin. She was clearly gratified by her reception and the attentions of the great. Turgot, on asking her whether she wished to see Versailles, was told: 'I have no desire to see the residence of tyrants' ('Memoires de Brissot', 2.237). No doubt for reasons of security she was very careful in her relations with Benjamin Franklin, the American envoy, and did not entertain him. Throughout her visit she was constantly made aware of the excitement generated by the American War of Independence. 
On 19 December 1778, less than two years after moving in to Alfred House, Catharine Macaulay announced her marriage, to William Graham, a mate to a ship's surgeon, aged twenty-one. The scandal that followed was due less to her marrying beneath her and the discrepancy between the ages of bride and bridegroom than to the rumours of an earlier sexual liaison with Dr Graham, her new husband's brother. A celebrated quack doctor, he had recently moved to Bath and begun to treat Catharine Macaulay, who recommended him to her friends. Her second marriage and the ensuing scandal fatally damaged her reputation. From being the focus of public interest she passed into relative obscurity. Of the last thirteen years of her life very little is known. 
Despite predictions that her second marriage would end Catharine Macaulay's career as historian, the 'History' continued -- two more volumes appeared in 1781 and the eighth and final volume in 1783. It was also predicted that the marriage would not last. It did, and to all appearances proved a happy one. In 1784 with her second husband she left for a visit to America of nearly a year. Already she and her 'History' were well known in America. Among ideas that had influenced the course of the American War of Independence her 'History' played a significant role. Through it she had become acquainted with Benjamin Franklin, Josiah Quincy, Benjamin Rush, Richard Henry Lee, John Adams, Ezra Styles, and Jonathan Mayhew, many of whom had come to Britain, where the Club of Honest Whigs welcomed them. Catharine Macaulay had frequently entertained them. On reaching America her first visit was to Mercy Otis Warren, wife of James Warren and sister of James Otis. With Mercy she had much in common. Indeed, it may have been Catharine Macaulay's influence that persuaded Mercy to become a historian. She went briefly to New York and met Richard Henry Lee who at this time was president of the continental congress. She spent ten days with the Washingtons at Mount Vernon. She continued to correspond with her many friends in America after she had returned to Britain. 
Ill health had dogged Catharine Macaulay's visit to America and on her return she went straight to the south of France in an effort to find a cure. When four years later news of the French Revolution reached England she was jubilant. The American War of Independence, she was convinced, had been its inspiration. In 1790 she published 'Letters on Education'. It covered a wide range of ideas. She was in favour of co-education and called on parents to reject 'the absurd notion, that the education of females should be of an opposite kind to that of males' (C. Macaulay, 'Letters on Education', 1790, 47). She expressed enlightened views on the upbringing of children. Children, she wrote, should be fed on fruit, eggs, and vegetables, and only very occasionally should be given meat. Sugar was bad for the teeth. They should be encouraged to wash regularly. It was a mistake to use baby talk in addressing them. She also argued passionately against capital punishment, and declared that if there had to be executions they should not be public events. She also argued in favour of reform of penal law and the abolition of slavery, decrying the deplorable 'treatment given by some of our countrymen to their African slaves' (ibid.). 
On the position of women, Macaulay argued that if it was better than it had been under slavery, 'we... have no great reason to boast of our privileges, or of the candour and indulgence of the men towards us' (Macaulay, 'Letters on Education', 210). She criticized women for their passive acceptance of the claimed natural superiority of men. Women's weaknesses were the result of 'situation and education only'. The education of women was an essential ingredient to a happy marriage. She was under no illusion about the operation of the sexual double standard in eighteenth-century society. The reason for the very different attitudes adopted towards any 'deviations from chastity in the two sexes', was, she thought, the result of men treating women as their property and women being denied any rights over 'their own persons' (p. 220). But while Catharine Macaulay was clearly sympathetic to the condition of her sex, it was not a priority in her thought. Neither in her 'History' nor in her political polemic do women occupy a place and she was not really concerned with the state of women's political representation. Until women were better educated, she thought, there was no hope of achieving political equality. 
In 1790 Catharine Macaulay also published an impassioned response to Burke's 'Reflections on the Revolution in France' (1790). This gave rise to a brief correspondence between her and Mary Wollstonecraft, in which both praised the other's work. Her answer to Burke raised once again their very different interpretations of the revolution of 1688 and what, if anything, it had achieved. 
Recurring ill health forced Catharine Macaulay out of London to Binfield in Berkshire, where she died on 22 June 1791 'after a long and very painful illness' ('GM'). She was a remarkable woman. No other woman before her had written history of the kind that she wrote. Though not strictly a feminist she always behaved as though equality between the sexes already existed. She refused to go out of the room with the ladies after dining in mixed company. When she visited the British Museum while writing her earlier volumes, she asked to see the letters exchanged between James I and the duke of Buckingham. The librarian, 'observing that many of them were wholly unfit for the inspection of any one of her sex', asked that he might be allowed to select a few. 'Phoo', said she, 'a historian is of no sex', and then deliberately read through them all (Taylor, 1.209). 


@@@@@


doc= 17345


Colin Campbell Macaulay (bap. 1800, d. 1853), solicitor and historian, was baptized at Rothley on 7 January 1800. Having been educated at Rugby School he travelled in Portugal, and in 1831 he became partner in a firm of solicitors at Leicester. He was president of the Leicester Literary and Philosophical Society in 1847 and 1848, and contributed historical papers on Cardinal Wolsey (1849), the duke of Marlborough (1850), and Queen Elizabeth (1851). On 30 April 1850 he married Mary Kendall Wood, eldest daughter of Richard Warner Wood; they had a son and a daughter. He died on 20 October 1853 at Knighton Lodge, Leicester, and was buried at Rothley. 


@@@@@


doc= 17346


Macaulay, Sir James Buchanan (1793-1859), lawyer in Canada, was born on 3 December 1793 at Newark (Niagara-on-the-Lake), Upper Canada, the second son of James Macaulay, an army surgeon, and his wife, Elizabeth Tuck Hayter. The family was moderately wealthy and well connected, and in 1805 James joined the sons of the Upper Canadian elite in the Revd John Strachan's school in Cornwall. In 1809 he was commissioned ensign with the 98th regiment of foot and in 1812 joined the Glengarry light infantry fencibles. He saw action against American forces at Sackets Harbor, Ogdensburg, Lundy's Lane, and Fort Erie. After the end of the war he began to study law (1816); in 1822 he was called to the bar and in 1825 he became a bencher of the Law Society. 
He was industrious and successful at the bar, and his high social standing was consolidated when, on 1 December 1821, he married Rachel Crookshank (1799/1800-1883), the daughter of John Gamble, an army surgeon and colleague of Macaulay's father. They had four daughters and one son and lived quietly in Toronto. Macaulay was a devout Anglican, active in church affairs, and a member of a small coterie of conservatives described derisively as the 'Family Compact'. 
In 1825 Macaulay was appointed by Sir Peregrine Maitland to the executive council, but he withdrew in 1829 after becoming a judge in the court of king's bench. He was concerned principally with matters of civil litigation and was in general fair, if conservative, in his judgments. He tended towards clemency and was concerned about prison conditions. He was a colonel in the militia and during the rebellion of 1837 in Upper Canada he helped organize the defence of the colony. In 1839 he was asked to report on the Indian department, but he showed little understanding of native concerns, suggesting that the plight of the 'degenerate races', as he called them, be relieved by Christian charity. He was asked, between 1839 and 1849, to undertake a fuller investigation of the Indian department and of the executive council, earning the approval of the governor-general, Lord Sydenham. In 1840 he began the first revision of Upper Canadian statute law, and he served on the commission of 1842 and 1843 inquiring into the court of chancery. In 1843 he was appointed to the court of appeal and in 1849 he became chief justice in the court of common pleas, which post he held until age and increasing deafness forced him to retire in 1856. In that year he was appointed QC and began the revision of the statute law of Upper and Lower Canada, a responsibility which he carried out meticulously. Despite poor health he was appointed to the bench of the court of error and appeal in 1857. In 1858 he was made CB and in 1859 he was knighted. He died on 26 November 1859 after suffering a heart attack at Osgoode Hall, Toronto, leaving his widow the family home at Wykeham Lodge in the city and an estate worth (Canadian) $40,000. A moderate conservative of good judgement, Macaulay helped shape policy on a wide range of questions. 


@@@@@


doc= 17347


John Macaulay (1720-1789), Church of Scotland minister, and his second wife, Margaret(died 1790), daughter of Colin Campbell of Inveresragan. John Macaulay was the eldest son of Angus Macaulay, and was minister successively of South Uist (1746), Lismore (1756), Inveraray (1765), and Cardross (1775). He dined with Samuel Johnson and suffered his anger during Boswell and Johnson's journey to Scotland in October 1773. Aside from Zachary, the other children from his second marriage included Aulay Macaulay and Colin (1760-1836), who served in the Indian army and at Seringapatam, was imprisoned along with Sir David Baird by Haidar Ali, and served as MP for Saltash from 1828 to 1830. Promoted to the rank of major-general in August 1830 and subsequently lieutenant-general, Colin Macaulay died at Clifton on 20 February 1836. John Macaulay died on 30 March 1789. 


@@@@@


doc= 17348


Macaulay, Kenneth (1723/4-1779), Church of Scotland minister and local historian, was the third son of Aulay Macaulay (died 1758), minister of Harris, and Margaret Morrison (died 1771), daughter of Kenneth Morrison, minister of Stornoway, Isle of Lewis. He was educated at King's College, Aberdeen, where he graduated MA on 1 April 1742. On 15 November 1749 he was appointed missionary to Lochaber, but declined the post. On 20 November 1751 he was ordained as assistant and successor to his father, on whose death in 1758 he became sole pastor. On 4 August of the same year he married Penelope Macleod (died 1799); the eldest of their five children, Neil, later became a missionary minister in Harris. Macaulay was presented by Archibald, third duke of Argyll, to the parish of Ardnamurchan, Argyll, and was admitted there on 15 July 1761. On 17 November 1772 he was translated to Cawdor in the presbytery of Nairn. 
In 1758 Macaulay visited St Kilda on behalf of the Society in Scotland for the Propagation of Christian Knowledge (SSPCK), and in 1764 he published in London as his own composition 'The history of St Kilda, containing a description of this remarkable island, the manners and customs of its inhabitants, the religious and pagan antiquities there found; with many other interesting particulars'. James Boswell showed the book to Samuel Johnson before their visit to the Hebrides in 1773, and Johnson pronounced it 'very well written, except for some foppery about liberty and slavery' (Boswell, 'Life', 2.150). The two travellers visited Macaulay on their journey to the Hebrides and from conversation with him came to the conclusion that he could not have written the book. 'There is', Johnson said, 'a combination in it of which Macaulay is not capable' (ibid., 5.119). Johnson may have been influenced in his opinion by a discussion he had on the English clergy with Macaulay, who was by no means respectful towards episcopal claims. Johnson pronounced him a 'bigot to laxness' (ibid., 5.120). Boswell was told that the book had been written by John Macpherson of Skye from materials supplied by Macaulay, but it is now generally accepted that the bulk of the book is Macaulay's own work, with some contributions from Macpherson. Macaulay died at the age of fifty-five on 2 March 1779 and was survived by his wife, who died on 7 May 1799. 


@@@@@


doc= 17349


Macaulay, Thomas Babington, Baron Macaulay (1800-1859), historian, essayist, and poet, was born on 25 October 1800, the son of Zachary Macaulay (1768-1838) and Selina Mills (died 1831). Zachary Macaulay was the son of John Macaulay, minister of Cardross in Dunbartonshire. After apprenticeship to a merchant in Glasgow, Zachary became an overseer on a West Indian plantation, where he formed a deep hatred for the institution of slavery. In 1793 he was made the first governor of the settlement which the first abolitionists had founded as a refuge for escaped slaves in Sierra Leone. Zachary's sister Jean had married Thomas Babington of Rothley Temple, Leicestershire, and Babington inspired his brother-in-law with many of his evangelical beliefs. Selina Mills was the daughter of a Quaker family who had been a pupil and later an assistant of Hannah More, the evangelical writer who had founded a school in Bristol. The two met when Zachary returned from Africa in 1796 to recover his health, but were not married until he had returned from a second visit to the colony in 1799. In his absence Selina had frequently stayed at Rothley Temple. On his return, he became secretary to the Sierra Leone Company and took a house in Lambeth. But Thomas was born in Rothley Temple and the house was a second home to him, as it was to all the Macaulay children. When raised to the peerage he became Baron Macaulay of Rothley. 
From both parents Thomas derived strong religious views. In 1802 Zachary Macaulay moved his family from Birchin Lane, Cornhill, to a home in the High Street, Clapham. It was here that most of the Macaulay children were brought up, among Wilberforces, Thorntons, Grants, and other evangelical families devoted to the cause of slavery abolition. All the settings of his childhood, from Rothley, the house of the Misses More in Barley Wood, near Clifton, and in Clapham reinforced the evangelical influences upon Macaulay. He was a highly precocious and sensitive child. He was reading by the age of three, and even as a small boy he astonished adults with his odd learning and recondite vocabulary. He very early showed the two salient features of his published work, a love of rhetoric and a highly retentive memory. The 'Bible' in King James's version was the earliest and probably the greatest influence. When as a little child he found a maid had thrown away the oyster shells with which he had marked out a plot in the garden, he came into his mother's drawing-room and declared, 'Cursed be Sally: for it is written, Cursed is he that removeth his neighbour's landmark.' This childish outburst illustrates the pattern of Macaulay's more mature controversies. His reading was so insatiable, his head so filled with eloquent phrases that his response was often quite unsuited to the occasion. Interior conviction was always more important to him than its social effects. Even when he had shed the evangelical outlook, the language of the 'Bible' shaped his style. He was shocked when supposedly educated people displayed an ignorance of scripture. In times of sorrow or loss his language became more biblical and sonorous. When he wanted to learn a new language he bought a 'Bible' in it to save the trouble of using a dictionary. Later influences were Milton (he could say 'Paradise Lost' by heart), Shakespeare, and Scott. The 'Lay of the Last Minstrel' and 'Marmion' inspired him to write a poem called 'The Battle of Cheviot'. He wrote hymns and commemorative verse, and even a religious tract to convert the native inhabitants of Malabar. 
His parents, aware that he showed 'marks of uncommon genius', strove to keep him humble, a plan applied more consistently by Zachary, who criticized him freely, than by Selina, who adored him and tried to soften the effects of her husband's severity. But his education as Zachary's heir and successor could not but mark him out as special. His siblings received less attention and seem to have accepted the fact. The two girls nearest him in age, Selina ('b'. 1802) and Jane ('b'. 1804), were largely taught at home. The third daughter, Frances ('b'. 1808), was too young to be a playmate of her brilliant brother, but too old to be an admirer. She never married, and she became the maid of all work who nursed her father in his last years. Henry ('b'. 1806) was apprenticed to a Liverpool merchant. Charles ('b'. 1813) was apprenticed to a surgeon. Only Thomas and John ('b'. 1805) went to university. John, after a short attempt in commerce, graduated from Queens' College, Cambridge, and became a clergyman. 
Thomas alone had a gentleman's education. In 1812 he was sent to a school run by an evangelical clergyman, Matthew Preston, at Little Shelford, near Cambridge. Here he was thoroughly drilled in the Latin and Greek classics and evangelical Christianity. In 1818 he entered Trinity College, Cambridge. There he distinguished himself in classical scholarship and literary feats. He attended the lectures of a Trinity fellow, J. H. Monk, who became the biographer of Richard Bentley, a former master of Trinity and a figure whom Macaulay greatly admired. But he found the mathematics which loomed so large in a Cambridge education much less congenial. He won a Trinity scholarship in April 1820, the Craven scholarship in March 1821, and in June that year the chancellor's medal for English verse. But in January 1822 he withdrew from the mathematics examination which was required for honours and had to be content with a plain BA. The reverse upset him less than it did his family. Besides his formal studies he had laid the foundations of an extraordinary knowledge of the classics of European literature, in Italian and French. His classical scholarship encouraged a scepticism about the foundation documents of Christianity which generated an impatience and contempt for the simplicities of the evangelical creed. He also encountered, in men like Charles Austin and the Romilly brothers, the philosophy of the utilitarians Bentham and James Mill. 
Utilitarianism for a short time gave an uncompromising edge to Macaulay's ethics, and helped form the public man with his carapace of aggressive self-confidence which concealed a deeply emotional nature. This first appears in his childhood letters to his mother, but in the middle 1820s he began to develop an affection for his sisters Hannah (1810-1873) and Margaret (1812-1834) which involved the deepest emotional relationship of his life. His letters to them read like love letters, and when Margaret married Edward Cropper he described his feelings like a spurned lover. After her death, which was a terrible blow to him, he depended on Hannah and her family. All through his public career the famous man, who held distinguished political office and was 'lionized' in society, needed the reassurance of an admiring family circle in which he could take refuge and return to the unselfconscious playfulness of childhood. He could be abrasive in company and critical of cant, especially of the religious sort. But his abiding affection for his family prevented any overt revolt against his religious inheritance; if he felt any scepticism for the central doctrines of Christianity he was discreet in the family circle, and in his published writings his real opinions were buried in an admiration for the grandeur of Christian civilization. 
After his degree Macaulay took up, without much more enthusiasm than he felt for mathematics, the study of the law. He was admitted a student of Lincoln's Inn on 25 January 1822. He could still however hope to gain a fellowship of Trinity and, after a disappointment in 1823, was elected to one on 1 October 1824. His most productive years at Cambridge followed. While ostensibly studying for the bar, he was still living there, debating regularly in the Cambridge Union, and writing his first articles for reviews. In June 1824 he began, with a few Cambridge contemporaries, writing for 'Knight's Quarterly Magazine', to his father's distress. In January 1825 he made his debut in the 'Edinburgh Review' with an article on West Indian slavery. The following August the 'Edinburgh' published his 'Milton' essay, which made him famous. 
Macaulay's formal education was completed before financial disaster struck his family. When Sierra Leone became a crown colony in 1808 Zachary's secretaryship ended and he set up as a merchant in partnership with his nephew Thomas Gisborne Babington. At first the business prospered. The Macaulay family moved in 1818 from Clapham to a larger house in Cadogan Place. But Zachary's part in the campaign for the abolition of slavery took more and more of his time, and in 1823 he handed over effective control of the business to his nephew. The family moved again, to 50 Great Ormond Street. In the following three years Babington rashly overextended the firm's commitments and in 1826 it became clear that it was insolvent. The partnership was dissolved in December 1828 and Zachary resumed control, but thereafter he and his family became dependent on the charity of others. Tragedy struck, in the death of the ailing sister Jane in 1830, a blow which hastened her mother's death the following year. They were not destitute, but they had to retrench and Thomas had for the first time in his life to consider a profession. 
Macaulay was not very successful at the law. Although called to the bar in February 1826 he never made a profit at his profession. The law could lead to a political career, but Macaulay was more interested in literature than politics. His nephew and biographer, G. O. Trevelyan, claimed that he became 'a staunch and vehement Whig' (Trevelyan, 'Life', 1.120). This seems unlikely, first because the leaders of the Clapham Sect had a tradition of being above party; and second because Macaulay made his political debut when the prospects of the whig party in parliament were poor. For the 'saints' of Clapham Sect, political influence was less important than doing God's work, and Thomas Macaulay retained something of this otherworldly attitude. If he did not retain his father's religious fervour he always had a conviction that the actions of politicians were ephemeral and that the works of great writers were more enduring. He certainly shared the impatience of his Cambridge contemporaries at the stuffiness and traditionalism of their elders, but his political opinions, as they appear in his early articles, are not so much whig as a mixture of Burkean toryism with its high regard for tradition and the historic constitution, and utilitarianism, with its critique of aristocratic government, the established church, and the law. The two themes are reconciled in the developing conviction that political abuses could be peacefully reformed and violent revolution avoided if the movement for popular education were to include teaching ordinary people the main events of their nation's past and encouraging them to value its achievements as their own. 
The conviction that this was the key to peaceful reform and that Macaulay could provide the historical work which would be both accurate and vivid had formed by 1828. In that year he was approached to write a history of England for the Society for the Diffusion of Useful Knowledge, and he wrote his essay 'History' and a long review of Hallam's 'Constitutional History of England' in the 'Edinburgh Review'. 'History' argues the romantic case that narratives which deal only with rulers, battles, and treaties miss the 'noiseless revolutions' which alter the lives of the majority; that the materials for these more profound changes in the structure of ordinary lives have been appropriated by the novelist, and that the historian must recover them. The review of Hallam applies this theme to a historian Macaulay admired but considered too dry and too traditional. These two essays were followed in 1829 by the famous assault on James Mill's 'Essay on Government' in which Macaulay repudiated the utilitarian view that a science of politics could be derived deductively from certain principles of human nature. The three articles attacking Mill and his followers are in Macaulay's most powerful polemical style, and they are a notable contribution to the quarrel between the 'Edinburgh Review' and its radical rival the 'Westminster Review', the organ of Benthamite utilitarianism; but they also elaborate Macaulay's conception of an inductive social science and his repudiation of the a priori method of the utilitarians and political economists. They provide an important clue to the method he used in the 'History of England' twenty years later, and they suggest that by 1829 Macaulay had, at least sketchily, conceived the ingredients of that popular success. 
Zachary Macaulay's business failure put these plans in abeyance, and made some steady alternative source of income essential. Despite his liberal, not to say radical, views, Thomas's political career began in a very traditional way. In December 1828 Lord Lyndhurst, the lord chancellor in Goderich's short-lived ministry and in the Wellington ministry which followed, appointed him to a commissionership in bankruptcy, which he held until the duke's fall. It was not renewed when Henry Brougham succeeded Lyndhurst as lord chancellor. Macaulay's relations with Brougham were already marred by mutual jealousy over their capacity to influence the 'Edinburgh Review', Brougham claiming it as an organ of the party he led, Macaulay reluctant to contribute to any periodical reputedly controlled by Brougham. When in February 1830 Lord Lansdowne offered Macaulay a seat in parliament for his borough of Calne, Brougham was very annoyed that it was not offered to his friend Denman. When Brougham told Napier, the 'Edinburgh''s editor, to countermand an article by Macaulay on the French revolution of July 1830, Macaulay resigned from the 'Review'. The quarrel was made up, at least outwardly, when Brougham offered a church living to John Macaulay, and a charity commissionership to Zachary, but Thomas remained unforgiving. He called Brougham 'a kind of Semi-Solomon. He 'half knows' everything from the cedar to the hyssop', and he refused to enter his house when invited ('Letters', 1.314). 
Macaulay was elected for Calne on 15 February 1830 and took his seat three days later. He made his maiden speech on 5 April 1830 in support of a motion for the repeal of Jewish disabilities, but he made his name as an orator with the introduction of the whig government's 'Reform Bill' in March 1831. He made five major speeches in support of the reform of parliament. They were carefully prepared, replete with literary and historical learning, and they held the House of Commons entranced with the richness of their language and the vehemence of the speaker. They were not however debating speeches. The whig diarist Greville called them 'harangues and never replies' (C. C. F. Greville, 'Memoirs', ed. Strachey and Fulford, 1938, 2.203). Macaulay was not skilled at impromptu replies to interruptions: 'Answer me', he said on one occasion, 'but do not interrupt me' (Macaulay, 'Speeches', ed. Young, 1935, 31). He was also hampered and embarrassed by the fact that he himself sat for the sort of close borough (nominally a close corporation but with only twenty-four electors) the 'Reform Bill' was supposed to abolish. For the first time too, he had to endure public correction. When one of his historical assertions was demolished by J. W. Croker in the debate of 20 September 1831, he did not answer in the house but took his revenge in a review of Croker's edition of Boswell's 'Life of Johnson' in the 'Edinburgh Review'. Soon after the 'Reform Act' was law, he sought a change of seat, and in the first elections for the reformed parliament he stood for Leeds. The election was marked by his polemic in the 'Edinburgh' against his tory opponent Sadler, whom he ridiculed for his anti-Malthusian views. He was returned on 14 December, second on the poll after John Marshall the flax-spinner. Marshall had 2012 votes, Macaulay 1984, and Sadler 1596. Macaulay held the seat for a little more than a year. 
Promotion when it came was probably due more to his Clapham connections than to his loyalty to the ministry. In June 1832 he had been appointed to the Board of Control, whose president was Charles Grant, 'the only saint in the ministry' of Grey, and son of Zachary Macaulay's Clapham friend. In December 1832, just before the Leeds election, he was made the board's secretary and thereby a spokesman in the House of Commons for Indian affairs. Grant was an amiable but indecisive chief, and Macaulay claimed on one occasion that he ran the board himself. His loyalty to his father's friends was in one case stronger than his loyalty to the ministry. When the government proposal for the abolition of slavery included a scheme for the freed slaves' wages to be used to help compensate the owners, the Clapham party objected and Macaulay agreed with them. He twice offered to resign his post but the offer was declined; in this way, as he said, he saved both his honour and his place. But in any case, the family's money difficulties combined with his own disillusionment with the ministers to convince him that he must leave office. In 1833 the government's 'Charter Act', presented to parliament by Grant, created a new supreme council for India, with a fourth post for a 'law member'. It was offered (probably not without some lobbying on his part) to Macaulay. The post in India would, he thought, enable him to be away from England while political parties regrouped and new questions arose. While in India, he could save money (he calculated on saving half his salary of $10,000) and 'return with a competence honestly earned' which would give his family security and himself independence ('Letters', 2.301). 
In early March 1834 Macaulay resigned his seat for Leeds, and on the 15th he sailed for India. He had persuaded his sister Hannah to go with him, and he also took a large library of books, as if for a prolonged exile. The voyage took nearly three months. They arrived in Madras early in June, and Macaulay immediately joined Lord William Bentinck, the governor-general, at Ootacamund, while his sister went on to Calcutta to stay with the bishop. Macaulay joined her at the end of September. Within a few weeks he suffered two blows. The first was Hannah's engagement to Charles Edward Trevelyan, a rising star of the Bengal civil service. Macaulay approved of Trevelyan as a vigorous, reforming official of strong character, but noticed his manners were brusque and his reading limited. The loss of Hannah was a severe shock. She and Trevelyan were married in December and while they were away on their honeymoon the news arrived of Margaret Cropper's death from scarlet fever. Macaulay's distress was so extreme that the Trevelyans returned early to be with him. He recovered, and it was some comfort to him that the three decided to keep house together, but the loss of Margaret marked him deeply. It strengthened his preference for books over people. 'Literature has saved my life and my reason,' he wrote, adding, 'Even now I dare not, in the intervals of business, remain alone without a book in my hand' ('Letters', 3.158). The books he read and reread were his beloved classical editions. In his stay in India he read most of the extant authors of ancient Greece and Rome. He took no interest in Indian literature or antiquities save as a mark of the superiority of things European. He avoided Calcutta society and incurred a lot of unpopularity for doing so. He lost something of his exuberant enjoyment of controversy, and as between politics and writing, he felt the balance of his interests tipping towards the latter. He recurred to the idea of 'some great historical work' (ibid.) instead of a return to politics. Above all, he became more conservative, more distrustful of change, and more respectful of the efforts of the rulers and administrators as against the radicals and theorists. His schoolboy love of the heroic now settled into a preference for the soldier and the pioneering adventurers whose courage had created British rule in India. 
Macaulay left his mark on British administration, less in actual change than in memorable arguments on disputed issues. These have been taken as more typical of British attitudes to India than the work of more hardened but more obscure men. His most famous contribution, in which he joined Trevelyan, was to the controversy between orientalists and Anglicizers over the allocation of a sum of money to native students in higher education, one party favouring instruction in Sanskrit and Arabic, the other pressing for all instruction in English. Macaulay's 'Minute on Indian Education' (2 February 1835) argued vigorously for the latter, on the grounds previously advanced by James Mill, that instruction in English would convey the findings of a more advanced culture and so the money would be more usefully spent. The 'Minute' has become famous as a landmark in the dispute, but it owes its fame mainly to the fact that G. O. Trevelyan printed it in an appendix to his book 'The Competition Wallah' (1864). 
In March 1836 Macaulay defended the so-called 'Black Act' which ended the privilege enjoyed by European settlers to appeal from the Suddur courts of the company to the supreme court, and put them instead on a par with the native inhabitants in the company's jurisdiction. In September 1836 he defended the decision of Bentinck's government to end censorship of the press, writing a minute which persuaded Lord Auckland, Bentinck's successor, to leave the decision unaltered. But the largest undertaking of Macaulay's Indian years was the penal code, the work of a commission in which he was joined by John Macleod and Charles Hay Cameron. As their health gave way, Macaulay completed the code more or less single-handed in May 1837. He pronounced it superior to Napoleon's and to Livingston's for Louisiana. He then gave notice of his intention to return home early in 1838. He had been abroad not five years but four. He sailed with the Trevelyans, and they arrived early in June, three weeks after Zachary Macaulay's death. 
Macaulay found the political scene much changed. While in India he had expected the English radical party to grow stronger. The general election of 1837 had reduced the whig government's majority but also wiped out the radical party in parliament. London was in a ferment of sentimental loyalty for the young Queen Victoria. At first Macaulay savoured his independence. When Greville met him, he said he was still a radical. In October 1838 he set out for Rome, partly to visit the scenes of the events which he described in what would become his 'Lays of Ancient Rome', partly in imitation of Gibbon meditating 'The Decline and Fall'. Being alone, he kept a journal which has some of the vividness of his letters to his sisters, and in which he meditated upon the history of the city, its past greatness and present dependence. He saw the squalor of papal administration which he thought 'Brahminical' ('Letters', 3.268), but also the grandeur of papal power which captivated him. He made frequent visits to St Peter's and called it a 'glorious place'. After Christmas he travelled to Naples and saw Pompeii under snow. 
Politics pursued him. On his journey out, while he was in Florence, he received a letter offering him the post of judge advocate. He refused it. 'The offer did not strike me as even tempting.' A man in office, but out of the cabinet, he reflected, was 'a mere slave' (Trevelyan, 'Life', 1909, 357). He wrote to Lord Melbourne saying he would support the government in parliament but hold no subordinate office. But in Naples he talked to Frederick Lamb, the premier's brother, and was relieved to hear the government had weathered the crisis in Canada and the scandal of Durham's mission. He returned by sea to Marseilles and coach through France, arriving in London in February 1839. He began work on the 'History of England' the following month. 
In May he was invited to stand as parliamentary candidate for Edinburgh in place of James Abercromby, who had been raised to the peerage. He was elected on 4 June, making the famous declaration of whig allegiance, 'I entered public life a Whig; and a Whig I am determined to remain.' He had actually gone to India to avoid whig collapse. Now he declared, 'While one shred of the old banner is flying, by that banner will I at last be found' ('Speeches', 182). He took his seat in parliament after the 'bedchamber' crisis: had he done so before, he might have had to vote against the ministry in the Jamaica debate which precipitated it. But he soon found independence impossible. In a weak ministry with a slender majority his talents were likely to be in greater demand, and on 17 September he was offered the cabinet post of secretary at war. He began his official duties with an unfortunate gaffe, when he addressed a letter to his constituents from Windsor Castle, and was much mocked for his arrogance. His two years in the cabinet were relatively uneventful, if only because the ministry was too weak to propose any major legislative measures. Macaulay spoke in its defence on a no-confidence motion on 29 January 1840, but failed to hold his own against a hostile opposition. He presented his department's estimates in March with more authority, having worked long at the details. His speech on the debate on war with China on 7 April was more successful. He began to like the official routine and confessed, 'I became too mere a bookworm in India, and on my voyage home' ('Letters', 3.321-2). But the government was sadly irresolute over the major issue of the corn laws, and to this debate Macaulay contributed nothing, being a convinced supporter of free trade but disliking the leaders of the Anti-Corn Law League. He was relieved when in early June 1841 the government was defeated in the debate on the corn laws and he was able to return to his 'History'. 
He seems at first to have thought he could write it in his intervals of leisure. At the general election of July 1841 he had retained his seat in parliament and continued to speak, occasionally but very effectively. In February 1841 he had done more than any other speaker to destroy Sergeant Talfourd's 'Copyright Bill', which proposed extending copyright to sixty years from the death of an author. The following year Lord Mahon brought in another bill, reducing the term to twenty-five years. Macaulay proposed an amendment, giving forty-two years from the date of publication, on the grounds that the best work was generally published late in a writer's life and was most unfairly penalized if the copyright dated only from his death. Macaulay's speech involved very much the same display of vast reading in the annals of literature, great and trivial, which he used to such effect in his critical reviews. It is a sign of the respect in which he was held that the motion was carried. On 3 May 1842 he showed his deep distrust for popular radicalism when he opposed the reception of the Chartist petition. His reasons were again utilitarian: he thought the non-electors had shown that they did not know their own best interests. He also spoke on Irish affairs in July 1843 and February 1844 and again on 14 April 1845 in the debate on the Maynooth grant, when his speech closed with a famous criticism of Peel's career. 
These efforts made it quite natural that he should be considered as a minister in any future Liberal ministry. When, on Peel's resignation early in December 1845, Lord John Russell tried to form a ministry, Macaulay was to have been paymaster-general, though he did not expect to be in office long. 'If I give to my history the time which I used to pass in transacting business when I was Secretary at War, I shall get on nearly as fast as when I was in opposition.' In the event the ministry foundered on Lord Grey's refusal to work with Lord Palmerston. It was Macaulay's indiscreet letter to his constituents, containing the sentence 'All our plans were frustrated by Lord Grey,' which made the matter public ('Letters', 4.280-81). It was not until Peel's resignation the following June that Russell formed a ministry and Macaulay became paymaster-general. By then, however, his liberal views on economic policy were not sufficient to satisfy his Edinburgh constituents, and a motley collection of critics, from free church presbyterians who disliked his preference for the kirk, to members of the kirk who disliked his sympathy for the Catholics in Ireland, and many others who questioned if he was a Christian at all, gathered against him. At the general election in July 1847 he was third in the poll. He was personally very hurt and indignant, but to a friend he merely said he felt 'manumitted, after the old fashion, by a slap in the face' (ibid., 342). He resigned his office in April the following year. 
In 1839 Macaulay's happiness was threatened by the prospect that the Trevelyans would be returning to India. He may have been instrumental in the appointment which staved this off, when Trevelyan was offered and accepted the post of assistant secretary to the Treasury. For some months in 1840 he and the Trevelyans lived together in a house in Great George Street. The Trevelyans decided to move to Clapham, however, and in September 1841 Macaulay himself moved to the Albany where much of the 'History of England' was written. He called it 'a very pleasant student's cell' but his life there, in central London, was not devoted exclusively to study. He was close to the clubs and the British Museum. He entertained friends to breakfast. While in office he gave formal dinners. He travelled a good deal, not always in search of materials for the 'History', and wherever he went in London he walked at least some of the way, often reading a book. He regularly walked to Clapham to see the Trevelyans. The 'History' was not even his sole literary activity. He was able to establish a reputation outside reviewing with the 'Lays of Ancient Rome', published in 1842. These were based on a hypothesis of the historian Niebuhr, himself reviving the theory of a Dutch scholar of the seventeenth century, Perizonius, that the early books of Livy's 'History' had been based on stories taken from oral poetry, since lost, and rendered into prose. Macaulay's aim was to put the stories back into ballad form for English readers. They were begun in India, and at first shown in manuscript form to friends. The poetry (for which Macaulay was always modest) was accompanied, and buttressed, by prose introductions, each offering a historical explanation of individual poems, in which Macaulay displayed considerable scholarship. He was sharply aware from precedents such as Talfourd's 'Ion' and Bulwer-Lytton's 'Last Days of Pompeii' of the dangers of historical anachronism. He thought the 'Lays' might be unpopular, but asserted that 'no man who is not a good scholar can attack it without exposing himself' ('Letters', 4.68). In fact the book was a great popular success. A first edition of 750 was sold out by December when a second of 500 was printed. 
By then he was obliged by the threat of a pirated edition in America to consider the reprinting of his review articles. At first he was against this, because he thought papers intended for a natural life of six weeks would look superficial in a more permanent format. Longman, however, disagreed and the three volumes appeared in April 1843. They contain all that Macaulay thought the least impermanent of his articles, and proved more popular than the collections of reviewers who in their own time had been equally famous. In 1849 he noted that while Francis Jeffrey's collected articles had reached a second edition and Sydney Smith's a fourth, his own 'Critical and Historical Essays' were reprinting for the seventh time. This may have been because he had left out his juvenilia in 'Knight's Quarterly Magazine' and his early political articles in the 'Edinburgh Review'. He included his 'Milton' but not his 'Dryden' (1828), which is biographically as interesting. He also omitted his attacks on James Mill and the utilitarians from a feeling of gratitude to Mill who had subsequently supported his appointment in India. He did not reprint the attacks on his old Leeds antagonist Sadler. Three polemics which he did reprint, probably with a certain vindictive relish, were his articles on Southey's 'Colloquies' (1830), Robert Montgomery's 'Poems' (1830), and Croker's edition of Boswell's 'Life of Johnson' (1831). 
Macaulay did not reprint the 1828 essay, 'History'. It may have seemed to him too crude. Some writers have taken it as a prospectus for the 'History of England'. But in the following twenty years his literary ambitions changed, as did his political views. Unfortunately we cannot follow them in detail: he had kept a journal of his visit to Italy in 1838-9, but abandoned it when he became a minister, resuming it again in 1848 when he was out of politics. So his plans for the 'History' from 1839 onwards must be inferred from his other writings and references in his letters. On his return from India he was given custody of the papers which Sir James Mackintosh had gathered for his unfinished 'History of the Revolution of 1688' and these included many transcriptions of official correspondence which Macaulay later called 'the rudest ore of history'. Already he had an intimate knowledge of English literature after 1660, and Mackintosh's work may have focused his attention on the political events of the reigns of James II and William III. But his stay in Rome gave Macaulay's reflections an international dimension. It was there that he decided to begin the 'History' at 1685. The revolution could be set in the context of the struggle between Catholicism and protestantism, with William III's accession finally tipping the balance of influence in Europe in favour of the latter. Here was a revolution of vital importance for the modern world, not only for English readers. The small stage of seventeenth-century England became the scene of a titanic struggle. The idea broached in the 1828 essay that the important changes in history are 'noiseless revolutions' was retained, but played down. Macaulay's sympathy for the life of the common people, never very strong, had been further weakened by the Chartist experience. He still held the utilitarian view that societies could progress only if people were freed from the controls of superstition, but he wanted enlightened leadership, not democracy, and he loathed disorder. He did not subscribe to any of the contemporary schemes (utilitarian, socialist, or positivist) for explaining or accelerating social progress. He merely wanted the energies of the individual freed for his own and therefore society's betterment. He assumed that the ignorant would agree with the better informed in such an arrangement. Yet he also wanted his 'History' to be popular, and he kept to his old aim of reclaiming for history the materials which had been assumed by the novelist. He did this not by extensive research in statistics of wages, poor relief, or demographic records, but by drawing on his encyclopaedic knowledge of the popular literature of the time -- chapbooks, ballads, popular songs, theatre, and what he called 'the lighter literature of the age'. 
Macaulay has been criticized for using novels and plays as if their characters were based on real people. On the contrary, he thought he could write a history which was as accessible and readable as a novel, yet which told a story that was true, and would on that account, 'supersede the last fashionable novel on the tables of young ladies' ('Letters', 4.15). It was accordingly written in a much more simple, modest, and undogmatic style than that used in his reviews. They were designed to be read once; the 'History' to be read again and again. Macaulay's long-standing conviction that literature outlasts politics and has greater influence in shaping opinion than the decisions of governments, enabled him to be, much more than is supposed, above party. Of course he did not conceal his opinion that England had in two hundred years become better governed and more humane, or hesitate to praise those he thought had contributed to make it so, and to condemn their opponents. It is clear that he favoured the forces of progress. But within that limitation he distributed praise and blame impartially on whig or tory. In any society there were, he said, supporters of change and innovation and supporters of tradition and order: but 'the best specimens of each class are to be found not far from the common frontier'. In times of crisis they co-operate; in 1660 their co-operation restored the monarchy, and in 1688 again it restored 'constitutional liberty'. In 1848, the year of revolution, this was a doctrine to please Englishmen of both parties. In the 'History of England' Macaulay told his readers why they had escaped the fate of European governments: 'It is because we had a preserving revolution in the seventeenth century that we have not had a destroying revolution in the nineteenth.' The message of the 'History of England' was not democratic, but its appeal was popular. 
The first two volumes, which took the story to the proclamation of William and Mary in February 1689, were published on 2 December 1848. Macaulay was very aware of their faults. 'As compared with excellence the work is a failure. But as compared with other similar books I cannot think it so' (Trevelyan, 'Life', 2.243). When the first sales passed expectations he thought there would be a reaction. But the sales continued to be spectacular. Twelve days from publication 3000 copies had been sold. By 10 January 1849 a second edition of 3000 had gone, and of a third edition of 5000, 1250 had been already ordered. Macaulay was praised in every social gathering he attended. Reviews were flattering. He was particularly touched in May 1849 by a letter from a group of working men in Dukinfield, near Manchester, thanking him for the pleasure of having the book read aloud to them every Wednesday evening for the past few months. 
The two volumes had their critics. Macaulay expected strong censure from the religious sects, 'Papists, churchmen, puritans and Quakers'. The Quakers were the first. A deputation of five came to him by appointment on 5 February 1849 to protest at his treatment of William Penn. Macaulay seems to have borne them down with a volley of evidence. 'Never was there such a rout,' he wrote, 'They had absolutely nothing to say' (G. O. Trevelyan, 'Life and Letters of Lord Macaulay', 1909 edn, 521). Perhaps they were given no time to say it: one of the delegation later recalled that Macaulay was 'extremely rude, treating the Friends with contempt' ('Letters', 5.6n). He had expected criticism from churchmen, and especially Tractarians, for his description in the third chapter of the clergy in 1685. He had a courteous but bruising exchange with the high-church bishop of Exeter, Henry Phillpotts. Another pamphlet by a Cambridge cleric, Churchill Babington, Macaulay dismissed as 'a silly book'. In April 1849 appeared a long-awaited critique in the 'Quarterly Review' from his old antagonist, J. W. Croker. Croker had had the assistance of various contributors, and Macaulay thought the length and tediousness of the review had done him a service. In fact it makes a number of shrewd criticisms which deserve more space, and exposes many practical errors which Macaulay silently corrected for subsequent editions. Its main weakness was that Croker had no quarrel with Macaulay's political interpretation of the revolution, and spent all his ingenuity in exposing small errors of fact and taste, paying little attention to the overall design. Much more damaging was the criticism of John Paget a decade later. Paget examined closely particular episodes and people in Macaulay's 'History' and his essays were published in 'Blackwood's Magazine'. Macaulay never replied to them. 
Amid all the critical acclaim, Macaulay began work on the next volume of the 'History of England'. He worked with more concentration than before. There were distractions. For six years from 1849 he took the Trevelyans on an Easter tour to some cathedral city to see fine buildings and savour historical associations. In November 1848 he had been elected lord rector of the University of Glasgow, and the following March he was inaugurated and made a learned and uplifting address. But when in July he was offered the regius chair in history at Cambridge he refused it. 'It would be strange if, having sacrificed for liberty a seat in the cabinet and 2,500$ a year, I should now sacrifice my liberty for a chair at Cambridge at 400$ a year' (Trevelyan, 'Life', 2.261). He travelled, but his journeys, even the Easter tours, were to gather inspiration and colour for the 'History'. In mid-August he took a three-week tour in Ireland. He crossed to Dublin at night and sat on deck in his greatcoat. 'As I could not read', he recorded in his journal, 'I used an excellent substitute for reading. I went through 'Paradise Lost' in my head. I could repeat half of it, and the best half. I really never enjoyed it so much' (ibid., 263). After working for a few days in Dublin he took the train to Drogheda and traced the course of William III's battle. From Dublin he went to Limerick and on to Killarney, thence to Kilkenny, Cork, and back to Dublin. At the end of August he went to Londonderry and acquired the close knowledge of its layout which makes his account of the siege of the city in chapter 12 so vivid. He returned on 4 September and immediately set out with his friend T. F. Ellis to France, a short trip which included some work in Parisian archives. They returned on 17 September. The Irish chapter was written in the autumn of 1849 when the memory of Ireland was still fresh. But the next chapter, on Scotland, was begun, and largely written in draft, before his Scottish tour in June and July 1850. These tours were essential for the graphic descriptions of the 'History' but they took their toll. In the winter of 1850 he suffered much from what he thought were rheumatic pains and congestion of the chest. By spring he had recovered and in June and July he went with his sister Hannah, now Lady Trevelyan, and her daughter, Margaret, on a tour of Scotland. On his return, while on holiday at Ventnor, Isle of Wight, that September, he wrote his account of the battle of Killiecrankie. His journal however has frequent complaints of difficult respiration, sleeping badly, and, what worried him most, flagging inspiration. But he did his Easter tours in 1851 and early 1852. In June 1852 he was asked to stand again for Edinburgh and took the request as a sign of contrition for the electors' mistake of five years before, and his acceptance as a demonstration that a large city electorate 'should not expect slavish obedience from men of spirit and ability'. He refused from a mixture of pride and ill health to canvass or even to travel to Edinburgh. He went to Clifton for a change of air and on his return suffered a heart attack. He managed to address his constituents only in November. His recovery was slow. He later said of this crisis, 'I became twenty years older in a week, and shall never be young again' ('Letters', 5.318). 
Macaulay soon found parliamentary life a strain. He spoke on 1 June 1853 against a bill for excluding the master of the rolls from the House of Commons. The measure was defeated, but he was exhausted by the effort. He supported the same month a measure for competitive examinations for appointees to the East India Company, but could not complete the speech, though he chaired the committee appointed to draw up rules for the examination which published its report in December 1854. His last speech in the Commons was on 19 July 1853. Then he went to Tunbridge Wells where he began preparing an edition of his speeches to combat the pirated edition by Henry Vizetelly. The volume was published the following year and is really his farewell to politics. He had by this time become convinced that he was too ill to continue an MP, and had ceased to attend late sessions. He was confined to his rooms throughout the winter and 1855 was the first year since 1849 in which he made no Easter tour. Instead he finished the fourth volume of the 'History'. The two volumes, 3 and 4, appeared in December 1855. Only in January 1856 did he retire from parliament. 
Macaulay had expected a cooler reception for the two volumes, but they sold as well as the first two. In ten weeks 26,500 copies were sold, and in March 1856 Longman's paid him the famous cheque for $20,000. But he no longer had any hopes of meeting his original aim, to take the narrative into the Hanoverian era. He had reached 1697 with chapter 22, the last of volume 4. After volume 4 his literary aims rapidly contracted. He moved out of the Albany when he bought Holly Lodge, Campden Hill, Kensington, where he moved in May 1856. He seized eagerly what diversions he could still manage. He resumed the Easter tours in 1856, but they were shorter. He went with his friend T. F. Ellis on an Italian tour in August. He did not take up volume 5 of the 'History' until November 1856, and then 'with little expectation of living to publish anything more'. He thought, privately, that he would have done his duty if he completed a history of the reign of William III. He still enjoyed the reading and writing for the work, but its composition was not a race against time. He was able to fit in five biographical essays, on Atterbury, Bunyan, Goldsmith, Johnson, and William Pitt for the 'Encyclopaedia Britannica', edited by his friend and former constituent Adam Black. He also accepted in August 1857 a peerage offered by Palmerston, taking his seat in the Lords (where he never spoke) in December. In October that year he was elected high steward of the borough of Cambridge, and the installation was deferred until the warm weather, in May 1858. He arranged a French tour with Ellis in the autumn, but in his hibernation which was now a necessity he received the blow he had been spared in 1839. Sir Charles Trevelyan was appointed governor of Madras, and his wife would have to follow him to India. He left England on 18 February, and in May, Macaulay knew that Hannah and the children would follow. He took them on a two-week tour of Scotland in late July and August. In October Hannah told him, by letter, that she would leave for India in February. He tried to find comfort in his books and writing, but was oppressed with the certainty that he would never see her again. In mid-December he had a heart attack, and he died in his study at Holly Lodge on 28 December 1859. He was buried in Westminster Abbey on 9 January 1860, in Poets' Corner, at the feet of the statue of Addison. 
Macaulay was a short, stout, physically awkward man who, in common with other men of genius, was indifferent to his appearance and to adverse comments on it. He was much more sensitive to his literary reputation, which he came to realize was likely to suffer from a career in politics. He was not a natural politician. He was a fine orator in a parliament which still admired elaborate, polished, and learned speeches on great occasions, but he was too proud to use the common methods of acquiring and keeping political influence and too fastidious for intrigue. He hid his distaste for the political process behind a touchy independence. He had most impact on issues like Indian administration and the laws of copyright, where neutral votes could be swayed by specialist knowledge. His polemical writing was more often driven by private moral feeling than by political opinion. He was quite capable of discharging ministerial duties efficiently and thoroughly, but they bored him. So did debates when the issues did not seem to compete for historic significance with the men and events he was reading about. For all his political experience he preferred the world of literature and especially of drama and epic poetry to that of everyday reality, and was never happier than in his study engaging in a dialogue with his favourite authors. 'With the dead there is no rivalry. In the dead there is no change. Plato is never sullen. Cervantes is never petulant. Demosthenes never comes unseasonably. Dante never stays too long' (Macaulay, 'Critical and Historical Essays', 2.282). The great exception to this preference for books over people was his family, at least those members of it who had not forfeited his esteem by financial irregularity or religious enthusiasm. He never outgrew the need to escape from the strains of public life into an intimate circle in which he could behave unselfconsciously and receive sincere love and admiration. In one way this domestic anchorage restricted the movement and range of his sympathy. Though he shed his religious fundamentalism he remained very rigid in his ethical standards, especially towards sexual infidelity. In another way however his love of family life served him well. It was the foundation for the extraordinary clarity of his writing. He loved to read his writings aloud in the family circle, in his boyhood to his mother and sisters, in later years until his last illness to Hannah Trevelyan and her children. He had an actor's feeling for his audience. He loved the company of children and the experience of introducing them, through word games and quizzes and nonsense verses, to the rich heritage of their language and its subtle nuances. If he had lived to read Matthew Arnold's condescending remark that his writings were 'pre-eminently fitted to give pleasure to all who are 'beginning' to feel enjoyment in the things of the mind' (quoted in G. S. Fraser, 'Macaulay's style as an essayist', 'Review of English Literature', 1/4, Oct 1960, 16) he would have taken it as a compliment. It is the foundation of his enduring popularity. 


@@@@@


doc= 17350


Macaulay, Zachary (1768-1838), slavery abolitionist, was born on 2 May 1768 in Inveraray, the third son of the twelve children of 
Given only a rudimentary education, Zachary Macaulay taught himself Latin and Greek and read the English classics voraciously. At fourteen he went to work in a merchant's office in Glasgow. Here, according to an autobiographical fragment which he wrote in 1797, he fell in with a group of university students who undermined his faith and indulged his passion for conversation and debate. Urged on by his colleagues at the counting-house, he also started to drink excessively. 
At the end of 1784 Macaulay obviously suffered some kind of personal embarrassment, although the precise details are unclear. To escape the 'labyrinth' in which he found himself he determined to go abroad. Not yet seventeen, he took up a position as an under-manager or bookkeeper on a sugar plantation in Jamaica. Initially repulsed by the sights he saw around him, not least the violence of the slave system, he soon adapted to his new surroundings and by his own account became 'callous and indifferent'. Nevertheless, he kept up his languages (Horace, he said, was his constant companion), moderated his drinking, and, as he had in Glasgow, proved himself to be a more than capable worker. In fact, he became a 'prodigy' among bookkeepers. Despite his protestations, he also took an interest in the welfare of the slaves. 
Macaulay returned to Britain in 1789, lured by the offer of a position from an uncle in London. Soon after his arrival he went to stay with his sister Jean, who in 1787 had married Thomas Babington, a country gentleman who owned Rothley Temple in Leicestershire. The visit was to change his life. Babington was a young man of strong evangelical views, and under his influence Macaulay's better nature began to assert itself. At some point during his time at Rothley Temple he underwent a conversion experience and, as a result, he became an intimate of Babington and his circle, which included Henry Thornton and William Wilberforce. 
Through his association with Babington, Macaulay was invited to visit Sierra Leone, the west African colony founded in 1787 to provide a home for emancipated slaves. Setting sail at the end of 1790 he did not see his friends again until the spring of 1792. No sooner had he returned to Britain than he was sent out again to Sierra Leone, this time as one of the council members. In March 1794 he became governor. A tireless and painstaking administrator, Macaulay steered the colony through a difficult period in its short history. Undeterred by a hostile environment and disputes among the settlers, he opened trade negotiations with the Fula kingdom and in September 1794 successfully resisted an invasion by French revolutionary forces. When he handed over the governorship in 1799 the capital, Freetown, was a bustling settlement of some 1200 inhabitants and the centre of a considerable trade with the interior. 
On 26 August 1799 Macaulay married Selina Mills (died 1831), the daughter of Thomas Mills, a Bristol bookseller. The couple, who had been introduced by their mutual friend Hannah More, eventually settled in Clapham, Surrey, where they raised their nine children, five daughters and four sons born between 1800 and 1814. To support himself Macaulay became secretary to the Sierra Leone Company, a position he held until 1808, when the colony was transferred to the British crown. It was not long, however, before he became absorbed in philanthropic endeavours, chief among them being the campaign to abolish the slave trade. Macaulay, of course, had direct personal experience of the trade, both in the West Indies and on the west coast of Africa, and it was this experience that he brought to bear on the early nineteenth-century abolitionist movement. 
In 1804 Macaulay was elected a member of the Society for the Abolition of the Slave Trade, which had only recently been revived by William Wilberforce. He quickly emerged as a leading figure in the parliamentary campaign which in 1807 resulted in victory for Wilberforce and his supporters. Throughout these proceedings Macaulay worked in the background, collecting information, drafting reports, and assisting his friends in the House of Commons. A brilliant statistician blessed with a prodigious memory, Macaulay had a rare gift for being able to master and abridge the most intractable sources. He was also scrupulously fair and accurate. When information was required Wilberforce would say, 'Look it out in Macaulay' (Booth, 65). 
After 1807 Macaulay played a major part in trying to ensure that the new legislation was enforced and that other European countries followed Britain's example. He became honorary secretary of the African Institution, which replaced the Society for the Abolition of the Slave Trade, and, following his resignation in 1812, continued to serve on the committee. In 1814, during the temporary peace in Europe, he travelled to Paris to present the British case for abolition of the slave trade by the continental powers. Macaulay was also in regular contact with the duke of Wellington and Lord Castlereagh at the congress of Vienna (1815), and with them fought unsuccessfully to block French efforts to revive the slave trade in those parts of Africa where it had already been suppressed. It was later said that Macaulay was the only one of the 'saints' whom Wellington liked. 
By the early 1820s Macaulay was contemplating a more direct attack on West Indian planters, namely the gradual abolition of slavery itself. In 1823 he helped to organize the Anti-Slavery Society and became editor of its monthly publication, the 'Anti-Slavery Reporter'. Through the pages of the 'Reporter' and pamphlets such as 'East and West India Sugar' (1823) and 'Negro Slavery' (1824), both of which were published anonymously, Macaulay sought to reveal the true enormities of the slave system and to counter claims that conditions in the West Indies had actually improved. In doing so, he provided Thomas Foxwell Buxton and his colleagues with the evidence on which they could take their stand in the Commons. For the most part Macaulay preferred to work behind the scenes. Even so, he was frequently the target of scurrilous attacks by pro-slavery interests, notably in the periodical 'John Bull', all of which he resisted with patience and great courage. 
Macaulay and his colleagues focused their attention on working through parliament. As time went on, however, the ideas and methods of the Anti-Slavery Society came under increasing pressure from young men like George Stephen who favoured taking the campaign out into the country. The result was the agency committee, organized in 1831. Like many conservatives within the movement, Macaulay looked askance at the populist appeal of the committee, its revivalist tone, and its support for the immediate abolition of slavery. Nevertheless, he assisted the new organization and gave it his tacit support. 
Macaulay was also involved in a number of other philanthropic endeavours. He helped to start the 'Christian Observer', the official organ of the Clapham Sect, and served as its editor from 1802 to 1816. He was a fellow of the Royal Society and an active member of the British and Foreign Bible Society, the Church Missionary Society, and the Society for the Suppression of Vice. He also found time to promote Sunday and infant schools. Macaulay took a keen interest in educational movements; he supported Andrew Bell's claim to be the originator of the monitorial system, for instance, and was one of the principal founders of the University of London. 
These various activities, and the many demands on his time, undoubtedly had an adverse effect on Macaulay's business interests. Soon after he stepped down as secretary of the Sierra Leone Company he started a business of his own, trading with Africa and the East Indies. He also acted as an agent for captains and shipowners seeking compensation, usually in the form of prize money, for their part in the suppression of the slave trade. By 1818 Macaulay was reputed to be worth $100,000. But then disaster struck. In 1823 he handed over control of his trading company to his nephew, Thomas Babington, who proved unequal to the task. It soon became apparent that what had once been a thriving business was on the verge of bankruptcy. In 1828 the family was forced to move from Cadogan Place into smaller premises in Great Ormond Street. Macaulay's financial circumstances steadily worsened, so much so that in 1834 he was exiled to Paris. With the help of his son Henry all of his debts were liquidated but the business was wound up and Macaulay spent the last years of his life in lodgings in Clarges Street, London. 
Macaulay had been born with a defect in one eye and as a boy suffered a serious accident to his right arm which required extensive surgery. He was repeatedly ill in Jamaica and his health broke down again in Sierra Leone, probably from overwork. In later life his financial embarrassments also took their toll. Macaulay died at Clarges Street on 13 May 1838 and was buried in Mecklenburgh Square, London. At a meeting held on 30 July 1838, with Sir Thomas Foxwell Buxton in the chair, it was agreed to erect a memorial to Macaulay in Westminster Abbey. The bust, which was designed and executed by Henry Weekes, incorporates a figure of a kneeling slave together with the motto 'Am I not a Man and a Brother?' 
An intense, tenacious, and imperturbable man, Macaulay holds an important place in the history of British anti-slavery. His was not a particularly glamorous role. But through calm and reasoned argument Macaulay laid the foundations for the campaign that would lead in 1834 to the abolition of slavery throughout Britain's colonial possessions. Nothing escaped his notice. He was the perfect foil to firebrands like James Stephen and did as much as anyone to give the anti-slavery movement intellectual respectability. Macaulay was a demanding husband and parent, whose stern moralism inevitably caused friction, not least with his eldest son, Thomas Babington Macaulay. Nevertheless, the family remained close-knit. 


@@@@@


doc= 17351


McAuley, Catherine Elizabeth (1778?-1841), Roman Catholic nun, was born at Stormanstown House, Dublin, probably on 29 September 1778, though her birth year is sometimes given as 1781. She was one of three children, two girls and a boy, born to James McGauley or McAuley ('c'.1723-1783) and his wife, Elinor, 'nee' Conway ('c'.1753-1798). Her parents belonged to the prosperous Dublin professional middle class by virtue of her father's work as an architect and builder and her mother's family involvement in the medical trades. They were both Roman Catholics, though her father seems to have been by far the more committed. At his death the three young children and their mother were left well provided for and remained in Dublin. Little is known of McAuley's education other than that it was undertaken at home and in the social and intellectual milieu of fashionable medical families. Much has been made of the children's indifference to their Catholicism after their father's death and their subsequent sojourns in protestant as well as Catholic households, but they made their first holy communion and were confirmed. Shortly after her mother's death in 1798 McAuley joined her brother and sister in the household of the protestant apothecary Armstrong, leaving there in 1803 for the home of another apothecary and physician, William Callaghan and his Quaker wife Catherine. 
The Callaghans, who had no children, treated McAuley as their adopted daughter and for the next twenty years her life centred on them, her own extended family, and the charitable activities which she undertook among the poor in the locality of the Callaghans' estate at Coolock House in north-east Dublin. She continued to practise her faith, attending St Mary's, Liffey Street, and she became well known to a number of priests who were leading figures within Irish Catholicism, including Dean Andrew Lube, Dr Daniel Murray, and Father Michael Blake. During this period she became involved in the contemporary debates about how best to combat poverty and was particularly concerned about the precariousness of life for young working-class women. Ideas for a lay organization appealed to her but she took no definite steps. This phase of her life ended with the deaths of Catherine Callaghan in 1819 and William in 1822, at which point she became sole heir to their considerable estate. From 1822 until her death she made use of this legacy and her independent status to put into practice some of her earlier ideas. 
McAuley's focus was the establishment of a permanent institute for educational, religious, and social services for women and children. To this end she leased a property in Baggot Street in south-east Dublin in June 1824 and commissioned a new building. Known as the House of Mercy, the institute opened in September 1827 as a school for the education of poor girls and a residence for homeless women and girls; McAuley also adopted nine children, seven of whom were either orphaned or motherless members of her own family. She soon invited other women to work with her, particularly those 'who prefer a conventual life, and are prevented embracing it from the nature of property or connections' (Sullivan, 11). By 1830 there were twelve in the community and they had added visiting the sick poor to their activities. A devotional life was practised from the outset and a chapel was dedicated in the house in 1829, but McAuley's original intention was for a lay and not a religious community. In 1830, however, she and her companions experienced a change of heart and took steps to found a new religious congregation for women, beginning in September of that year with a period of formation with the Presentation Sisters in Dublin. The first members of the new congregation, the Sisters of Mercy, made their vows on 12 December 1831 and McAuley was appointed superior by Archbishop Murray. In addition to the usual vows of poverty, chastity, and obedience, the Sisters of Mercy took a fourth vow: to devote themselves for life to the service of the poor, sick, and ignorant. The first chapters of the constitutions and rule were submitted to Rome in December 1833, leading to initial approval of the congregation in March 1835. Branch houses of the Sisters of Mercy were opened in McAuley's lifetime in other parts of Ireland and in England (1839), while plans were agreed for a mission to Newfoundland. 
McAuley was one of the pioneers of the active religious life in the English-speaking world, creating a highly adaptable and stable organization which spread rapidly throughout the English-speaking world and then beyond, to Newfoundland (1842), the United States (1843), Australia (1845), Scotland (1849), New Zealand (1849), and South America (1856). McAuley died on 11 November 1841 at the House of Mercy, Baggot Street, Dublin, from pulmonary tuberculosis and an internal abscess, and was buried in the convent cemetery at Baggot Street. She was declared venerable in 1990. 


@@@@@


doc= 17352


M'Avoy, Margaret (1800-1820), impostor, was born at Liverpool of respectable parentage on 28 June 1800. Of sickly constitution, she appeared to become totally blind in June 1816. Her case attracted considerable contemporary attention from the readiness with which she was alleged to distinguish, by touch, colours of cloth, silk, and stained glass. She could also accurately describe the height, dress, bearing, and other characteristics of her visitors, and even decipher letters in a printed book or manuscript with her fingers' ends, so as to be able to read with tolerable fluency. Sir Joseph Banks, the naturalist, asked William Roscoe of Liverpool to investigate; Roscoe concluded that M'Avoy could see, and that her demonstrations were an elaborate fraud. She died at Liverpool on 18 August 1820. 


@@@@@


doc= 17353


MacBain, Sir James (1828-1892), businessman and politician in Australia, born on 19 April 1828 at Kinrives, Ross-shire, was the youngest son of Smith MacBain, a farmer, and his wife, Christina Taylor. While he was still an infant his family moved to Scotsburn, and thence to Invergordon. His education was much interrupted by poor health, after his fall from a horse. In 1845 he was apprenticed for five years to Andrew Smith, a draper and warehouseman, of Inverness, and became his bookkeeper and cashier. In 1852 he was employed as a traveller for John Milligan & Co., of Bradford. He married in May 1853 Jessie, the daughter of William Smith of Forres, the brother of his Inverness employer, and the couple immediately emigrated to Melbourne. For four years MacBain held a clerkship in the Bank of New South Wales. In 1857 he paid a visit to Britain, and on his return to Melbourne the following year became managing partner for a branch of the firm of Gibbs, Ronald & Co., mercantile and squatting (pastoral land) agents. In 1863 he became partner in the London house, as well as the colonial branches, and when, two years later, the business was bought by the Australian Mortgage (Mercantile) Land and Finance Company, he became chairman and managing director, a post he retained for over twenty-five years. He was also director of two leading and several other banks and many insurance offices, and engaged extensively and successfully in speculation in agricultural land. 
In 1864 MacBain was elected to the legislative assembly of Victoria as member for the Wimmera district, a scattered constituency, which he represented for sixteen years. He was a prominent advocate of the abolition of state aid to religion, but opposed both the '1872 Education Act' and the 'Land Tax Act' as injudicious and imperfect. He supported free trade and the end of squatting after fair compensation to the squatter. 
In 1880 MacBain was elected to represent the central (on redistribution of districts in 1882 the South Yarra) province in the legislative council. From August 1881 to March 1883 he was minister without portfolio representing Sir Bryan O'Loghlen's government in the council (he had declined previous offers on account of his business commitments). A solid tory, on 27 November 1884 he became president of the legislative council, and, having fulfilled his duties creditably, was created knight bachelor in 1886 and KCMG in 1889. 
MacBain visited England in 1874-5, and again in 1883, when he acted as chairman of the Victorian commissioners at the Amsterdam Exhibition. In 1888 he was president of the executive commission of the Melbourne Centennial Exhibition. 
MacBain was a leading member of the Presbyterian church and took an active and generous part in church affairs. He was a trustee of the Scotch College in Melbourne, the Presbyterian Ladies' College, the Melbourne Working Men's College, the Victorian National Gallery, and other institutions, and was president of the Royal Caledonian Society and, for many years, of the board for the protection of Aborigines. After having suffered for some time from the effects of hepatitis, he died, on 4 November 1892, at his home, Scotsburn, Toorak, a Melbourne suburb. He was survived by his widow and their adopted son, MacBain's nephew. He was buried at Booroonda cemetery, Melbourne, on 7 November. 


@@@@@


doc= 17354


Macbean, Alexander (d. 1784), writer and amanuensis, of whose origins nothing is known, was employed as an amanuensis by the encyclopaedist Ephraim Chambers. After this he became one of the six amanuenses employed by Samuel Johnson on his 'Dictionary'. About 1758 Johnson obtained for him the post of librarian to Archibald Campbell, third duke of Argyll. When, on the duke's death in 1761, Macbean was left 'without a shilling', he became mainly dependent upon charity. Johnson, who praised his learning and faculty for languages, but described his 'ignorance of life' as complete, subsequently advised him to write a geographical dictionary, and wrote a preface for his 'Dictionary of Ancient Geography' when it appeared in 1773. The book was well conceived, but Johnson confessed to Madame D'Arblay it destroyed his hopes of Macbean's doing anything properly 'when he found he had given as much labour to Capua as to Rome' (Fanny D'Arblay, 'Diary'). Two years later, when Macbean was starving, as his former colleague, Peyton, had already done, Johnson gave him 4 guineas and collected more (Piozzi, 1.218), and in 1780, through his influence with Lord Thurlow, obtained him admission as a poor brother to the Charterhouse. There he died on 26 June 1784, removing, Johnson lamented, 'a screen between him and death' (cf. 'Works of the Rev. Jonathan Swift', 11.246). Johnson said of him: 'He was very pious; he was very innocent; he did no ill, and of doing good a continual tenour of distress allowed him few opportunities.' 
Besides the 'Dictionary of Ancient Geography' Macbean published, in 1743, 'A synopsis or short analytical view of chemistry, translated from the high Dutch of Dr Godfrey Rothen', and in 1779 he compiled 'A Dictionary of the Bible'. He also compiled numerous indexes, including that to Johnson's edition of the 'English Poets' (Nichols, 'Lit. anecdotes', 5.30). 


@@@@@


doc= 17355


Macbean, Forbes (1725-1800), army officer, was born at Inverness on 1 July 1725, the son of Alexander Macbean ('c'.1684-1762) and his wife, Marjory (died 1766). His father was minister of the High Church in Inverness and so militant a Presbyterian as to earn the nickname John Knox of the North; he was also fiercely anti-Jacobite and in the circumstances it is hardly surprising that Forbes and two of his foster brothers, Robert and William, sons of the Revd Archibald Bannatyne, minister of Dores, Inverness-shire, should follow military careers. Forbes Macbean entered the Royal Military Academy, Woolwich, as a cadet-matross on 3 August 1743 and passed out as a lieutenant-fireworker, Royal Artillery, on 4 April 1745. He was immediately posted to Flanders and had charge of two guns at the battle of Fontenoy. Having been ordered home in 1745, in consequence of the Jacobite rising, he joined the army of William Augustus, duke of Cumberland, at Lichfield and served at the siege of Carlisle in December. He did not accompany the duke to Scotland but the fact of his being a serving officer subsequently enabled his father to intercede with Cumberland on behalf of some deserters condemned to death after Culloden. In the meantime Forbes returned to Flanders, where he commanded a pair of light battalion guns attached to the 19th foot at the battle of Rocoux, and again at Laffeldt in the following year. 
In November 1753 one of Macbean's foster brothers, Robert Bannatyne, joined the East India Company's Madras army, and some months later Macbean too volunteered to go to India with one of three Royal Artillery companies ordered there under Major John Chalmers. His application was unsuccessful, which was probably just as well, for only four of the twenty-two officers in the three companies ever returned home and Robert Bannatyne was killed at the storming of Conjeeveram in 1759. Nevertheless as a result of the departure of these companies Macbean was promoted lieutenant on 1 March 1755 and further promoted captain-lieutenant on 1 April. Next, offered a posting to Ireland, he instead purchased the adjutancy at Woolwich, a post that he held until promoted captain on 1 January 1759. In April of that year he was ordered to Germany, where he commanded a brigade of heavy artillery, most notably at Minden on 1 August 1759, after which he received an autograph letter from the allied commander, Duke Ferdinand of Brunswick, who wrote: 'I have reason to be infinitely satisfied with your behaviour, activity and zeal' ('Fasti Scot.', 6.457), together with a rather more practical gratuity of 500 crowns. He again distinguished himself at Warburg, on 30 July 1760, and at Fritzlar, on 12 February 1761, before returning home on sick leave. 
In 1762 Macbean went to Portugal with Count Wilhelm von Lippe, who had formerly been the allied artillery commander under Brunswick and had been commissioned to modernize the rather dilapidated Portuguese army. At Lippe's request Macbean was commissioned a colonel in the Portuguese artillery in 1763 and made inspector-general of Portuguese artillery two years later. Having relinquished this appointment in 1769 Macbean then commanded a company of Royal Artillery in Canada until 1773, before returning home, having been made a brevet major on 23 July 1772. A brevet lieutenant-colonelcy followed on 29 August 1777, and in March 1778 he was appointed commander, Royal Artillery, in Canada, in succession to Major-General Thomas Phillips. In anticipation of an invasion in 1780 he was assigned a field command at Sorel but the Americans failed to oblige and he saw no further action. Thereafter however he was successively promoted colonel (brevet) on 20 November 1782 and colonel, Royal Artillery, on 1 December, major-general on 12 October 1793, and lieutenant-general on 1 January 1798; on 25 September 1793 he was appointed colonel-commandant of the invalid battalion Royal Artillery. It is not known when or where he married his wife, Ann (1729/30-1818), but two sons followed him into the army. The elder, Frederick, was colonel of the 6th foot and had six sons of his own, all soldiers. Two died young; two, Frederick and Forbes, became colonels; and two, William and Archibald, became generals. Forbes Macbean, regarded as a scientific soldier, was made fellow of the Royal Society in 1786. He died at his home, at Woolwich Common, on 11 November 1800; his wife, who survived him by many years, died at Greenwich in 1818, aged eighty-eight. 


@@@@@


doc= 17356


Macbeth (d. 1057), king of Scots, was the son of Findlaech mac Ruaidri (died 1020), king of Moray, and (probably) 'nepos' (nephew or grandson) of Malcolm II (d. 1034). Macbeth became king of Moray in 1032 when his cousin Gille Comgain mac Mail Brigte was burnt with fifty of his followers, possibly at Macbeth's instigation. Gille Comgain and his brother Mael Coluim (died 1029) had killed Macbeth's father, Findlaech, in 1020. Macbeth married Gille Comgain's widow, Gruoch, the daughter of Boite mac Cinaeda, who was probably a son of Kenneth II (died 995). As king of Moray, Macbeth had to contend with the growing power of Earl Thorfinn of Orkney. The Norse 'Orkneyinga Saga' (a source of dubious reliability) relates how Karl Hundason (probably to be identified with Macbeth) campaigned unsuccessfully to assert his control over Caithness and Sutherland. Macbeth had better fortune against Duncan I, king of Scots, whose campaign against Moray in 1040 culminated in Duncan's death in battle against Macbeth, probably at Pitgaveny near Elgin on 14 August. What had been Duncan's opportunity in the crisis of succession in 1034 now became Macbeth's, and Macbeth became king of Scots. 
Whatever dynastic claim Macbeth may have had, it is notable that both his father, Findlaech, and his cousin Mael Coluim were described as 'king of Scotland' in their obits, even though their power base seems to have been Moray. Perhaps Macbeth's accession was simply the culmination of Moray's increasing dominance over the more prestigious kingship of 'Scotland'. Macbeth also had land and influence beyond Moray (perhaps through his wife, Gruoch, who belonged to the once dominant lineage of descendants of Kenneth I), and is recorded as a benefactor of the Celi De of Loch Leven, to whom he and his wife granted estates in Fothriff (west Fife). Macbeth's kingship did not go uncontested, however. In 1045 he defeated and killed Duncan I's father, Crinan, abbot of Dunkeld. But by 1050 Macbeth's position was sufficiently stable to allow him to make a pilgrimage to Rome -- the only reigning king of Scotland to do so -- where he 'scattered money like seed to the poor' (Anderson, 'Early Sources', 1.588). He was alive to developments in the wider world, and in 1052 took two Norman knights into his service -- the first Scottish king to take such recruits. In 1054 he faced a strong challenge from Duncan I's now adult son, Malcolm Canmore ['see 'Malcolm III], who was backed by a powerful Northumbrian army. A bloody battle took place on 27 July, probably at Dunsinane (in what is now Perthshire), after which Macbeth was forced to give Malcolm some lands and position. This set up Malcolm to challenge Macbeth, and he killed him on 15 August 1057 at Lumphanan in Mar. The chief beneficiary, however, was Macbeth's stepson, Lulach ['see below'], who became king. His father, Gille Comgain, had been killed by Macbeth. It may be that when Macbeth was finally overcome it was by the combined might of the sons of the kings he had killed in the advancement of his own career. A late (and debatable) source alleges that he was buried on Iona. 
The Macbeth of Shakespeare's play was largely drawn from Ralph Holinshed's 'Chronicles', published in 1577. Holinshed followed the history of Hector Boece, who copied and enlarged the narrative in Andrew Wyntoun's metrical chronicle, written in the early fifteenth century. Wyntoun described Macbeth as 'thane of Cromarty' and 'thane of Moray'. Whether or not Macbeth was 'thane of Cromarty' cannot now be ascertained, but he was certainly not a mere 'thane' of Moray. Boece, without any apparent authority, altered these titles to the 'thane of Glamis' and 'thane of Cawdor' and Shakespeare followed this baseless attribution. 




@@@@@


doc= 17357


Macbeth, Norman (1821-1888), portrait painter, was born on 7 November 1821 at Port Glasgow, Renfrewshire, the son of James McBeath, an excise officer, and Janet Lees, his wife. As a boy he moved to Glasgow and served a seven years' apprenticeship as an engraver. He then moved to London, where he studied at the Royal Academy Schools, and made copies in the National Gallery. Afterwards he travelled to Paris, where he studied in the Louvre. In 1845 he established himself as a portrait painter in Greenock, moving to Glasgow in 1848, but was practising in Greenock again by 1856. He was a regular exhibitor at the Royal Scottish Academy from 1845. In 1861 he went to Edinburgh, where he gained much employment as a hard-working portrait painter of both public and private commissions. Macbeth was elected an associate of the Royal Scottish Academy in 1870, and an academician in 1880. 
Macbeth's works, which include 'Sir John Steel RSA, Sculptor' (1878; Royal Scottish Academy, diploma collection), 'Alexander Whitelaw MP' (1880; Glasgow Museums and Art Galleries), and 'William Forrest HRSA' (1886; Royal Scottish Academy), are conventional and competent but lack any distinction in either their treatment or ability to capture character. He also painted some genre subjects and landscapes, particularly of Arran early in his career, and of Switzerland in 1883, and of Berkshire in the last years of his life. On 21 April 1846 Macbeth married Mary Walker and among their children were the painters James Macbeth (1847-1891), Robert Walker Macbeth, and Henry Macbeth-Raeburn (1860-1947), and Allan Macbeth (1856-1910), organist, choirmaster, and principal of the Glasgow College of Music. Norman Macbeth moved to London in 1886 and died there, at his home, 10 Belsize Avenue, Hampstead, on 27 February 1888. He was buried in Glasgow on 2 March. 


@@@@@


doc= 17358


Mac Bradaigh, Fiachra (c.1690-c.1760), poet and scribe, may have been born in the townland of Drumgallon in the parish of Drung, co. Cavan, where he later lived. He taught in a 'hedge school' in Stradone in the nearby parish of Laragh, and was dubbed 'a witty schoolmaster' and 'a tolerably good poet' (O'Reilly, ccx). Some half-dozen of his poems are extant, three of them in his own hand. The titles, or opening lines, of three others are known but they appear not to have survived. Mac Bradaigh's most celebrated compositions are his 'Aisling' ('Vision poem'), his 'Faoistin' ('Confession'), and his 'Seachran' (a humorous account of his wanderings, including a journey to Dublin). The first and last of these appeared in print within a generation of his death, in a Dublin magazine, 'Anthologia Hibernica' (October and December 1793). 'The rollicking drollery of his verses' has been remarked on, as has the fact that 'he puts the stamp of his locality and of his own individuality on his compositions' (O Mordha, 6). 
Mac Bradaigh's scribal work survives in a manuscript in the British Library (MS Egerton 135) and, indirectly, in a manuscript in the Royal Irish Academy, Dublin. The former contains three of his own poems and some genealogical material addressed to three friends who may well have been former pupils from his school in Stradone. Two of them were working as clerks in the Dublin Linen Hall and the third may also have been resident in the capital. The material in Mac Bradaigh's hand, dated September 1755, appears to have been intended as a rough draft; in a note he asks Muiris O Gormain, the celebrated south Ulster scribe, then based in Dublin, to rewrite it 'with good ink and plaine writing' (O Mordha, 13). The Royal Irish Academy manuscript is a careful early nineteenth-century copy, penned in co. Cork, of an interesting collection of early modern Irish prose tales and some short pieces of poetry which Mac Bradaigh compiled in Drumgallon early in 1722. The original, produced for a local gentleman and landholder named Ros Mac Caba, or Ross Mac Cabe, of Lappan, also in the parish of Drung, appears to be lost. 
The precise date and place of Mac Bradaigh's death are uncertain. One tradition suggests that he died in his native place, while a conflicting one indicates, enigmatically, that he was buried in Dunsandle, presumably the place of that name in co. Galway. The suggestion, sometimes made, that Fiachra was a brother to the rather notorious Pilib Mac Bradaigh (alias Pilib an Ministeir or Parson Brady) is without foundation. 


@@@@@


doc= 17359


Macbrady, Philip (fl. 1711), Irish scholar, was born in co. Cavan. He was brought up a protestant and became vicar of the parish of Inishmagrath, in the diocese of Kilmore -- hence the by-name Pilip Ministeir by which he was also known. He translated into Irish a sermon preached by John Tillotson, archbishop of Canterbury, before William III and Mary II at Hampton Court in April 1689, on 'St Luke' 10. 42, and this was included in a book of sermons compiled by Charles Lynegar and John Richardson, printed in Irish type, but with a title-page in Roman letters, by Elinor Everingham, entitled 'Seanmora ar na priom Phonicibh na Chreideamh' (1711). 
Macbrady was a friend of the blind harpist Turlough Carolan and wrote an Irish poem addressed to him, besides other verses and epigrams. Nothing is known of his family life, other than a verse written on seeing his daughter weep at the report of the death of a youth. He suspected it was her lover, and asked why she wept. 'Some snuff I was taking', was her reply, but her father saw the true cause, recited this Irish verse, found the report of the youth's death to be mistaken, sent for him, and consented to the marriage. He is now known mainly for the humorous Irish compositions in which he features, some having passed into the oral tradition of his native Cavan. 


@@@@@


doc= 17360


Macbride, David (1726-1778), chemist and physician, was born on 26 April 1726 at Ballymoney, co. Antrim, Ireland, one of three children of Robert McBride (1686/7-1759) ['see under 'McBride, John] and his wife, the daughter of Mr Boyd of Killabeg, co. Down. His father was a Scottish minister, and John Macbride (d. 1800) was his brother. He was educated at the village school, and after serving an apprenticeship to a local surgeon he entered the Royal Navy, where he was a mate aboard a hospital ship and then a surgeon during the war of Austrian succession (1741-8). The seafaring life enabled him to observe scurvy -- the scourge of the eighteenth-century British navy -- and this shaped his lifelong search for an effective antiscorbutic. 
After the peace of 1748 Macbride studied anatomy with Monro Secundus in Edinburgh and with William Hunter in London, where he also studied midwifery with William Smellie. He returned to Ballymoney in 1749 and moved to Dublin in 1751. He soon won the affections of Dorcas Evory, but her father made her marry George Cumming, a Dublin merchant, and Macbride went on to marry Margaret Armstrong on 20 November 1753 at St Audoen's Church, Dublin. In due course, however, the widowed Macbride married his widowed 'first love' in the same church on 5 June 1762. He had no children by either marriage. 
Macbride set up practice as a surgeon and accoucheur in 1752, but bashfulness limited his practice for several years. His real abilities were known only to his family and close friends, who appreciated him not only for his pleasant nature and agreeable manner but also for his general knowledge of painting, music, and polite literature. Attracted to the Enlightenment world of polite and useful learning, he joined and read papers before the Medico-Philosophical Society, formed in 1756 in Dublin; he became its secretary in 1762. His medical practice expanded considerably in 1764, when the publication of his 'Experimental Essays' brought him into notice and when the University of Glasgow made him MD. With this qualification in hand, Macbride started a course of medical lectures in his home in the winter of 1766-7. He published them in 1772 as 'A Methodical Introduction to the Theory and Practice of Physic', which was translated into Latin in 1774 and reissued in an enlarged edition in Dublin in 1776. Macbride's interest in useful knowledge was also evident in December 1767, when he made a new discovery in the art of tanning, substituting lime-water for water in part of the process. For this discovery he was, in 1768, made an honorary member of the Dublin Royal Society, which also awarded him a silver medal. In 1769 the Society of Arts of London gave him a gold medal, and his 'Account of the improved method of tanning leather' was published in the 'Philosophical Transactions' of 1778. 
Macbride is remembered mainly for his work on scurvy in his 'Experimental Essays'. The object and method of his researches were characteristic of Enlightenment medicine, which looked to science to curb the diseases of modern institutional populations, in gaols, in hospital ships, and in military camps. The most important of these diseases were fevers. In the early 1750s John Pringle emphasized the putrid nature of gaol fever, dysentery, and scurvy, and tested various substances for their antiseptic or restorative qualities. Interpreting these results within a theoretical framework shaped by the work of Stephen Hales and Joseph Black in pneumatic (gas) chemistry, Macbride related putrefaction to the loss of fixed air (carbon dioxide) and the efficacy of antiseptics or antiscorbutics in the prevention of, or restoration from, this loss. As a cheap and readily available source of fixed air, Macbride recommended to the Admiralty in 1767 the use of fresh wort, or infusion of malt, in the treatment of scurvy. While his brother, Admiral John Macbride, reported some success with the remedy on a voyage in 1765-7, the results obtained on Cook's expeditions were confused and ambiguous; in the early 1790s the Admiralty finally decided in favour of James Lind's recommendation of lemon juice. Macbride's experimental results also sparked Joseph Priestley's interest in the medicinal possibilities of the new gases he was discovering, and this research led to the work of Thomas Beddoes and the Pneumatic Institute. 
The attention focused on Macbride in the wake of his 'Experimental Essays' also had its adverse effects. The resulting demand for his medical services induced in his gentle and uncertain nature a state of chronic tension and insomnia. This enfeebling condition led to a fever, brought on by a cold, from which he died, in his house in Cavendish Row, Dublin, on 28 December 1778; he was buried in St Audoen's Church. Although a minor figure in eighteenth-century science and medicine, Macbride was nevertheless remembered by many -- not least the anxious women he aided through the perils of eighteenth-century birthing; for them he was 'the hope of weeping eyes' ('Dublin Quarterly Journal of Medical Science', 289). 


@@@@@


doc= 17361


McBride, John (c.1650-1718), minister of the Presbyterian General Synod of Ulster and religious controversialist, may have been the son of John McBryd, merchant, admitted a freeman of Belfast in 1644. He clearly came from Scottish stock but was almost certainly born in the north of Ireland, since on entering Glasgow University in 1666 he styled himself 'Hibernus'. Having graduated in 1673 McBride was ordained in 1679 as minister of Clare, co. Armagh. In or before 1687 he had married Margaret (died in or after 1718?), daughter of William Fairlie of Tullyreavy, co. Tyrone. They had three sons and a daughter, to whom McBride was a loving if heavy-handed and even irascible parent. He left in 1688 to take charge of the parish of Borgue in Kirkcudbrightshire, and attended the national assembly of the Church of Scotland in 1692. A popular preacher, rigorously orthodox, and with a sharp if heavily sardonic wit, he was called to Ayr in 1691, but the presbytery refused to translate him. By June 1694 he was back at Clare, and attending the General Synod of Ulster, and later that year succeeded Patrick Adair at Belfast. Through his friendship with the third earl of Donegal he was able to obtain a site for a new church in Rosemary Lane (subsequently Rosemary Street), to which the congregation removed in 1695. 
McBride's intellectual capacity and force of character propelled him to the forefront of the Presbyterian community in Ireland. As early as 1695 he was involved in canvassing the Irish parliament in a vain attempt to secure a toleration act, and afterwards threw himself into the paper war over the issue ignited by the Dublin dissenting minister Joseph Boyse's 'Case of the Dissenting Protestants of Ireland'. Boyse had been answered by three Anglican clergymen, bishops Pullein of Dromore and Dopping of Meath, and a future archbishop, Edward Synge, and McBride's 'Animadversions on the Answer to the Case', published in 1697, took issue with each of Boyse's detractors: the pamphlet was undeniably effective, if remorselessly ponderous. The same year he was elected moderator of the general synod. At the beginning of the next synod, in June 1698, he preached as outgoing moderator; the sermon, a strong defence of Presbyterian church organization and of synodical authority in particular, was deemed sufficiently important to be printed. The style, 'minister of Belfast', accorded him on the title-page, and a passage in which he appeared to claim that synods were legal even without the consent of the secular power, enraged Bishop Edward Walkington of Down and Connor, who alerted the Dublin government. As good whigs the lords justices were unwilling to prosecute, and instead McBride was summoned to a special hearing, presided over by the lord chancellor, John Methuen, assisted by the chief justices, and in the presence of six bishops. He successfully defended himself, pointing out that the composition of the title-page was not his responsibility, and that the offending passage of text had been qualified by a saving phrase. The lord chancellor was thus able to dismiss him with nothing more than an admonition to behave 'rectably' for the future towards the established church. 
McBride's stature among Ulster's Presbyterians was such that in 1700 the new patent for the 'regium donum' (the royal grant towards the maintenance of ministers) was lodged with him for safe keeping. He plunged into print again in 1702 with a 'Vindication of Marriage, as Solemnized by Presbyterians in the North of Ireland', a point by point refutation of the case made by the established church, in pamphlets and lawsuits, against the legality of marriages performed by Presbyterian ministers. He had thus made himself a prime target for Anglican revenge when the passage of the English statute of 1703 imposing an abjuration oath in England and Ireland exposed him to prosecution. Together with two other ministers McBride refused the oath rather than (as he saw it) commit himself to uphold episcopacy, and swear to something he could not know, the Pretender's illegitimacy. As he explained to his old friend Sir Hans Sloane, 'my scrupling the oaths is not from the least disaffection to her Majesty's person or government' but was a simple obedience to conscience, that 'incommunicable jewel, the loss whereof nothing can repair or requite' (BL, Sloane MS 4043, fol. 68). Fearing arrest he spent the winter of 1703-4 in Scotland, where the abjuration did not apply, but was back in Belfast to attend the synod in June 1704. However, local tory magistrates eventually secured a warrant, and in 1705 he was obliged to take refuge again in Scotland. There is a story (the supposed evidence for which is still visible) that the mayor of Belfast, who came to arrest him, was so enraged at finding the bird flown that he drew his sword and stabbed the portrait of McBride which hung in the manse. 
McBride remained in Glasgow until 1708, supplying the Blackfriars kirk but declining a chair in divinity at the university. He was chosen moderator of Glasgow presbytery in 1708. In the meantime the General Synod of Ulster had appointed James Kirkpatrick to assist him in Belfast, and then, following a petition from some of the elders, which McBride had at first endorsed, divided the congregation into two. There were factional, and perhaps, doctrinal tensions between the two churches (Kirkpatrick and his friends being associated with advanced theological and philosophical ideas), and a group of McBride's supporters disputed the practical arrangements which the synod had made for the division. Thinking himself safe under a whig viceroy, McBride returned to Ireland to help settle matters. He was duly discharged by magistrates at Carrickfergus in respect of the earlier warrant, but within two years his situation had once more deteriorated. There were quarrels with those other Presbyterian ministers who were prepared to take the oaths, and in summer 1710 some high-flying JPs, anticipating political changes in Ireland in the wake of the impeachment of the high-church clergyman, Henry Sacheverell, in England, took out new warrants against the nonjurors. McBride returned to Glasgow while appeals were made to the English ministry. He was sufficiently encouraged to reappear in Ireland, but withdrew for a third time in 1712 following a presentment against him by the co. Antrim grand jury. 
In McBride's absence the general synod advised ministers to take the abjuration, but only 'if they have clearness to it' ('Records of the General Synod', 1.283) and at the same time renewed an earlier appointment to McBride to write 'an history of this church' (ibid., 1.284), with Kirkpatrick to help him. What he produced was a polemical defence of the Presbyterians' political record against tory charges of disloyalty. The particular object of McBride's indignation was his neighbour in Belfast, the Church of Ireland parson William Tisdall, whose 'Sample of Trew-Blue Presbyterian Loyalty' (1709) provided the occasion for his own reply, 'A Sample of Jet-Black Pr -- Tic Calumny', published anonymously in Glasgow in 1713. Although concerned with contemporary political developments (and from time to time defending himself, in the third person), he offered a typically learned and laborious disquisition, essentially historical in structure and argument and lacking the verve and incisiveness of his Anglican antagonist. 
Despite being subject to an outstanding warrant McBride returned to Ireland for good in June 1713. Orders were given for his arrest but the sub-sheriff ignored them. After the Hanoverian succession McBride remained true to his principles and would not take the oaths to George I, but the authorities now left him alone. Although increasingly infirm and racked with gout he joined his fellow nonjuror Alexander McCracken in 1716-17 in opposing moves to accept a legal toleration on any other basis than subscription to the Westminster confession, a prelude to the great controversy over subscription which would divide the general synod in 1720-26. He died on 21 July 1718, 'aetatis suae 68', and was buried in Belfast on 23 July. His wife almost certainly outlived him. Their younger children were each left a guinea in his will, since, as he said, he had already during his lifetime adequately provided for them. 




@@@@@


doc= 17362


Macbride, John (c.1735-1800), naval officer and politician, was one of three children of Robert McBride (1686/7-1759) ['see under 'McBride, John (c.1650-1718)], a Presbyterian minister of Ballymoney, co. Antrim, and his wife, 'nee' Boyd, of Killabeg, co. Down. David Macbride, chemist and physician, was his elder brother. John entered the Royal Navy about 1754, having served for some years in the merchant marine. His early days were spent as a midshipman, master's mate, or able seaman in the 'Garland' in the West Indies. He was promoted lieutenant on 27 October 1758. 
Macbride came to public attention in August 1761 while in command of the cutter 'Grace'. He secured permission to lead some small boats into the roadstead at Dunkirk and captured a French privateer anchored there. In April 1762 he was promoted to command the fireship 'Grampus', and shortly afterwards he took over several other vessels, all in home waters. In 1766 he took the frigate 'Jason' to the Falkland Islands, about which he published 'A Journal of the Winds and Weather... at Falkland Islands from 1 Feb 1766 to 19 Jan 1767' (1770?). He then commanded several more vessels in home waters, on one occasion, in May 1772, escorting the queen of Denmark to the Scheldt. On 14 July 1774 he married Ursula, daughter of William Folkes of Hillington Hall, Norfolk. The couple had one son, John David Macbride, who later became principal of Magdalen Hall, Oxford. In 1776 he was appointed to command the line of battle ship 'Bienfaisant' (64 guns) and in her he was engaged in the tactically indecisive action off Ushant on 27 July 1778. Macbride did not play a significant part in the fighting; however, his evidence in favour of Viscount Keppel was instrumental in securing the commander-in-chief's acquittal when court martialled for misconduct in February 1779. Macbride was less supportive of Sir Hugh Palliser when he resigned from the Admiralty and was in turn court martialled. 
In December 1779 Macbride sailed in the 'Bienfaisant' with Sir George Rodney to relieve Gibraltar and 'en route', on 8 January 1780, he captured a Spanish 54-gun vessel. Macbride's ship took an important part in the battle of Cape St Vincent eight days later. The Spanish ship 'San Domingo' blew up while engaged with the 'Bienfaisant', and then the 'Phoenix', flagship of Admiral Don Juan de Langara, surrendered to her. Because of a smallpox outbreak on the British vessel, Macbride agreed to let Langara and his officers remain on the 'Phoenix', but they were to act as if they were prisoners on the British ship. Both vessels eventually arrived safely in Gibraltar harbour. 
Macbride was sent back to Britain with Rodney's dispatches and in March 1780 resumed command of 'Bienfaisant'. His next notable action occurred shortly afterwards when, in the company of three other vessels, he went in search of a French privateer with which he eventually made contact off the Old Head of Kinsale on 13 August. Macbride's vessel opened fire first on the French ship, the 'Comte d'Artois' (64 guns; over 600 men). After just over an hour, with the arrival of one of Macbride's supporting vessels, the French surrendered. Of the British squadron only 'Bienfaisant' had suffered any serious casualties. In January 1781 he was appointed to command the former enemy frigate 'Artois' (40 guns), and in her he took part in the battle of the Dogger Bank (5 August). In the aftermath of the battle he briefly took command of the line of battle ship 'Princess Amelia', whose captain had been killed in the action. He then returned to the 'Artois' and on 3 December was engaged in another sharp fight with privateers, which resulted in his capturing two Dutch vessels in the North Sea. In April 1782, while cruising in the English Channel, Macbride was able to observe a French fleet heading for the West Indies, and reported their position to the main fleet, which intercepted and captured about half of them. In June he was stationed in Ireland, where he was employed to impress men for service with the fleet. 
With the return of peace Macbride's career took a new turn. In 1784 he was elected MP for Plymouth, a seat he held until 1790 despite being appointed to command the Plymouth guardship 'Cumberland' in 1788. As an MP Macbride spoke on naval affairs on several occasions. He was one of the naval members of the duke of Richmond's commission which investigated the state of the Portsmouth and Plymouth defences (1785-6) and he spoke out and voted against the proposals in the House of Commons. 
Macbride went back to active service with the outbreak of war against France in February 1793. Promoted rear-admiral on 1 February, he became commander-in-chief of a frigate squadron patrolling the downs. He was then placed in command of a squadron off Brest and in December 1793 he led a small fleet to Brittany and Normandy, attempting to create a diversion on behalf of French royalists. On 4 July 1795 he was promoted vice-admiral and by early 1796 he was back in the North Sea, watching the Dutch fleet in the Texel. In February 1799 he was appointed admiral of the blue. His last appointments do not seem to have been especially successful, though for much of his career he was a popular and well-respected officer. He died following a stroke on 17 February 1800 at the Spring Garden Coffee House in London. His wife survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 17363


MacBride, John Alexander Patterson (1819-1890), sculptor, was born in February 1819 at Campbeltown, Argyll, the son of Archibald MacBride. 'His mother was a McKenzie, and his grandmother a McKinnon' ('The Graphic'). He was trained as a sculptor at Liverpool in the studio of William Spence and also studied drawing at the Liverpool Art School with fellow students Richard Ansdell and Samuel Huggins. At the same time he studied anatomy at the Liverpool medical school under the eminent surgeons James Long and Alfred Higginson. In 1841, on the completion of his time with Spence, MacBride moved to London where he continued his studies at the British Museum. In 1844 his life-size group 'Margaret of Anjou and her Son' was highly commended in the first sculpture contest at Westminster Hall. This work received mixed reviews. The 'Literary Gazette' considered Margaret 'a virago' and her son 'a poor attenuated, impudent lad' (Gunnis, 247) but the work so impressed one of the judges, Samuel Joseph, that he took MacBride into his studio without charging his usual fee of 500 guineas. In Joseph's studio MacBride was a 'premier pupil'; he was appointed studio manager and became Joseph's chief assistant. After Joseph's bankruptcy MacBride returned to Liverpool and by 1848 was an associate of the Liverpool Academy. He became a full member in 1850. MacBride was an enthusiastic supporter of the Pre-Raphaelites and as secretary of the Liverpool Academy in 1851 and 1852 was instrumental in these years in awarding the annual prize of 50 guineas to Holman Hunt and John Everett Millais. 
After establishing himself in Liverpool MacBride continued to exhibit at the Royal Academy between 1848 and 1853 but his principal source of patronage was the area in which he spent most of his working life, the city of Liverpool and its environs. MacBride was most commonly sought to execute the standard form of nineteenth-century sculpted memorial, the marble classicizing bust. Notable examples are 'Sir William Brown (Bart)' for St George's Hall; the 'Revd Dr T. S. Raffles' (exh. Liverpool Academy, 1865) for the Great George Street Chapel, Liverpool; his friend the author 'Philip James Bailey' (Scottish National Portrait Gallery, Edinburgh); 'John Laird' (1863) for Birkenhead Hospital; 'Lieutenant-Colonel Peter Thomson' (mayor of Liverpool) (Walker Art Gallery, Liverpool); and 'General Lord Viscount Combermere' (1853). MacBride carved the statue of Sir Hugh Myddelton for the Royal Exchange, London; statues of 'The Four Seasons' for Garswood Hall, Lancashire, for Sir John Gerrard; and a statue of the Wesleyan minister Dr Adam Clarke for Portrush, co. Antrim. For St Mary's Church, Birkenhead, he carved the tablet in memory of Dr Stevenson (1854). This was noted by Timothy Stevens to be 'an outstanding example' of the nineteenth-century practice of illustrating the occupation of the departed on a monument, and 'represents Stevenson, the first medical man to settle in Birkenhead, holding a watch and feeling the pulse of a patient' (Stevens, 48). The monument is now in the Oratory, St James's cemetery, Liverpool. For reproduction by Messrs Minton of Stoke-on-Trent he modelled statuettes of Lord Clyde, Lord Havelock, Prince Albert, H. M. Stanley (his last work), and a reduced-size version of his 'Margaret of Anjou' group. Models of his 'Lady Godiva' were awarded by the Liverpool Art Union as one of their prizes in 1850. He lobbied for the commission for a statue to commemorate the duke of Wellington to surmount the Liverpool Column, but this went instead to the sculptor George Lawson, whose brother Andrew designed the column (1862-3). 
MacBride was also sought after as an art critic and lecturer: he delivered courses on sculpture at the British Museum, at the Crystal Palace, and for the corporations of Liverpool, Bradford, and Greenock, among others. About 1883 he moved to London and then, in deteriorating health, to Southend-on-Sea, where he died on 4 April 1890. 


@@@@@


doc= 17364


Macbride, John David (1778-1868), college head, was born on 28 June 1778 at Plympton St Maurice, Devon, the only son of John Macbride (c.1735-1800), naval captain (later MP for Plymouth, 1784-90, and admiral, 1799), and his wife, Ursula, eldest daughter of William Folkes, of Hillington Hall, Norfolk. The physician David Macbride was his uncle. After being educated at Cheam School, Surrey, he matriculated at Exeter College, Oxford, on 28 March 1795, graduating BA in 1799. On 9 July 1800 he became a fellow of Exeter, vacating the fellowship on his marriage (19 July 1805) to Mary (1770/71-1862), second daughter of Sir Joseph Radcliffe, bt, and widow of Joseph Starkie, of Redvales. The couple had one child, a daughter. 
Macbride then took up legal studies, becoming both BCL and DCL in November 1811; he served as assessor of the chancellor's court of Oxford University from 1812 to 1840. He also interested himself in oriental literature, and in 1813 was appointed lord almoner's reader in Arabic (from 1862, professor). In 1813 he also became a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries, and was appointed principal of Magdalen Hall, succeeding Henry Ford in both this and the readership. He retained these Oxford appointments until his death. He held several other university offices, being a perpetual delegate of privileges from 1813, a perpetual delegate of the university press from 1814, a commissioner of sewers (1823-45), and of the market (1825-66). 
Macbride was made principal of Magdalen Hall to supervise its projected transfer to the site of the former Hertford College, which it acquired in 1816; this move, made more urgent when the hall's original buildings adjoining Magdalen College were damaged by fire in 1820, was completed in 1822. The hall prospered under him, and especially under his energetic vice-principal from 1832 to 1848, William Jacobson, afterwards bishop of Chester; shortly after Macbride's death it achieved college status as the present Hertford College (1874). In 1863 the jubilee of his headship was marked by the foundation of the Macbride scholarship; he was also commemorated by the annual Macbride university sermon, which he endowed in 1848. 
Macbride published three volumes of his theology lectures, and a few other articles and speeches, but his principal work was 'The Mohammedan Religion Explained' (1857), a polemic with no pretension to original research, despite its impressive number of Arabic quotations. He was not a man of deep learning, but a profoundly religious layman of the 'old' evangelical school, politically a moderate Conservative, and in character kind, sincere, and humorous. Well off himself, he was known for his generosity to the poor. He died at Oxford on 24 January 1868 and was buried on 30 January in Holywell cemetery; he was mourned as one of the last links with the Oxford of the previous century. 


@@@@@


doc= 17365


Robert McBride (1686/7-1759), eldest son of John, was also educated at Glasgow. He was always intended for the ministry, and while still a probationer preached on the king's birthday in 1716 to the Belfast company of independent volunteers, a sermon which was subsequently printed. In September that year he was admitted as minister of Ballymoney, co. Antrim, where he stayed for the rest of his life and was remembered as the model of a conscientious and efficient pastor. A strong supporter of orthodox theology, and of the principle of subscription, he frequently clashed with the New Light faction in the general synod, and especially with his father's successor, Samuel Haliday. At one point he was sent over to Scotland to obtain the opinion of the general assembly, and on his return found himself accused of misrepresenting the views of the non-subscribers. In or before 1726 he married the daughter of a Mr Boyd of Killabeg, co. Down. They had a daughter and two sons, David MacBride and John MacBride, both of whom joined the Royal Navy. In 1726 he contributed a pamphlet to the controversy, the 'Overtures Transmitted by the General Synod, 1725, in a Fair Light'. In 1728 he was elected moderator. He died on 2 September 1759 in his seventy-third year, and was buried in Ballymoney churchyard. A memorial tablet inside the parish church described him as 'truly pious, always cheerful, moderate in his principles... universally beloved and lived in friendship with the good men of all persuasions' (Witherow, 211), perhaps in unconscious irony, in view of his father's long record of conflict with the established church. 


@@@@@


doc= 17366


Maoilin Og Mac Bruaideadha (d. 1602) belonged to a branch of the family who were mainly historians or 'seanchaidhe', though he himself composed bardic verse to the professional standard known as 'dan direach'. His now lost book of annals, covering the late sixteenth century, was drawn on by the four masters and a Westmeath scribe in the early seventeenth century. Presumably this was the original source for the obituary in 1563 of Diarmaid Mac Bruaideadha, 'ollamh' of Ui Bhracain and Ui Fhearmaic (territories of Mac Gormain and O Deagha). Diarmaid's brother and successor was Maoilin Og's father, Maoilin the elder, who had risen to be 'ollamh' in history to O Briain before his death in 1582, at which a third brother, Giolla Brighde, became 'ollamh'. The title had passed to Maoilin Og ('M. the younger') by 1599. 
In that year the insurgent army of Aodh Ruadh O Domhnaill plundered co. Clare. Maoilin Og entered their camp and secured the return of his cattle by reciting a praise poem to Aodh Ruadh, of which only one verse survives (Walsh, 1.210). Another, though undated, expression of anti-government feeling comes in the poem 'Brathair don bhas an doidhbhreas' where he complains that an O Briain chief, probably Sir Toirdhealbhach of Ennistimon ('Catalogue of Irish Manuscripts', 1.394), has dismissed him, and he appears to mock his patron's protestantism, desertion of old Gaelic customs, and indifference to relatives and poets. Yet before the poet's death on 31 December 1602 he had served the protestant cause by joining other Irish scholars at the new Trinity College near Dublin to prepare the text of an Irish translation of the 'New Testament' for publication (McGrath, 61n.). Naturally the four masters' notice of his death lists his long historical poems on the genealogies of O Briain, Mag Cochlain, Mag Gormain, and others as his greatest achievements, combining literary merit and erudition. They awarded him the title 'file', or 'learned poet', seldom used by annalists about any scholar later than the twelfth century. 
The four masters' own annalistic compilation is prefaced by a letter of recommendation from Maoilin Og's son, 


@@@@@


doc= 17367


Mac Bruaidin, Tadhg mac Daire (b. c.1570, d. in or after 1625), Gaelic poet and genealogist, was from Knockanalban (Knockanalbanie or Cnoc an Albanaigh), barony of Ibrickan, in the parish of Kilmurry, co. Clare, one of a large family of sons and daughters of Daire Mac Bruaideadha and Finola Gray of Knockanalban. Mentioned in the fiants of Elizabeth as resident at Knockanalban in 1586 and 1602 ('Fiants', nos. 4860, 6615), Tadhg also appears as a witness (Teige Mac Brody) of a conveyancing agreement dated 1594 (Hardiman, 83). Information concerning him is supplied by his descendant Anthony Bruodinus OFM in a work published in Prague in 1669, and in a work published two years later under a pseudonym in which he responded to his detractor Thomas Carew. Of his brothers, Domhnall mac Daire is also known as a poet and the compositions of both are sometimes confounded in the sources. 
According to Bruodinus, Tadhg knew Greek, Latin, and English, and became tutor to Donnchadh O Briain, the future earl of Thomond. The latter is said to have been fostered for the first seven years of his life in the house of Tadhg's sister Finola, and to have been attended by Tadhg during his education at the English court, where he went for two years at the age of twenty-one. The same is known to have been residing in the court of Elizabeth in 1577. Following Donnchadh O Briain's succession as fourth earl of Thomond in 1580 Tadhg is said to have served as 'aulae prefectus' in his household (Bruodinus, 'Propugnaculum', 851) and to have acted as district sheriff. (Tadhg is not mentioned among the list of high sheriffs of co. Clare, however; see McGrath, 62). Tadhg married Anna Mohuny with whom he had six children, and his estate passed to his son Jacobus on his death. According to O'Flanagan (1808), Tadhg was assigned Dunogan Castle (barony of Ibrickan) by the earl of Thomond, but this cannot be verified (McGrath, 62). Irish sources refer to him commonly as Tadhg mac Daire, while his full name sometimes appears as Tadhg mac Daire M(h)ic Bhruaideadha (Mhic Bhruaidin) from which it is concluded that he did not become head of the surname (that is, 'Mac Bruaideadha') in his lifetime. 
In all approximately thirty compositions attributed to Tadhg have survived. Among these are a number which can be dated approximately to the early 1580s. Ten members of the O'Briens of Thomond and the Burkes of Clanricarde are remembered in the elegy 'Anois diolam an deachmhaidh', apparently written about 1580 (O'Grady, 390). The poet recalls other former Connaught patrons in 'A mhacaoimh shenas mo sheirc' (O Lochlainn), including a 'Mhaol Mordha'. He can be identified as M. Mac Suibhne of Sligo (died 1581) for whom Tadhg composed jointly with Tadhg Dall O hUiginn a 'crosantacht' 'Tugam aghaidh ar Mhaol Mordha'. A further composition by him in that genre, 'Rannam le cheile a chlann Uilliam' (Mac Cionnaith, no. 111), was composed for two of the Burkes of Clanricarde some time before 1582 (Bruodinus, 'Anatomicum Examen', 116). The poem 'Teallach flaithis fine Caoimh' which gives the martial roll of the ancestors of Art (son of Art) O Caoimh was written before about 1583 (Walsh, 7). 
Several compositions are addressed by Tadhg to Donnchadh O Briain, among the earliest of which is the widely disseminated 'Mor ata ar theagasc flatha', a poem of advice which was composed possibly to mark the earl's succession in 1580 (O'Flanagan). Much copied also is the short didactic poem to the same patron 'Mo cheithre rann duit a Dhonnchaidh', but less so the short composition 'Aoidhe o Cais na chrich fein' which deals with the earl's martial exploits. Tadhg's elegy written on the occasion of the death of the earl in 1624, 'Easgar Gaoidheal eag aoinfhir' (O Cuiv), is transmitted in only one independent copy. The genealogical poem 'Mithid dul d'fhaghail m'fhiach' addresses another of the O'Briens, namely Donnchadh, son of Brian of Carraig O gConaill. The short composition 'Ni trath dod dhol a Dhiarmaid' is a touching prayer for the recovery from illness of Diarmaid O Briain, fifth baron of Inchiquin (died 1624). In contrast, 'Tairgidh mo sheachna a shiol mBriain' represents a sharply worded warning to certain of the O'Briens not to interfere with his property, lest they be made to feel the power of his satire. Similar in theme and tone is 'Foiridh mo leisge a Leath Chuinn', a threatening satire against a member of the Burkes who joined in stealing cattle from the poet during a foray into his district led by Red Hugh O'Donnell in 1599 (Mac Cionnaith, no. 95). Apart from the poems for Art O Caoimh and Donnchadh O Briain (Carraig O gConaill), further evidence of Tadhg's activity as a professional genealogist is in a tract on Clann Ui Dhuibhdhabhoireann ascribed to him to which is appended a poem on the same subject '[Ni crann] aontoraidh an uaisle' (incomplete) (Macnamara). 
Tadhg is chiefly known, however, as the initiator and chief protagonist of the poetic contention known as 'Iomarbhagh na bhfileadh' dealing with the rival historical claims to supremacy in Ireland of the descendants of the mythical Eibhear representing the northern half of Ireland, and those of Eireamhon representing the southern half. In all he contributed nine poems of varying length to the controversy, beginning with 'Olc do thagrais a Thorna', a criticism of claims in favour of the northern half by the ancient author Torna Eigeas. In a letter from Dublin dated June 1617 he issued an invitation to other protagonists to meet at Gort, co. Galway, in order to submit the dispute to arbitration by judges to be nominated by both sides. The letter with his own signature survives (Breatnach, 97-9). 
A number of religious compositions are also ascribed to Tadhg's authorship including an address to the cross of Christ ('A chroch De deana mo leigheas') and a nativity poem ('Deanadh go subhach siol Adhaimh') (Mac Cionnaith, nos. 2, 17). 
A tradition recorded by nineteenth-century co. Clare sources tells that Tadhg was murdered in 1652 by a Cromwellian soldier who was granted his Dunogan lands, but no verification is available and the date given conflicts with the evidence of Bruodinus who understood his relation to have died about 1621 (McGrath, 62). The only contemporary evidence that Tadhg lived beyond that date is found in a list of names drawn up by Don Philip O'Sullivan Beare about the year 1625 in which 'Thaddaeus MacBruodinus' is mentioned among a list of contemporary Irish lawyers and doctors and poets on the continent at the time of writing (Gwynn, 11). It may be therefore that Tadhg left Ireland following the death of Thomond in 1624. 


@@@@@


doc= 17368


Mac Caba, Cathaoir (fl. 1728-1739), poet and harper, was born at Cloghballybeg in the parish of Mullagh, co. Cavan. Throughout his life he was the intimate friend of the celebrated harper Turlogh O'Carolan 
(Toirdhealbhach O Cearbhallain; 1670-1738)
, who addressed two poems to him, one of them on hearing a report of his death -- the report, which was false, originated as a practical joke played on O'Carolan by his friend. Mac Caba addressed several poems and some miscellaneous verses to O'Carolan. Many of these were humorous (such as his contribution to a 'scolding match' between the two) but one of them was a lament on the great harper's death which has been adjudged to evince 'a competence in versification and a depth of feeling to which [O'Carolan] could hardly attain' (O'Sullivan, 1.68). Mac Caba had dealings in 1727-8 with the noted scholar Charles O'Conor (1710-1791) and spent some periods at the latter's home at Belanagare, co. Roscommon, where they exchanged harp tunes. Mac Caba was friendly with the O'Donnell family of Larkfield, near Manorhamilton, co. Leitrim, and he composed a lament in 1736 for a relation of that family's, Colonel Manus O'Donnell of Newport, co. Mayo. In addition to a small number of other extant poems, there is record of at least two other works by Mac Caba that seem not to have survived. While it has been suggested that Mac Caba may have died as early as 1739, one authority declares that he outlived O'Carolan by many years and that, 'having obtained a licence to teach, as a 'Popish school-master', he earned a scanty subsistence in his old age and finally died in want' (Hardiman, 1.lxii). He was said to have been buried in the churchyard of Mullagh, near the well of St Ultan. 


@@@@@


doc= 17369


McCabe, Edward (1816-1885), cardinal and Roman Catholic archbishop of Dublin, born at Dublin on 14 February 1816, was the son of poor parents. He was educated at Father Michael Doyle's school at Arran Quay, Dublin. In 1833 he entered St Patrick's College, Maynooth, where he was ordained on 24 June 1839. He was for some time curate at Clontarf, co. Dublin, and then transferred to the pro-cathedral parish of Dublin. Daniel Murray and his successor to the archbishopric, Paul Cullen, recognized his organizing talent; he was appointed a canon in 1855 and he refused a nomination to the bishopric of Grahamstown, Cape Colony, in the same year. In 1856 Cullen appointed him parish priest of St Nicholas Without, and he was promoted to the post of vicar-general of the archdiocese. His health gave way under the strain of work, and in 1865 he was removed to the parish of Kingstown (Dun Laoghaire). There he built a new church at Monkstown and opened a local hospital. In 1872 he drew up the address given by the Catholics of the archdiocese of Dublin in answer to the remarks of William Nicholas Keogh, the judge in the celebrated Galway election case. As Cardinal Cullen was becoming infirm, McCabe was on 25 July 1877 consecrated bishop of Gadara 'in partibus infidelium', and appointed as his auxiliary. After Cullen's death in 1878, McCabe became archbishop of Dublin on 23 March 1879. He at once issued a circular calling attention to the position of Irish Roman Catholics with regard to university education ('The Times', 1 April 1879). He was installed as archbishop on 4 May 1879, and on 12 March 1882 was created a cardinal. 
In his politics McCabe was opposed to the campaign for home rule and land reform led by Charles Stewart Parnell and Michael Davitt. Though aware of the plight of tenant farmers and appalled by wholesale evictions, he had sympathy for the economic difficulties facing landlords. He regularly condemned agrarian outrages and in October 1881 issued a pastoral letter denouncing in fierce terms the Land League's 'no rent' manifesto. McCabe zealously sought to keep priests from engaging in political agitation. All of this left him isolated among his fellow prelates and increasingly alienated from the generality of Irish nationalist opinion. So great was his unpopularity that his return from Rome in 1882 with the red hat passed almost unnoticed in his native city, and on one occasion his life was threatened. He was a member of the senate of the Royal University of Ireland, and served in 1880 on the Mansion House committee in Dublin for the relief of famine throughout Ireland. Sandwiched between the reigns of Cullen and Walsh, two giant figures in ecclesiastical and political spheres in nineteenth-century Ireland, McCabe's period as archbishop might be dismissed as a mere interlude were it not for the eventful times in which he lived. None the less, he enjoyed the confidence of the papacy at a time when Anglo-Vatican relations were undergoing a temporary thaw. He was also the last archbishop of Dublin to be made a cardinal. Plagued by ill health during the latter part of his administration, McCabe died at his home in Eblana Avenue, Kingstown, on 11 February 1885 and was the first archbishop of Dublin to be buried at Glasnevin. 


@@@@@


doc= 17370


MacCabe, William Bernard (1801-1891), journalist and historian, was born in Dublin on 23 November 1801, of Roman Catholic parents. In 1823 he joined the Dublin 'Morning Register' as a reporter; for the next decade he worked for the Dublin press, reporting many of Daniel O'Connell's early speeches and editing several papers. About 1833 he moved to London, where he worked as a parliamentary reporter on the 'Morning Chronicle' and (from 1835) also served on the staff of the 'Morning Herald'. During the parliamentary recesses he spent much time abroad, acting as a foreign correspondent; he also wrote critical reviews for both papers. In 1847 he was appointed consul in London for the Oriental Republic of Uruguay; he resigned this post and all other London appointments about 1851, when he moved back to Ireland to become editor (until 1857) of the 'Weekly Telegraph', a Roman Catholic newspaper under the influence of Cardinal Wiseman. Subsequently he seems to have lived for some time in Brittany. 
In 1847-54 MacCabe published, in three enormous volumes, 'A Catholic History of England', a work consisting of extracts from monastic chroniclers, dovetailed to form a continuous narrative. MacCabe aimed not only to introduce his readership to neglected works of early English literature, but also to allow them to form their own historical opinions from primary sources. His footnotes reveal him to be extremely erudite, but almost criminally naive in his neglect of such rudimentary critical approaches as were then practised: he fails to contextualize his sources fully, and analysis of their content and credibility is limited to simplistic comparisons with other sources for the same events. However, the second volume of the 'Catholic History' was reviewed enthusiastically in September 1849 in the 'Dublin Review' (to which MacCabe himself was a contributor): praising it as 'a solid and instructive... an orderly and agreeable narrative' ('Dublin Review', 130), the critic emphasized its value in correcting the anti-Catholic perspectives of such historians as Sharon Turner and Samuel Laing. MacCabe had originally intended to continue his history up to at least the English Reformation, but no further volumes of the 'Catholic History' were published. 
MacCabe also wrote several turgid historical novels, set in early medieval Europe and later translated into several continental languages: these included 'Bertha' (3 vols., 1851) and 'Adelaide, Queen of Italy' (1856). In 1861 he published the more interesting 'Agnes Arnold' (1861), a novel set in the time of the 1798 Irish rising. MacCabe translated several works into English, including J. J. I. von Dollinger's 'Christentum und Kirche' (1860), which appeared as 'The Church and Churches' in 1862. He contributed to 'Once a Week' and 'Notes and Queries', and also published articles in the Catholic 'Dublin Review' on subjects ranging from Spanish novelists to the 1848 revolutions. MacCabe died on 8 December 1891 at his home, 2 Eglinton Terrace, Donnybrook, co. Dublin. 


@@@@@


doc= 17371


McCabe, William Putnam (c.1776-1821), Irish nationalist and cotton manufacturer, was born in Belfast, the third of four children of Thomas McCabe ('c'.1739-1820), watchmaker, cotton manufacturer, and United Irishman, and his first wife, Jean Woolsey (died June 1790), daughter of John Woolsey, merchant of Portadown. His middle name, Putnam, derived from a distant relative who served under George Washington. He was educated in Belfast, specializing in mechanics and drawing, before working in his father's mill. Being somewhat unruly as a young man, he was sent to train in Glasgow and Manchester in the hope that this would have a maturing effect. After returning to Belfast he joined the Society of United Irishmen and was employed as an emissary by the Belfast committee, being sent to Connaught in late 1796. McCabe travelled around Ireland, organizing civilian societies into military units. 
An excellent mimic, McCabe adopted various Irish and Scottish dialects to conceal his identity from the authorities. He took great care to avoid arrest, but his reputation was such that a price of $500 was placed on his head. A description was circulated thus: 'height five foot four inches: well made: walks smart: full face: black or dark eyes: dark hair: whiskers: good complexion: not corpulent but pretty lusty: a great deal of vivacity: wears pantaloons and boots' (McCabe, 17). McCabe's escapes from capture are legendary. Arrested in Dublin in May 1798, he persuaded his Dumbarton fencible guards that he was an innocent Scot, wrongly apprehended while out for a stroll. So convinced were they by his accent that he was released. On another occasion McCabe evaded capture by fooling his pursuers into thinking that he had escaped through his open bedroom window when, in fact, he had hidden under the mattress. 
McCabe was aide-de-camp to the rebel commander-in-chief Lord Edward Fitzgerald. His role in the rising is, however, unclear. Some accounts place him at Naas and Kildare before he joined the belated French invasion force under Humbert, which landed in the west in August 1798. The insurrection crushed, McCabe returned to Dublin, thence to Wales and Scotland. He travelled regularly between Dublin, London, Hamburg, and Paris, continuing his intrigue on behalf of the United Irishmen by, for example, conspiring with the United Britons and Colonel Edward Despard in 1802. In 1801 at Christ Church, Southwark, London, he married Elizabeth McNeil, 'nee' Lockhart ('c'.1777-1806), widow of Captain Alexander McNeil of the 8th light dragoons, and sister of Sir Alexander McDonald Lockhart of Lee, Scotland. According to a copy of the marriage record, McCabe was married as 'William Lee, of Manchester' ('Pallot's Marriage Index'). The couple moved that year to Paris and forcibly took with them Elizabeth's ward, Louisa Neville, who remained in France until about 1811 and later married the Canadian politician Thomas Chandler Haliburton, William and Elizabeth had one daughter, Elizabeth ('b'. 'c'.1802). 
McCabe subsequently established a cotton business near Rouen, where he received a gift of 4000 francs from Napoleon, who visited the factory. There McCabe is said to have helped train Irish emigres for Robert Emmet's 1803 uprising. Upon selling his mill at Rouen, he loaned money to the United Irishman Arthur O'Connor, whose failure to repay the debt led to protracted court battles, in both France and Ireland. McCabe returned to Ireland regularly between 1810 and 1814 to pursue his claims, but was arrested in 1814, only to be freed by order of the chief secretary, Robert Peel, on condition that he leave Ireland. On returning again in 1817 he was arrested and sent to Kilmainham gaol, Dublin, where he languished for eighteen months. At the end of 1818 he returned to France, but was detained again in Glasgow the following year. 
Towards the end of his life McCabe was infirm with rheumatism. He died in Paris on 6 January 1821 and was buried at the Vaugirard cemetery in Paris. His daughter, Elizabeth, married Andrew Nesbitt of co. Meath two weeks after McCabe's death. Nesbitt promptly spent the several thousand pounds left by McCabe to his daughter, and when he died in 1839 Elizabeth and her children were left destitute. 


@@@@@


doc= 17372


MacCaghwell, Hugh (1571?-1626), Roman Catholic archbishop of Armagh and theologian, was born at Sall, co. Down. The names of his parents are unknown, but he was a member of a bardic family originally seated at Clogher in co. Tyrone, the name of his clan being generally Latinized as Cavellus. On reaching adulthood he went to the Isle of Man to study the classics and dialectics. By 1599 he was recalled to Ulster by Hugh O'Neill, earl of Tyrone, who appointed him tutor to his sons, Henry and Hugh. In 1600 Tyrone sent him and Henry to Spain, where they settled at Salamanca. There MacCaghwell attended a philosophy course at the university and joined the Franciscans in 1604. He may later have taught briefly theology at Salamanca. About 1606 he went to the Spanish Netherlands, having being appointed chief chaplain of the Irish regiment in Flanders in December 1605. There he became one of the leading figures in the local Irish emigre community, part of the so-called northern clique. This highly influential group adopted a strongly anti-English line and effectively controlled the flow of patronage from the Spanish crown to the Irish exiles. MacCaghwell played a key role in securing the foundation of a college for Irish Franciscans at Louvain in 1607, becoming professor of theology and guardian of the college in the same year. Over the next seven years he successfully devoted himself to establishing the college on a firm financial basis, going on many fund-raising tours outside the Netherlands. 
In 1613 MacCaghwell was approached by English agents who wanted to open negotiations with Tyrone, who had fled Ulster in 1607, for the earl's peaceful return to Ireland. Nothing came of this as the Spanish preferred to keep Tyrone and the English estranged. Generally, MacCaghwell stayed out of political matters, preferring to concentrate on his administrative duties and theological studies. In 1618 he published under his Irish name Aodh Mac Aingil 'Scathan shacramuinte na haithridhe' or 'A mirror of the sacrament of penance', a devotional work written in Irish. Although this acknowledged James I as the rightful ruler of Ireland, it also identified Ireland as a Catholic nation and demonstrates a very modern sense of national consciousness. Moreover, the work is a prominent example of how the literary language of contemporary Irish poets was used to produce a readable prose text. As a theologian MacCaghwell was held in high regard and specialized in the works of John Duns Scotus, whose doctrines he strongly defended. He published a number of theological tracts under his Latinized name Hugo Cavellus in the 1620s, including editions of a number of Scotus's works, which brought him a high reputation throughout Europe. 
In 1620 MacCaghwell represented his province at the chapter-general of the Franciscans held in Spain. He was subsequently made definitor-general of the Franciscan order and spent most of 1622 in Paris, reforming the Parisian Franciscan convent. He was summoned in 1623 to Rome, where he read theology at the convent of Ara Coeli and was highly regarded by Pope Urban VIII. Partly through MacCaghwell's influence an Irish college was established at St Isidore's in Rome. When an election to the generalship of the Franciscan order was held in 1624 he was second in the poll. Subsequently, when the archbishopric of Armagh fell vacant with the death of Peter Lombard in 1625, John O'Neill, earl of Tyrone, Albert O'Donnell, earl of Tyrconnell, and Luke Wadding all strongly urged MacCaghwell's promotion to that see. He was consecrated on 7 June 1626 and immediately prepared to journey to Ireland. However, he fell ill suddenly and died of a fever at St Isidore's on 22 September 1626. A highly ascetic lifestyle combined with a delicate constitution contributed heavily to his death. He was buried in the church of St Isidore, where Tyrone had a monument placed over his grave. There is a fresco of him by Emmanuele di Como in the theological hall at St Isidore's College. 


@@@@@


doc= 17373


Maccall, William (1812-1888), writer and public lecturer, was born in Largs, Ayrshire, on 25 February 1812, the eldest child of six sons and six daughters of John Maccall ('b'. 1793), a builder, and his wife, Elizabeth Murdoch ('b'. 1792). He later told the biographer Francis Espinasse (1823-1912) that he enlisted in the dragoons but was soon bought off. Then, intended for the ministry in the evangelical United Secession church, to which his parents belonged, he matriculated in the University of Glasgow in 1827. By the time he left the university in 1833 doubt had set in, and he was attracted by the preaching of the Revd George Harris (1794-1859), the Unitarian minister at Glasgow, who secured his appointment as minister at Greenock in 1833-4. 
Maccall then entered a theological seminary in Geneva, where he learned German and became an ardent disciple of Rousseau. On returning to England he supplied pulpits in London, and in 1837 became minister at Moor Lane Chapel, Bolton, where Harris had been the first and only truly successful pastor. By 1840 the declining congregation was unable to pay a stipend, and Maccall resigned. After a brief involvement with the anti-corn law and Chartist agitations, he failed in candidacies at Bristol and Brixton. A visit to James Forrest (died 1858), minister at Devonport, whom he had known at Glasgow and who had succeeded him at Greenock, led to his appointment at Crediton, in Devon, in 1841. After three months he moved to Coseley but, disliking it, returned to Crediton, where he preached until 1846, supplementing his stipend of $100 by teaching languages. 
While at Bolton, Maccall had courted Mary (1819-1837), fifth child and fourth daughter of John Haselden (1785?-1835), a cotton manufacturer who belonged to Moor Lane. Five months after her death, at the age of eighteen, he proposed to her older sister Alice (1813-1878); they were married on 3 March 1842, helped by a small legacy from her uncle. Any expectations from the Haselden inheritance collapsed with the failure of the family firm following a disastrous mill fire in November 1842. Their only child, Elizabeth, was born the next year. 
In 1839, in a sermon published as 'The Clergy and the Nation', Maccall told the Unitarian congregation at Todmorden that they must demand that their ministers preach and act in politics or choose those who would. He later insisted that he did not preach politics at Crediton, making only appropriate references to the game laws and the corn laws; but one member of the congregation organized a campaign against his 'indecent political declamation'. While the congregation supported their minister, his stipend was reduced to $40 by what he alleged was the trustees' financial mismanagement. He resigned in mid-summer 1846 and moved to London, supplying pulpits -- 'of the least 'tight-laced' Unitarian species' Carlyle called them (T. Carlyle to O. Blewitt, 6 March 1853, Archives of the Royal Literary Fund) -- and trying to maintain himself and his family by writing and lecturing. 
The most curious surviving instance of Maccall's potboiling is a collection of materials for the history of amber, translated mostly from German and published in 'Cope's Tobacco Plant', the house organ of a Liverpool tobacco manufacturer. More seriously, in 1854 he translated Spinoza's 'Tractatus politicus', a French textbook in biology in 1877, and 'Christian Legends', from the collection by Karl Eduard von Bulow (1803-1853), in 1884. He had mixed success in writing for periodicals, quarrels or changes in editorship cutting short his contributions to 'The Spectator', 'The Critic', 'Fraser's Magazine', and the 'Gentleman's Magazine'. Many of his reviews and essays were subsequently republished in books. 
A tall, erect man, with a wonderful conversational gift, Maccall profoundly impressed John Sterling (1806-1844), who met him on a stagecoach in 1842 and whose letter written at the time led in 1848 to a meeting with Thomas Carlyle, who went out of his way to help with connections. When Maccall suffered a serious illness and mental collapse, Carlyle gave impressive support for an application in 1853 to the Royal Literary Fund that resulted in a grant of $40. Carlyle continued to think well of Maccall, though he described him as 'harsh-edged, as a rusty 'lipped' [broken-edged] razor' and suspected that his difficulties with his congregations had been largely of his own making (T. Carlyle to M. Carlyle, 13 Feb 1853; Fielding, 'Collected Letters of Thomas and Jane Welsh Carlyle', 28 2000, 40). Certainly his aggressiveness and savagery alienated editors and some well-disposed friends, and the continued sympathy of both John Stuart Mill and George Eliot did not prevent his harshly criticizing their work in publications such as 'The Newest Materialism' (1873). Espinasse remarked that, while Maccall could be indulgent with foreign writers, he 'seemed to regard as a criminal offence the mere writing of an English book' (Espinasse, 251). 
Predictably, these qualities were better adapted to the lecture platform, although even there Maccall's self-absorption could alienate audiences. He had given up the Unitarian connection by the 1850s, distressed, like his friend Forrest, by what he came to see as Unitarian frigidity, shallowness, and narrowness (Maccall, 'Via crucis', 21), but he remained a Christian of a cloudy and expansive sort, suggested in the medieval ideals set out in the preface to his 1884 translation of 'Christian Legends'. 
Most of Maccall's subsequent work must, however, be seen as flowing from 'The Elements of Individualism', thirty-five lectures given to his Crediton congregation in 1845-6 and published in book form by John Chapman in 1847. This elaborate credo, rambling and self-indulgent, is a call to the fullest individual development, to reveal God existing in every man and woman, and a passionate plea for toleration. John Stuart Mill saw the work as a major predecessor of his 'On Liberty' (1859), one of the books Maccall reviewed so stringently. He also revealed a Carlylean prophetic streak, hailing the hero both as individual -- notably in his 1857 panegyric on Charles James Napier (1782-1853) -- and as archetype in 'The Agents of Civilization' (1840; repr. 1893), shallow, inspirational ruminations on the hero, poet, priest, artist, prophet, philosopher, apostle, and martyr. In 'National Missions' (1855) each of the great national cultures is matched to a single characteristic: Egypt and religion, Greece and beauty, Palestine and faith, Italy and art, France and manners, England and science, and so on. 
In 1878 Alice Maccall died after long suffering from a blood disorder. 'Via crucis' (1880) is a husband's passionate lament and a harrowing revelation of his own life of failure and misery. He died on 19 November 1888 at his home, Fountain Villa, Woolwich Road, Bexleyheath, Kent. 


@@@@@


doc= 17374


Mac Cairteain, Uilliam (1667/8-1724), poet and scribe, was born in Munster; a manuscript in his own hand records that he was aged thirty-four on 30 March 1702 (Royal Irish Academy, MS 23 H 18, p. 137). The names of his parents are not known. His wife's name was Cait, and she was evidently related to another Cork poet and scribe, Eoghan O Caoimh (1656-1726). In his youth Uilliam Mac Cairteain served in the cavalry of the army of James II in Ireland and was a participant in the ambush of Williamite soldiers at Beal Atha Salainn (Six Mile Water) close to his home in co. Cork in April 1691. After the war he lived as a farmer just north of Cork city on a farm straddling the parishes of Carraig na bhFear and Teampall Geal (Whitechurch). The locality was renowned for its poetic and scribal tradition. Approximately thirty of his poetic compositions survive including works in praise of local Catholic gentry and laments on exiled gentry and clergy. He also composed humorous poems. Little information survives concerning his family, but a fellow poet's composition on the occasion of the marriage of his son in 1725 reveals that he had a son named Donall who was himself a poet and inherited his books. Traditional sources suggest he also had sons named Tadhg and Sean and daughters whose names are not recorded. 
A small number of manuscripts in Irish transcribed by Mac Cairteain survives, containing stories from the Fiannaiocht (Ossianic) tradition, selected poetry, principally by fellow Munster poets Daibhi O Bruadair and Eoghan O Caoimh, and devotional texts. Mac Cairteain's scholarly contacts included John Sleyne, Catholic bishop of Cork from 1693 to 1703, from whom he borrowed manuscripts and for whom he wrote poetry. He may also have been employed by Sleyne to copy manuscripts. He was part of the same scholarly circle as the Revd Conor Mac Cairteain (1658-1737) who may have been his parish priest. Mac Cairteain was closely associated with the poet and scribe Eoghan O Caoimh and was godfather to Eoghan's son Art, who died in France in 1709 while studying for the priesthood. Their association was not without its tensions. Mac Cairteain wrote poetry in praise of Donall O Colmain's prose satire 'Parliament na mBan'. In his own locality Mac Cairteain enjoyed the patronage of the McCarthy family. He may also have enjoyed the patronage of the prominent Cork Jacobite Sir James Cotter (died 1705), and he was an admirer of both Sir James and his son. One of his poems revealed that Sir James had been responsible for the death of the regicide John Lisle in 1664. 
After the death of Diarmaid Mac Seain Bui Mhic Carthaigh in 1705 Mac Cairteain became head of the local court of poetry which had been based at Gleann na Ratha, Blarney, co. Cork, and later at Teampall Geal. This assembly sought to maintain standards of poetic composition. The poetry of a younger poet from the same locality, Sean O Murchu na Raithineach (1700-1762), indicates that he was indebted to the encouragement he received from Mac Cairteain who also lent him books. On Mac Cairteain's death in November 1724 he was succeeded as chief poet by Liam ruadh Mac Coitir ('c'.1690-1738) who was in turn succeeded by Sean na Raithineach. Mac Cairteain was buried in the parish of Teampall Geal, co. Cork, and was long remembered in the locality for his wit and humour. 


@@@@@


doc= 17375


M'Carthy, Sir Charles (1764-1824), colonial governor and army officer, came from the Irish sept of the name. He was the second son of Jean Gabriel Gueroult and Charlotte Michelle, granddaughter of Michael MacCarthy, who went to France with James II. An uncle, Charles Thaddeus Francois MacCarthy, knight of St Louis, and an officer of the guards of Louis XV, persuaded M'Carthy to adopt his mother's maiden name. M'Carthy's elder brother (1765-1793), a captain in the Irish brigade in the French service, died unmarried; a sister married Charles Francois, Comte Fontaine de Morve, and died childless. 
After the revolution the Irish brigade, formerly in the service of France, was reorganized in British pay and M'Carthy was appointed on 1 October 1794 ensign in the regiment of James Henry, Count Conway -- afterwards called the 5th regiment of the Irish brigade -- with which he served in the West Indies. He was made a lieutenant on 31 December 1795 and captain on 1 October 1796. In 1800 he was appointed captain 52nd foot and, on 14 April 1804, major in the New Brunswick fencibles (afterwards the Old 104th foot), a fine body of backwoodsmen which he commanded for several years. On 30 May 1811 he was promoted to lieutenant-colonel in the Royal African Corps, and the year after was made governor of Senegal and Goree. When these settlements were returned to France under the treaty of 1814 M'Carthy was transferred to Sierra Leone as governor, and when Cape Coast Castle was taken out of the hands of the Royal African Company, he was sent to govern there as well. On 22 November 1820 he was knighted (KCMG), and on 19 July 1821 attained the rank of colonel. 
In December 1823, M'Carthy received news that the Asante, incensed at the protection given to the Fante, were moving down in force against Cape Coast. After arranging the defence of the settlement by African auxiliaries, on 10 January 1824 M'Carthy set out with a small advance force, consisting of a company of the Royal Africans, and some colonial militia and volunteers. Exhausted with marching in the heavy rains, and having expended its ammunition, on 21 January 1824 the little band was routed by an overwhelming force of Asante. M'Carthy was mortally wounded, and his head taken by the Asante as a war trophy. M'Carthy had tried to advance Christianity and Western customs, particularly in the villages set up for recaptives. 


@@@@@


doc= 17376


MacCarthy, Cormac Oge Laidhir, lord of Muskerry (d. 1536), chieftain, was the son of Cormac MacCarthy, lord of Muskerry (died 1495), and Mary, daughter of Edmund Fitzmaurice, baron of Lixnaw. In 1498 Cormac Oge killed his uncle Eoghan MacCarthy, lord of Muskerry, who three years earlier had killed his father and taken over the lordship. In this he was aided by his brother-in-law Thomas fitz Thomas Fitzgerald, subsequently eleventh earl of Desmond, the two proving firm allies and important actors in Munster's political history in the early sixteenth century. In 1501 Cormac Oge became lord of Muskerry. He continued to be involved in events outside his lordship and participated in the expedition led by the lord deputy, Gerald Fitzgerald, eighth earl of Kildare, against Teige O'Brien of Thomond in 1510. In 1516 he joined with his brother-in-law Thomas in support of James fitz Maurice Fitzgerald, subsequently tenth earl of Desmond, then in conflict with John fitz Thomas Fitzgerald, subsequently twelfth 'de facto' earl of Desmond. In 1520, however, they sided against James, who had succeeded as tenth earl earlier that year, and inflicted a very heavy defeat on him at the battle of Mourne, co. Cork. Cormac and Thomas again attacked James in December 1527 when they joined Piers Butler, earl of Ormond, in besieging him at Dungarvan. 
Thomas fitz Thomas succeeded as eleventh earl of Desmond in 1529, and when he died five years later Cormac supported Thomas's grandson and heir James fitz Maurice Fitzgerald, twelfth de jure earl, who was married to Cormac's daughter Mary. He provided James with military support and wrote to Henry VIII on his behalf in 1535, but James was opposed by the majority of the Desmond Geraldines and was in England by the following year. Cormac met Lord Lieutenant Thomas Howard, earl of Surrey, at Waterford in 1520 and appeared willing to hold his lands of the crown, but nothing came of the meeting. 
Cormac Oge married Katherine, daughter of John, Lord Barry, with whom he apparently had at least five sons: Tadhg, who succeeded as lord of Muskerry (died 1565), Diarmuid, Eoghan, Ceallachan, and Cormac; there were also at least three daughters: Julia (Shely, Cicely), Ellen (Joan), and Mary. He died in 1536 and was buried at Kilcrea, co. Cork. 


@@@@@


doc= 17377


MacCarthy, Denis Florence (1817-1882), Young Irelander and poet, was born at 24 Lower Sackville Street, Dublin, on 26 May 1817, the son of John (1786/7-1857) and Sarah MacCarthy (1787/8-1845). A strong Catholic, he wanted to become a priest and went to Maynooth, but after two years of study, he changed to law at Trinity College, Dublin; he was called to the bar in 1846. However, his main interest was literature, and he also developed a keen interest in foreign languages, especially Spanish. His first poem, 'My Wishes', was published in the 'Dublin Satirist' on 12 April 1834, and for the next two years he contributed both prose and verse to this magazine. 
MacCarthy supported Daniel O'Connell's Loyal National Repeal Association, but his political interests were always subordinate to his literary tastes. Nevertheless, he employed his literary talents to encourage a cultural revival in Ireland, believing that it would lead to a repeal of the Union between Great Britain and Ireland. On 14 October 1843 his first contribution appeared in 'The Nation', to which he afterwards regularly contributed political verse and poetry under the pseudonyms of Desmond, Vig, Trifolium, Antonio, and S.E.Y., or above his initials. Some of his poems were published in the new edition of 'The Spirit of the Nation' (1844). In 1845 he was a founder member of the '82 Club, a half-military organization, formed by upper-class members of the Repeal Association and Young Ireland. 
In 1846 he edited 'The Poets and Dramatists of Ireland' and 'The Book of Irish Ballads' for Young Ireland's 'Library of Ireland', with introductory essays on the history and religion of the Irish, and on ballad poetry. In 1847 he was a member of the original council of the Irish Confederation, but 'was seldom seen at a committee' (Duffy, 'Four Years', 441). The following year he ceased to be a member of the council. Duffy maintains that MacCarthy was part of the Young Ireland movement because of his close friendship with 'The Nation' writers, rather than because of passionate political convictions. He describes him as having a good sense of humour, and being charming in society, but reluctant to make public speeches (Duffy, 'Young Ireland', 133ff.). This reluctance to attract public attention might perhaps explain his absence in purely political activities, rather than being due to a lack of strong convictions. He certainly was no radical, and was not involved in the revolutionary activities of the Confederation in 1848. However, he resumed writing for the new 'Nation' in 1849, albeit contributing to it less frequently than before. 
During the time of his involvement in Young Ireland, he married Elizabeth Donnelly (1820/21-1874). The couple had nine children, six of whom predeceased him. His eldest son, John, published a collection of his father's poems in 1882. His daughter, Sister Mary Stanislaus MacCarthy OSD, was also a poet, publishing predominantly religious poetry. 
Most of MacCarthy's original work and his translations from Spanish, German, French, Italian, Greek, and Latin poetry were published in periodicals. In 1850 the first collection of his poetry, 'Ballads, Poems, and Lyrics Original and Translated', appeared. In 1853 MacCarthy published 'Dramas of Calderon', his first translations of the works of the Spanish dramatist Calderon. All in all, MacCarthy translated fifteen of Calderon's plays. On the other hand, some of MacCarthy's early poems were translated into French by Le Chevalier de Chatelain and published in 1863-4. 
In 1853-4, MacCarthy was appointed to a professorship in English literature at the Catholic University, Dublin, but being of a restless nature, he resigned after a few months, because he did not like the sedentary nature of the post. In 1857 he published ''The Bell-Founder' and other Poems' and ''Underglimpses' and other Poems'. In 1864 the ill health of some members of his family forced MacCarthy to leave Ireland for long periods of time. He travelled extensively on the continent, before finally settling in London in 1871, where he was granted a civil-list pension of $100 a year. In 1872 he published 'Shelley's Early Life', and from 1873 onwards he regularly wrote religious poetry and prose for the 'Irish Monthly'. At the request of the committees in charge of the celebrations, MacCarthy wrote the centenary odes in honour of Daniel O'Connell (1875) and Thomas Moore (1879). He was also elected a member of the Real Academia of Spain. In 1881 it presented him with a commemorative medal of Calderon's bicentenary, in recognition of MacCarthy's work in Spanish literature. MacCarthy spent the last few months of his life in Ireland, and died at his home, 4 Herbert Terrace, Blackrock, co. Dublin, on 7 April 1882. He was buried on 11 April in the family vault in Glasnevin cemetery, Dublin. A committee was set up in Dublin to honour his memory. 


@@@@@


doc= 17378


Maccarthy, Donough, styled fourth earl of Clancarty (1668-1734), Jacobite army officer, was born in Blarney, co. Cork, the only son of Callaghan Maccarthy, third earl of Clancarty (died 1676), and Elizabeth, daughter of George Fitzgerald, sixteenth earl of Kildare. Maccarthy was the grandson of Donough MacCarthy, second Viscount Muskerry, a general of the Irish forces in Munster supporting Charles I during the revolution. In exile the viscount was created earl of Clancarty, and he returned to Ireland after the restoration of Charles II. During this period the Clancartys, staunch Catholics and loyal to the Stuart kings, were one of the noblest and richest families in Ireland, with estates in Cork and co. Kerry. On his father's death on 21 November 1676 Maccarthy became the fourth earl of Clancarty. The family's wealth and power ensured that the young earl would be drawn into the Catholic-protestant struggles for control over the Irish kingdom. His mother, Elizabeth, a protestant, was appointed Clancarty's guardian by her late husband. To fend off Catholic influences and ensure a proper protestant education for her son, she placed him under the care of John Fell, bishop of Oxford and dean of Christ Church. 
It was while Donough was at Oxford that he drew the attention of Charles II and became the subject of one of the greatest scandals of the day. Charles, concerned that there were too many 'old Cromwellians' in the Irish army, intended to root out the protestant veterans of the interregnum and replace them with loyal Catholic royalists. In 1684 Charles began to reorganize the army under Richard Talbot, the first earl of Tyrconnell, and purge Irish officers, replacing them with loyal Catholics. The first commission he granted was to Colonel Justin MacCarthy, Clancarty's uncle. Justin, a veteran of the armies of Louis XIV of France, had strong ties to the Stuart cause and Catholic factions at court. Married to Arabella, daughter of Thomas Wentworth, earl of Strafford, MacCarthy was also an adviser to James, duke of York. It was MacCarthy who proposed to enlist the young earl of Clancarty in the Catholic cause. The king sent a letter, countersigned by the earl of Sunderland, to John Fell commanding that the young earl should 'keep his Christmas at London with his uncle'. Fell suspected subterfuge but, unable to contact the earl's mother and unwilling to dismiss the king's wishes, sent the boy to Sunderland's London house. On his arrival in London, Clancarty (aged fifteen or sixteen years old) was quickly married to Sunderland's second daughter, Lady Elizabeth Spencer (died 1704), who by various accounts was between eleven and thirteen years old, at Westminster Abbey on 31 December 1684. The marriage caused a great scandal. Intended to bind one of Ireland's most powerful families more closely to the Stuart cause, it was seen by many as a crude attempt by the king to advance his Irish policies. The Sunderlands enlisted the aid of the diarist John Evelyn to break the news to the earl's distraught mother. Gilbert Burnet, bishop of Salisbury, wrote an account of the incident in his 'History of my Own Time'. Attempting to cover up Sunderland's role in Charles's 'sinister' policies, Burnet later deleted references to his friend in a subsequent draft that was eventually published. 
Clancarty was immediately recalled to Ireland, before consummating his marriage and without his new bride. In defiance of his mother, he converted to Catholicism within a year. On the accession of James II, Clancarty received command of a troop of horse, giving the Stuarts another loyal Catholic officer in the Irish army. The appointment prompted a letter of complaint from the earl of Clarendon that the commission deprived a Captain Brook 'of his troop of horse in Lord Ardglasse's regiment though he gave sixteen hundred pounds for it not two years ago'. Serving with his uncle Justin MacCarthy under the command of Tyrconnell, Clancarty's service amounted to little more than licensed banditry. He had a reputation as a brutal, even sadistic, commander. Clancarty allegedly had a man hung up by his hair and ordered that another, a butcher in Mallow, be tossed in a blanket. According to J. P. Kenyon, Clancarty also took a second wife and fathered a son. In May 1689, though under age, he was granted a royal dispensation that allowed him to sit in the Irish House of Lords. 
At the outbreak of the revolution of 1688 Clancarty, a loyal supporter of James II, greeted the deposed king when James invaded Ireland in 1689. Clancarty was appointed lord of the bedchamber and later colonel of the 4th regiment of foot, later called Clancarty's regiment. Fighting beside his uncle, who was now a general titled by James II as Viscount Mountcashel, Clancarty participated throughout the ill-fated Irish campaign. Mountcashel was wounded and captured during the campaign. He later broke parole and entered the army of Louis XIV. Clancarty surrendered to Marlborough at the siege of Cork in October 1690 and was sent to the Tower of London. The earl's estate (yielding a rent of about $10,000 a year) was seized, though the dowager countess and her daughters were provided a pension. He was attainted and his title forfeited on 11 May 1691. The bulk of the forfeited estates went to William Bentinck, Lord Woodstock. 
On 27 October 1694 Clancarty escaped from the tower by leaving a 'periwig block' dressed up in his bed to fool the watch. The guards allegedly found a note pinned to the blanket with the inscription 'this block must answer for me'. He joined James II's court at St Germain as commander of the second troop of Horse Guards, disbanded in 1697 after the treaty of Ryswick. By this time, Clancarty was thoroughly estranged from the earl of Sunderland, who considered him little more than a dissolute brigand. Sunderland refused to support a petition for the return of Clancarty's confiscated estates and blocked the earl's efforts to reunite with his wife, Sunderland's daughter. Nevertheless Clancarty, who had not seen Lady Clancarty in over a decade, returned to England in secret. On an evening in late December he sent for her. Elizabeth, now in her twenties, a slim woman with dark good looks, expressive eyes, and a high forehead, was still loyal to Clancarty and agreed to meet him at his mother's house. Clancarty tried to convince her to consummate their marriage, but she refused. The earl persisted, following her that night to Norfolk House at St James Square, London, where she went to bed with him. Lady Clancarty's maid revealed the earl's presence to a porter, who ran to Sunderland's house. Sunderland went to Whitehall and, finding the secretary of state, Sir James Vernon, working late, had a warrant sworn out for Clancarty's arrest. Accompanied by armed soldiers, Sunderland dragged Clancarty from Elizabeth's bed and deposited him in London's Newgate prison. Elizabeth took refuge with the family of Jael Boscawen, where she mounted a campaign to secure her husband's release. For the second time controversy over the Clancarty marriage became the talk of London. In defiance of her parents, Elizabeth enlisted the aid of a long list of members of court to plead her husband's case before William III. William remarked that 'he never was so teased about anything so much as petitions and requests in behalf of that little spark Lord Clancarty' (Kenyon, 303). Clancarty was pardoned on condition of leaving the kingdom. In addition, he received a small pension of $300 a year and Lady Clancarty received a grant of $2000 a year 'out of the first fruits of office'. 
The earl and countess of Clancarty went to Hamburg and then took up residence on an island in the Elbe River, near Altona. They had a daughter, Charlotte, and two sons, Robert Maccarthy and Justin, before Lady Clancarty's death in 1704. Clancarty himself died on 19 September 1734 at Praals-Hoff. His daughter, Charlotte, married John West, the seventh Lord Delawarr. Justin served as an officer in the Neapolitan army. The eldest son, Robert, became Viscount Muskerry and titular earl of Clancarty. He entered the British navy and served as governor of Newfoundland from 1733 to 1735. After returning to Britain and failing in efforts to recover the family estate he went back to sea, rising to command the 'Adventure'. He left the navy in 1741 to support Charles Edward Stuart and the Jacobite cause. He was granted a pension of $1000 a year by Louis XV of France and retired to Boulogne. The last Clancarty to champion the Stuart claim to the throne, he died on 19 September 1769. 
The scandals of the Clancarty marriage were retold in Lord Macaulay's 'History of England'. The story was later adopted by Tom Taylor as an 'original drama' and first produced at the Royal Olympic Theatre in London on 9 March 1874. Clancarty's life and marriage remain of enduring interest not only as what Macaulay called a 'romantic history', but as a tale reflective of the web of political, religious, and military conflicts that strained the Irish aristocracy during the Stuart age. 


@@@@@


doc= 17379


MacCarthy, John George (1829-1892), land commissioner and author, born at Cork in June 1829, was the son of John MacCarthy, merchant, of Cork, and his wife, Jane, daughter of George O'Driscoll, distiller, of Cork. He was educated at St Vincent's, a local private school. In 1851 MacCarthy made a continental tour and wrote his first book entitled 'Letters on the Land Tenures of Europe'. He was admitted a solicitor in 1853, and continued to practise in Cork until 1881. In 1859 he married Maria Josephine, daughter of John Hanrahan of Mount Prospect, Cork, and they had a family of at least three sons. 
MacCarthy was an early supporter of Isaac Butt's home rule efforts and had written, in 1871, 'A Plea for Home Government of Ireland'. From 1874 to 1880 he represented Mallow in parliament as a home-ruler. While in parliament he devoted his attention to the Irish land question, and his mastery of the subject led to his appointment as an assistant commissioner under the 'Land Act' of 1881. On the passing of the 'Land Purchase Act' in 1885, MacCarthy was appointed one of the two commissioners selected to carry out that measure. He was a firm believer in the efficacy of peasant proprietorship, and administered the different 'Land Purchase Acts' with justice and fairness. 
MacCarthy was connected with many philanthropic institutions, notably the Cork Young Men's Society, of which he was for a long period president, and in recognition of services to the Roman Catholic church he was made a knight of the order of St Gregory by Pope Leo XIII. In addition to several legal pamphlets he was the author of historical works and a further book on the Irish land question. MacCarthy died at the Eastern Hotel, Drummond Street, London, on 7 September 1892, and was buried in Glasnevin cemetery, Dublin, on the 10th. 


@@@@@


doc= 17380


MacCarthy, Justin, first Viscount Mountcashel (c.1643-1694), army officer, was the third and youngest son of Donough MacCarthy, first earl of Clancarty (1594-1665), and Eleanor Butler (1612-1682), sister of James Butler, the first duke of Ormond. He was brought up in exile in France, where his eldest brother commanded a regiment. About 1663 he married Lady Arabella ('b'. 'c'.1628), a daughter of Thomas Wentworth, first earl of Strafford, a lady some fifteen years his senior. They had no children. MacCarthy's military career began in French service, probably in the Irish regiment raised in 1671 by his cousin Sir George Hamilton. In 1676 MacCarthy was appointed lieutenant-colonel of the duke of Monmouth's regiment, then in French pay, and served against the Dutch. He returned to England in 1678, where it was Charles II's intention to employ him in Ireland. He was given the colonelcy of a regiment of foot in succession to Sir Thomas Dongan, but the accidental discovery of MacCarthy in the houses of parliament in the wake of the uncovering of the Popish Plot caused an uproar when it was revealed that he, an Irish Catholic, held the king's commission. The secretary of state Sir Joseph Williamson was sent to the Tower for countersigning this and other commissions, and MacCarthy fled to Ireland and applied to join the Danish army. 
Both MacCarthy's brothers were dead by 1676, and his nephew Donough Maccarthy (1668-1734) succeeded as the fourth earl of Clancarty. In 1684, when Clancarty was sixteen, his protestant mother entrusted his education to Dr John Fell (of the celebrated epigram), bishop of Oxford. While in London, 'to pervert his nephew, as well as make his own court, [McCarthy] got the king to write to the bishop to let the young lord come up and see the diversions of the town at Christmas' (Burnet, 2.448), where he was instrumental in arranging his marriage to the fourteen-year-old daughter of the secretary of state Robert Spencer, second earl of Sunderland, and his conversion to Roman Catholicism. In January 1685 MacCarthy was again given the colonelcy of an Irish regiment despite objections that he was a Catholic. Following the accession of James II, he was in 1686 made a privy councillor and promoted to major-general, the second most senior post in the Irish army. Although he was at first recommended for the post by Clarendon, the lord lieutenant, the two men fell out over the deductions that were made from subsistence pay which had become widespread in the Irish army and which Clarendon saw as an abuse. Clarendon was abruptly recalled in early 1687 and MacCarthy kept his post throughout Tyrconnell's purge of protestants in the army. 
In February 1689, just before King James arrived in Ireland, the protestants of Bandon declared themselves for William III. MacCarthy marched his regiment into the town while the population were at their Sunday services and installed eight of his men as a garrison to keep the peace. On the next day ('bloody Monday') these Irish troops were either killed or chased out, the town gates were shut, and a flag proclaiming 'no surrender' was raised. MacCarthy returned to the town, forced his way in, rounded up the culprits, and took them back to Cork, where they petitioned King James for mercy. This provided James with an opportunity of showing his goodwill to his protestant subjects: 'You may now see you have a gracious king' ('Full and True Account', 2). 
In May 1689, following James's abortive mission to Londonderry, MacCarthy was made master-general of the ordnance in place of Viscount Mountjoy, who was then in the Bastille. In the Dublin parliament of that month MacCarthy sat as a member for co. Cork. On 22 May he brought up to the House of Lords the bill for repealing the 'Act of Settlement'. On the following day he was created Baron Castleinch and Viscount Mountcashel and he took his seat in the upper house on 24 May. 
In the summer of 1689, while the best part of King James's Irish army was besieging Londonderry, MacCarthy was ordered to lead a force of some 4000 men to attack the second stronghold of Williamite resistance, Enniskillen. He was instructed to join forces with Patrick Sarsfield, who was south of the Erne, and James Fitzjames, duke of Berwick, who was at Trillick, and mount a combined attack on Enniskillen. Once an English fleet had been spotted on Lough Swilly, Berwick was recalled to Londonderry and, without contacting Sarsfield, MacCarthy marched on alone. His orders were first to attack Crom Castle, on Upper Lough Erne, which he did unsuccessfully on 30 July 1689. Alerted to his presence, William Wolseley led a force from Enniskillen 15 miles away. On 31 July MacCarthy detached Anthony Hamilton with his dragoons to attack a body of Enniskillen horsemen. Hamilton was defeated and his men chased away. MacCarthy met Wolseley at Newtownbutler, where the Enniskilliners charged through a bog and scattered his army. Once the battle had been decided, MacCarthy led a few horsemen in a desperate charge on those troops who had captured his artillery. He was shot from his horse and taken prisoner to Enniskillen. He told his captors that 'he came with a design to lose his life, and was sorry that he had missed his aim, being unwilling to outlive the disgrace of that day' (Harris, 225). MacCarthy's wounds were treated and once he had given his parole he was allowed to walk in the town. Following a rumour that the Irish intended to free him, he was confined in a cell. Considering himself no longer bound by parole, he escaped by bribing his guard, Sergeant Acheson, who was later executed. 'The General [Schomberg] was much concerned when he heard of 'Mackarty's' Escape, and said he took him to be a Man of Honour, but he would not expect that in an Irish Man any more' (Story, 51). 
When MacCarthy arrived back in Dublin at the end of December, he was greeted with bonfires and a procession to Dublin Castle, where he was received by King James. He was chosen to command a force of 5000 Irish recruits, who were to serve in France in exchange for a like number of veteran troops to be sent by Louis XIV to support James's army. MacCarthy was delighted. He had written to the French minister of war that this command was 'the thing I most desire in the world... If they should send another that would cause me the greatest grief and I would only think of retiring for the rest of my days' (Murphy, 28). The French ambassador, D'Avaux, commented at the time that MacCarthy's short sight would prevent him from ever becoming a great general. John Michelburne more graphically recalled 'my colonel, old Justin Maccartie, looks damn'd squinting upon me with his blind eyes' (Michelburne, 5). 
Throughout the spring, with some difficulty, the troops for the 'Mountcashel brigade' were recruited and MacCarthy set sail from Cork on 18 April 1690. On his arrival in Brest he was acquitted by a French tribunal of any wrongdoing in breaking his parole in Enniskillen. He was received by Louis XIV at Versailles, had money lavished upon him, and was promoted to the rank of lieutenant-general. In the late summer of 1690 Mountcashel's brigade marched across France to join Marshal Catinat in Italy. In September they were in action in Savoy, where the Irish troops were said to have 'performed miracles' ('Journal... Dangeau', 3.225), although MacCarthy was shot and dangerously wounded in the chest. He wintered at King James's court in exile at St Germain, where he was involved in the palace plots to discredit Tyrconnell. He campaigned for an audience for the delegation sent to France by Sarsfield and circulated his correspondence from Ireland. By the summer of 1691 he had sufficiently recovered to be sent to Catalonia to serve under Marshal Noailles. In 1692 he joined the army on the Rhine and remained there until the spring of 1694. His old wounds rendered him unfit for command, and he travelled to Bareges in the French Pyrenees to take the curative waters. He died there on 1 July 1694, and was buried there. His wife survived him. By a will dated 8 May 1693 he adopted his distant cousin Florence Callaghan MacCarthy of Carrignavar, co. Cork, as his son and sought to bequeath his title to him. 


@@@@@


doc= 17381


MacCarthy, Nicholas Tuite (1769-1833), Jesuit, was the son of Justin MacCarthy Reagh (1744-1811), of Springhouse, co. Tipperary, and his wife, Mary Winifred ('b'. 1747), daughter of Nicholas Tuite, an Irish plantation owner on the West Indian island of St Croix, then a Danish possession. Born in Dublin on 19 May 1769, at four years of age he was taken to Toulouse, where his father was naturalized (1776) and ennobled by Louis XVI as Count MacCarthy. At the age of seven he was sent to the College du Plessis in Paris, and at fourteen received the tonsure at St Magloire seminary, being styled, from a property near Bordeaux purchased by his father, the Abbe de Levignac. His relative Arthur Dillon, archbishop of Narbonne, would have given him a benefice 'in commendam', but MacCarthy would not accept a sinecure. The French Revolution interrupted his studies at the Sorbonne, and he returned to Toulouse, where he took advantage of his father's magnificent library and helped to educate his younger brothers, one of whom, Viscount Robert MacCarthy, was later deputy for the Drome (1815-20). 
Because of ill health MacCarthy delayed his ordination to the priesthood until 1814, after which date he soon won fame as a preacher. In 1817 he was offered the bishopric of Montauban but declined preferment, having determined to join the Society of Jesus. This he did in 1820, after which he continued to be in demand as a preacher at court, in the principal French towns, and at Geneva. The revolution of 1830 led him to retire to Savoy, but he was summoned to Rome on a preaching mission which undermined his health. He died on 3 May 1833 in the bishop's palace at Annecy, France, and was buried in the cathedral. His posthumously published sermons were translated into Spanish, Italian, English, and German. They are characterized by moral rigorism and fervent denunciation of rationalism and revolution. 


@@@@@


doc= 17382


Maccarthy, Robert, styled fifth earl of Clancarty (d. 1769), Jacobite sympathizer and Royal Naval officer, was the eldest son of the scandalous union between Donough Maccarthy, styled fourth earl of Clancarty (1668-1734), and Elizabeth (died 1704), the second daughter of Robert Spencer, second earl of Sunderland, who was aged between eleven and thirteen years at their marriage on 31 December 1684. Lord Clancarty left his wife without consummating the marriage and returned to Ireland, where he participated in James II's unsuccessful invasion attempt of 1689. A decade after his marriage Clancarty returned from exile against the wishes of Sunderland and was rearrested by government troops. Clancarty was finally pardoned by William III (though his estates and title were forfeited to William, earl of Portland), and he and his wife went to Hamburg, where they lived on a government pension. 
After his mother's death in 1704 Robert Maccarthy (styled Viscount Muskerry) returned to England and, with his sister Charlotte, was befriended by Sarah, duchess of Marlborough, a former associate of the countess of Clancarty. While the duchess did not approve of a Stuart restoration, she kept many in her circle who, like Robert, maintained a Jacobite connection. A profligate youth who combined hard drinking with a rough temper, Muskerry lost the sight of an eye during a drunken brawl at a tavern. His sister once remarked that 'his judgement is not his brightest side' (Harris, 326). On 14 December 1722 he married his first wife, Joanna (1693-1759), daughter of Henry Player of Alverstone, Hampshire. 
Through his association with the duchess, Muskerry received a commission in the British navy, and at the time of his father's death in September 1734 he commanded a ship off Newfoundland. Muskerry now assumed his father's title as fifth earl of Clancarty, but failed to have it recognized in Britain. At this date the British government also cancelled his father's pension, but in lieu the duchess of Marlborough granted Clancarty an annuity of $400 and provided him with an apartment in the courtyard of Marlborough House. From 1733 to 1735 Muskerry served as governor of Newfoundland. On his return to England he attempted to recover the family estates, which had made his ancestors some of the wealthiest and largest landholders in Ireland. The suit provoked severe disruption within the Irish aristocracy. John Boyle, fifth earl of Orrery wrote to Jonathan Swift that 'Lord Clancarty's Thunderbolt will destroy half of our most wealthy Neighbours' ('Correspondence of Jonathan Swift', 5.360). Clancarty continued to draw heavily on support from the duchess of Marlborough, who allegedly paid the legal bills for his suit. In addition the French minister, Cardinal Fleury, pleaded Clancarty's case with Sir Robert Walpole. Despite their backing, the claim proved unsuccessful. Having failed in his efforts, Clancarty returned to sea, rising to command the 'Adventure' at the outbreak of the War of Jenkins's Ear (1739) before leaving the navy in 1741. At the death of Sarah, duchess of Marlborough (18 October 1744), he received a gift of $1000 and a further $1000 a year, as well as a manor in Buckinghamshire. 
However, Clancarty left England to join the ranks of adventurers who travelled to Paris to support Charles Edward Stuart, the Young Pretender, and the Jacobite forces planning to invade Scotland. Clancarty did not accompany the prince, and after the uprising's collapse he was to be found, often drunk and dishevelled, unsuccessfully scheming for the Jacobite cause in France. Excluded from the 1747 'Act of Indemnity', Clancarty never returned to England. After the death of his first wife in January 1759, he married Elizabeth Farnelly (died 1790). Granted a pension of $1000 a year by Louis XV, Clancarty had by now retired to Boulogne. There he gained a reputation as a pleasant storyteller and generous host who 'generally finished the evening in an oblivion of all former cares' ('Works of Jonathan Swift', 18.412). A heavy drinker his whole life, apparently he finally drank himself to death on 19 September 1769. He was survived by two sons, who took commissions in the French army. Clancarty's life was chronicled in the July and August editions of 'Walker's Hibernian Magazine' (1796) -- a portrait of a minor, ineffective, but certainly colourful champion of the ill-fated Stuart cause. 


@@@@@


doc= 17383


MacCarthy Reagh, Florence (1562-c.1640), chieftain and writer on Ireland, was probably born at Kilbrittan Castle, the eldest son of Sir Donough MacCarthy Reagh (died 1576), the second of the MacCarthy chiefs, the others being the MacCarthy of Muskerry and the MacCarthy More, the greatest. His mother was a daughter of James FitzMaurice of Desmond and the aunt of the last earl of Desmond. His father, who was lord of Carberry in west Cork, and a loyal subject of the crown, taught his son the arts of Gaelic politics and dissimulation, in which he would so excel. MacCarthy began his career by exacting tribute from and laying other impositions upon his father's dependants, which attracted the attention of the local authorities. Upon Sir Donough's death, the chieftainship passed to his younger brother, Sir Owen (Eoghan) MacCarthy. Finian was made a ward of the president of Munster, Sir William Drury, and was left with twenty-seven ploughlands worth $1500 a year by his father. He became of age about 1578, when he entered the royal army with 300 of his own men and gained a reputation as a good fighting man on the side of the crown in the Desmond rebellion in Munster. 
After the suppression of the rebellion in 1583, MacCarthy went to London, where Elizabeth I received him and awarded him $1000 for his services and gave him an annual pension of $100. He spent some considerable time at the court over the next five years, took up the fashions of the typical English courtier, learned to speak good English, and Anglicized his forename to Florence. He returned to Ireland and was present in 1585 at the opening of the Irish parliament in Dublin held by Sir John Perrott. Throughout his life he played a double game both as an English gentleman and as a Gaelic lord, and was in consequence increasingly distrusted by both sides. He remained a Catholic after he became of age, but refused to sue for livery of his estates, which would have necessitated his taking the oath of supremacy. He developed a liking for Spanish culture and learned to speak Spanish, having several relatives at the Spanish court at Madrid. He was described in one dispatch as being 'more Spanish than English' ('CSP Ire.', '1596-7', 232). It subsequently transpired that he had had connections with Sir William Stanley, who in 1586 had betrayed the English garrison at Deventer to the Spanish. 
Florence stood second in succession to the title of MacCarthy Reagh behind his uncle Sir Owen and his cousin Donal-na-pipi. He stood opposed to Donal's claims to the clan title, in virtue of a patent given the latter by his father some years before. In 1583-4 the clan MacCarthy Reagh made Donal swear that he would not divert the succession from Florence, on payment of a bond of $10,000. Florence also had aspirations of becoming the MacCarthy More, and to that end in 1588 he eloped with and married the sole heir, Ellen (also known as Eileen), daughter of Donal McCarthy, first earl of Clancare, the current MacCarthy More. It had already been arranged that she should marry Nicholas, son of Sir Valentine Browne, an undertaker (planter) in co. Kerry of English birth, who held lands by mortgage from the earl. The prospect of one man with well-known Spanish sympathies holding the titles of both MacCarthy Reagh and MacCarthy More caused consternation among the authorities. Florence and his wife were taken prisoner. He was put in Cork gaol for six months and on 10 February 1589 sent to the Tower of London. Clancare promised to persuade his daughter to divorce Florence, who, to forestall this, had her removed from imprisonment in Cork on 18 February. He was questioned by the privy council on 23 March in relation to his Spanish connections, which he denied. He remained in the Tower until his marriage to Ellen was finally accepted by the authorities and she was permitted to come out of hiding and visit her husband in London. He was released from the Tower on 19 January 1591 on condition that he remain in London. The earl of Ormond later stood surety for Florence, and he was permitted to return to Ireland in November 1593. 
In his absence Florence's properties in Munster had fallen prey to the depredations of local magnates and settlers, and he incurred huge legal expenses in prosecuting suits against Lord Barry, whom he blamed for being the author of his misfortunes. The earl of Clancare died in 1596 and Florence's claims to his lands were regarded sympathetically by the authorities, who considered him a useful pawn in a situation of growing unrest among the northern Gaelic chieftains. In 1598 Clancare's illegitimate son, Donal, had proclaimed himself the MacCarthy More and offered his support to Hugh O'Neill, earl of Tyrone, in his rebellion against the crown. But Florence's brother-in-law, the O'Sullivan More, refused to inaugurate Donal as MacCarthy More, and thereby negated his claim to it. On 16 March 1598 the English privy council ruled that Florence and not Valentine Browne should inherit Clancare's lands. 
Florence finally returned to Munster in 1599, to claim the title of MacCarthy More. He hired 500 Connaught mercenaries or bonaghs, sealed off the entrances to his country, defeated Donal, and was inaugurated on 1 January 1600 as the MacCarthy More. In February the earl of Tyrone marched into Munster and called all the lords of the province to a parley. Florence's useful Spanish connections swayed Tyrone into accepting him as an ally. Tyrone therefore banished Donal and reinstalled Florence as the MacCarthy More and gave him 600 mercenaries. Florence promptly wrote to the English authorities informing them of his loyalty to the queen. In April the Munster commissioners under Captain Flower sent a force of 1000 to despoil the MacCarthy country. Florence laid an ambush for them as they were returning between Kinsale and Cork on 21 April. The ensuing battle, in which the Irish forces were eventually defeated after forcing an initial retreat by the English, was the one and only time that Florence actually encountered royal troops in the field. Upon Sir George Carew's arrival in Ireland as treasurer at war and subsequently lord justice and president of Munster, he invited a nervous Florence to a meeting on 29 October on a promise of safe conduct, at which he assured Carew of his neutrality and promised to send his eldest son to Cork as a pledge if the queen would grant him the Desmond estates and confirm his title of MacCarthy More. It is likely that Florence spent the next several months making arrangements with the Spanish for a landing in Munster, while at the same time protesting his loyalty to both the English authorities and the Irish rebels, especially Tyrone. It is most likely that his behaviour was inspired by the fear of being sent back to the Tower. 
After the capture in late May 1601 of the 'sugan' ('straw') or pretender earl of Desmond, James FitzThomas, who had been appointed by Tyrone, Carew felt himself to be in a position to take matters finally into his control. He arrested Florence, even though he still remained under the protection of the great seal, and was sent under a spurious pretext to the Tower; here and at the Marshalsea, with two periods of liberty within England, he spent the rest of his long life. He was never tried with any offence and continued to try to regain his escheated lands. But he was apparently treated with some leniency and given special privileges, including access to his books, which enabled him to compose 'A treatise on the antiquity and history of Ireland', a history of Ireland from mythical times to the Norman conquest, a work of some scholarship. He died in London about 1640. His schemings and dealings with both English and Irish left him with an unedifying reputation among his contemporaries as a vain, ambitious, and foolish man, who tried to please both sides and pleased neither. The eldest of his four sons, Tadhg, died as a boy in the Tower, so he was succeeded as the MacCarthy More by his second son, Donal, who married Sarah, the daughter of Randal MacDonnell, earl of Antrim. Their relationship had long since become estranged: she had held Castle Lough in Desmond with her own supporters against him and was to receive a government pension for informing on her husband to Carew. 


@@@@@


doc= 17384


Macartney, George (c.1660-1730), army officer, was born in Belfast about 1660, the elder son of George Macartney, a recent settler from Scotland, and his wife, Martha Davies. One of the vanguard of a new, steady flow of Scots into Ulster, his father set up as a merchant and prospered. His mother came from the family of a prominent lawyer and politician, Sir John Davies (died 1626), who had been attorney-general for Ireland. Macartney's younger brother Isaac belonged to the more civilized, urban element in an Ireland still regarded as semi-barbarous; he and his sons became influential in the expanding commercial life of Belfast, which by 1700 'had replaced Limerick as the fourth port of Ireland' (Foster, 127). 
Macartney was educated at home, and then in France. He may have been sent there to qualify for foreign commerce, like Francis Osbaldistone in Scott's 'Rob Roy'. Like Francis, he broke away from any such prudent course. With or without paternal approval, he joined the Scots guards, and from then on was an army man to the backbone. Much of his career was to be linked with his ancestral Scotland. His military and Scottish bent showed even in his marriage, to the widow of a General Douglas. There were offspring, but this branch of the family, unlike Isaac's, died out before making its mark. 
Macartney rose as a soldier, climbing the ladder from 'volunteer' to lieutenant-colonel, with the Nine Years' War (1688-97) in his ears. Only a brief interval of peace divided this from the last of Louis XIV's challenges to Europe, the War of the Spanish Succession (1702-13). Macartney's service in the field belonged to the years 1706 to 1710, when he was in his forties, and when promotion could be swift for a man of courage and enterprise. In April 1703 -- the year before Marlborough's first grand victory, at Blenheim -- he was appointed to the colonelcy of a new infantry regiment, to be raised in Scotland, and to be in a sense his own corps in an army still run largely by private enterprise. It was soon seeing action in Flanders, that 'cockpit of Europe', and before the end of 1705 Macartney was a brigadier. Not much later he and his men were sent to take part in the fighting in Spain. In April 1707 at the battle of Almanza, in the south-east, near Albacete, he was at the head of a brigade. His commander was Ruvigny, a Huguenot exile now earl of Galway, of whose 15,000 men only one-third were British. Ruvigny was outnumbered, and after severe losses had to effect a withdrawal. Macartney's regiment was cut to pieces, and he was captured. 
Before long Macartney was free again, by an exchange; Marlborough knew his value and took a personal interest in getting him back. He was soon displaying a side of his nature -- and of his Ireland -- by some drunken misbehaviour to an old woman. She proved to be a clergyman's widow and took her complaint to the bishop of London, who carried it to Queen Anne; the latter summarily dismissed the culprit from the army. He had to sell his regiment, which after its wear and tear may not have been worth much; then, going back to his early beginnings, he rejoined the army as a gentleman volunteer. 
Circumstances favoured Macartney. In 1709 Marlborough was trying to penetrate northern France. His bloodiest encounter took place at Malplaquet, just inside the frontier, in September. Very large forces were engaged on each side; Marlborough could claim victory, but with far more severe losses than those of his opponent Villars, who had occupied a better position. It was the kind of situation where Macartney could be at his best, and the following year saw him promoted major-general, directing the siege of Douai. But Marlborough and his war policy were losing favour, and in August 1710 the whig ministry was replaced by a tory government headed by Harley and St John. In December, Marlborough was deprived of all his posts and charged with peculation, and Swift could crow, in his letters to Stella, over the dismissal of Macartney and other like-minded officers. 
A duel was to be the cause of Macartney's next discomfiture, though the quarrel was not his own. His fellow tory-hater Charles, fourth Baron Mohun, had for years been at loggerheads with James, fourth duke of Hamilton, a Scottish ally of the tories and high in favour with the queen. With everyone anxiously awaiting Anne's death, politicians' nerves were under acute strain. 
In November 1712 the bitterness between Mohun and Hamilton erupted in a challenge, and the former enlisted Macartney as his second. There is no sign of any close friendship between the two men, and the link must have been chiefly political. The affray, in Hyde Park on 15 November 1712, ended with both principals mortally wounded. Their seconds seem to have made only a show of using their swords; but at a privy council enquiry the duke's second, another Hamilton, declared on oath that Macartney had given the death blow to the helpless duke. Macartney hid for a few days, and escaped to the Netherlands with a price on his head. He was in exile for four years and thus missed the Jacobite rising of autumn 1715, following Anne's death; however, its failure enabled him to return and submit to the law. 
In June 1716 Macartney was tried for murder and virtually acquitted; Hamilton had more or less withdrawn his accusation, and been retired from the army. Macartney was clearly the kind of man that a new dynasty, still insecure, stood in need of as a prop. He was immediately reinstated in the army with the rank of colonel and soon raised to lieutenant-general. There were no more wars in store for him, but in 1718 he was made governor of the strategic border town of Berwick, and in 1722 he became a comptroller of army accounts; later he was commanding general in Ireland and governor of Portsmouth. Macartney died in 1730. He was a man of no great note on his own account, but he belonged to a band of fighting-men who built an army that in some degree altered the course of European history. 


@@@@@


doc= 17385


Mac Cearbhaill, David (d. 1289), archbishop of Cashel, held the archbishopric from 1253 until his death in 1289. Before his episcopal appointment he held the deanery of Cashel, but apart from this virtually nothing is known of his early career. His family background was predominantly Irish and his election was opposed by Henry III on the grounds of his affinity with the king's enemies. Pope Innocent IV confirmed his election in August 1254 and royal assent was eventually obtained in February 1255. The new archbishop did fealty to the king in person and was consecrated in Cashel in the summer of 1255. 
One of Mac Cearbhaill's earliest actions as archbishop was to hold a provincial council at which various disputes with his suffragan bishops and clergy were settled. Nevertheless, in the following years Archbishop David was involved in serious quarrels with both the suffragan bishop of Lismore and the dean of Cashel. His reputation as a contentious prelate is given further substantiation by the events of 1266, when he confirmed, and in one case consecrated, suffragan bishops before royal assent had been obtained. In 1267 he was summoned into the king's presence and pardoned for these offences. 
The archbishop had strong sympathies with the Cistercian tradition. In 1255 he had petitioned the general chapter for permission to have the services of two Cistercian monks to help him in his administration. In 1269, fourteen years after his consecration, he himself took the habit of a Cistercian monk. This marked a turning point in his career and he became very involved in the affairs of that order. In 1272, having removed a Benedictine community, he founded Hore Abbey in Cashel, bringing monks from Mellifont. In 1274 he attended the chapter general at Citeaux and was granted his petition that all the daughter houses removed from Mellifont's jurisdiction by Abbot Lexington in 1228 were to be restored. 
In this same year the archbishop was present at the Council of Lyons; and he made a vow to go on pilgrimage to the Holy Land which he does not appear to have fulfilled. He was in England in January 1275 and then returned to Ireland to oversee the reorganization of the Cistercian houses. He provoked the hostility of many of the English in Ireland who complained of his anti-English sentiments and actions. It was alleged that his abbey in Cashel was full of rogues who killed English people and that the archbishop had made an Irish boy of twenty-two years bishop of Cork, to humiliate the English. His personal relations with the king, however, appear to have been cordial and despite being branded anti-English he was one of the prime movers in the unsuccessful attempts in the period 1277-81 to extend English law to the Irish. With his suffragan bishops of Emly and Killaloe, he spent the best part of four years in England negotiating with royal officials. Together with five other bishops of the Cashel province they pledged all their temporalities to guarantee payment of the proposed fine of 10,000 marks. When the negotiations broke down, Mac Cearbhaill returned to Cashel. Little is known of the last six years of his life. He died in Cashel on 1 August 1289 and may have been buried in Hore Abbey. 
Although the evidence points to Mac Cearbhaill having been a quarrelsome prelate, he also emerges as able and courageous. He placed himself firmly within native Irish ecclesiastical tradition, while at the same time attempting to establish a working relationship with the crown. The contradictory evidence of his career is, in the words of J. Watt, 'an expression of the conflict facing every Irish prelate who ministered in the 'terre Engleis'' (Watt, 160). 


@@@@@


doc= 17386


McCaul, Alexander (1799-1863), Hebrew scholar and missionary to the Jews, was born of protestant parents in Dublin on 16 May 1799. He was educated at a private school, entered Trinity College, Dublin, on 3 October 1814, graduated BA in 1819, and proceeded MA in 1831; he was created DD in 1837. He was for some time tutor to the earl of Rosse, but becoming interested in the Jews he was sent in 1821 to Poland as a missionary by the London Society for Promoting Christianity amongst the Jews. He studied Hebrew and German at Warsaw, and at the close of 1822 went to St Petersburg, where he was received by the tsar, who took some interest in his work. After returning to England he was ordained and served the curacy of Huntley, near Gloucester, where he became friendly with Samuel Roffey Maitland. 
In 1823 McCaul married and returned to Poland, where he lived at Warsaw as head of the mission to the Jews and as English chaplain until 1830. He was supported by the Grand Duke Constantine, but had disputes with the Lutheran congregations, and withdrew to Berlin, where he was befriended by Sir Henry Rose, the English ambassador, and by Crown Prince Friedrich Wilhelm of Prussia, who had known him at Warsaw. To improve his health he visited Ireland, and returned for a short time to Poland in 1832. He finally decided to settle in London, and took up residence in Palestine Place, Cambridge Road; there he actively supported the London Society and helped to found the Jews' Operatives Converts Institution. In 1837 he began the publication of 'Old Paths', a weekly pamphlet on Jewish ritual, which continued for sixty weeks. In 1840 he was appointed principal of the Jewish college founded by the London Society; and in the summer of 1841, through Friedrich Wilhelm IV of Prussia, he was offered the bishopric of Jerusalem, though he declined it because he thought it would be better held by one who had earlier been of the Jewish faith. In the same year McCaul succeeded Michael Solomon Alexander as professor of Hebrew and rabbinical literature at King's College, London; in 1846 he was also elected to a chair of divinity and later he was also professor of ecclesiastical history. He held these three chairs until 1863. 
In addition to these offices McCaul in 1843 was appointed rector of St James's, Duke's Place, London; in 1845 he became prebendary of St Paul's, and in 1847 he declined Archbishop Howley's offer of any one of the four new colonial bishoprics. In 1850 he became rector of St Magnus, St Margaret, and St Michael, Fish Street Hill. When the sittings of convocation were revived in 1852, McCaul was elected proctor for the London clergy, and he represented them until his death. At first strongly opposed to the revival of the ancient powers of convocation, he modified his views and worked dogmatically with the high-churchmen, opposing the relaxation of the subscription to the articles, and seconding Archdeacon Denison's motion for the appointment of a committee (of which he was afterwards a member) for the assessment of Bishop Colenso's works on the 'Old Testament'. 
McCaul published many single sermons and pamphlets, and several books, the chief being 'A Hebrew Primer' (1844), Warburtonian lectures (2 sers., 1846-52), 'Rationalism, and the Divine Interpretation of Scripture' (1850), a critique of 'Essays and Reviews', entitled 'Some Notes on the First Chapter of Genesis' (1861), and 'An Examination of Bishop Colenso's Difficulties with Regard to the Pentateuch' (2 vols., 1863-4). McCaul died at his rectory, 39 King William Street, London, on 13 November 1863, and was buried at Ilford, Essex. He left several sons, his wife having apparently predeceased him. His friends donated a stained-glass window in his memory in King's College chapel. 


@@@@@


doc= 17387


McCausland, Dominick (1806-1873), judge and religious writer, was born at his father's residence, Roe Park, co. Londonderry, on 20 August 1806, the third of four sons of Marcus Langford McCausland and his wife, a daughter of John Kennedy of Cultra, co. Down, and aunt of Sir Arthur Edward Kennedy. His father died when McCausland was still an infant and he was taught at the Revd Dr Moore's school, Parkhill, Gloucestershire, and for two years at the Royal School, Dungannon. In 1822 he went to Trinity College, Dublin, where he graduated BA in 1827, winning the gold medal for science in his year. He proceeded LLD and LLB in 1859. Ill health contributed to his missing a fellowship, and he went on a tour of the continent for two years. 
After his tour McCausland returned to Ireland to study law and was called to the Irish bar in 1835. He selected the north-western circuit, and became QC in 1860. In the second administration of Lord Derby (1858-9), McCausland was appointed crown prosecutor, and immediately afterwards was elected 'father', or president, of the circuit bar. Notwithstanding the demands of a busy practice he found time to write several religious works, including 'On the Latter Days of the Jewish Church and Nation, as Revealed in the Apocalypse' (1841), and 'The Times of the Gentiles as Revealed in the Apocalypse' (1852). These works were later republished in a combined second edition as 'The Latter Days of Jerusalem and Rome as Revealed in the Apocalypse'. Other works were 'Sermons in Stones' (1856), which went into thirteen editions, 'Adam and the Adamite' (1864), and 'The Builders of Babel' (1871). McCausland died at his home, 12 Fitzgibbon Street, Dublin, on 28 June 1873, and was buried at St George's, Dublin, on 1 July. His wife, Emily, and at least three of their sons, survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 17388


McCheyne, Robert Murray (1813-1843), Church of Scotland minister, was born on 21 May 1813 at 14 Dublin Street, Edinburgh, the youngest of the five children of Adam McCheyne (died 1854), lawyer and writer to the signet, and his wife, Lockhart Murray Dickson (died 1854), youngest daughter of David Dickson, proprietor of Nether Locharwood, in Dumfries. While Robert was recovering from scarlet fever at the age of four, his father taught him to read and write the Greek alphabet. The following year he was sent to George Knight's school. Two years later the family moved to 56 Queen Street, Edinburgh, and sixteen years later to 20 Hill Street. From October 1821 McCheyne attended Infirmary Street high school, Edinburgh. He matriculated at Edinburgh University in 1827. In 1831 he entered the Divinity Hall. At university he won prizes in all his classes. He had a particular love for natural scenery, and many of his letters are illustrated by sketches that testify to his skill in drawing. 
On 8 July 1831 McCheyne's brother David died at the age of twenty-six -- of the effects of a cold caught while hill walking. The two brothers had been close, and David often shared his evangelical Christian faith with Robert. David's death strongly contributed to Robert's conversion, which occurred soon afterwards. In 1835 he went before Edinburgh presbytery for his licence to preach. He later wrote that, 'For a good hour... all heckled me, like so many terriers on a rat' (Smellie, 45). However, because the Edinburgh presbytery was so busy, McCheyne undertook further examinations, and was instead licensed by the presbytery of Annan on 1 July 1835, and became, as he expressed it, 'a preacher of the Gospel, an honour to which I cannot name an equal' (ibid., 46). In November he became assistant to John Bonar in the parishes of Larbert and Dunipace, near Stirling. 
McCheyne's fame as a preacher spread quickly and, along with Andrew Bonar and Alexander Somerville, he was considered by the new church of St Peter in Dundee. It was McCheyne who was called and he was ordained there on 24 November 1836. From the start of his ministry the church was full, with some 1100 people attending, many having to stand. People were not drawn by his oratory or voice, but by the power, simplicity, freeness, and sufficiency of the gospel he preached. As one of his contemporaries, a Mr Hamilton of Regent Square, London, commented, 'few ministers preach with the fervour, the Christ-exalting simplicity, and the prayerful expectancy of Robert McCheyne' (Bonar, 172). In his first year of ministry he received three further calls offering far more than the $200 yearly stipend he was receiving, but he rejected each one. He became actively involved in the cause of church extension, and in 1837 became secretary to the Forfarshire Association. 
In late 1838, being thoroughly exhausted, McCheyne was forced to leave Dundee and return to his family's Edinburgh home. A little later he joined the Church of Scotland's mission of inquiry to Israel, its remit being to inquire into the number, condition, and character of the Jews. The mission left England on 29 March 1839, and returned on 6 November. The details of its visit were recorded and subsequently published in the 'Narrative of a Mission of Enquiry to the Jews from the Church of Scotland, in 1839' (1842). McCheyne had been worried about leaving his congregation during his visit to Israel, but he was relieved when William C. Burns successfully took his place. 
In November 1842 McCheyne was a member of the convocation and would have led his church into the Free Church had he lived to see the Disruption. In early 1843 he took part in a number of evangelistic missions, one of which crossed the border into Northumberland. In February 1843 he journeyed to the north-east of Scotland, to the districts of Deer and Ellon, where he preached and spoke twenty-seven times in twenty-four different places. 
McCheyne never married, but he was twice engaged. His first fiancee was a Miss Maxwell, the daughter of a Dundee physician; possibly her parents prevented the marriage. He was later engaged to Jessie Thain of Heath Park near Blairgowrie. 
In 1843 typhus was prevalent in Dundee, but McCheyne visited freely among the sick. Being weak himself, he soon caught the infection and quickly became gravely ill. On Saturday 25 March, in his own bedroom with Dr James Gibson beside him, McCheyne died while raising his hands as if to pronounce the benediction. All Dundee was moved by the news of his death. His parents agreed to the wish of St Peter's that McCheyne be buried in St Peter's graveyard, rather than in the family's own burial-ground in Edinburgh. He was buried on Thursday 30 March, with perhaps 7000 people attending the funeral. 
McCheyne was esteemed by his contemporaries for the remarkable results of his short period of ministry, the hymns he wrote (including 'Jehovah Tsidkenu' and 'The Barren Fig-Tree'), and his published diary and sermons, collected in A. A. Bonar's 'Memoir and Remains' (1844; 2nd edn, 1892). Some indication of the success of, and interest in, McCheyne's life and ministry may be seen in the fact that this work had, by 1910, sold more than 500,000 copies. 


@@@@@


doc= 17389


McCluer, John (1759?-1795), hydrographer, joined the Bombay marine as a volunteer about 1777. He was promoted second lieutenant on 18 February 1780 and first lieutenant on 8 January 1784. His hydrographic career probably began in March 1785 when, in the 'Scorpion', he surveyed Muscat and Matruh harbours at the entrance to the Gulf of Oman, a project which he followed by conducting a survey from Muscat to Bushehr. He continued to work in the Persian Gulf in 1786-7, thus enabling Alexander Dalrymple to publish from his surveys a chart extending from the entrance to the Persian Gulf to Basrah. Later in 1787 he made the first comprehensive survey of Bombay harbour, after which he was employed for two years in the 'Experiment', his task being to conduct a detailed survey of the west coast of India; he was assisted by John Proctor in a pattamar, a locally built lateen-rigged sailing vessel. 
Early in 1790, assisted by Lieutenant John Wedgbrough, McCluer carried out a number of surveys in Laccadive, thus completing a comprehensive survey of the west coast of India from Diu Head to Cape Cormorin. At some stage he also surveyed Mocha Road at the southern end of the Red Sea. On 23 August 1790, when by his own submission he was thirty-one years old, he was sent to the Palau Islands in the 'Panther', with the 'Endeavour' (Lieutenant William Drummond) as consort, to inform the king of the death in London of his son, Prince Lee Boo. McCluer first called at several ports to embark seeds, plants, and cattle and to rate his chronometers. His course then took him through Sallawatty Strait between Sallawatty and the western end of the island of New Guinea. He reached the Palau Islands on 21 January 1791, where he broke the news to the king of his son's death. McCluer then proceeded to Macau for supplies, leaving John Proctor in the 'Endeavour' (Drummond having died) to commence a survey of the Palau Islands. 
McCluer returned to the islands and then sailed for New Guinea with the 'Endeavour' to carry out a survey of the western end of the island in accordance with his instructions, during which voyage the 'Panther' became the first English vessel for seventy years to call at Amboyna for supplies. Continuing his survey, he discovered an extensive inlet at the south-western end of New Guinea, which was subsequently named McCluer inlet (Teluk Berau). He then followed the south coast of New Guinea to the east as far as Cape Valsche (Ug Salah) before turning south and running a line of soundings, during December 1791 and January 1792, off the north coast of Australia, which he sighted at intervals. His soundings were later incorporated by Matthew Flinders into his small-scale chart of Australia. After calling at Timor, McCluer made for Bencoolen on the west coast of Sumatra to report his discoveries to the East India Company, one of which was that nutmeg grew near the coast of New Guinea. He returned to the Palau Islands via the island of Sulu, where he embarked grain, seeds, and cattle. On his arrival in the islands on 20 January 1793 McCluer sent Proctor in the 'Endeavour' to Macau to inform the court of directors of the East India Company that he intended to remain in the Palau Islands to establish an English settlement. On 2 February he handed over the command of the 'Panther' to Wedgbrough, who returned in her to Bombay. 
After fifteen months McCluer, who was promoted captain on 27 June 1793, decided to return to the service of the East India Company. Leaving the islands in the 'Panther''s launch, which had been left behind for him, McCluer made a remarkable nineteen-day voyage to Macau. Here he bought the barque 'Venus' with the intention of returning in her to Bombay after first calling at the Palau Islands to embark his native wives and family. However, before he could sail Captain John Hayes, a fellow officer in the Bombay marine, arrived in Macau from Batavia with the news that a settlement he had established in Dorey harbour in Geelvink Bay on the north coast of New Guinea was urgently in need of provisions. McCluer was persuaded to undertake its relief. He sailed from Macau on 24 July 1794 and, after calling at the Palau Islands to embark his family, he continued to New Guinea. Having relieved the settlement, McCluer sailed for Bencoolen, calling at Amboyna and Timor 'en route'. From here six of his women were taken to Bombay in a Bombay frigate, while he continued to Calcutta. He sailed from the latter port in August 1795 and was never heard of again, the 'Venus' having probably foundered in a storm in the Bay of Bengal. In his will, dated 12 February 1793, he made provision for 'a female named Elizabeth Tennel' and 'a child named Margaret by a Malabar mother'. 
McCluer was a talented artist and drew many coastal views as aids to navigation during his career. His surveys and views were published by Dalrymple as hydrographer to the East India Company in some forty charts, plans, and sheets of coastal views. His charts of the west coast of India survived as Admiralty charts until the mid-nineteenth century. Dalrymple also published three memoirs giving details of McCluer's surveys in the Persian Gulf and of the west coast of India, while James Horsburgh published McCluer's directions for Mocha and made considerable use of his sailing directions for the west coast of India and the Laccadive Islands in his 'India Directory'. 


@@@@@


doc= 17390


McClure, Sir Robert John Le Mesurier (1807-1873), naval officer, son of Robert McClure (died 1806), captain in the 89th regiment, and his wife, Jane, daughter of Archdeacon Elgee, rector of Wexford, Ireland, was born at Wexford on 28 January 1807, five months after his father's death. Captain John Le Mesurier of Alderney, Channel Islands, an old comrade of his father, was his godfather and guardian. McClure was educated at Eton College and the Royal Military College, Sandhurst, and entered the navy in 1824. He passed his examination in 1830, and in 1836-7 was mate of the 'Terror' in her Arctic voyage under Captain George Back. On the return of the 'Terror' in September 1837 McClure was promoted lieutenant. In 1838-9 he served on board the 'Niagara' (20 guns), the flagship of Commodore Sandom, on the Great Lakes in Canada during the uprising; and from 1839 to 1842 he was in the 'Pilot' (16 guns) in the West Indies. From 1842 to 1846 he commanded the 'Romney', receiving ship at Havana. In December 1846 he was appointed to the coastguard, which he left in 1848 to go as first lieutenant of the 'Investigator' with Captain Bird in the Arctic expedition of Sir James Clark Ross. On Ross's return in autumn 1849 it was at once decided to send the same two ships to renew the search for Sir John Franklin by way of the Bering Strait. Captain Richard Collinson was appointed to the 'Enterprise' as senior officer of the expedition, and McClure, who had shown energy and resourcefulness, was promoted on 4 November 1849 to the command of the 'Investigator'. 
The ships sailed from Plymouth on 20 January 1850. As they passed into the Pacific on 16 April they were separated in a gale and did not meet again. When McClure arrived off Honolulu on 1 July, he found that the 'Enterprise' had gone on ahead of him, having been fearful of losing the short remains of the summer. The 'Investigator' sailed for the north on 4 July and joined the 'Plover' in Kotzebue Sound, Alaska, on 29 July. The 'Enterprise' had then got into a streak of contrary winds and was a fortnight behind. McClure had faint hope of meeting her at the next rendezvous, off Cape Lisburne; and on departing from Kotzebue Sound he left a letter for the Admiralty explaining the course he proposed to follow in the event of not meeting the 'Enterprise'. 
The 'Investigator' fell in with the 'Herald' some 30 miles past Cape Lisburne, but though Captain Kellett did not think that the 'Enterprise' had passed, and suggested that the 'Investigator' had better wait, he would not order her to do so. McClure therefore went on alone, until his progress was stopped by the firm ice of Melville Sound. He was compelled to turn southward, and by 10 October had completed the arrangements for wintering in Prince of Wales Strait. He journeyed along the coast of Banks Island and arrived at its north-eastern extremity on 26 October, where he climbed a hill some 600 feet high and looked across the ice to Melville Island and to 'Parry's farthest' -- the furthest point reached by Sir William Edward Parry in 1820. No land lay between. The north-west passage was discovered. It was not until several years later that it was known that Franklin and his companions had discovered another passage more than four years before. 
In summer 1851 McClure, finding it impossible to advance into Melville Sound, retraced his steps, hoping to be able to cross Banks Strait to 'Parry's farthest'. However, the strait was then as impassable as it has always been found, and on 23 September the 'Investigator' was forced into a bay on the northern shore of Banks Island, which, with a sense of immediate relief, McClure named the Bay of Mercy. The ship remained there. 
In April 1852 McClure, with a sledge party, succeeded in crossing the strait and actually arriving at Winter Harbour on Melville Island. He found a notice of Lieutenant Francis Leopold McClintock's having been there the previous June, but no stores nor news of probable relief. The summer of 1852 passed and the 'Investigator' was still blocked up in the Bay of Mercy. Provisions were running short, the men were falling ill, and McClure had made his arrangements for abandoning the ship in April 1853, when on the 6th Lieutenant Bedford Pim of the 'Resolute' reached them from Melville Island. McClure's first idea was to get what relief was possible from the 'Resolute', and remain, in the hopes of getting the 'Investigator' free in the course of the summer. He crossed over to Melville Island to consult with Kellett, but after a medical survey of the 'Investigator''s crew it was resolved that further stay was inadvisable and that the ship must be abandoned. The men were therefore conveyed across the ice to the 'Resolute'. The season, however, proved very unfavourable. The 'Resolute' was unable to get to the eastward, and the 'Investigator''s men thus passed a fourth winter in the ice. In April 1854 they were transferred to the 'North Star' and finally arrived in England on 28 September. The news of their safety and of their great discovery had been brought home by Lieutenant Cresswell in the 'Phoenix' (Captain Inglefield) in the previous October. 
McClure was, as a matter of form, court-martialled for the loss of his ship, and honourably acquitted. He was knighted on 21 November 1855 and promoted captain (commission dated back to 18 December 1850). In the session of 1855 parliament awarded a grant of $10,000 to the officers and crew of the 'Investigator'. 
In 1856 McClure was appointed to the 'Esk' for service on the Pacific station. In the following year he brought her to China to reinforce the squadron there, and in December commanded a battalion of the naval brigade at the capture of Canton (Guangzhou). He was afterwards for some time senior officer in the Strait of Malacca, was made a CB on 20 May 1859, and returned to England in 1861. He had no further service, but was promoted rear-admiral on 20 March 1867, and vice-admiral, on the retired list, on 29 May 1873. In 1869 he married Constance Ada, daughter of Richard H. Tudor of Birkenhead, Cheshire. 
McClure, according to the navigator and writer Sherard Osborn, who knew him well, was cool and bold in all perils, a severe disciplinarian, yet modest, and would in war have been a great leader. McClure died at his home, 25 Duke Street, St James's, London, on 17 October 1873 and was buried on the 25th in Kensal Green cemetery. His wife survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 17391


MacCodrum, Iain (1693?-1779), Scottish Gaelic poet, was born at Aird an Runnair in North Uist, the son of Farquhar MacCodrum (died 'c'.1740), a crofter. MacCodrum lived in various locations in North Uist throughout his life. Apart from a youthful satirical piece, there are no dated poems ascribed to him until the late 1740s. Two of his poems appeared, without acknowledgement, in Alasdair Mac Mhaighstir Alasdair's collection of 1751. He had apparently been visited by his famous contemporary, who came again about 1755, when the two poets recited scurrilous songs at a local gathering attended by the Revd Donald MacQueen, and remembered in local tradition. 
In 1760 James Macpherson, on one of his tours collecting Ossianic balladry, visited MacCodrum, who had a large fund of traditional verse and story, but Macpherson's companion took umbrage at MacCodrum's humorous slighting of his brand of Gaelic, and they left without milking this rich source of lore. In 1763 Sir James MacDonald of Sleat, baronet, met MacCodrum in Uist, and appointed him as his family bard, giving him a rent-free holding of land, and annual quantities of meal and cheese, and a small annual payment. MacDonald listened regularly to MacCodrum's recitations of Ossianic verse, and tried to improve his own knowledge of Gaelic. No doubt this sequence of events was triggered by the public prominence of James Macpherson's work at that time. 
After his appointment MacCodrum composed a series of songs in praise of Sir James MacDonald and other chiefs and lairds, and an elegy for Sir James in 1766. Sir James's successor continued to pay the bard's emoluments, and MacCodrum travelled to neighbouring islands, and to Skye, meeting the descendants of the famous MacMhuirich poets in South Uist, and Captain Allan MacDonald, husband of the famous Flora, in Skye. MacCodrum died in 1779 and was buried in North Uist. He had been married three times, and was survived by his third wife, Mary Robertson, and by a daughter. 
MacCodrum's poetry was widely known in his home island, and his twentieth-century editor, William Matheson, reported that in the early 1930s there was a man in North Uist who knew seventeen of his poems, from traditional sources. Matheson's edition, published in 1938, is compiled from oral tradition and from a long list of books and manuscripts dating from 1751 to 1933, including Alasdair Mac Mhaighstir Alasdair's 1751 collection, the McLagan Manuscripts, the Eigg collection of 1776, John Mackenzie's 'Beauties of Gaelic Poetry' of 1841, and the collection of work by Uist bards (1894). 
MacCodrum's songs in praise of the chiefs and lairds tend to be extended, and fairly conventional, using many of the stereotypes common in such verse, and referring to a succession of clans and their military prowess, but showing a good knowledge of Gaelic legend and history. He uses a variety of metrical forms, three-line, seven-line, and eight-line stanzas, and some more extended ones. In a poem composed during the Seven Years' War (1756-63) he comments quite knowledgeably on the participants in that struggle, but then concentrates on a local altercation. 
The songs concerning local events and personalities are the most successful part of MacCodrum's output, combining wit, observation, and satire, and making what can probably be regarded as an early and major contribution to the corpus of so-called 'village verse' which was to retain its popularity into the late twentieth century. He has songs about old age, a dispute between the Friend and the Enemy of Whisky, satires on individuals, a satire on Uist tailors, a light-hearted complaint about his wife, a song about a bout of fever, and so on. 
MacCodrum's verse has been authoritatively edited by William Matheson, in the edition published by the Scottish Gaelic Texts Society in 1938, and Matheson draws on tradition and manuscripts to establish the main pattern of his life. Donald Archie MacDonald, a fellow North Uist man, added his own perspective to MacCodrum's work in an article in 'Gairm', 129 (1985). 


@@@@@


doc= 17392


Urard mac Coise (d. 983x1023), Gaelic poet, is recorded in the annals of Ulster and the annals of Tigernach as having died in 990. Other annals record dates of 983 and 988 and even as late as 1023 in the seventeenth-century compilation, the annals of the four masters. The discrepancy has given rise to considerable uncertainty, especially since another poet, the similarly named Airbertach mac Coise, the lector and 'erenagh' of Ros Ailithir (Ross Carbery), died in 1016. While there may have been two poets named Urard mac Coise, it seems most likely that the later date arises from confusion with Airbertach mac Coise, the author of a long geographical poem, 'Ro fessa hi curp domuin duir', preserved in the twelfth-century 'Book of Leinster'. It is possible that some of the poems ascribed to Urard, composed not long after 1000, were in fact the work of Airbertach or others. Urard's posthumous fame, and later poems retrospectively authored on him, make this an attractive theory. 
While a small number of Urard's poems seem to survive, his fame mainly rested on the prose tale 'Airec menman Uraird maic Coise' ('The stratagem of Urard mac Coise'). Urard's authorship of this tale has been generally accepted and a composition date of some time before 980 has been plausibly suggested. The 'Airec menman' tale is a third-person narrative in which Urard describes how Cenel nEogain raiders carry off his possessions and destroy his home at 'Clartha' (probably Clare, in Westmeath). The poet decides to exact compensation by visiting Domnall mac Muirchertaig (died 980), the Cenel nEogain king of Tara. Domnall welcomes Urard and asks him for news. The word for both news and stories is the same, 'scela', and Urard cleverly accepts this opening by listing all the tales he knows. This tale list is, in fact, an important piece of evidence proving the existence of versions of certain narratives by the end of the tenth century. Moreover, it delineates the repertory expected of an 'ollam', the highest grade of 'fili' or professional poet. The last of Urard's titles is 'Orgain cathrach Mail Milscothaig' ('The destruction of the fort of Mael Milscothach'). The king has never heard this tale and asks Urard to recite it. As the tale progresses, it becomes clear that Mael Milscothach, Mael of the Sweet Words, is in fact Urard himself. Mael Milscothach successfully seeks reparation at the court of the king of Tara, following the destruction of his home. At the denouement of this tale within a tale, Urard tells Domnall that he is indeed that king. Domnall, taking the hint, apprehends the wrongdoers and brings the nobles of Cenel nEogain together. The latter compensate the poet for his loss. Furthermore, at a council of professional poets and judges, the king attempts to fix the compensation and honour price owed to a poet. The matter is eventually handed over to Flann, the lector of Clonmacnoise. Since the annals of Tigernach mention that Urard died in penitence at Clonmacnoise, it is possible that he may have had links with the monastery. In any event, Flann decides that Urard should receive complete compensation for his losses, as well as an honour price equal to the king of Tara. This ruling should, furthermore, apply to every 'ollam'. 
It has been argued that this tale represents an attempt by the 'filid', the professional poets, to force back changes in Irish society inimical to the status of their order. It has been convincingly shown, however, that the claims set forth in 'Airec menman' are innovatory and an attempt to enhance further the high status of the 'filid'. Eighth-century legal material, dealing with the status of 'filid', assigns to an 'ollam' an honour price equivalent to a petty king. The plea in 'Airec menman', that this should be replaced with an honour price equivalent to the king of Tara, reflects the profound changes that were transforming ninth- and tenth-century Irish society. The petty kingdoms were sinking to the level of lordships in an area of wider authority. The overkings, with greater economic resources, had become the most significant lay patrons. For a poet such as Urard, it was important to take advantage of this and become associated with the greater kings. 
Urard's reputation as the confidant of great kings was such that the chief poet of the annals became associated not only with Domnall mac Muirchertaig, but with his immediate successor in the high-kingship, Mael Sechnaill mac Domnaill (died 1022), the last southern Ui Neill king of Tara. In these, late, sources, Urard is awarded the revenues of Ireland for a year by Mael Sechnaill, a paradigm of generosity. A poem in praise of Mael Sechnaill is retrospectively authored on Urard. Moreover, a version of this tale is contained in the seventeenth-century annals of Clonmacnoise. 
Urard was imagined as the ideal 'fili'. Ironically, this image was self-created. It was eagerly perpetuated by Urard's 'fili' successors for many generations; a version of 'Airec menman' was written as late as the end of the sixteenth century, on the eve of the destruction of the 'filid'. For six centuries Urard mac Coise was an eloquent supporter of the privileges of the professional poets. 


@@@@@


doc= 17393


McComb, William (1793-1873), poet, son of Thomas McComb, a draper, was born at Coleraine, co. Londonderry, on 17 August 1793. His mother's surname was Foster. After receiving an elementary education in his native town, he was apprenticed to Thomas O'Neill, a Belfast wholesale draper, but after a short time left him, and, after training with the Kildare Place Society, Dublin, became a teacher of Brown Street daily school in Belfast. 
In 1816 McComb married Sarah Johnson of Hillsborough, Belfast, and a year later published 'The Dirge of O'Neill and other Poems' in Belfast. The collection commemorated Arthur O'Neill, a blind harpist considered the last of the Irish itinerant bards, who had died in co. Armagh the previous year. One of the poems, 'O Erin my country! although thy harp slumbers' became particularly popular. McComb followed this moderate success with 'The School of the Sabbath' in 1822, a long poem 'adapted to inspire pity for the ignorant poor, and augmented energy for the promotion of Sunday Schools' (McComb, 402). 
In 1827 McComb's wife, Sarah, died, and he abandoned teaching to start business as a bookseller in High Street, Belfast. In 1830 he married Eliza Barkley, the widow of Captain Robert Walkinshaw Campbell of Belfast, and the couple had several children. In 1840 he established 'McComb's Presbyterian Almanac', which became a highly popular annual in the north of Ireland. He took a deep interest in many of the charitable institutions of Belfast, and was one of the founders and the first treasurer of the Ulster Institution for the Education of the Deaf and Dumb and the Blind. 

'The Voice of a Year, or, Recollections of 1848', McComb's third collection of poems, appeared in 1849. 'Its theme is Revolution' remarked the 'Belfast News-Letter', 'and its moral the guilt and misery of attempting to change the institutions of a nation by the prowess of the popular sword, instead of the power of popular opinion' (McComb, 420). 
In 1864 McComb retired from business, and later that year published a collected edition of his poetry, 'Poetical Works', to much acclaim from the protestant and unionist press. The 'Belfast Protestant Journal' claimed 'Mr McComb's reputation as a poet is not local, but national', and compared him to Thomas Moore (McComb, 404). McComb's 'national' appeal was, however, limited by his virulent anti-Catholicism, demonstrable in lines from 'The Voice of a Year' such as: '
Princes and Potentates from thrones were hurled 

Wherever haughty Rome her blood-red flag unfurled 
(stanza 41)' and 'Antichrist, arrayed in papal power' (stanza 42). On 13 September 1873 McComb died at home, in Colin View Terrace, Belfast. He was interred in Hillsborough churchyard. 


@@@@@


doc= 17394


McCombie, William (1809-1870), farmer and journalist, was born on 7 May 1809 at Alford, Aberdeenshire, the son of William McCombie, farmer, and his wife, Marjory Wishart. McCombie received little formal education and was largely self-educated under the influence of his mother. 'The Spectator' regarded him as the greatest example of the autodidact in Scotland after his fellow journalist Hugh Miller ('The Spectator', 14 May 1870). His early life was spent on his father's farm with his spare time devoted to the composition of essays on religious and philosophical subjects. These essays were collected in 1835 under the title of 'Hours of Thought' (1835), which reached a third, expanded edition by 1856; a second early work, 'Moral Agency and Man as a Moral Agent' (1842), was an attack on Calvinist theology. In early 1840 McCombie married Anne, daughter of Joseph Robertson of Aberdeen. In this period McCombie was also active in the Mutual Improvement Movement which operated in the north-east of Scotland, becoming honorary president of the Aberdeenshire and Banffshire Mutual Instruction Union. The activities of this organization extended beyond adult education and provided a link between the Free Church of Scotland, the Liberal Party, and the conservative peasantry. It is in connection with a lecture for a Mutual Improvement Society in 1850 that a description is provided of McCombie as 'a tall slightly stooping man, in the prime of life... with a fine intellectual face, a keen searching, yet pleasant and slightly humorous glance and expression' (Smith, 67). 
From 1849 McCombie was on the staff of the 'Aberdeen Gazette', and soon became the editor, changing the title of the paper to the 'Aberdeen Free Press' in 1853. The paper was a supporter of the Liberal cause and of the Free Church which was powerful in Aberdeen, although McCombie himself was a Baptist. Under McCombie's editorship it supported some quite advanced causes such as universal suffrage. In journalistic terms McCombie's regime saw an improved standard of editorship but this may have had more to do with his assistant and successor, William Alexander, than with McCombie, who devoted more time to farming than to day-to-day editorial duties. McCombie was a keen Liberal in politics and wholly behind the Liberal cause, being particularly active in the cause of tenant farmers who became increasingly restive throughout Scotland in the 1860s, especially on the issue of the Game Laws. His cousin, William McCombie of Tillyfour ('bap'. 1805, died 1880), the famous cattle breeder, was Liberal MP for West Aberdeenshire from 1868 to 1876 and president of the Scottish chamber of agriculture. The 'Aberdeen Free Press' also reported at great length on the American Civil War, which was an important influence on Scottish Liberalism in the mid-nineteenth century. McCombie positioned himself firmly behind the North on the grounds of the evil of slavery, which he felt had been forced on the South by Britain in the eighteenth century. 
McCombie's final publication in 1869 was a pamphlet entitled 'The Irish land question practically considered: a letter to the Rt Hon William E. Gladstone, M.P.' (with whom he had corresponded during the 1860s). In order to prepare himself for constructive comment on the Irish land issue McCombie toured Ireland in the autumn of 1868. In the pamphlet he argued that Irish nationalism was 'exotic' (p. 13) and was only sustained by the continuing injustices of the land system and the church. If these two issues were dealt with then, in McCombie's view, it would 'speedily die' (ibid.). He was critical of both tenants and landowners, the former for their lack of initiative and exertion and the latter for their selfishness and 'utter disregard for the public interest' (ibid., 33). Nevertheless, he felt that 'were the resources and capabilities of the soil properly developed it might maintain in comfort as large a population as that before the famine' (ibid., 10). This pamphlet was perhaps McCombie's most accessible and most practical piece of work; his other writings were, like much of his journalism, rather abstract and even metaphysical. 
McCombie was an active lay preacher in the John Street Baptist Church in Aberdeen and his 'Sermons and Lectures' (1871) were prepared for posthumous publication by his daughter. He also published two volumes commemorating the work of George Murray, a shoemaker and journalist ('Literary Remains of George Murray', 1860) and Alexander Bethune, a farmer poet ('Memoirs of Alexander Bethune', 1845). His other principal publication was a collection of essays on the subject of education: 'On Education in its Constituents, Objects and Issues' (1857). 
McCombie remained a practical farmer throughout his career, first on his father's farm at Cairnballoch, and then, from the late 1860s, at Milton of Kemnay, also in Aberdeenshire. 'The Spectator' recorded in 1870 that 'he rapidly made his fine farm a model for both the completeness of its arrangements and the quality of its stock' (14 May 1870). Indeed, McCombie's reputation as an agriculturist did much to improve the profile of the 'Aberdeen Free Press' which until his editorship had been in the shadow of the 'Aberdeen Journal'. 
In early 1870 McCombie was laid low with a severe attack of bronchitis and chronic dyspepsia, ailments from which he had suffered for most of his life, and which resulted in his death on 6 May 1870 at 9 Broadford Place, Aberdeen. He was survived by his widow and their four sons and two daughters. 
McCombie could be characterized merely as a provincial newspaper editor and obscure essayist, but within the confines of the north-east of Scotland, however, he was much more than this. The very clear regional identity of this part of the country, allied to his political activities, especially concerning the fate of tenant farmers, assured him a wider prominence. He was also well known as a practical farmer. Much of his literary output, with the possible exception of his 'Hours of Thought' and his pamphlet, 'The Irish Land Question', was rather obscure; on his death 'The Spectator' commented 'the world has never given a welcome to his books... his written dissertations were not distinctive or complete enough to be singled out for special remembrance' (14 May 1870). His contemporary prominence stemmed from his editorship of the 'Aberdeen Free Press' which was sustained and developed by his successor, William Alexander, who turned the paper into a daily in 1872. McCombie's life, however, fits a nineteenth-century Scottish stereotype which emphasized his self-education, his piety, and his contribution to his locality. 


@@@@@


doc= 17395


McCombie, William (bap. 1805, d. 1880), cattle breeder, was born at Home Farm, Tillyfour, Aberdeenshire, and baptized on 3 August 1805, the younger son of Charles McCombie, a farmer and cattle dealer, who was descended from an old highland family, and his wife, Anne, 'nee' Black. He was educated at the parish school and Marischal College, Aberdeen. 
McCombie worked with his father until he leased the Tillyfour farm from him in 1829, and in 1832 he founded a polled Angus herd. Realizing that there was no future in driving lean cattle from the north of Scotland to be fattened in the south, he turned to the breeding of black polled cattle, carrying on the work of Hugh Watson of Keiller (1789-1865), the first to improve Aberdeen Angus cattle. McCombie became famous as an exhibitor of prize stock, and was the first Scottish exhibitor of fat cattle at Birmingham. He won more than five hundred prizes, including Prince Albert's cup for the best animal in the French or foreign classes at Poissy in 1862, and a similar prize at the Paris Exhibition in 1878. After his champion ox, Black Prince, won the blue riband at Smithfield in 1866, Queen Victoria asked him to bring it to Windsor, and following this the queen visited Tillyfour in 1867 to inspect McCombie's herd. McCombie also wrote 'Cattle and Cattle Breeders' (1867), which ran to four editions. He was one of the largest farmers in Aberdeenshire, with 1200 acres of arable land, and he was one of the earliest presidents of the Scottish chamber of agriculture. 
From 1868 until 1876 McCombie was MP for West Aberdeenshire, the first tenant farmer to be an MP in Scotland. He resigned in 1876 because of failing health. The McCombie prize for black polled cattle, an annual prize, was set up in Aberdeen in his honour. McCombie spent the rest of his life at Tillyfour, which he had bought in 1875, on the death of his eldest brother. He died unmarried at Home Farm on 1 February 1880. 


@@@@@


doc= 17396


Mac Con Midhe, Giolla Brighde (d. 1272?), poet, was a member of a family which for more than three centuries acted as hereditary poets of the Ceneal Eoghain, the O Neill family, and related septs. He sprang from one of these septs, the Ceneal Moain, settled around Ardstraw in Tyrone, although he tells that his mother was a member of the Ceneal Conaill. The 'Ceart Ui Neill', a traditional listing of O Neill's tributes, places the land of Mac Con Midhe, known as 'the Reciter's land', at Lough Ui Mhaoldubhain, which has been identified as the modern Lough Katherine at Baronscourt. Giolla Brighde Mac Con Midhe has at times been confused with an earlier poet, Giolla Brighde Albanach (surname unknown) who addressed a number of poems to Cathal Croibhdhearg O Conchobhair, king of Connacht (died 1224), but this is now rejected as mere scribal error, based on the identity of forenames. 
Of the twenty-one poems clearly attributable to Giolla Brighde Mac Con Midhe, the earliest dateable ones are addressed to Domhnall Mor O Domhnaill, king of Tir Conaill (died 1241), containing allusions appropriate to the period of political weakness in Tir Eoghain in the years after 1230. He also eulogized Domhnall Mor's four sons, Maoilsheachlainn, Gofraid, Aodh, and Domhnall Og, three of whom succeeded their father in the kingship of Tir Conaill. His most famous composition, however, was an elegy of some eighty-one verses lamenting the death of Brian O Neill and his vassal chiefs at the battle of Down in 1260. In this composition he makes clear that he held the position of 'ollamh', or court poet, to O Neill, who awarded him twenty cows as the price of a poem, and a stipend of twenty cows on May day, besides presents of gold and clothing. Presumably after O Neill's death, Mac Con Midhe entered a similar relationship with Domhnall Og O Domhnaill, who ruled Tir Conaill from 1258 to 1281, and he records receiving twenty cows with their calves from this king each May day. Single compositions of his to other contemporary chiefs survive, and some formal religious poems, but most touching is his poem of supplication to God for a surviving son, all his previous children having died 'while they drank their first milk', a situation particularly distressing for a poet, since Irish custom demanded a more stringent monogamy from this profession than from ordinary laymen. As with many of his other poems, this supplication ends by invoking the saint 'Bridget, after whom I was baptized'. 
A fifteenth-century poet from the same family, Briain Ruadh Mac Con Midhe, recalled a tradition that Giolla Brighde died while his patron, Domhnall Og O Domhnaill, was on a plundering expedition to the Erne. O Domhnaill is said to have raided Ceneal Moain on his way back, but, learning that he had met no resistance because the inhabitants were in the act of burying their celebrated poet, he returned the prey. If true, this would place Giolla Brighde Mac Con Midhe's death certainly before 1281, when Domhnall Og himself died, and possibly in the year 1272, when the king is recorded as going on an expedition to Lough Erne and Lough Oughter. 


@@@@@


doc= 17397


McConnell, William (1831-1867), cartoonist and illustrator, was born in Warwick Street, London, on 29 September 1831, the son of an Irish tailor, and had a sister, Annie (who survived him). After seeing some of his early sketches Mark Lemon, the first editor of 'Punch', sent him to study wood-engraving with Joseph Swain. His first contribution to 'Punch' (aged eighteen) seems to have been an illuminated capital (vol. 18, January-June 1850). Thereafter he produced some sixty illustrations for the magazine, notably two whole-page political cartoons: 'Louis Napoleon Viewing the Body of Liberty', published on 4 December 1851, and 'The Rivals, or, A Military Position', published on 28 February 1852. In July 1852 he left after a dispute over money and 'the contumelious and shabby treatment meted out to him by Mark Lemon' (Spielmann, 460). He also contributed to the 'Illustrated London News' (1851-60) and the short-lived 'Diogenes' (1853-4, including the strip cartoon 'How Mr Poppleton Enjoyed a Masquerade'). 
In 1855 McConnell began drawing for the 'Illustrated London Magazine'. He served as the first staff comic artist and political cartoonist on the 'Illustrated Times' (1855-61) and later on 'The Train' (launched on 1 January 1856). In 1857 he illustrated a series of articles by George Augustus Sala for the 'Leisure Hour', and the following year he began contributing to another short-lived magazine, 'Town Talk' (1858-9); for the latter he supplied both full-page cartoons and a strip-cartoon series, 'The Adventures of Mr Wilderspin on his Journey through Life', by Andrew Halliday, which was later published as a book (1861). In the same year he illustrated Sala's 'Twice round the clock' -- an account of life in London during a 24-hour period -- which was published in instalments from the first issue of the 'Welcome Guest' (1 May 1858) and later (1859) became a very successful book. Another 'Welcome Guest' serial which he illustrated for Sala was 'Make your game, or, The adventures of the stout gentleman, the thin gentleman and the man with the iron chest', later also published as a book (1860). In 1863 he contributed to the short-lived 'Comic News' (1863-4), in particular the strip 'The Adventures of Mr Swellington Fipps', and in 1864 he began drawing for 'London Society' and the 'Churchman's Family Magazine' and then the 'Sunday Magazine' (1865). 
Among the books for which McConnell provided illustrations were G. Godwin's 'London Shadows' (1854, though the title-page credits only John Brown); Oliver Oldfellow's 'Our School' (1857); G. F. Pardon's 'The Months' (1858); A. W. Cole's 'Lorimer Littlegood Esq.' (1858); 'Tom Thumb's Alphabet' ('c'.1860); R. J. Shields's 'The Knights of the Red Cross' (1861); W. Smith's 'Advertise: How? When?' (1863); 'The Beautiful Picture Book' (1865); and the posthumous 'My Pet's Picture Book' (1868), 'The Turtle Dove's Nest' (1886), and 'Nursery Rhymes' (1890). In April 1867 he sketched fifteen double portraits which, if inverted, showed animals ('As Brave as... a Lion', 'As Greedy as... a Pig', and so on). However, illness prevented him engraving them himself, and they were later published posthumously as 'Upside Down, or, Turnover Traits' (1868), with verses by Thomas Hood the younger. 
In appearance McConnell was 'a handsome little fellow, bright, alert, and full of originality. He was always exceptionally well dressed' (Spielmann, 460), and was clean-shaven with dark hair and a short dark moustache. He signed himself M'Connell, McConnell, McC, WMc, Mc, or one of two combinations of W and M which also include an A, suggesting another forename. An accomplished cartoonist and pioneer comic-strip artist, and 'one of the most successful book illustrators of our time' ('Art Journal', 172), he was 'a good and improving draughtsman, especially of horses; and he revelled in beggars, 'swells' and backgrounds' (Spielmann, 461). McConnell died of consumption at his home, 17 Tavistock Street, London, on 14 May 1867 aged thirty-five. 


@@@@@


doc= 17398


Maccormac, Henry (1800-1886), physician, was born at Carnan, co. Armagh, the fifth of the eight children of John Maccormac (died 1811), a linen merchant, and his wife, Anne (died 1846), daughter of Joseph Hall, a distiller from co. Armagh. He studied medicine in Dublin and then in Paris, where he studied at the L'Hotel Dieu under the famous surgeon Guillaume, Baron Dupuytren, before graduating MD at Edinburgh in 1824 with a thesis entitled 'De clabo secalino'. In the same year he became a licentiate of the Royal College of Surgeons of Edinburgh. 
Following the completion of his studies Maccormac visited Africa, travelling by land from the Cape of Good Hope to Sierra Leone where his brother John was a magistrate. During this journey he nearly died of yellow fever. He subsequently made two voyages to the United States and Canada. He was appointed physician in 1828 to the Belfast Fever Hospital, where in 1832 he successfully limited the spread of an outbreak of cholera in the city. In recognition of this work he received a public testimonial from the citizens of Belfast. In 1833 he married Mary Newsam 
(or Newsham; 1811-1871)
; they raised a family of two sons and three daughters. 
In 1835 a faculty of medicine was established in the Belfast Academical Institution and Maccormac was appointed to the chair of theory and practice of medicine, a post he held until 1848. During this time he was also, from 1840 to 1845, dean of the faculty of medicine. In 1849 Maccormac unsuccessfully applied for the chair of medicine in the new Queen's College. In the same year he was appointed physician to the Belfast Lunatic Asylum, a position which he held until his death. He brought about a marked change in the quality of the life of the patients, introducing an active healthy regimen to the asylum and improving the patients' diet. In 1849 cholera again struck Belfast, but owing to Maccormac's methods there were no deaths in the asylum. 
Maccormac's medical writings cover a broad range of subjects but he devoted particular attention to the cause and cure of tuberculosis. In the mid-nineteenth century a wide variety of theories were advanced to explain the cause of the disease. Without a common belief in the contagious nature of tuberculosis, causes such as physical predisposition, hereditary inheritance, poverty, and alcoholism were suggested. Maccormac believed that the disease was caused by re-breathed air and advocated the benefits of fresh air as a cure. He was in good company as this view was shared by Florence Nightingale. However, the stubborn way in which Maccormac put forward his ideas, refusing to see reason in any of those who opposed him, did not endear him to his peers. He demanded that his patients follow his advice and open the windows of their homes to ensure good health. On one occasion he had to appear in court for breaking the window panes of the house of a patient who had refused to heed his advice. 
In 1861 Maccormac gave a paper to the Royal Medical and Surgical Society in London on 'the true nature and absolute preventibility of tubercular consumption' in which he presented his belief that foul and impure air was the only possible source of tuberculosis. This paper was so badly received by the society that its members refused to pass a vote of thanks to him and calls were made for all future papers to be reviewed by a committee before being read to the society. Undaunted by this slight, Maccormac immediately replied robustly to his critics in the pages of the 'Dublin Medical Press'. The event was not forgotten by Maccormac, and twenty years later he published another letter to the society on the subject asking them to reconsider their earlier actions. The attitude of the members of the Royal Medical and Surgical Society was not shared by all of Maccormac's contemporaries. His ideas on the open-air treatment of tuberculosis were embraced in Europe. Indeed a street was named after him in Copenhagen in recognition of his contribution to the treatment of the disease. 
About 1866 Maccormac retired from his practice, though he continued to attend the asylum, and devoted himself to his literary and scientific studies. He wrote on a wide variety of subjects including medicine, insanity, religion, philology, and classical antiquity. He also concerned himself with the well-being of animals, writing a work advocating a way of killing animals for food that was more humane than the practices of the time. Although a deeply religious man, he did not adhere to any particular faith. One of his daughters, Mary, remained unmarried and looked after her father after the death of his wife in 1871. One of his sons was the distinguished surgeon Sir William MacCormac. Henry Maccormac died on 26 May 1886 at Fisherwick Place, Belfast. 


@@@@@


doc= 17399


McCormick, Charles (c.1755-1807), historian and biographer, was born in Ireland, the son of Charles McCormick of Rathkeal, near Limerick. He was educated at the Middle Temple, London, and on 18 July 1783 matriculated at St Mary Hall, Oxford, graduating BCL on 18 June 1794. Thereafter he abandoned law for literature. His principal published works are 'The History of England, from the Death of George the Second to the Peace of 1783' (n.d.), 'The Secret History of the Court and Reign of Charles the Second' (1792), and 'Memoirs of... Edmund Burke' (1797), a supposedly 'disgraceful piece of party virulence' (Lowndes, 1434). In 1805 he published 'Light Reading at Leisure Hours', and followed this with a continuation of Rapin's 'History of England'. His death from dropsy, in London on 29 July 1807, meant his proposed history of Ireland remained unfinished. 
McCormick's writing brought him little financial reward. On his death his wife, of whom no further details are known, was left in such poverty that a public appeal was set up for her support. 


@@@@@


doc= 17400


Maccormick, Joseph (1733-1799), Church of Scotland minister, was born at St Andrews on 22 January 1733, the son of John Maccormick, a minister in that town. He graduated MA at St Andrews University in 1750 and was granted a bursary in theology from the university exchequer in the same year. After serving as tutor in the Hepburn family at Clarkington, he entered in 1756 upon trials before the presbytery of Dalkeith. Maccormick was early affiliated with the moderate literati settled in the general vicinity of Edinburgh, including William Robertson, Alexander Carlyle, and John Home. His attendance at performances of Home's 'Douglas' in 1756 was opposed by the presbytery of Dalkeith, which consequently transferred his trials to the presbytery of Edinburgh. He was there licensed on 30 March 1757 and ordained minister of Kilmany, Fife, on 17 April 1758. He was presented by Robert Hepburn of Baads to the living of Temple on 21 November 1760, and while there, in 1766, had the degree of DD conferred upon him by St Andrews University. He married, on 7 May 1770, Mary (died 1822), daughter of Joseph Simson, a Bristol merchant; they had one son and three daughters. 
Through the favour of Janet, countess of Hyndford, Maccormick was transferred in 1771 to Prestonpans, where he edited his only major work, 'State-papers and letters, addressed to William Carstares... to which is prefixed the life of Mr. Carstares' (1774). The documents included in this collection had come into the hands of Charles Mackie, professor of civil history at Edinburgh University, as trustee to Carstares's widow. He in turn entrusted them to Maccormick, who was Carstares's great-nephew, along with some materials for a life. Prefixed to the letters are memoirs of the correspondents taken from the manuscript of 'The characters of the court of Great Britain', in the earl of Hyndford's library. William Robertson, Maccormick's long time friend and ally, was active in helping him secure a publisher. 
In May 1782 Maccormick was elected moderator of the general assembly, and in the following July, thanks again to the support of Robertson, he was presented by George III to the charge of St Leonards in his native presbytery in conjunction with the principalship of the United College of St Andrews. He was appointed one of the deans of the Chapel Royal on 19 July 1788, and he was a non-resident fellow of the Royal Society of Edinburgh. 
Alexander Carlyle's judgement of him is well known, 'rather a Merry Andrew, than a Wit' ('Autobiography', ed. Burton, 134), as is Walter Scott's complaint that as a boy he 'yawnd under the inflictions of a Doctor M'Cormick, a name in which dullness seems to have been hereditary' ('Journal', 602). But these comments obscure his genuine accomplishments as a steadfast supporter of the moderate party. A member of the general assembly on seven occasions, he was one of the speakers backing Robertson's effort to repeal the Catholic penal laws in 1778. The documents comprising the 'State-Papers' have been relied upon by later historians and biographers. Maccormick's life of Carstares, with its portrayal of Carstares's public role as leader of the Church of Scotland and of his private character as embodying tolerance, charity, and moderation, was a significant contribution to moderate ideology. Maccormick died at Edinburgh on 17 June 1799. 


@@@@@


doc= 17401


McCormick, Robert (1800-1890), naval surgeon, explorer, and naturalist, born at Runham, near Great Yarmouth, Norfolk, on 22 July 1800, was the only son of Robert McCormick (died 1817), surgeon in the navy, son of Robert McCormick of Ballyreagh, co. Tyrone, where the family had been settled for several generations. He spent his childhood near Great Yarmouth, and was educated by his mother and sisters. Despite his father's death in the wreck of the 'Defense' in December 1817, he decided to become a naval surgeon. He studied medicine in 1821, under Sir Astley Cooper, at Guy's and St Thomas's hospitals in London; on 6 December 1822 became a member of the Royal College of Surgeons; and in 1823 entered the navy as an assistant surgeon. He was sent out to the West Indies, where he remained for two years, seeing most of the islands and the coast of the Spanish main. In the summer of 1825 he was invalided home with yellow fever, and, after a year in a cutter in the North Sea, volunteered for Arctic service with William Edward Parry, with whom he sailed in the 'Hecla', in the expedition to the north of Spitsbergen in the summer of 1827. He took no part in the sledging expeditions, but contributed by keeping the crew healthy and by studying the natural history of Spitsbergen. On his return he was promoted surgeon on 27 November 1827. 
Two years later McCormick was again sent out to the West Indies, very much against his will, and within three months he was invalided home. His next appointment was to a surveying brig on the coast of Brazil. That, too, he found uncomfortable, and got superseded after a few months. In 1828 he was appointed to a sloop employed for some time in the blockade of the coast of Holland. Early the next year she was sent out to the West Indies, and McCormick, with a rooted dislike to the station, and especially in a small craft, was invalided home for a third time. He was now on half pay for upwards of four years, and in the intervals of study made many excursions on foot through England and Wales, travelling some 3440 miles, and pursuing his favourite studies of geology and natural history. In 1839 he was appointed, as much in the capacity of naturalist as surgeon, to the 'Terror', then going on a voyage to the Antarctic, under the command of Captain James Clark Ross. He worked on all branches of science, although his zoological findings were published only considerably later, by John Gray and Sir John Richardson on orders from the Admiralty, after the task had remained undone for some time after the expedition; McCormick apparently lacked the necessary ability. 
When the expedition returned to England, in the autumn of 1843, McCormick was disappointed of promotion. In September 1845 he was appointed surgeon to the 'William and Mary' yacht at Woolwich. He understood that this appointment was for life, or until promotion, and was very angry at being, after two years, moved to the 'Fisgard', the flagship attached to Woolwich Dockyard, from which he was superseded in December 1848. His next idea was to conduct a party in search of Sir John Franklin, and he laid before the Board of Admiralty a proposal to undertake such a search in small boats and sledges in Wellington Channel, the Boothia peninsula, and King William Island. Although his suggestions were soundly based, as McClintock was later to prove, the Admiralty dismissed his plan as dangerous. However, in 1852, while surgeon of the 'North Star', he was able to carry it out to some extent. In the 'Forlorn Hope' he explored the Wellington Channel, covering 240 statute miles, mapping the east side of the channel, but finding no trace of Franklin. He afterwards published 'Narrative of a Boat Expedition up the Wellington Channel in the Year 1852' (1854). 
McCormick returned to England in the 'Phoenix' in October 1853 and was awarded the Arctic medal in 1857. He had never ceased to urge on the Admiralty his claims for promotion, contending that his service with the Antarctic expedition was exceptional and ought to be exceptionally rewarded. The Admiralty at last promoted him, on 20 May 1859, to be deputy inspector of hospitals. He had, however, no employment, and in July 1865 he was put on the retired list, the Admiralty refusing him the honorary rank of inspector of hospitals. His friends, as well as himself, thought that he was badly used. He was a man of considerable ability, although lacking the single-mindedness of his successful scientific colleagues such as Hooker and Lyell; but in his relations with the Admiralty he was sadly wanting in tact. He disagreed with each of the medical directors-general of his time and in his avoidance of Caribbean duty was almost insubordinate. He died, unmarried, on 28 October 1890 at his home, Hecla Villa, 22 Ridgway Place, Wimbledon. The accounts of his several voyages and expeditions, together with a very detailed autobiography, were published as 'Voyages of Discovery in the Arctic and Antarctic Seas and Round the World' (2 vols., 1884), but came too late to arouse much interest. As Robert Johnson has remarked, 'he thought it the harbinger of a distinguished future, but, in the event, the 'Forlorn Hope' was his first, last and only command' ('DCB'). None the less, he is remembered in several place names in the Arctic and Antarctic. 


@@@@@


doc= 17402


McCosh, James (1811-1894), philosopher and college head, was born at the family home, Carskeoch, Patna, Ayrshire, on 1 April 1811, the fifth of seven children of Andrew McCosh, farmer, and his wife, Jean, daughter of James Carson, farmer. McCosh grew up at Carskeoch, in an area with a long history of defiant protestantism. He received religious inspiration from both parents and regularly walked with them the several miles to the Straiton parish church. Andrew McCosh died when James was nine, and, an older brother having died at the age of three, James was the only male family member left to work the farm. 
McCosh attended the local parish school and in 1824 entered Glasgow University. In 1829 he began his studies for the ministry at Edinburgh University. He became closely attached to Thomas Chalmers, in the chair of divinity, and also acquainted with David Welsh, professor of church history. The philosopher Sir William Hamilton also taught at Edinburgh and McCosh became absorbed in his writings. He received his master of arts degree from Edinburgh in 1834 and was licensed by the presbytery of Ayr (26 March 1834) as a member of the Church of Scotland. 
In October 1835 McCosh began his ministry at the abbey church of Arbroath on the eastern coast of Scotland. Here he attended to a heavily working-class parish. Shortly, he began a collaboration with Thomas Guthrie of nearby Brechin. Guthrie had joined other evangelicals in the fight against patronage in the national church. In January 1839 McCosh became minister of the cathedral church of Brechin. He now made the movement for complete separation of church and state his main cause. At St Andrew's Church in Edinburgh, on 18 May 1843, McCosh joined Chalmers, Welsh, and Guthrie in seceding from the general assembly meeting and reconvening to form the Free Church of Scotland. He was from 1844 to 1851 minister of the East Free Church, Brechin. On 29 September 1845 McCosh married Isabella Guthrie (died 1909), daughter of Alexander Guthrie, older brother of Thomas and a noted physician. They had five children: Mary Jane ('b'. 1846), Andrew (1848-1849), Alexander Guthrie ('b'. 1850), Margaret Sarah ('b'. 1852), and Andrew James ('b'. 1858). 
McCosh's interest in philosophy led to the publication in 1850 of his first book, 'The Method of the Divine Government, Physical and Moral'. The book was read and admired by the earl of Clarendon, lord lieutenant of Ireland, and helped secure McCosh's appointment (14 November 1851) as professor of logic and metaphysics at the newly established Queen's College, Belfast. In philosophy McCosh sought a viable middle ground between what he considered an overzealous intuitionism that cannot validate a real world, and a strenuous materialism that honours no spiritual reality. He confronted these problems within the tradition of Scottish philosophy. He praised Thomas Reid and Dugald Stewart for defending the truths of consciousness but faulted them for not successfully connecting them with a world of experience. He believed that Thomas Brown had left philosophy in a similarly dubious state by restricting it to the immediately knowable, the laws of the mind itself. He praised Hamilton, however, for insisting that we do not know attributes without knowing substance. In 'The Intuitions of the Mind, Inductively Investigated' (1860) McCosh sought to demonstrate that all intuitions are of something and that they must connect to experience. His 'intuitional realism' thus stayed within the general thematic emphasis of the Scottish school but his more emphatic empiricism gave McCosh his distinct place in it. On the other hand, McCosh believed that Hamilton's negative idea of the absolute had damaging implications for religious belief. McCosh paid his highest respects to Scottish philosophy in 'The Scottish Philosophy, Biographical, Expository, Critical, from Hutcheson to Hamilton' (1875). It remains a useful intellectual history. 
In 1868 McCosh accepted an invitation to become president of the College of New Jersey (Princeton) in the United States; he delivered his inaugural speech on 27 October that year. He had become well known in certain quarters of America, particularly in the protestant religious press, where his books were widely reviewed and often praised for making a useful alliance with Christianity. At Princeton he announced his intention to open the college to new areas of learning. He modernized the curriculum and expanded the faculty. McCosh held two public debates with Charles William Eliot, president of Harvard and major defender of the elective system. Free choice, McCosh said, would enable students to bypass not just the ancient classics but the modern sciences, now a necessary component of the higher learning. 
McCosh proved to be a successful academic politician at Princeton. He made new connections with wealthy Presbyterians who welcomed his effort to transform Princeton from a provincial college to a national university. On several occasions he called on such individuals to provide money to support new academic programmes or buildings. He worked with Princeton alumni to establish new chapters around the United States as he sought to broaden the geographical base of the student body. McCosh also won the support and affection of a group of students, whom he called 'me bright young men', and who shared his vision of a renewed Princeton. Woodrow Wilson -- in the class of 1879 and editor of the student newspaper 'The Princetonian' -- championed McCosh's causes. 
Although he maintained a strict moral regime at Princeton and made religion prominent at the college, McCosh's liberal views on evolution brought him enemies. His writings on science had begun at Queen's and there his work with George Dickie had led to a co-authored book, 'Typical Forms and Special Ends in Creation' (1855). Their discussions of 'collocation' and 'homologies' outlined a dynamic teleological process at work in nature and prepared McCosh's receptivity to all theories of evolution, including Darwin's. But some individuals in Princeton's board of trustees denounced McCosh for his accommodationist stance. By 1880 he felt frustrated with the reactionary temper of the trustees and prevailed in his quest to have an alumni trustee position created. Furthermore, in a significant reversal, McCosh, determined to see the success of his changes at Princeton, began appointing to faculty positions some of his best former students, several of whom became noted scholars. 
To friend and foe alike McCosh was a commanding figure at the college. His tall and imposing physique had become stooped in his older years, but students flatteringly attributed that posture to his scholarly habits. He sported lengthy sideburns and spoke with a rough Scottish brogue that gave piquancy to his speech. A proud man, he boasted unabashedly of his accomplishments at Princeton, where the students gave him the nickname Old Jimmie. Always referring to 'me college', he would escort visitors to Princeton around the campus, pointing at new buildings and saying 'that's mine; I built that'. Students who might at first have found him intimidating soon learned to see through his 'big bow-wow', as one of them called it. Many later remembered his personal kindness toward them. McCosh resigned the presidency in June 1888, but continued teaching. He died at his college home, in Princeton, New Jersey, on 16 November 1894 and was buried in the president's plot at the college on 20 November. 


@@@@@


doc= 17403


McCoy, Sir Frederick (1821/2-1899), palaeontologist, was born in Dublin, the second of three children of Simon Henry McCoy (1794/5-1875), medical practitioner, and his wife, Bridget (1798/9-1876). Although he initially studied for the medical profession, McCoy's consuming interest was in the natural sciences and this became his life's work. There were few periods throughout his career when he did not have some curatorial role in a natural history museum. During his late teens and early twenties he was employed to identify, arrange, and catalogue the fossil collections of the Geological Society of Dublin, the Royal Dublin Society, and Richard Griffith's geological survey of Ireland. In 1842 or 1843 he married Anna Maria (1819/20-1886), daughter of Thomas Harrison, attorney, and his wife, Eliza. They had five children, only two of whom reached adulthood: Emily Mary (1842-1891) and Frederick Henry (1843-1887). 
In 1845 McCoy joined the geological survey of Ireland as an assistant field geologist. He resigned late in 1846 and was then invited by Adam Sedgwick, professor of geology in Cambridge University, to classify and catalogue the geological museum's fossil collection. This occupied him full-time until 1849 when he was appointed to the foundation chair of geology and mineralogy in Queen's College, Belfast, and made curator of its museum. During this period he returned to Cambridge each summer to complete his work for Sedgwick, who described him in a letter to Roderick Murchison, dated 6 October 1851, as 'an excellent naturalist, an incomparable and most philosophical palaeontologist, and one of the steadiest and quickest workmen that ever undertook the arrangement of a Museum' (Clark and Hughes, footnote to p. 194). 
McCoy was appointed foundation professor of natural science in the University of Melbourne in 1854 and director of the Museum of Natural and Applied Sciences in 1857, either of which would have been a full-time job for a man of lesser drive and capacity. Contemporaries described him as: 'strongly built and ruddy of countenance'; 'though somewhat peppery when thwarted, he was really warm-hearted and friendly' (Scott, 34). When, in 1856, the Victorian government moved to disband the small public museum it had set up in 1854, McCoy persuaded it, against strong opposition from the Philosophical Institute, to re-establish the museum in the grounds of the university. A separate building was provided in 1862 and the public museum remained there under McCoy's stewardship until his death. He was also state palaeontologist, served on a number of royal commissions, and was an active member of many learned societies. 
McCoy saw museums as 'the most ready and effectual means of communicating the knowledge and practical experience of the experienced few to the many' ('The Argus', 29 May 1857). Typically, he put this vision into practice by providing scale models of gold-mining tools, plant, and equipment for the enlightenment of 'new-chum' miners making their way through Melbourne to the goldfields. 
Government funding for the museum was always niggardly and the governing trustees hostile. McCoy, almost single-handedly, built up the collection over four decades, mainly by trading Australia's unique flora and fauna with museums around the world. At his death, the museum contained over 500,000 specimens and was internationally recognized. McCoy was one of Australia's principal scientists of his time. 
As an academic McCoy was less successful and arguably his major achievement at the university was the establishment of a systematic botanic garden that was a key resource for the study of botany and medicine. McCoy lectured in chemistry, mineralogy, botany, anatomy, physiology of animals, zoology, and geology. For the first decade his lectures were well attended, but as the years went by and McCoy aged and sickened, his popularity with the students waned and they complained of irrelevance, an excess of theory, and insufficient practice in his subjects. 
McCoy's professional achievements were recognized and honoured widely. He was fellow of the Geological Society of London (1852), winner of its Murchison medal (1879), honorary member of the Cambridge Philosophical Society (1853), fellow of the Royal Society (1880), CMG (1886), DSc (Cambridge) 'honoris causa' -- the first recipient (1886) -- and KCMG (1891); he also received a number of awards and decorations from other European countries. He wrote seminal works on the palaeontology of Ireland and of Great Britain, and the palaeontology and zoology of Victoria, Australia, and he was a prolific contributor to learned journals. 
Born a Roman Catholic, McCoy joined the Church of England some time between 1846 and 1854. He died of renal failure on 13 May 1899 at his home, Maritima, 45 South Road, Brighton, Melbourne, and was buried on 15 May in the Anglican section of Brighton cemetery, Melbourne. Inconclusive evidence suggests that he made a deathbed recantation. 


@@@@@


doc= 17404


McCracken, Henry Joy (1767-1798), businessman and Irish nationalist, was born at 39 High Street, Belfast, on 31 August 1767, the fifth child of Captain John McCracken (1721-1803), shipowner and textile manufacturer, and his wife, Ann Joy (1730-1814). Both the Joy and McCracken families were Presbyterian, industrious, and prominent; his mother was a great-granddaughter of George Martin, sovereign (mayor) of Belfast in 1645, and the daughter of Francis Joy, a public notary of Huguenot descent, and founder of one of Ireland's first newspapers, the 'Belfast News-Letter'. In 1777 the families joined economic forces to create one of Belfast's first mechanical cotton-spinning mills, Joy, McCabe, and McCracken. McCracken displayed an early talent for mechanics and, following his education at a local school run by David Mason, was apprenticed to the family business: by 1789, he was managing the mill. A humane and popular employer, he followed in the philanthropic family tradition by creating a lending library for the poor, and in 1788 created, with his sister Mary Ann McCracken (1770-1866), social reformer, Belfast's first non-denominational Sunday school. 
A crusader by temperament, McCracken was influenced by his family's advanced political ideas. In 1788 Belfast had been at the forefront of the volunteer movement. His father and four of his relatives were founding members of the 1st Belfast volunteer company, and an uncle, Henry Joy, had been a delegate to the Dungannon convention of February 1782, which had demanded greater legislative freedom for Ireland. His family, like many other Ulster Presbyterians, had sympathized with the rebellious American colonies, and McCracken later embraced the more revolutionary ideals of the French Revolution and the ideas of Tom Paine's 'The Rights of Man'. After the Society of United Irishmen was formed in 1791, the McCracken family welcomed to Belfast the Dublin lawyer Theobald Wolfe Tone. Tone joined the society, was elected an honorary member of the 1st Belfast volunteer company, and began a chapter of the society in Dublin. Although not a founding member, McCracken formally joined the United Irishmen in March 1795, at a time when it was being reorganized into a secret revolutionary society dedicated to the military overthrow of British rule, with French aid, and the creation of an Irish republic. 
Before Tone left Belfast for exile in Philadelphia, he, McCracken, and other Belfast radicals climbed Cave Hill in Belfast and swore an oath to undermine British rule and create a republic. While McCracken remained lukewarm to the notion of the necessity of obtaining French military aid, he played a crucial role in forging an alliance between the Catholic Defenders and the largely Presbyterian United Irishmen of Ulster. Before the French invasion fleet floundered outside Bantry Bay the authorities struck against the United Irishmen in the north: in October 1796 McCracken was arrested and imprisoned in Kilmainham gaol, Dublin. Although he initially refused to accept bail, his increasing ill health led him to accept bail and release in November 1797. Having returned to a province suffering under the full weight of the suspension of habeas corpus and the repressive measures carried out by the military under the provisions of the 'Insurrection Act' of 1796, McCracken threw himself into the planning of a United Irishmen rebellion. Expecting another French invasion in the spring of 1798, the Ulster directory of the Society of United Irishmen dispatched McCracken to Dublin to help co-ordinate an effective rising. 
On his return to Belfast, McCracken informed the Ulster leaders that an attack on Dublin, together with the simultaneous stopping of all mail-coaches to hamper government intelligence on 27 May, would signal a general uprising under the leadership of Lord Edward Fitzgerald. The betrayal of the Leinster directory to the authorities and the subsequent arrest of Fitzgerald led to the easy suppression of the Dublin revolt; yet, when a more serious and successful rebellion broke out in co. Wexford, on 26-7 May, McCracken urged Robert Simms, the adjutant-general of Antrim, to mobilize forces. Dismayed at Simms's refusal, McCracken, by then deputy chief of the Antrim Defenders, pressed the issue and replaced Simms on 3 June, thereby becoming in effect the United Irish commander-in-chief in Ulster. The plans for an Ulster rising had already been betrayed to General George Nugent, but, having issued a stirring proclamation on 6 June, McCracken, with approximately 1500 men, attacked the county town of Antrim on 7 June. 
In a short, sharp action, McCracken's forces initially captured the town in a battle which took the life of John, Lord O'Neill. They were eventually forced to retreat by the arrival of forces dispatched by Nugent, and a similar rising in co. Down was also defeated by Nugent at the battle of Ballynahinch on 12-13 June. Following his defeat McCracken took refuge in the mountains outside Ballymena, hoping to secure passage to the United States. He was recognized by three Carrickfergus yeomen, and was arrested, brought to Belfast, and, following a court martial, hanged, to the great dismay of the townspeople, on 17 July 1798, outside the market house. As a final act of humanity, General Nugent allowed McCracken's body to be quickly cut down and entrusted to the care of his sister; he was buried the following day in St George's churchyard, Belfast. 
Although McCracken never married, an illegitimate daughter was brought to Mary Ann McCracken two weeks following his execution. It is usually assumed that Mary Bodel was the mother, and the child, Maria, was brought up in the McCracken household, the constant companion of Mary Ann. In later life Maria married another Belfast radical, William McCleery. In 1998 the Republic of Ireland issued five commemorative stamps remembering the 1798 rising: one bore the portrait of the Ulster Presbyterian Henry Joy McCracken. 


@@@@@


doc= 17405


M'Creery, John (1768-1832), printer, was born at Burndennet near Strabane in co. Tyrone; his father was probably James M'Creery ('c'.1745-1811), a printer in Strabane. John M'Creery came to Liverpool, where he was apprenticed to George Wood (1754-1815), printer of Princes Street. M'Creery set up as a printer in Houghton Street, Liverpool, his earliest imprints being dated 1792, when he printed Thomas Hall's 'Achmet to Selim, or, The Dying Negro', a slim quarto. M'Creery became acquainted with William Roscoe, who played a leading part in many Liverpool institutions, and who became M'Creery's principal patron, entrusting to him the printing of his 'Life of Lorenzo de' Medici' (2 vols., 1796). M'Creery produced much ephemeral work for those Liverpool institutions with which Roscoe was associated. While these are no better than the jobbing work of his time, he aspired to fine printing, as he clearly indicates in the preface to the first part of his 'The Press: a Poem' (1803), which was set in the transitional typeface cut by William Martin for the Boydell Shakespeare, printed by William Bulmer; it was illustrated with wood-engravings by Henry Hole, a former apprentice of Thomas Bewick. In this preface, expatiating on the 'art' of printing, M'Creery also makes clear his belief that his 'remote' situation in Liverpool prevented his achieving fine printing. However, a study of his output suggests that his later work did not improve upon the substantial books that he produced for Roscoe while in Liverpool. 
Nevertheless, in 1805, with William Martin's advice, M'Creery moved to London, establishing himself in Black Horse Court, Fleet Street, and registering his press under the 'Seditious Societies Act' on 28 December of that year. He became free of the Stationers' Company by redemption on 4 February 1806, and was immediately cloathed in the livery; he was active on the committee of master printers, which was at that time negotiating wages with the journeymen compositors and pressmen. He still relied to a considerable extent on his former Liverpool patrons, especially Roscoe, for work, though initially he gained some support in London, printing 'Bibliomania' (2 vols., 1811) for the demanding author T. F. Dibdin. In spite of Dibdin's praise M'Creery's business declined, and by 1817 he had only a single compositor at work. He published a second part of 'The Press' in 1827. He appears to have been a poor man of business, and had retired by June 1828. Soon afterwards he returned to Liverpool. In the autumn of 1831 M'Creery visited Paris with his wife and daughters, and on 18 April 1832 he died there of cholera. His body was brought back to England, and he was buried in London at Kensal Green cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 17406


McCrie, Thomas (1772-1835), Original Secession minister and ecclesiastical historian, was born at Duns, Berwickshire, in 1772 and baptized on 22 November, the eldest son of Thomas McCrie, manufacturer and merchant in Duns, and his first wife, Mary, daughter of John Hood, a farmer near Duns. His parents belonged to that branch of the seceders from the Church of Scotland in 1733 known as the Anti-Burghers, who had split from the original seceders by 1747 over the burgess oath, which was held to imply an acknowledgement of the Church of Scotland. Reared in that seceding tradition and encouraged by his maternal grandfather, Thomas received a classical education at Duns parish school, and before he had reached the age of fifteen served as an elementary teacher in two country schools near by. In 1788 he became an usher or assistant teacher first at the parish school at Kelso, Roxburghshire, and then in East Linton, Haddingtonshire, before entering Edinburgh University in December of that year. His arts course included classes in Latin, Greek, Hebrew, mathematics, logic, and moral philosophy, to whose professor, Dugald Stewart, among all his college teachers, he was most indebted. As was not unusual, he did not graduate; and in May 1791 he was appointed teacher at a private Anti-Burgher school in Brechin, Forfarshire. During the harvest months from September 1791 he attended the Divinity Hall at Whitburn, Linlithgowshire, where he studied for the ministry of his denomination under the Revd Archibald Bruce, professor of theology in the Anti-Burghers' General Associate Synod -- an office to which McCrie succeeded in 1816. In May 1794 he left his teaching post at Brechin and spent the summer at the home of his maternal uncle near Dunbar, Haddingtonshire, before returning to Edinburgh University in the winter to complete his arts course by attending the natural philosophy class. Licensed on 9 September 1795 by the associate presbytery of Kelso, he declined to express a view on the magistrate's power in religious matters, for the subject was then pending before the General Associate Synod, and was admitted minister of the second associate congregation in Potterrow, Edinburgh, on 26 May 1796. On 24 December that year he married Janet ('IGI' gives Jessie) Dickson (died 1821), daughter of William Dickson, a farmer in Swinton parish, Berwickshire. They had four sons and one daughter: Thomas McCrie (1797-1875), professor of church history and systematic theology in the English Presbyterian College, London; William, a merchant in Edinburgh; Jessie, who married Archibald Meikle of Flemington; John, who died aged twenty-eight on 4 October 1837; and George, minister of Clova, Aberdeenshire. 
From 1793 the Anti-Burghers, to McCrie's dismay, developed scruples on the civil magistrate's role within the church, which led them to revise their adherence to the teaching of the Westminster confession of faith on the magistrate's duty to promote true religion. Their 'new testimony', adopted by the General Associate Synod in May 1804, led McCrie with five other ministers, including his mentor Archibald Bruce, vigorously to protest at the synod's action. McCrie remained attached to the standards and constitution of the Church of Scotland 'as settled in her reforming periods', upheld the principle of an established church, and condemned the complete separation of church and state. On 28 August 1806 he and three other 'Old Light' ministers formed themselves into the Constitutional Associate Presbytery. Deposed from his ministry by the synod on 2 September 1806 and ejected from his Potterrow meeting-house after a lawsuit in March 1809, McCrie assembled his people for worship in a chapel at the foot of Carrubber's Close, Edinburgh, until in 1813 a new church was built in West Richmond Street, where he preached for the rest of his life. By 1827 the 'constitutionalists' were joined by former brethren who, dissatisfied with the union of the Burgher and Anti-Burgher synods in 1820, had split to form the Associate Synod of Protesters, and who merged with McCrie's Constitutional Presbytery on 18 May as the Associate Synod of Original Seceders, a designation intended to denote that they stood precisely on the same ground as that occupied by the original seceders; later they adopted the name Original Secession church. 
In these disputes McCrie's stand was reinforced by his study of Scottish church history since the Reformation, and he proved a formidable scholar in defending Presbyterian traditions. His earlier writings on church history included a study of the Hussites and essays on the covenanting minister Alexander Henderson; Patrick Hamilton, first Scottish martyr in the Reformation; Francis Lambert of Avignon, the French reformer of Hesse; Andre Rivet, French protestant and professor at Leiden; and John Murray, a Scottish Presbyterian opponent of James VI. His first major work, a scholarly and sympathetic biography of John Knox, published in 1811, sought to counter the prevailing 'enlightened' view of Knox in the histories of David Hume and William Robertson as a fierce and gloomy bigot, the foe to polite learning and innocent enjoyment, who stirred up vulgar enthusiasm to effect a revolution against Rome and France in defiance of the crown. The evangelical revival helps account for the widespread popularity of McCrie's 'Knox' and for a renewed interest in the principles of the Scottish Reformation. On 3 February 1813 Edinburgh University conferred on him the degree of doctor of divinity. His next study, appropriately, was a biography of Andrew Melville (1545-1622), the champion of presbytery and adversary of James VI's bishops, in which McCrie made extensive use of manuscript material to elucidate the principles of early presbyterianism. That work, first published in 1819, did not gain the popularity of his study of Knox, though it involved 'a hundred times more labour', yet its scholarship remains unsurpassed nearly two centuries later. On the 'second reformation' of the covenanting period, McCrie took to task Sir Walter Scott's view in 'Old Mortality' that the covenanters, far from defending political freedoms, were no more than religious enthusiasts determined to impose an ecclesiastical tyranny. For McCrie, the Reformation principles of Scotland combined political and religious liberty, and the covenanters had played a crucial role in the struggle for national and individual rights. His literary output extended to histories of the Reformation in Italy (1827), translated into French, German, and Dutch (and placed on the papal 'Index expurgatorius') and in Spain (1829), and, at the end of his life, an uncompleted study of Calvin. 
After the death of his first wife on 1 June 1821, McCrie sailed for the Netherlands in May 1822, visiting The Hague, Leiden, Haarlem, Amsterdam, and Utrecht, and preached at the Scots Kirk in Rotterdam. At home he served as a founding member of the Gaelic School Society, opposed whig plans for Irish education in 1832, petitioned the House of Commons against Roman Catholic emancipation in 1829, and gave evidence in 1834 to a House of Commons committee on church patronage, which he considered to be at variance with Presbyterian principles. On 4 October 1827 he married Mary Chalmers, the fourth daughter of Robert Chalmers, minister of Haddington. McCrie died in Edinburgh on 3 August 1835 and was buried on 12 August in Greyfriars churchyard; a deputation from the general assembly of the Church of Scotland attended his funeral. 


@@@@@


doc= 17407


McCrie, Thomas (1797-1875), ecclesiastical historian and Free Church of Scotland minister, was born in Edinburgh on 7 November 1797, the eldest in a family of four sons and a daughter of Thomas McCrie (1772-1835), Secession church minister, and his wife, Janet Dickson (died 1821). He was educated at the high school and university in Edinburgh before entering the theological hall of the Original Secession church. Licensed on 15 August 1820, McCrie was ordained minister of a congregation at Crieff, Perthshire, in 1821, but it was so poorly supported that he demitted the charge in July 1826. He was inducted to a church at Clola, Aberdeenshire, on 16 April 1829. On 28 December 1830 he married Walteria Chalmers (died 1875), the daughter of a Secession minister and sister of his father's second wife. There were no children. McCrie succeeded his father in Davie Street Church, Edinburgh, on 9 June 1836 and in the same year succeeded Dr George Paxton as the theological professor of the Original Secession church. McCrie received the degrees of DD from Marischal College, Aberdeen, in 1848 and LLD from Glasgow University in 1850. 
McCrie was moderator of his church's synod when it united with the Free Church of Scotland in 1852 and moderator of the Free Church general assembly in 1856. In October of that year he demitted his charge in order to serve as professor of church history and exegesis to the English Presbyterian synod. He remained in London until, his sight affected by cataract, he retired to Gullane, East Lothian, in 1866. 
A good preacher, McCrie is chiefly remembered for his publications, which included his father's collected works in four volumes, a biography of his father, several titles for the Wodrow Society, and 'Sketches of Scottish Church History', which passed through several editions. For several years McCrie was editor of the 'British and Foreign Evangelical Review' and he was also a contributor to 'The Witness' under Hugh Miller. He enjoyed a close friendship with James Aitken Wylie (1808-1890), whose background, interests, and conservative outlook were similar to his own. 
He died on 9 May 1875 at his home, 39 Minto Street, Edinburgh, and was buried beside his father in Greyfriars churchyard on 14 May. His wife predeceased him by a matter of weeks. 


@@@@@


doc= 17408


Mac Cuarta, Seamas Dall (c.1645-1733), Irish-language poet, may have been born in the area known as Creamhainn (the tribal territory of Creamhthainn or Ui Chreamhthainn in early medieval times), on the borders of co. Louth and co. Monaghan, although some authorities have argued for a birthplace in the vicinity of Dundalk, others for one in co. Meath, and still others -- with perhaps greater probability -- in the district of Omeath, co. Louth, with which he is most closely identified. He spent most of his life in and around Omeath but also had close links with the vicinity of the Boyne, particularly with the townland of Kellystown in the parish of Monknewtown, barony of Upper Slane. He lost his sight as a boy, in unexplained circumstances, and -- like many of his contemporaries who shared his affliction -- spent most of his life as a wandering minstrel. 
Mac Cuarta's poetry reflects a familiarity with Irish literature and history, the classics (Greek and Latin), and the 'Bible'. His surviving work -- the earliest of which appears to date from about 1690 -- runs to more than fifty poems and is to be found in approximately 130 manuscripts. One of the manuscripts dates from as early as 1724-5 and no fewer than fifteen of his poems occur in manuscripts that were penned either during his lifetime or immediately after his death. 
Much of Mac Cuarta's work echoes the political events of his time, such as the catastrophic battle of Aughrim (1691) -- which inspired 'Tuireamh Shomhairle Mhic Dhomhnaill' (a lament for a Catholic leader who fell in that battle) -- and the subsequent subjugation of his people by the English, who are condemned both as foreigners and heretics. (Strangely enough, Mac Cuarta does not mention the battle of the Boyne.) He bitterly laments the loss of the traditional local chieftains, the O'Neills of the Fews, in south Armagh, where their great castle at Glasdrummond now lay broken and deserted. He is especially bitter about those Irishmen whom he deems to have betrayed their compatriots and accordingly praises local men of non-noble lineage -- whom others consider upstarts -- who are willing to challenge the English, however futile their efforts, and he never loses hope that eventually the Englishry will be destroyed and the exiled leaders will return. 
Mac Cuarta's great love of nature (despite his blindness) is most poignantly reflected in his poem to the cuckoo -- 'Failte don ean' ('Welcome to the bird') -- said to date from 1707. His work includes a body of religious poetry that is characterized by strong Marian devotion and a fiercely anti-protestant tone. Other poems on ecclesiastical matters include one welcoming the appointment of James O'Shiel OFM as bishop of Down and Connor in 1717 and a lament for a priest named Pilib O Raghallaigh. His poems of 'exile' (which relate to his being some twenty or thirty miles removed from some of his favourite haunts), 'Beannacht Boinne' and 'Duiche Chreamhainn', are noteworthy, as are his elegies, particularly that on his close friend Niall Og Mac Murchaidh who died in 1714. He also mourned the death of his two brothers Ruairi and Brian, in 1717. He composed numerous poems in praise of chieftains -- Toirealach O Neill, Brian Mac Naois, Brian Mac Eoghain, Mac Airt Ui Neill, the baron of Slane, and others -- as well as several in praise of women; these latter works are rather pedestrian and lacking in passion. 
One of Mac Cuarta's most justly celebrated works is his well-crafted, delicious little satire 'Tithe Chorr an Chait' on the niggardly inhabitants of the village of Corrakit. A more bitter one is his attack, 'Scanradh an Daill', on the miscreant who had callously stolen 18 guineas from the blind poet. Mac Cuarta was a noted practitioner of the verse form known as 'tri rainn agus amhran' (consisting of three quatrains in traditional -- albeit rather loose -- syllabic metre and a stanza in song metre). He was also famed for his sociability and his great friendship with his fellow poets and musicians, most notably Niall Og Mac Mhurchaidh, Padraig Mac Giolla Fhiondain (1665-1733), and Toirdhealbhach O Cearbhallain 
(Turlogh O'Carolan; 1670-1738)
-- they praised, mocked, and mourned one another, as appropriate. For example, Mac Cuarta lamented Niall Og and Mac Giolla Fhiondain lamented Mac Cuarta. From the latter lament comes the knowledge that Mac Cuarta died in February 1733, but there is no indication of where he was buried. Two editions of his writings (neither complete) have appeared, the first in 1925 and the second in 1971. 


@@@@@


doc= 17409


MacCullagh, James (1809-1847), mathematician, was born in Landahussy, in the parish of Upper Badoney, Tyrone, Ireland, the eldest of twelve children of James MacCullagh (1777-1857), farmer, and his wife, Margaret (1784-1839), 'nee' Ballentine(?). While MacCullagh was still young his father left his mountain farm and the family moved to Strabane, where MacCullagh's mathematical talent first became apparent. He attended the schools of the historian the Revd John Graham and of the classicist the Revd Thomas Rolleston at Strabane in co. Tyrone. On 1 November 1824 he was admitted to Trinity College, Dublin, as a pensioner and on 1 June 1825 he was a successful candidate for a sizarship. On 24 June 1826 he took up residence in the college, where he lived until his death. He was elected a foundation scholar on 11 June 1827 and graduated a bachelor of arts on 2 March 1829. 
MacCullagh benefited greatly from the renaissance in mathematical education at the college initiated by Bartholomew Lloyd, and his rapid promotion owed much to the patronage of Lloyd. In June 1829 he was an unsuccessful candidate in the highly competitive fellowship examination. Following the failure of a second attempt in 1831 he sent the provost, Lloyd, a letter containing several theorems relating to a geometrical theory of rotation and to the theory of attraction. The publication in 1834 of Louis Poinsot's theory of rotary motion meant that MacCullagh's work had been superseded but his letter was published in 1844 in the 'Proceedings of the Royal Irish Academy'. He competed successfully for a fellowship in 1832 and was elected a junior fellow on 18 June 1832. Shortly afterwards he was made junior assistant to the Erasmus Smith professor of mathematics and assistant to the lecturer in Greek. 
In the course of the eighteen years of his career MacCullagh wrote some thirty-nine papers, presented for the most part to the Royal Irish Academy and published in its 'Proceedings' or 'Transactions'. Most of his papers were republished posthumously, together with his lectures on the rotation of a solid body and on the attraction of ellipsoids, in 'The Collected Works of James MacCullagh' (1880). His first two papers dealt with geometrical theorems on the rectification of conic sections, and with double refraction in a crystallized medium, in which context he provided a description of Fresnel's wave surface. Evidence of his profound understanding of double refraction in crystals is evident in his first major paper 'Geometrical propositions applied to the wave theory of light' (1833). In the following years he set about trying to improve the derivation by Fresnel of the laws governing the reflection of light and to extend them to crystalline surfaces. For an ether having the same density everywhere, he assumed (unlike Fresnel) that the vibrations were parallel to the plane of polarization and (like Fresnel) that the incident transverse waves give rise only to transverse reflected and refracted waves. His theory of crystalline reflection and refraction (1835-7) was identical with a theory of Franz Ernst Neumann announced in 1835 and published in 1837. In papers of 1836 MacCullagh treated the optical behaviour of quartz and the reflection of light from metals. 
MacCullagh's most important paper on light, 'An essay towards a dynamical theory of crystalline reflexion and refraction', in which he set forth equations which describe a light-bearing ether having the properties necessary to justify the assumptions he had made in earlier work on crystalline reflection, was read on 9 December 1839 (final version published 1843). In it he followed the method adopted by George Green in an 1838 investigation of the propagation of waves in a real elastic medium. Early in 1840 he was able to reconcile his theory of optical activity in quartz with his dynamical theory, and in May 1841 he gave an account of how his theory could be extended to include total reflection. In 1843 he published the results of experiments carried out in 1837 on metallic reflection with the assistance of Thomas Grubb. However, he remained sceptical as to the truth of the wave theory of light. At the British Association meeting at Manchester in 1842, where a vigorous discussion of the wave theory took place, he adopted an agnostic stance, and suggested that the theory was still lacking in physical principles. 
Although MacCullagh had provided a mathematical framework for the description of a wide range of optical phenomena, his work was received with scepticism. However, his dynamical theory found supporters, particularly among Anglo-Irish scientists, decades after his death. In 1880 George Francis FitzGerald provided an interpretation of his theory of reflection and refraction so as to bring it into harmony with Maxwell's electromagnetic theory. George Gabriel Stokes was particularly critical of MacCullagh's work but Joseph Larmor and Lord Rayleigh considered this judgement too harsh. 
Despite his preoccupation with the physical problem of the propagation of light, MacCullagh's primary talent was as a geometer. His success in developing his ether theory was due in part to his geometrical skills. He had been interested in surfaces, especially the ellipsoid and second-order surfaces, since 1829 when he first investigated the Fresnel wave surface. The ellipsoid was also relevant to his early investigations of the rotation of a solid body. The first part of his major mathematical work, 'On surfaces of the second order' (1843), dealt with the generalization of the focus-directrix property of conic sections; the second considered various properties of second-order surfaces. Inversive geometry and the use of reciprocal surfaces had been used to good advantage both in his elucidation of the Fresnel wave surface and in his treatment of the rotation of a solid body. This idea was extended in his 1843 paper to what is referred to as the modular generation of surfaces such as the ellipsoid. As with all his mathematical writing this paper is characterized by its elegance and simplicity of style. 
In 1835 the chair of mathematics at Trinity College, Dublin, became vacant, and MacCullagh was appointed. He was a lay fellow of the college, and in the following year he was freed, at his own request, from the requirement to take holy orders. In the summer of 1838 the degrees LLB and LLD were conferred on him. He had previously been elected (in February 1833) a member of the Royal Irish Academy, and was now elected to the academy's council and was awarded its Cunningham medal for his paper on the laws of crystalline reflection and refraction, the presentation being made by William Rowan Hamilton on 25 June 1838. On this occasion Hamilton referred to Neumann's paper but gave priority to MacCullagh. This claim was disputed by Neumann in a letter of 8 October read at the meeting of 30 November. MacCullagh insisted on his priority in publication and the independence of his work. 
MacCullagh made an important contribution to the development of the school of mathematics at Trinity College, Dublin, and helped establish a geometrical bias there. He delivered a special course of lectures to the fellowship candidates and from 1837 to 1843 was an examiner at the annual fellowship examinations. He was an inspiring lecturer and of his graduate students, after 1835, twenty became fellows and a number were to make original contributions in mathematics. He was instrumental in the establishment of the school of engineering in 1841 and subsequently shared responsibility for teaching mechanics and physics to engineering students. On 4 December 1843 he was appointed Erasmus Smith professor of natural and experimental philosophy, in succession to Humphrey Lloyd, and he was allowed to substitute a course of physics lectures in place of those he had previously provided for fellowship candidates. 
MacCullagh's other scholarly interests included Egyptian chronology and Irish culture. He devoted much effort to building up the Royal Irish Academy's Museum of Antiquities (now part of the National Museum of Ireland) donating from his own funds for the purchase of Irish antiquities. He was awarded the Copley medal of the Royal Society in 1842, and was elected a fellow in the following year. He attended the annual meetings of the British Association for the Advancement of Science in Dublin (1835), Bristol (1836), Manchester (1842), and Cork (1843), and he travelled to the continent on at least three occasions (1840, 1842, 1846). Together with Charles Babbage he attended a scientific meeting at Turin in September 1840. He was elected to the Athenaeum in February 1842. 
The last months of MacCullagh's life were marked by an involvement in politics. In the general election of 1847 he decided to compete for one of the two Dublin University seats at Westminster, in opposition to the sitting members who were Oxford graduates. He was a liberal but without party affiliation or political experience, and in a constituency that was strongly tory he was inevitably an outsider: he received 374 out of 2224 votes cast, finishing last of four candidates. The Young Irelanders applauded his patriotism after his death, an obituary notice in 'The Nation' (30 October 1847) describing him as a 'warm and ardent nationalist'. It is likely, however, that he was a nationalist only in the sense that he believed Irishmen should show self-respect and promote their own national institutions. He made no pronouncements on constitutional issues. 
MacCullagh's powerful drive for achievement was frustrated by a series of disappointments in science and politics. His personality was characterized by excessive sensitivity, introspection, and a lack of stability. An impetuous temperament combined with suspicion or fear of plagiarism caused him to make extravagant claims on occasions. He died on the evening of Sunday 24 October 1847, being found in his college apartment with his throat cut. An inquest the next day returned a verdict of suicide. No trace of his collection of manuscript papers was found after his death. A funeral service was held in the college on 30 October and he was buried in the family vault in the graveyard of St Patrick's parish church of Upper Badoney, co. Tyrone. He is commemorated by a brass plaque in the church and by a marble tablet on the family grave erected by his sister Isabella (1823-1894). Three sisters and a younger brother were dependent on him at the time of his death and an appeal to the prime minister, with the support of important academics and politicians, helped procure a civil-list pension for his sisters. 


@@@@@


doc= 17410


McCulloch, Horatio (1805-1867), landscape painter, was born in Glasgow in November 1805, the son of Alexander McCulloch (died 'c'.1827), cotton merchant, and his wife, Margaret Watson. He studied art under John Knox, the landscape, portrait, and panorama painter in Glasgow, and was a friend of the artists Daniel Macnee and William Leighton Leitch. McCulloch and Macnee left Glasgow to work at Cumnock in Ayrshire, then moved to Edinburgh where they were employed by William Home Lizars, the engraver. 
McCulloch's earliest documented work, 'Portrait of a Boy', was shown by a Glasgow printseller in 1819. In 1828 the Glasgow Dilettanti Society's first exhibition had four works by McCulloch, including two studies; his tendency to show sketches aroused some criticism. From 1829 he exhibited with the Scottish Academy in Edinburgh and was elected an associate in 1834. Although he occasionally contributed to exhibitions in Manchester, Liverpool, Dublin, Belfast, and London, his work was not that well known in England. His early paintings reflect the style of Alexander Nasmyth and John Knox in their classical composition and meticulous technique but, following his move to Edinburgh, he came under the influence of the Revd John Thomson of Duddingston, then Scotland's most admired landscape artist, in his Romantic vision of the country and exuberant brushwork, and Hugh William 'Grecian' Williams. McCulloch's painting became more spontaneous and fluid and he can be regarded as a pioneer of a freer style of watercolour painting. Although contemporary critics emphasized the 'natural' quality of his works, Alexander Fraser, his fellow artist, friend, and biographer, wrote that he 'did not want to know too much of anything; for him objects of sight were to be studied only as they were objects of taste -- food for imagination, or as they appealed to his sense of beauty or grandeur' (Fraser, 37). 
McCulloch was an outstanding and influential painter of the Scottish landscape whose work appeared in a variety of settings. Robert Napier, the renowned marine engineer, had him decorate panels for steamships; his views were used to illustrate the 'Steam Boat Companion' (1831), published by James Lumsden, a major patron; they also appeared in 'The Scottish Annual' (1836), William Beattie's 'Scotland Illustrated' (1838), and 'Scotland Delineated' (1847-54). His work was acquired by the art unions in Glasgow and Edinburgh as well as by private collectors. McCulloch was particularly drawn to the western highlands and islands, Stirlingshire, Lanarkshire, and Renfrewshire. The Isle of Skye also provided great inspiration and it was there that he married Marcella McLellan on 6 September 1847. 
In the 1850s and 1860s McCulloch's style changed; this is most obvious in his outdoor studies, which reveal a greater interest in detail and composition. Some of his best-known and most popular pictures date from this period, including 'My Heart's in the Highlands' (1860, Glasgow Art Gallery and Museum), commissioned by the Royal Association for the Promotion of the Fine Arts in Scotland and engraved by William Forrest for its 'Illustrated Songs of Robert Burns' (1861). 'Glencoe' (1864, Glasgow Art Gallery and Museum), regarded as one of the most pictorially successful of the later works, is the most reproduced of all his images of Scotland. He and Landseer, more than any other mid-nineteenth-century artist, contributed to the popular Victorian image of the highlands, revealing nature in all its elements. 
Alexander Fraser wrote that, as a young man, McCulloch was popular for his 'good-heartedness, and merry, harem-scarem disposition' (Fraser, 19). One portrait by Daniel Macnee (1842, Glasgow Art Gallery and Museum) captures a fresh-faced artist gazing eagerly; it contrasts with the more rugged appearance photographed by Thomas Annan in the 1860s and included in Fraser's monograph. McCulloch died at his home, St Colm Villa, Trinity, Leith, near Edinburgh, on 24 June 1867 and was buried in Warriston cemetery in Edinburgh on 28 June. His works are in the collections of the Glasgow Art Gallery and Museum; the National Gallery of Scotland, Edinburgh; Perth Museum and Art Gallery; McManus Galleries, Dundee; and other public collections. 


@@@@@


doc= 17411


McCulloch, Sir James (1819-1893), politician and entrepreneur in Australia, the son of George McCulloch, a carter, and his wife, Jean Thomson, was born on 19 March 1819 at Glasgow. After a rudimentary education he entered the office of the merchants J. and A. Dennistoun. On 1 August 1841 he married Susan, the daughter of the Revd James Renwick of Muirton, Forfar. In 1853 Dennistouns sent him to open a branch in Melbourne, where his energy, connections, and lively personality quickly made him a leader in the business community, public charities, and institutions. In 1854 he was nominated to the legislative council of Victoria, and in October 1856 he was elected to the first legislative assembly under responsible government. 
Described as a mercantile liberal, in the next seven years McCulloch was in and out of the legislative assembly, twice held office amid constant ministerial changes, twice visited Britain, was twice president of the chamber of commerce, formed a new company, McCulloch, Sellar & Co., in succession to Dennistouns, was elected a member of the Melbourne Club, and began to acquire pastoral interests. In 1863, dissatisfied with Charles Duffy's radical and disastrous land selection act which had enabled pastoralists, acting largely through dummies, rather than agricultural selectors, to buy crown lands, he helped to defeat the existing administration and, allied with some of his former radical opponents, became premier and chief secretary in the first stable ministry that Victoria had had. 
McCulloch immediately took a strong stand against British proposals to increase convict transportation to Western Australia, and then, after the legislative council, elected on a restricted franchise which strongly favoured squatters and conservatives, twice rejected government land legislation, he went to the country in November 1864 on a programme which included a new land bill, council reform, and moderate tariff increases. He won handsomely and the council was virtually compelled to accept another land bill, which, despite continued dummying, achieved partial success. Partly in revenge, the council opposed the tariff in the name of free trade. McCulloch then 'tacked' the customs duties to the appropriation bill, which the council consequently rejected. Uproar ensued; public payments were maintained by the government's borrowing money from the London Chartered Bank, of which McCulloch was the local director (other banks refusing to lend), to which it confessed judgment when sued under the 'Crown Remedies and Liabilities Act'. Compromise failing and his majority dwindling, McCulloch appealed to the country, and in February 1866 was returned with a crushing and more radical majority. The council then passed the tariff, but its power remained intact. 
The dispute was renewed in May 1866 when the imperial government recalled the governor, Sir Charles Darling, for partisanship with the ministry and McCulloch proposed to vote Lady Darling $20,000 in compensation. Colonial government regulations prevented this, until Sir Charles resigned from government service; McCulloch then, in July 1867, put the grant on the estimates, and refused to put it up separately. The council rejected the appropriation bill, and deadlock returned. Fresh elections in February 1868 sent the government back stronger than before, and when London instructed the governor that the grant must be reintroduced separately, McCulloch resigned. His huge majority made a conservative ministry impotent, but eight weeks later, in July, news of Darling's re-entry into the colonial service made the grant unacceptable and unnecessary. McCulloch resumed office, now becoming treasurer as well as premier and chief secretary. Radical disappointment at the inconclusive end of the crises and the concessions to pastoralists which accompanied easier terms for selection in a new land act the following year, together with corruption scandals, weakened his government. It fell on a minor issue in September 1869. McCulloch was knighted in 1870 and became premier and chief secretary again in April of that year. He succeeded in abolishing state aid to religion and won the 1871 elections promising to establish state secular education, but he was defeated in June when his proposals for modest tariff increases dissatisfied the more ardent protectionists in his party, and proposals for a property tax alienated many uncommitted members. 
After resigning his seat in March 1872, McCulloch acted as agent-general for Victoria in London during early 1873; the following year his KB was converted to KCMG. He then returned to Australia and re-entered the assembly at the 1874 elections. Although his old party was in power, he first helped to defeat it on taxation, then rejoined it to overthrow the radical Berry ministry, and he became premier and treasurer in October 1875. Berry launched systematic parliamentary obstruction; McCulloch defeated this by introducing the closure, but his attempts to establish a balanced system of direct taxation failed. In May 1877 Berry, campaigning for a land tax on great estates, won a devastating electoral victory. A year later McCulloch resigned from parliament. 
McCulloch then devoted himself to business, holding several directorships and helping establish the frozen meat trade. Having been a trustee of the public library, museums, and national gallery of Victoria since 1870, he could now work for it more strenuously, and he played a considerable part in selecting pictures for it. He retired to England in 1886, and died on 30 January 1893 at his residence, Garbrand Hall, Ewell, Surrey, leaving an estate valued at more than $22,000. He was survived by his second wife, Margaret Boak, the daughter of his associate William Inglis of Walflat, Dumbarton, whom he had married on 17 October 1867, but he had had no children from either of his marriages. McCulloch was an honest, energetic, determined, and very effective politician. At times he was ready to compromise, on other occasions he seemed opportunistic and unscrupulous, but he was a consistent liberal who carried out several important reforms. 


@@@@@


doc= 17412


MacCulloch, John (1773-1835), surgeon and geologist, was born on 6 October 1773 at his grandparents' home on Guernsey. He was the third of eight children born to James MacCulloch (1746-1832), wine merchant of Roscoff, and his wife, Elizabeth de Lisle, daughter of Thomas de Lisle, a Guernsey jurat. John early showed his solitary and precocious nature, so his father sent him to schools in Cornwall between 1778 and 1790. In M'Gilvray's Grammar School, Lostwithiel, MacCulloch served as head pupil, and there he was inspired to become a doctor. He studied medicine at Edinburgh University from 1790 to 1794. He also read chemistry under Joseph Black and natural history under John Walker. In 1793, he graduated MD, presenting a dissertation, 'De igne electreo', reviewing uses of electricity to cure intermittent fevers. However, postgraduate studies were curtailed by his parents' internment during the French Revolution. 
On 15 August 1795 MacCulloch became surgeon's mate in the Royal Artillery, rising to senior assistant surgeon by 1803, then being drafted to the ordnance chemical department, becoming ordnance chemist in 1806 and retiring from the army with a small military pension. In September 1808 he became a licentiate of the Royal College of Physicians and settled at Blackheath, where he practised privately until 1811 when ordnance duties necessitated prolonged absences for geological surveys. Always an opportunist, in 1820 he became physician to Prince Leopold, later king of the Belgians. MacCulloch's principal contribution to medicine was his compilation and analysis of data on fevers. He attributed recurrent fevers to bad air which he made the theme of his book, 'Malaria' (1827). His description of symptoms and analysis of causes showed an appreciation of the role of the environment in propagating malarial disease. He published 'An Essay on the Remittent Diseases' in 1828 and argued that there were causal links between malaria and other intermittent fevers but ignored some contrary evidence. 
As ordnance chemist MacCulloch prepared chemicals, analysed materials, and gave lectures on chemistry, first to students of the Royal Military Academy at Woolwich, then to East India Company military cadets at Addiscombe. He lectured at Woolwich (1803-21) and at Addiscombe (1814-35). During the Napoleonic wars he was responsible for analysing purity of sulphur and nitrate shipments for the gunpowder mills and he checked the efficacy of gunpowder delivered from them. When the powdermill wheels of Belgian limestone wore out in 1809, MacCulloch was assigned the task of locating British replacement limestone; thus began his paid geological fieldwork. 
MacCulloch's growing interest in geology evinced itself in diaries of tours in the Lake District in 1805 and the west country in 1807, during which he visited mines and commented upon rocks, but his zeal was best expressed when he joined the Geological Society of London in 1808 and promptly read a paper on Channel Island geology. Between 1809 and 1813 he conducted geological surveys in Wessex, Wales, and Scotland, searching for silica-free limestone for millwheels. He located appropriate rocks in Skye and Sutherland but the quarries were difficult to work so no wheels were delivered. 
Each summer from 1814 to 1821 MacCulloch acted as geologist to the ordnance trigonometrical survey. His tasks were to examine the geology of rocks around the survey stations to determine whether they were dense enough to distort the position of the vertical plumb line and so introduce errors in the survey, and also to find a detached mountain of simple geological structure where the deflection produced by a known mass could be measured exactly. In eight seasons he examined the geology of hundreds of Scottish peaks, completed a geological map of west Scotland, and recommended Ben Stack and Ailsa Craig for the deflection experiment. 
Thorough descriptions of MacCulloch's discoveries concerning Scottish rocks were published in the 'Transactions of the Geological Society of London' where his closely reasoned and well illustrated papers epitomized the Baconian skills advocated by the society. He served as Geological Society president in 1816-18, but his wide scientific expertise was best attested by his election as fellow of the Royal Society in 1820. Unexpectedly, survey work took its toll; after he suffered enlargement of the spleen in 1821, he was unfit for duty until 1822, and remained unhealthy thereafter. 
In 1824 ordnance establishments were being cut; the chemical department was abolished, with MacCulloch retiring on pension, and the geological survey was transferred to the Treasury. Until 1832 MacCulloch spent each summer surveying central and southern Scotland to complete his map. Costs exceeded $1000 per year but although the Scottish geological fraternity challenged the expenditure in parliament during 1830-31, the survey was completed. MacCulloch suffered a stroke in 1831, but he rallied to draft the final reports and map which were demanded by the Treasury when prompted by Robert Jameson, who roused the Highland Society to seek publication. 
Latterly MacCulloch was alienated from geological peers who had hailed his success in 1819 on publishing 'A Description of the Western Islands of Scotland' and again in 1821 when he released 'A Geological Classification of Rocks', which served ten years as textbook for his geology lectures in the East India College. Those books embodied the results of careful field observation and demonstrated understanding of crystalline rock origins, and the power of erosion. From 1821 onwards writing was an auxiliary source of income and occupation and MacCulloch wrote dozens of scientific papers, book reviews, and articles for the 'Edinburgh Encyclopaedia'. His most controversial book, 'The Highlands and Western Islands of Scotland' (1824), stated that lazy highlanders should be cleared from the land, and met virulent opposition. MacCulloch's scientific reputation was marred by his last geology book, 'The System of Geology', published in 1831. He wrote it before 1824 but found no funds to publish until 1830 when his ideas, largely based on studies of crystalline rocks, had become unfashionable. Fossils had become the favoured analytical tool in geology, but MacCulloch belittled their value. 
MacCulloch was a handsome, charming man in his prime, about 1820 when Faulkner painted him, but as his health deteriorated his face became puffy and his manner acerbic. Nevertheless, he married Louisa Margaretta White of Croydon on 6 July 1835 at St Martin-in-the-Fields, London. On honeymoon in Cornwall he suffered severe injuries in a carriage accident near Penzance and died after the amputation of a leg on 20 August 1835. He was buried at Gulval church near Penzance. 
The 4 mile to an inch Scottish geological map by MacCulloch appeared in 1836 and was criticized for topographical and geological inaccuracy, but it was not superseded for many years. His widow published his 'Proofs and Illustrations of the Attributes of God' in 1837. In it he argued that geological evidence revealed the work of God in creation, an idea well received by the Church of England, but tested by Charles Darwin against his embryonic theory of evolution. 
MacCulloch bequeathed money which supported his widow for twenty-three years and he left publications on medicine and geology which acted as the solid observational basis for later theoretical development. A contemporary, Charles Lyell, praised MacCulloch as an observer and commented on the powerful and lasting value of his written work. A twentieth-century biography considered that MacCulloch's work 'greatly advanced general knowledge of the varied rock formations of Scotland, especially that of the igneous rocks' (Eyles, 593-5). Finally, MacCulloch exemplified early scientific professionalization in Britain, first challenging government bureaucracy to meet administrative and financial burdens involved in geological research. 


@@@@@


doc= 17413


McCulloch, John Ramsay (1789-1864), political economist, was born on 1 March 1789, in Whithorn, Wigtownshire, the eldest of two sons of William McCulloch and of Sarah, daughter of the Revd James Laing DD, minister of the parish of Glasserton. The family owned the freehold of a small estate, Auchengool, in the stewartry of Kirkcudbright, and when John Ramsay was five years old, William McCulloch died, a year before his own father, upon which Sarah's father took charge of their home and property and assumed guardianship of the two boys. Sarah herself escaped from her father's domination by marrying a cousin, Dr David Dempster, but it was not until sixteen-year-old John Ramsay formally inherited Auchengool, together with his father's house and small farm in Whithorn, that he and his brother went to live with their mother and stepfather. Although Dr Laing pursued until 1809 his litigious endeavours to dispute John Ramsay's inheritance, the latter (according to H. G. Reid, his biographer, son-in-law, and personal assistant) was to recall his maternal grandfather gratefully, in later years, as a good classical scholar with a taste for modern as well as ancient literature, whose well-stocked library nourished his youthful passion for books. 
In October 1807, after moving with the Dempsters to Edinburgh, McCulloch entered the university there, where he studied various subjects (including mathematics, agriculture, and metaphysics); there is no evidence, however, that he attended Dugald Stewart's lectures in political economy. He left without graduating, returned in August 1811 to his house in Whithorn, and on 12 November of that year married Isabella Stewart. He then took employment in Edinburgh as a lawyer's clerk and it was there that he became interested in political economy. In 1815 he wrote his first 'Essay on the Question of Reducing the Interest of the National Debt', which he boldly sent to David Ricardo for comment. The 27-year-old was rewarded for his temerity in addressing the leading British political economist of the day by receiving a generously full critical comment on his 'Essay'. A few months later he sent Ricardo a much enlarged and duly revised edition of the pamphlet -- which did not altogether accept the master's critique. By the time Ricardo's classic 'Principles of Political Economy' was published McCulloch had joined the staff of 'The Scotsman', a new liberal newspaper for which he reviewed the book in May 1817. More significant, however, in establishing his early reputation as a well-informed economic journalist, in close touch with recent thinking on political economy, was the substantial review article on Ricardo's 'Principles' that was McCulloch's first contribution to the influential 'Edinburgh Review' (June 1818). He remained that journal's principal economic writer for almost twenty years and was regarded by himself, and his contemporaries -- including Ricardo -- as the latter's principal popularizer. 
By the end of 1818 McCulloch had published more than fifty articles on current politico-economic themes -- mainly in 'The Scotsman' (of which he was editor from 1817 to 1821) or the 'Edinburgh Review' -- and had written two of the twenty major articles he was to contribute to the 6th, 7th, and 8th editions of the 'Encyclopaedia Britannica' and its supplements. He was then sending Ricardo first drafts or proofs of his articles and getting back both constructive advice and warm encouragement. Moreover, after Ricardo took his seat as an MP, early in 1819, McCulloch had no hesitation either in using him to extract from other MPs or officials factual data and perspectives relevant to his current journalistic projects, or in urging him to speak in Commons debates on issues of special concern to politically minded Scots. Over the next four to five years the congenial, often lengthy, argumentative letters passing between these two seekers after truth in the new science of political economy created a professional relationship valued by each of them. They first met in May 1823, when McCulloch visited London to spend six weeks in lively discussion with Ricardo and his circle and participated in a meeting of the Political Economy Club. This was after he had already delivered the third of his annual course of lectures to Edinburgh students -- to an audience that reached sixty in early 1823. A cordial letter from Ricardo, which arrived after McCulloch's return home, anticipated his next London visit, the following year, to give a similar course which ought to prove instructive to 'some of the grown gentlemen in the House of Commons' ('Works and Correspondence', 9.301). However, Ricardo died two months later. So, although McCulloch did return to London (in April 1824) to lecture to an audience that included government ministers and MPs, it was James Mill and his friends who had raised the funds to endow a Ricardo memorial lectureship on political economy for ten years and ensured that McCulloch would be the first incumbent. 
The Ricardo Memorial Lectures were so successful that in the first year McCulloch was persuaded to repeat them in Liverpool in the autumn of 1824. In 1825 and 1826 his London audiences (at times including such eminent dignitaries as the chancellor of the exchequer, the president of the Board of Trade, and the lord mayor) were so large that he gave twenty-six lectures, twice weekly, at a City as well as a West End location -- supplementing them with private classes in his own rooms for the more earnest of his regular listeners. He also gave occasional one-off lectures, one of which -- a discourse delivered at the opening of the City of London Literary and Scientific Institution -- was said to have attracted nearly 800 auditors. In spite of his fame as a teacher of political economy in London, McCulloch's friends failed in their campaign to establish an Edinburgh chair in the subject, for which they saw him as the best-qualified candidate. The reason was that, during his years as an outspoken editor of 'The Scotsman', he had made a bitter enemy of (among others) John Wilson, Dugald Stewart's successor in the chair of moral philosophy, who though totally without interest in, or knowledge of, political economy, could (and did) claim it as being within his own professorial brief. McCulloch had not yet affronted influential Londoners, however, when he was offered, and in 1828 accepted, the chair of political economy in the newly founded University of London. It proved a disappointing episode in his career. After buying an expensive house in fashionable Fitzroy Square, he quarrelled continuously with the university council (mainly about money matters, but also on educational issues) and was confronted by dwindling student audiences. Money was, of course, a pressing consideration for a middle-aged man who took his family responsibilities seriously. Isabella bore him twelve children, of whom four boys (including William McCulloch) and six girls survived, and McCulloch was anxious to add to the small return generated by his Scottish properties a basic salary of the kind attached to public office. He vacated the London University chair in 1837, and eventually, in 1838, he was appointed comptroller of the Stationery Office at a salary of $600 per annum, which rose gradually to $1200 in 1854. There he gained a deserved reputation among government ministers for his vigorous efforts to cut the costs of paper and printing in government offices -- tempered by a humane consideration for those members of his staff who faced personal financial crises. According to the obituary published in the 1864 'Annual Register', McCulloch's economy drive achieved annual savings that 'far exceeded the cost of the department he presided over' ('Annual Register', 196). 
Meanwhile McCulloch continued to justify Ricardo's assessment of him as a 'zealous advocate for the correct principles of political economy' ('Works and Correspondence', 9.155). He was arguably the first professional economist. He published a steady stream of seriously researched and lucidly expounded articles, pamphlets, and books. From 1820 (when he first offered private classes in political economy to Edinburgh students) to 1837, when he left his London chair, he was also a conscientious lecturer in the subject. As early as 1822 his reputation was such that he was invited to write the first substantive article on political economy to appear in the 'Encyclopaedia Britannica'. As usual, he submitted it for Ricardo's approval and was duly encouraged by the latter's response: 'Besides a valuable historical sketch, you have given so clear an exposition of all the important principles of the science that you have left nothing for me to wish for' (ibid., 9.275). This was the article that McCulloch expanded into his popular textbook, 'Principles of Political Economy, with a Sketch of the Rise and Progress of the Science' (1825), which went through five editions. Apart from a best-selling annotated edition of Adam Smith's 'Wealth of Nations' (1828) and a (less successful) edition of David Ricardo's works (1845), he also produced the first systematic account of the theory and policy of public finance: 'Treatise on the Principles and Practical Influence of Taxation and the Funding System' (1845). 
McCulloch reached an even wider audience, however, and added substantially to his annual income with his three statistical reference books, of which the most financially rewarding was his 'Dictionary, Practical, Theoretical, and Historical of Commerce and Commercial Navigation' (1832), a virtually single-handed work which he revised, expanded, and updated nine times. These 'dictionaries' were not simply compilations of statistical and other facts; for McCulloch was a pioneer in critical assessment and analytical treatment of economic information he gathered from a variety of public and private sources. None of his contemporaries, for example, was better informed or more outspoken on the deficiencies of the broad range of official statistics then available. The many journalists, public officials, MPs, and government ministers who used his figures to buttress their arguments and policy recommendations had no excuse for ignoring the fragility of the basic data. At the same time, this most prolific author was an avid reader. Few, if any, writers on economic matters had read so widely and so exhaustively on the science and substance of their subject -- as effectively illustrated by his 400-page bibliography 'Literature of Political Economy' (1845). Nor did he confine his reading to economic questions. A keen bibliophile, McCulloch built up a valuable library of over 10,000 books which, after his death, his friend Lord Overstone bought for $5000. 
Although McCulloch's association with Ricardo and his circle helped to enhance his early reputation as an expert in the new science of political economy, it seems to have obscured, until recently, his distinctive qualities as an applied economist for later historians of economic thought. The fact is that McCulloch was never converted to the Ricardian abstract style of theorizing -- even during the three years before Ricardo's death, when their eager exchange of views and information was at its peak. McCulloch's own interest in political economy stemmed always from his immediate concern with questions of practical policy. He judged economic theories in terms of their usefulness when applied to urgent current problems. As he continued to address a widening range of contemporary economic problems and to amass the relevant statistics and other data, and as he continually revised and updated his 'Principles' in the light of experience, his divergence from the orthodox Ricardian model became increasingly obvious. In his own time he was probably more famous, more widely read by those engaged in making or debating economic policy, and more often singled out for attack by critics of the 'dismal science' than any other economist. Although Sir Robert Peel, for example, had crucially failed in 1825 to support the claim for a separate chair of political economy in Edinburgh, he was frankly impressed in the 1830s by McCulloch's views on public finance, and in 1846 he was to acknowledge his services to the science of political economy by getting him an annual state pension of $200. McCulloch was by then internationally famous. His 'Principles' was a familiar text for American undergraduates and was translated into French, German, Portuguese, Spanish, and Italian. In 1843 he was elected a foreign associate of the Institut de France. Evidently this early example of a professional economist was a public personality in his own time. The obituary in 'The Scotsman', for example, referred to his 'great sagacity and manly commonsense' as well as to 'an independence of judgment that occasionally revelled in arbitrary assertion and cherished prejudice', and went on to notice 'something almost Johnsonian in his intellectual aspect and style' ('The Scotsman', 13 Nov 1864). 
On the other hand, given McCulloch's eclectic use of economic theory, and his dauntingly large output of articles, pamphlets, and books, realistically (if often repetitiously) focused on a variety of specific nineteenth-century problems, subsequent commentators have found it hard to put his contribution into perspective and have tended to underrate him -- at least until Professor O'Brien's comprehensive account and evaluation of his work as a whole was published in 1970. It is now apparent that for most of the half-century preceding his death this hard-working, largely self-educated Scot did more than any other economist of his day to introduce the new science of political economy to an interested public. In particular, for example, although McCulloch neither invented nor developed the classical wage-fund theory, he used it to such effect that, according to Joseph Schumpeter, 'he established himself as the leading exponent of the wage-fund doctrine' (J. A. Schumpeter, 'History of Economic Analysis', 1955, 669). He continued to keep in touch with new thinking on economic affairs, not only by reading voraciously, but also by exchanging ideas and arguments with other economists -- for example at the London Political Economy Club, where he participated regularly from 1839 to 1852 and made many good friends. His distinctive technique was to marry to current economic data theories developed by such leaders in classical political economy as Smith, Hume, or Ricardo and to furnish the analysis with insights arising out of his own interpretation of recent economic events, or borrowed from friends (such as the banker Lord Overstone) who were themselves active agents in crucial decision-making processes. 
McCulloch was still working on an 11th edition of his 'Commercial Dictionary', and still in charge of HM Stationery Office in Prince Street, Westminster, when he died there (of the chronic bronchitis that had afflicted him for most of his life) on 11 November 1864. He was buried a week later in Brompton cemetery, where Isabella -- to whom he had been happily married for fifty-three years -- was laid beside him three years later. 


@@@@@


doc= 17414


McCulloch, William (1816-1885), army and political officer in India, the eldest son of John Ramsay McCulloch (1789-1864), political economist, and his wife, Isabella, 'nee' Stewart (died 1867), was born on 28 February 1816 in the parish of St Cuthbert's, Edinburgh. He attended the Edinburgh high school and joined Addiscombe College as a cadet, on the nomination of James Rivett Carnac, on 15 February 1833. He was commissioned ensign on 12 December 1834, and arrived at Fort William on 21 July 1835. He was appointed successively to the 56th native infantry at Dinapore (8 August), 30th native infantry at Benares (12 August), and 13th native infantry at Bareilly (24 September), and he commanded the detachment at Deolia employed on cordon duty. After becoming lieutenant on 18 February 1839, he was appointed interpreter and quartermaster to his corps in July 1839, and assistant to the political agent at Manipur in April 1840. Although he temporarily acted as superintendent of Cachar from 2 February to 7 November 1842, he continued to hold his office at Manipur until the middle of 1845, when he was promoted to the post of political agent there. He obtained the rank of captain on 30 June 1848 and of major on 4 September 1857, and retired from the army with the rank of lieutenant-colonel on 31 December 1861. In 1863 his place at Manipur was taken by assistant surgeon Dillon, but Dillon's failure led to McCulloch resuming office late in 1864. He finally retired in 1867. He was author of an 'Account of the Valley of Munnipore and the Hill Tribes' (1859). McCulloch died at Shillong, Assam, on 4 April 1885. 


@@@@@


doc= 17415


MacCurtin, Andrew (c.1670-1738), poet and scribe, was born in the townland of Moyglass, about 5 miles south of Milltown Malbay, in the parish of Kilmurry, co. Clare. His father, Roland Mac Cruitin, is reputed to have been a prosperous farmer but nothing else is known about his immediate family. MacCurtin's work displays a familiarity with older forms of the Irish language and with the syllabic metres employed by the professional bardic poets of earlier centuries -- suggesting that his education included elements of the curriculum of the bardic schools which had disappeared in the early seventeenth century. This is consistent both with the cultural conservatism of Clare, a region which was partially sheltered from the rapid social change that affected most of Ireland in the seventeenth century, and also with the MacCurtins' status as members of the hereditary learned caste of medieval Ireland. 
The MacCurtins had acted as hereditary antiquaries to the O'Briens, lords of Thomond, since the fourteenth century, a role which had evolved into that of scribes and notaries by the early seventeenth century. Andrew MacCurtin maintained the scholarly tradition of his ancestors by establishing a school in his native parish, where he appears to have resided throughout his life. The extant manuscripts in his hand contain copies of several long texts, including devotional works such as Geoffrey Keating's 'Tri Bior-Ghaoithe an Bhais' and 'Eochair Sgiath an Aifrinn'; linguistic works such as Micheal O Cleirigh's 'Focloir no Sanasan Nua' and Hugh MacCurtin's 'Elements of the Irish Language Grammatically Explained in English'; and historical works such as 'Caithreim Thoirdhealbhaigh' and Geoffrey Keating's 'Foras Feasa ar Eirinn'. The fact that at least five copies of the last work survive in MacCurtin's hand leaves little doubt that he supplemented his income from teaching by copying manuscripts. MacCurtin wrote a modernized version of 'Beatha Sheanain', the life of St Senan, and a holograph copy (St Patrick's College, Maynooth, MS C41) dating from 1721 was the exemplar used by several later scribes. 
More than forty of MacCurtin's poems are extant. Several are written in the older syllabic metres and extol the virtues or lament the deaths of members of the co. Clare gentry, particularly the O'Briens of Leamaneh and Ennistimon, the MacDonnells of Kilkee, and the O'Loghlens of Burren. A 'duanaire' or compendium of encomiastic verse (Royal Irish Academy, MS E iv 3) that MacCurtin wrote for one of the O'Loghlens in 1727, contains poems by himself and other authors, and is one of the last such volumes to have been compiled. 
While Andrew MacCurtin's 'oeuvre' is not as politicized as that of his relative, fellow poet, and contemporary Hugh MacCurtin, a composition which begins ''Ar mbeith sealad domhsa in aicis mhor cois taoide'' and appears to date from 1718-19 is an early example of a Jacobite 'aisling' or vision poem, a genre which became popular with Munster poets from the middle of the eighteenth century onwards. Another of his political poems, the work beginning ''Go cuig roimh luis da dtugadh grasaibh De'', has been dated to 1735 and is noteworthy for its prediction that an invasion of Britain would take place in 1745. But MacCurtin's best-known poem is probably a more personal composition beginning ''Beannu doimhin duit, a Dhoinn na Duimhche'' in which the aged poet appealed to Donn, the fairy king of a range of sandhills in west Clare, for hospitality at a time when no patronage was forthcoming from members of the gentry. 
The date of MacCurtin's death is given as 1738 in a manuscript (TCD, MS H.6.11, 23) written in 1754, and this seems more likely than the alternative date of 1749 which is mentioned in later sources. He was buried in Kilfarboy churchyard, near Milltown Malbay, and was lamented by Hugh MacCurtin in a poem beginning ''Ni buan bron go bas ollaimh''. 


