@@@@@


doc= 17416


MacCurtin, Hugh (1680?-1755), poet and antiquary, was born near Liscannor in the parish of Kilmacrehy, co. Clare. Nothing is known of his immediate family except that his father was named Conchobhar Og Mac Cruitin. The MacCurtins were one of the hereditary learned families of medieval Irish society and acted as antiquaries to the O'Briens, lords of Thomond, from the fourteenth century, a role which had evolved into that of scribes and notaries by the seventeenth century. MacCurtin was educated locally, at least partly in the school run by Andrew MacCurtin, a relative and fellow poet. 
Some fifty poems by Hugh MacCurtin are extant. His corpus includes encomiastic verse addressed to patrons and written in the obsolescent syllabic metres employed by the professional bards of earlier centuries; Jacobite verse written in the stressed metres of popular song and intended for a mass audience; and a small number of works dealing with more personal themes. MacCurtin worked as a scribe and teacher, and there is evidence to suggest that the prominent patriot Charles Lucas may have been one of his pupils. His early compositions include laments for Daniel O'Brien, fourth Viscount Clare, and Charles O'Brien, fifth Viscount Clare, two brothers who were successive colonels of the 'regiment de Clare', an Irish regiment in the French service. A poem which denounced those who took an oath abjuring the Pretender (James Francis Edward Stuart) probably dates from 1709. MacCurtin married and had at least two daughters, but the poem beginning ''Is trua do chas a shuaircbhean bhrea'' suggests that the marriage was not a success. Addressed to an unnamed woman, it expresses the poet's sorrow that he must leave her and return to 'three women' in co. Clare, presumably his wife and two daughters. 
By 1713 MacCurtin had moved to Dublin where he found employment copying and translating Irish manuscripts. His patrons there included William Hawkins, Ulster king of arms; the Revd Anthony Raymond, an aspiring historian and friend of Jonathan Swift; and Aaron Crossly, author of 'The Peerage of Ireland' (1724). While in Dublin, MacCurtin associated with the literary circle grouped around the poet and schoolmaster Tadhg O Neachtain, and published his first book, 'A Brief Discourse in Vindication of the Antiquity of Ireland' (1717), which is little more than an abridged translation of Geoffrey Keating's 'Foras Feasa ar Eirinn'. MacCurtin was imprisoned about this time and, in 1749, Charles Lucas alleged that the detention was a consequence of the trenchant criticism of Sir Richard Cox's 'Hibernia Anglicana' contained in MacCurtin's 'Discourse'. This seems unlikely since Cox, a leading tory, was out of favour with government after 1715, and the large number of prominent Jacobites whose names appeared on MacCurtin's list of subscribers may have been a more relevant factor. 
MacCurtin had returned to co. Clare by 1721, but in 1724 he composed a lament on the death of Edmund Byrne, Roman Catholic archbishop of Dublin, at the request of Tadhg O Neachtain. What is arguably his best known poem, ''Ar aonach ma theid sin ar uair de lo'', a satire on the social pretensions of ignorant but newly prosperous peasants, also seems to date from the 1720s. MacCurtin left Ireland about 1727 and travelled to the Irish Franciscan college at Louvain where his second book, 'The Elements of the Irish Language Grammatically Explained in English', was published in 1728. This is a work of considerable scholarship, but it is clear that MacCurtin drew heavily from an unpublished manuscript grammar by Francis Walsh. 
MacCurtin crossed into France later in 1728 and enlisted in the 'regiment de Clare', a unit which contained many soldiers from his native county. A work composed during his period of military service, ''Is grinn an tsollamhain chim fen Nollaig seo'', anticipates a French invasion of Britain and the execution of George II. After his discharge in 1729 he proceeded to Paris where he assisted Conchobhar O Beaglaoich with the preparation of 'The English Irish Dictionary', the first dictionary of its kind, which was published in 1731. It is likely that MacCurtin's assistance in the preparation of the dictionary was largely clerical, but he contributed an initial dedicatory poem. He appears to have remained in France until 1739 when he returned to co. Clare. 
MacCurtin spent his final years as a schoolteacher in his native parish of Kilmacrehy and appears to have written little after 1745. He died in 1755 and is variously reported to have been interred in Kilmacrehy churchyard, and in Kilvoydane churchyard, near Corrofin, co. Clare. The latter may be the more likely resting place as his daughters were living nearby in 1761. 


@@@@@


doc= 17417


Macdiarmid, John (1779-1808), journalist and author, was born at Weem, Perthshire, where his father, James Macdiarmid (1743-1828), was parish minister. His mother was Catherine, only child of John Buik, minister of Tannadice, Forfarshire. A brother, James, was an officer in the army. After receiving elementary education at home, he studied at Edinburgh and St Andrews Universities, and for a short time was a private tutor. In 1801 he settled in London, where he wrote for various periodicals, and edited the 'St James's Chronicle'. When war with France broke out in 1802 he especially studied the subject of national defence, and in 1805 published, in two volumes, 'An Enquiry into the System of National Defence in Great Britain', deprecating the substitution of volunteers for a strong standing army. In 1806 appeared his 'Enquiry into the Principles of Civil and Military Subordination', soon after which he suffered a paralytic stroke. In spite of it, with the help of a friend, he was able to publish in 1807 his best-known work, 'Lives of British Statesmen', reprinted in 1820 and 1838, comprising the biographies of Sir Thomas More, Lord Burleigh, Lord Stafford, and Lord Clarendon. A second stroke and paralysis, however, proved fatal, and Macdiarmid died in poverty in London on 7 April 1808. 


@@@@@


doc= 17418


M'Diarmid, John (1790-1852), newspaper editor, born at Glasgow, was the son of Hugh M'Diarmid, minister of the Gaelic church in Glasgow. After some education, mainly in Edinburgh, he became, at an early age, owing to his father's death, a clerk in an Edinburgh counting-house, whence he passed into the head office of the Commercial Bank, Edinburgh, remaining there until 1817. He devoted his leisure to study, attending several classes in the university, and for two years spent his evenings as amanuensis to Professor John Playfair, who gave him access to his classes and his library. He was a distinguished member of a college debating society, and of the Edinburgh Forum, a club that helped to train many good speakers, and he wrote some clever verses. He formed friendships with Sir Walter Scott and his circle. In 1819 he married Anne, 'nee' McKnight (died 1850), of Dumfries. 
On 25 January 1817 M'Diarmid joined Charles Maclaren and William Ritchie in preparing the first number of 'The Scotsman' newspaper, and in the same month he moved to Dumfries to become editor of the 'Dumfries and Galloway Courier', which he edited until his death. M'Diarmid became an authority on Dumfriesshire, especially its agriculture, and wrote many attractive descriptions of his journeys about the county. In 1820 he declined the editorship of the 'Caledonian Mercury' in Edinburgh, receiving at the same time an interest in the property of the 'Courier', of which he became owner in 1837. His paper followed the liberal political line common in lowland Scotland at that time. His son, William Ritchie M'Diarmid, became a partner in the paper in 1843. 
When, in September 1832, Dumfries suffered heavily from cholera, M'Diarmid's appeal for a relief fund brought in $2900, which he skilfully distributed. He was the trusted adviser of Robert Burns's widow, Jean, until her death in 1834, when he was her executor. M'Diarmid published editions, with memoirs, of William Cowper (1817) and Oliver Goldsmith (1823). In 1820 the first volume of his 'Scrap Book', consisting of selections and original contributions, appeared. A second series speedily followed, and both were frequently reprinted. In 1825 he started the 'Dumfries Magazine', which ran for three years. In 1830 he reprinted 'Sketches from Nature' from the 'Courier', and in 1832 he contributed to an 'Illustrated Picture of Dumfries', an account of the town and district. He also wrote a description of Moffat and a life of William Nicholson (1782-1849), the Galloway poet. 
M'Diarmid died of erysipelas at Dumfries on 18 November 1852, and was buried next to his wife in Dumfries cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 17419


Alexander MacDonald, twelfth earl of Ross (d. 1449), styled himself 'lord of the isles and master [heirs] of the earldom of Ross' (Munro and Munro, 34) in a charter dated at Finlaggan (where he had a 'mansion' on an island in the loch) in 1427, while his mother was still living. The third lord of the Isles, Alexander, was one of the highland chiefs arrested when James I came to Inverness in 1428, but though taken to Perth he managed to escape, gathered his forces, and faced a royal army in Lochaber where he gave himself up without a battle, and after a humiliating submission at Edinburgh, 'clad only in short and drawers' (Bower, 8.488-90), in August 1429, was imprisoned in Tantallon Castle. In Alexander's absence his cousins Donald Balloch and Alasdair Carrach carried on the rebellion, and after their defeat of the king's army at Inverlochy in 1431, terms were agreed and Alexander was released. He kept within the law thereafter and co-operated with the crown, and shortly before the death of James I was issuing charters as fully established twelfth earl of Ross. He administered the lordship and earldom as a single unit, with one council including leading men of his own kin and other clans from both areas; and for a time he was justiciar north of the Forth. But his loyalty was less than wholehearted, if it was he who entered into an offensive and defensive league with the earls of Douglas and Crawford in 1445-6, with serious consequences that followed in the next generation. However, no evidence exists as to exactly which earls of Douglas, Ross, and Crawford were involved, nor of the contents of the bond, which may never have been written down. The only exact date assigned to the bond, 7 March 1445, comes from an unreliable seventeenth-century source, while 1450-51 has also been suggested, when Douglas was already threatened by James II, and Alexander's son was out of favour because of his Livingston connections. 
Alexander MacDonald had a wife, Elizabeth (apparently a Haliburton of Dirleton, and not a Seton as has been supposed), but his sons Celestine of Lochalsh and Hugh of Sleat, whose descendants were to claim succession to the lordship, were not the children of any recorded marriage. His daughter, Florence, was the mother of Farquhar Mackintosh ['see under 'Mackintosh family (per. c.1491-1606)]. A Ross chronicle says that Alexander died at Dingwall on 9 May 1449, and was buried at the chanonry of Ross (Fortrose). His successor, as fourth lord of the Isles and thirteenth earl of Ross, was his lawful son 


@@@@@


doc= 17420


MacColla, Alasdair (d. 1647), clan leader, was the third son of Col MacGillespie (died 1647) -- also known as Coll Ciotach or Colkitto, names that many sources wrongly assign to his son -- and (probably) Mary MacDonald, who had been repudiated by her former husband, Ranald MacDonald of Benbecula. Alasdair's father was a claimant to chieftancy of the clan Ian Mor, the southern branch of the now fragmented MacDonald clan that had once dominated the lordship of the isles. Since the lordship had been abolished at the end of the fifteenth century other clans (above all the Campbells) had taken advantage of the weakness and internal feuds of the MacDonalds to build up their own power. Kintyre and Jura passed to the Campbells in 1607, and Islay too was handed over to them after a bitter succession feud among the Macdonalds led them into a confused rebellion. Coll Ciotach played a prominent part in these internal struggles that sought to save the clan's lands but instead hastened their loss, and emerged in possession of the island of Colonsay. Alasdair MacColla's youth was spent in this surviving fragment of the old MacDonald empire, doubtless with visits to his close kinsmen in Ireland, the MacDonnells of Antrim. In 1638 the earl of Antrim sought to exploit the conflict between Charles I and the Scottish covenanters by offering the king military help in Scotland in return for former MacDonald lands in Scotland. This provoked the earl of Argyll, as chief of the Campbells, into imprisoning Coll Ciotach and two of Alasdair's brothers, and driving the remnants of the family into exile. 
Alasdair MacColla and his brother Ranald escaped to Antrim, and from there they led a small-scale and brief raid on Islay in November 1640. When the Irish uprising began in October 1641 Alasdair served as a captain in a regiment raised in Antrim to resist the rebels, but the tensions in a regiment which mixed Roman Catholic officers and men, like Alasdair, with protestants in fighting a war in which the two sides were largely defined by religious allegiance were intolerable. In January 1642 Alasdair and his co-religionists attacked their protestant colleagues and led local Catholics in joining the uprising. He commanded a force which won a notable victory at the battle of the Laney on 11 February, but soon eastern Ulster was occupied by an army from Scotland, the MacDonnell lands in Antrim being garrisoned by a Campbell regiment under Argyll's command. At Glenmaquin, co. Donegal, Alasdair persuaded the Irish commander, Sir Phelim O'Neill, to attack a protestant force on 16 June, and in the defeat that followed he was severely injured. 
Alasdair's priorities lay, as always, in protecting his family and clan, and he now reconsidered his position. Alliance with the Irish had seemed a way of fighting the Campbells and regaining clan lands in Scotland and freedom for his father and brothers, but now the Irish cause was faltering. Alasdair and Ranald therefore negotiated a secret agreement with the earl of Leven (general of the Scottish army in Ireland) whereby they would desert the Irish and in return his relatives would be freed and family property restored. The brothers duly deserted, but their agreement with the Scots army soon broke down and they returned to the rebel cause, by one account because Alasdair was 'so generous as he would in no termes take service against the Irishes, with whom he had once syded' (Gordon, 64). 
In 1643 Alasdair became involved in Antrim's plans to bring help from Ireland to Charles I against his English and Scottish enemies, and in November 1643 he led a raid on Islay and Colonsay. He was soon driven back to Ireland, but there Antrim gave him command, with the rank of major-general, of a mixed Irish and highland Scots expeditionary force which was intended to land in the west highlands and join Scottish royalists in war against the covenanting regime. He landed his troops (about sixteen hundred strong, far fewer than had been planned) in Morvern and Ardnamurchan in July 1644, but quickly found that he lacked credibility. His orders from the king were to join the marquess of Huntly, but the latter's attempt at a rising against the covenanters had been defeated months before, and even royalist-inclined chiefs were reluctant to rise in arms under a man whose previous landings had been failures, and whose arrival was seen as much or more as an Irish invasion than as a royalist rising. 
Alasdair marched his men through the highlands in search of support, unaware that at the same time the royalist marquess of Montrose was making his way to the highlands hoping to find men to lead in a rising. When the two men learned of each other's movements is not clear, but they met in Atholl. The meeting was momentous. Montrose's leadership provided Alasdair's force with Scottish royalist noble leadership, providing a degree of respectability and credibility, while Alasdair provided Montrose with a body of veterans already in arms around which to build an army. It was to form the nucleus of the royalist army in the campaigns that followed. From September 1644 to August 1645 six successive victories were achieved, Alasdair himself playing a major part in all but one of them. However, difference in ambitions between the two men caused frequent tension. Montrose was fighting for the king, hoping to subdue Scotland then intervene in England to bring victory to Charles in the English civil war, whereas Alasdair and his men had specifically Irish and highland agendas. To Alasdair, the war was fought on behalf of family and to regain clan lands in Scotland. After the victories at Tippermuir (1 September 1644) and Aberdeen (13 September) Alasdair went back to the highlands on expeditions valuable to Montrose in that men were recruited to strengthen his army, but which he probably had no alternative to sanctioning, as such opportunities to wage war on the Campbells were the price of Alasdair's continuing support. At the end of 1644 Montrose at first planned to quarter for the winter in the lowlands, but Alasdair and his men persuaded him instead to undertake a campaign in the west. This culminated in the routing of the Campbells at Inverlochy (2 February 1645). 
Alasdair played a central role in turning near defeat into victory at Auldearn (9 May), but was absent from Alford (2 July), being again in the west fighting and recruiting. He returned in time to fight in the last victory of the campaign, at Kilsyth (15 August), but the divergence between his and Montrose's objectives then contributed to disaster. Montrose, determined to break into England, moved south to the border, while Alasdair, though knighted by Montrose, insisted on taking most of his men back to Argyll to prevent any resurgence of Campbell power. The fact that he left 700 of his Irish troops with Montrose may indicate an element of compromise, and is perhaps a sign that Alasdair intended, as in the past, to rejoin Montrose after his foray. But Montrose's army was destroyed at Philiphaugh (13 September) and he was forced to flee back to the highlands to try to rebuild an army. Alasdair failed to rejoin him, choosing instead to continue his war in Argyll. When in mid-1646 Charles I (then a prisoner of the Scottish army in England) ordered royalist forces in Scotland to disband, Montrose duly went into exile, but Alasdair remained in arms. He had co-operated with the royalist cause, but now put clan ambitions first, refusing to surrender the lands in Argyll that he had overrun. In 1647 lowland covenanting forces combined with the Campbells in a campaign against him and his resistance disintegrated. Driven into Kintyre, he and some of his men escaped first to Islay and then to Ireland, while the remnants of his army were massacred. 
Alasdair hoped to receive Irish aid for a prompt return to Scotland, but there was no hope of Irish confederates, now fighting for survival, engaging in another Scottish venture. Instead Alasdair was appointed lieutenant-general of Lord Taaffe's Munster army and governor of Clonmel. On 13 November 1647 Taaffe's army faced Lord Inchiquin's at Knocknanuss, co. Cork. Alasdair led the right wing in a successful charge and plundered the enemy baggage train, but the collapse of the rest of the confederate army then exposed him and his men to cavalry charges, and they were slaughtered or dispersed. Alasdair was evidently captured, but shot immediately after the battle by a junior officer, perhaps in a dispute over who should have credit for taking so important a prisoner. 
Most accounts of the 1644-5 royalist campaign in Scotland present Alasdair's role as a limited one: he was brave and a good leader in battle, but blundering and untrustworthy. He thus becomes a useful scapegoat for Montrose's occasional mistakes and final failure. Certainly his strategic vision was limited, and his focus on clan was frustrating to Montrose. But without Alasdair he would not have had an army, and there is strong evidence that the tactic that was to bring highland armies repeated success in the century that followed (up to the battle of Falkirk in 1746) -- the highland charge -- was developed by Alasdair from older Gaelic tactics. His men would drop their muskets after firing one volley, and charge their enemies with their swords, thus catching them off guard, as they were still struggling to reload their muskets, without (until the end of the seventeenth century) bayonets to defend themselves. It was such fast and wild highland charges, timed to bring tactical advantage, that won most of Montrose's battles. 
In Gaelic sources Alasdair shares fully with Montrose in credit for the 'year of victories'. In the words of Neil MacMhuirich the Gaels were 'the men who did all the service' (MacBain and Kennedy, 2.203), and Alasdair was their leader. The many tales that circulated for generations in Ireland and the highlands about his great size and strength, and the myths of supernatural signs that accompanied his birth and his deeds, are reflections of the status he achieved among his own people. Poets, male and female, sang his praises. Of his personal life all that is known is that, probably during the 1644-5 campaign, he married a daughter of Hector MacAllister of Loup. 


@@@@@


doc= 17421


Macdonald, Alexander, of Glencoe (d. 1692), clan chief and victim of massacre, was probably born in Glencoe between the early 1620s and early 1630s, the son of Alexander Macdonald 
(Alasdair Maciain; died in or after 1657)
, who by 1627 was chief (reputedly eleventh chief) of a branch of the clan Donald inhabiting Glencoe in Lorn, Argyll. Tradition asserts that he was educated in Paris, one of several indications that the clan were Roman Catholics, although it has also been suggested that they were episcopalians. Since the mid-sixteenth century Glencoe had been owned by the Campbells, earls of Argyll, whose policy was to prevent the Macdonalds from gaining legally secure rights to their lands. During the civil wars the latter were among the clans which rose unsuccessfully under the marquess of Montrose against the Campbells, but they avoided vengeance afterwards. The later tradition of a constant Macdonald-Campbell feud is groundless. Between local and national crises, they linked themselves by bonds of manrent (clientage), friendship, business, and marriage. Similarly, the glen was not the inaccessible robbers' nest of myth. Like other clans in the area the Glencoe Macdonalds were notorious for cattle raiding and robbery, but Argyll was still able to use its rents for security in deeds and peacefully lease out its woods. The scale of violence decreased until, in the later seventeenth century, except in time of wars, cattle raiding was perpetrated by small groups of displaced caterans (marauders) and chiefs could profit (perhaps not always honestly) from supplying the watches against them. 
Alexander Macdonald (sometimes called Alasdair Ruaidh on account of his red hair, but most usually known as Maciain) succeeded his father as putative twelfth chief some time after January 1657, when the two men signed a bond of friendship with Sir John Campbell of Glenorchy and his eldest son, John Campbell (1635-1716). Intended to guard against repetition of heavy gentry casualties such as the Campbells had sustained in the 1640s, the bond agreed that there would be mutual warning of impending danger. By the early 1660s Maciain had married: clan tradition that his wife was the daughter of Archibald Gillespie (died 1683), chief of the Macdonalds of Keppoch, seems implausible owing to the youth of the latter's sons when he died, and no plausible alternative has been advanced. At any rate, Maciain and his wife had two sons, John (Iain) and Alexander (Alasdair) Og, who were serving soldiers in 1685 and married by 1692. 
In 1665 Maciain, who of the two hundred or so families in the clan could send about one hundred men to war, dispatched a contingent to support Ewen Cameron of Lochiel in his confrontation over lands with Lauchlan Mackintosh of Torcastle; this dispute was settled peaceably. East highland cattle raiding by some of the inhabitants of Glencoe rendered Argyll, as owner, and John Campbell, as temporary lessee, liable to pay the resulting penalties and in 1673 Argyll sold on the glen to Sir James Campbell of Lawers. That year Maciain, still an established local figure, was able to visit the Inveraray justice eyre even after substituting the wrong defendant in one trial. However, soon after, and probably not for the only time, he murdered two of his own clansmen, according to tradition because they had informed on a cattle raid. However bad the affair, he could have disposed of opponents with a veneer of legality had he possessed the judicial rights enjoyed by many other chiefs. Since he lacked them, it was probably for this crime that Argyll imprisoned him at Inveraray, but he escaped, and in April 1674 the privy council reported that he had committed several murders and robberies since. The affair was soon lost in the greater disruption caused by Argyll's campaign to dispossess the Maclean chiefs of their estate and the Maclean-Macdonald resistance, but Edinburgh lawyers dwelt on the worst highland atrocities to justify extending their cumbersome and costly system there in all matters. One of them, Sir John Dalrymple, remembered the story: he still referred to 'the murderer McIain' in 1692 (NL Scot., MS 7014, fol. 8). 
The Maclean-Macdonald coalition's struggle of 1674-80 against Argyll ended in defeat, but in the meantime it had enabled an adroit chief like Maciain and his clan to profit considerably through offering protection to some of the Campbells. The clan's raiding against other Campbells increased so enormously that Argyll determined to buy back the glen from Lawers, evict the clan (who, he believed, neglected farming for robbery), and plant it with honest tenants; but he lacked the money. Meanwhile, on the other side, many Glencoe men served for pay in John Campbell's highland company, and some fought for him against the Caithness Sinclairs in 1680. If a letter printed in 1817 is genuine, a large contingent also accompanied the highland host in plundering the richer lowland west: they were not John Campbell's men, but he dared not leave them behind near his undefended estates. 
In 1680 Maciain was one of two men who acted as executors to Angus (Aeneas), Lord Macdonell and Aros, an officially recognized position of trust. A formidable figure, well over 6 feet high, he was still strong and active in old age, with his beard curled in horns. A contemporary's description, 'much loved by his neighbours... a person of great integrity, honour, good-nature and courage' (MacKnight, 321), is corroborated by the bards' praise for him as a wise chief and counsellor, although the context was the edge of legality. A peaceful period was broken in 1685 by Argyll's rebellion, during which Maciain and both his sons served on the government side. Like many others from the general down, they plundered widely and fairly indiscriminately. Glencoe was sold in 1687 to the Tutor of Appin, chief of the Stewarts, Glencoe's western neighbours. He wanted their fighting men as vassals, to make the Stewarts a powerful clan. This gave greater practical security of tenure. Maciain in 1688 sent sixty men who, with other clan contingents, joined Macdonald of Keppoch in opposing his oppressive landlord, Mackintosh, in the last private clan battle, Mulroy. 
When the Jacobite rising of John Graham, Viscount Dundee, broke out in 1689, Maciain joined it, serving with the Stewarts. During Dundee's abortive Strathspey campaign, he plundered Williamite enemies, but he tried to restrain a Maclean contingent which had begun plundering friendly inhabitants -- until a second-sighted man warned him of the dragoons about to attack the Macleans, and he retired. The Appin and Glencoe men were not at Killiecrankie, since a force under the tenth earl of Argyll was advancing towards their country. It fled at the news, and Maciain and his men joined the highland army, commanded after Dundee's death by Major-General Cannon, for an uninspired campaign and the defeat at Dunkeld. He was one of the chiefs who on 24 August, before they dispersed, signed a bond promising to reassemble. 
In October Glencoe men were in one party sent out by Cannon to destroy the castle at Achallader of John Campbell, by this time earl of Breadalbane, in order to prevent the government from establishing a garrison, and in another which ravaged Glenlyon, thus preventing the laird, Robert Campbell, from redeeming his estates from the marquess of Atholl. Victorian writers deduced that this made Breadalbane and Glenlyon specially vindictive against the Macdonalds of Glencoe. In reality, Breadalbane knew they had acted under orders; in November, he privately praised Maciain's forbearance towards Campbells on a spectacular raid down Loch Lomond. Glenlyon blamed Atholl. 
In February 1690 Maciain was among the chiefs who signed a letter to King James promising to fight on following the arrival of a new Jacobite commander, Major-General Thomas Buchan. His second son, Alasdair Og, became a captain in Buchan's new regiment, and took part in the spring campaign which ended disastrously at Cromdale. That autumn, the enemy closed in. A force under Argyll captured the Stewarts' castle, and would next have overrun Glencoe had a crisis not diverted it to Mull. Most ordinary Glencoe clansmen submitted to Colonel John Hill, the honest governor of the new Fort William; by May 1691 Maciain was considering it. 
The next month, as part of a government initiative to end the war, Breadalbane offered the chiefs, gathered at Achallader, money to buy out troublesome feudal superiorities over them, in return for taking the oaths to King William before the sheriffs in the shire towns by a deadline finally extended to 1 January 1692. The Glencoe men had previously helped Breadalbane frighten away an intruding presbyterian minister, but when Maciain attended at Achallader, the earl quarrelled with him and threatened him over stolen cattle; Maciain later said that he feared a mischief from nobody so much. Yet Breadalbane obtained for him the promise of $150 to buy the superiority of Glencoe and pardon for the murder. The earl's selfish but constructive plans, for a huge highland militia with himself as general (and including a Glencoe contingent camouflaged under the Tutor's name), depended on a total and genuine pacification. 
However, Breadalbane's political enemies subsequently tempted the major chiefs into posturing about fighting on with insincere promises of larger rewards: Alasdair Macdonell of Glengarry was the most extreme, and Maciain probably followed him blindly, distracted by talk of the Catholic chiefs going abroad rather than taking the oaths. He failed to check the procedure, though the second-sighted man's prophecy that he would be killed in his own house frightened him. In the event, more because of fear of a government campaign of repression than because of King James's belated authorization, just before the deadline, the chiefs rushed to submit. On 31 December 1691 Maciain appeared at Fort William, wrongly supposing that Hill was entitled to administer the oath. Hill sent him off to Inveraray with a recommendation. Immediately afterwards, Glengarry offered terms for surrender, which, verbal mention but not the document made clear, were intended to protect Maciain also. Maciain hurried southwards through the snow. He encountered Argyll's regiment marching to Fort William, and Captain Thomas Drummond briefly detained him. Only on 6 January 1692, after desperate pleading, did he take the oath before sheriff-depute Sir Colin Campbell of Ardkinglass. Returning, he found that Argyll's regiment had stayed one night in Glencoe without harming it. 
However, news of Maciain's belated submission did not reach secretary of state Sir John Dalrymple. A false report that he had submitted on time was corrected by Argyll, but not superseded by the truth. When Dalrymple realized that Glengarry, having a castle, might defeat a midwinter attack, and that his surrender should therefore be accepted, he selected as an alternative scapegoat Maciain, whom he saw as a murderer, at the head of people who were cattle thieves and papists. Therefore, instructions to Hill (duplicated to Major-General Sir Thomas Livingstone) on the surrender terms, drafted by Dalrymple and signed by William on 16 January, included the observation that 'it will be a proper vindication of public justice to extirpate that sect [sept] of thieves' (Gordon, 65). Dalrymple's covering letters, demanding that for 'a just example of vengeance' they should 'be rooted out in earnest' (ibid., 66), made clear his personal enthusiasm. 
Hill, himself politically vulnerable, knew that the Glencoe men had submitted and had rights to protection, but dared not oppose Dalrymple openly. Livingstone, in the same position, also hated the Glencoe men and despised Hill. On 23 January 1692 he sent an order for the attack to Hill's scheming lieutenant-colonel, James Hamilton. Hill, while passively hoping for a countermand, let Hamilton and Major Robert Duncanson, commanding Argyll's regiment, plan the attack. They introduced the outrageous idea that troops quartered on the inhabitants should slaughter their hosts. On 1 February 1692 two companies under Captain Campbell of Glenlyon, who did not know the plan, and Captain Drummond, who probably did, entered Glencoe, reassured the Macdonalds, and were quartered among the settlements -- technically a penalty for unpaid taxes, but they were treated, and behaved, as guests. Maciain had a dozen in his house. He sent away the unmarried girls and, fearing a disarmament, hid the clan's weapons elsewhere; otherwise, the mutual duties highland hospitality traditionally imposed seemed sufficient protection. 
On 12 February Hamilton arranged a rendezvous in Glencoe at 7 a.m. the next day with Duncanson, quartered nearby. Duncanson wrote secretly that evening to Glenlyon, ordering him at 5 a.m. 'to fall upon the Rebells, the McDonalds of Glenco, and putt all to the sword under seventy. you are to have a speciall care that the old Fox and his sones doe upon no account escape your hands...' (NL Scot., Adv. MS 23.6.24). Threatened with dismissal and ruin, Glenlyon decided to obey and dissembled, accepting Maciain's invitation to dinner the next day. A blizzard arose. 
Between 4 a.m. and 5 a.m. on 13 February Lieutenant John Lindsay, Ensign Lundie, and soldiers from Glenlyon's company arrived at Maciain's house, in Polveig. As he rose from his bed to greet them, they shot him in the back, killing him, pulled the body outside by the heels and left it lying naked. His wife tried to dress and escape, but the soldiers stripped her naked and pulled her rings off her fingers with their teeth. Her sons found her, but, like other Glencoe women, she died of exposure and ill treatment that day or the next. Several of the clan gentry were also murdered; perhaps thirty-eight men and half a dozen women and children in all. Maciain's sons and their families, warned by suspicious servants, escaped. Duncanson's two-hour anticipation of Hamilton's arrival, other changes in his order, and the raging blizzard allowed the inhabitants to escape through the unguarded passes out of the glen, though an unknown number, especially women and children, died of exposure. The troops burnt the houses and departed with all the clan's livestock and moveable property. When they dared return, the survivors buried Maciain in Eilean Munde, their burial isle in the glen's sea loch. 
The news hastened the submissions of other chiefs. Breadalbane, almost alone, was shocked enough to declare his innocence, but this merely increased suspicions of his guilt. Hill, recovering his courage, began applying for permission to resettle the survivors in Glencoe, but even when Dalrymple heard the full truth, he suggested sending them to Ireland, the plantations, or anywhere else in Scotland. Hill applied elsewhere, and in August 1692 received permission to allow them back. 
Although totally impoverished, the clan, under Maciain's son John Macdonald (died after 1710) as chief, remained quiet. In 1695, he and other survivors testified before the parliamentary inquiry into the massacre, but their appeal for compensation had almost no result. Some prosperity probably returned about 1706. In 1711, ownership of the glen was transferred to the Stewart chief, Appin. Argyll was still the latter's superior, but Stewart ownership created a protective buffer. Indeed, the Argyll family by then were treating their rebel vassals more mildly than the state did Jacobite landowners. Alexander Macdonald, John's son and successor, who joined the 1715 rising but submitted early, fairly soon regained practical control of the glen; and it was not long lost to the family even after he also joined Prince Charles Edward in 1745. A member of the prince's council, he was afterwards imprisoned until 1749. 


@@@@@


doc= 17422


MacDonald, Alexander (c.1695-c.1770), Scottish Gaelic poet, was born at Dalilea on the north bank of Loch Shiel; he was the second son of the Revd Alexander MacDonald 
(Maighstir Alasdair; 'c'.1655-1724)
, the episcopalian clergyman in the wide parish of Ardnamurchan, and of his wife, who was a MacLachlan from Morven. His eldest brother was Angus, and he had several sisters. His father came from South Uist; his patrilineal great-grandfather, Ranald, was a son of Allan MacDonald, chief of Clanranald, and his patrilineal great-grandmother belonged to the family of the MacDonalds of Islay. Flora MacDonald of the Jacobite rising of 1745 was the poet's first cousin. The Revd Alexander MacDonald had graduated MA from the University of Glasgow in 1674, going on to study divinity thereafter. He seems to have been settled at Dalilea not later than 1687, and probably earlier. His son Alasdair is said to have attended Glasgow University also; his father may have intended him for the ministry and the chief of Clanranald apparently wished him to follow the law. He may have served Clanranald for some time in a quasi-legal capacity, but by 1729 or a little earlier he was employed as teacher and catechist (posts funded by the general assembly of the Church of Scotland and by the Scottish Society for the Propagation of Christian Knowledge), and he held various posts in locations from Islandfinnan to south Morven, until 1745. Shortly before the outbreak of the 'Forty-Five he seems to have officially converted to Roman Catholicism, a conversion that may have been as much political as religious. Alasdair married Jane MacDonald of Dalness; their son, Ranald ['see 'MacDhomnuill, Raonuill], was a folklorist. Ranald was old enough to hold the school fort for his father when Alasdair was preparing for the rising in 1744-5. There were several daughters of this marriage also, the youngest born about 1746-7. 
Alasdair played a prominent part in the 'Forty-Five; he held a captain's commission, made the acquaintance of Prince Charlie soon after his landing, and acted as the prince's Gaelic tutor. A journal of the 'Forty-Five campaign was compiled by Alasdair and some prominent MacDonald relatives and friends, and this was published in 'The Lockhart Papers', while various interviews with Bishop Forbes (between December 1747 and April 1751) later appeared in 'The Lyon in Mourning'. Alasdair seems to have been involved in the entire campaign, from the welcome at Glenfinnan -- via the battles of Prestonpans and Falkirk, the entries to Edinburgh and Glasgow, the march to Derby, and the skirmish at Clifton near Penrith -- to the battle of Culloden. Some references in 'The Lockhart Papers' and early poems referring to the battle of Sheriffmuir suggest that he may have taken part in the Jacobite rising of 1715 also, but this cannot be verified. His surviving poetry includes many songs and poems connected with the 'Forty-Five and with the political events of 1745-8. Some of these describe battles, or praise the highland clans, or propose toasts to the Stewarts, or vilify Cumberland and the anti-highland measures taken by the government after the rising. One or two also assess the situation, and its historical background, in a calm, judicious way. 
Approximately 6000 lines survive of verse ascribed to Alasdair. It is likely that this represents only part of his total output. This verse has a wide range, as is indicated by a brief listing of topics: the origins of the Gaelic language, an address to the muses, an elegy for a pet dove, poems describing summer and winter and other poems of natural description, the idyllic 'Praise of Morag' and the scurrilous 'Dispraise of Morag', a bridal song, a fierce satire of an anti-Jacobite poetess, a satire of a priest and his parish, a satire of dissolute octogenarians in Ardnamurchan, a lengthy mixture of fun and satire directed at a catalogue of Campbells (named 'The Ark'), and a long poem of over 560 lines on Clanranald's galley ('Birlinn Chlann Raghnaill'). This poetry shows Alasdair's acquaintance with the earlier traditions of Gaelic verse and saga, with classical literature to some extent, and probably with the work of earlier Scots poets such as Gavin Douglas, and with the contemporary eighteenth-century poet James Thomson, author of 'The Seasons'. These influences surface in various poems, but never dominate them. The poet is his own master, in terms of construction, development of theme, and felicity of language. He deploys a huge vocabulary, and continually shows inventive genius. His two seasonal poems owe something to an ancient Gaelic tradition of nature description and also to Thomson's 'Seasons', but they also carry the clear stamp of Alasdair's own genius; a succession of eighteenth-century Gaelic poets followed him in this particular seasonal poetry track. His 'Praise of Morag' has a delicate erotic felicity and his galley poem a detailed dramatic development, while his satires explore the language of depravity with brilliance. There is some earlier evidence of his involvement with Gaelic vocabulary, for he edited a Gaelic-English vocabulary for the Scottish Society for the Propagation of Christian Knowledge in the mid-1730s. This was published in 1741 and is partly based on an existing vocabulary of English and on Edward Lhuyd's 'Archaeologia Britannica' (1707). A manuscript in the special collections department of Glasgow University Library includes copies, apparently in the poet's hand, of Irish grammars, one from an English-Irish dictionary published in Paris in 1732. The poet's 'Vocabulary' was the first secular Gaelic book to be printed and the collection of his own poetry published in 1751 was the first printed collection of secular Gaelic verse. 
Relatively little is known of Alasdair's later years after his last meeting with Bishop Forbes in 1751. It is known that he lived for a short period on the Isle of Canna, where he apparently composed at least part of the galley poem. Later he lived in Moidart, Knoydart, Morar, and Arisaig, apparently dying about 1770 in isolation from his family, but reciting with his final breaths some newly composed lines to two youngsters who were watching over him on his deathbed. He was buried at Arisaig. It is not known when his wife died. His son, Ranald, by 1770 was living on the Isle of Eigg, and in 1776 he published an anthology of Gaelic verse, apparently using his father's papers and including a few items of his father's verse. There has been a succession of editions of Alasdair's poetry, most of them rather uncritical. The most complete works, with an English translation, appeared in 1924; a critical edition of the 'Birlinn' in 1933 (A. MacLeod, 'Sar Orain, Three Gaelic Poems', 1933); an important collection of his political poems in 1933 ('Highland Songs of the 'Forty-Five', ed. J. L. Campbell, 1933; repr., 1984); and an edition of 'Selected Poems', using a wide range of sources, in 1996 ('Alasdair Mac Mhaighstir Alasdair, Selected Poems', ed. D. S. Thomson). 


@@@@@


doc= 17423


MacDonald, Alexander (1736-1791), vicar apostolic of the highland district, the son of Ranald MacDonald, laird of Bornish, was born at Bornish on the island of South Uist. He entered the Scots College, Rome, on 20 January 1754, was ordained there on 10 August 1764, and returned to Scotland in April 1765. He was sent to the island of Barra, where he remained a missionary until 1780. On the death of Bishop John MacDonald (1727-1779) he was elected vicar apostolic by the priests of the highland district. He was nominated titular bishop of Polemonium on 30 September 1779, and was consecrated by Bishop Hay at Scalan on 12 March 1780. In 1783 he refounded the highland seminary at Samalaman, where he died on 9 September 1791, and was probably buried on St Finnan's Isle on Loch Moidart. 


@@@@@


doc= 17424


Macdonald, Alexander (1755-1837), Roman Catholic priest and Scottish Gaelic scholar, was born in the west highlands of Scotland. Aged eleven he was received into the Roman Catholic seminary of Bourblach, in North Morar, by Bishop Hugh Macdonald. Alexander Macdonald was later sent to the Scots College in Rome, where, aged twenty-three, he was ordained priest by dispensation. In 1782 he returned to Scotland and, being a good student of Gaelic, he was placed at Balloch, near Drummond Castle, Perthshire, to attend the highlanders resident in that mission. Ten years later he was appointed missionary of the Gaelic chapel in Blackfriars' Wynd, Edinburgh. Afterwards he returned to Balloch, and eventually he built a chapel at Crieff, Perthshire, where he passed the remainder of his life, except for a short interval in 1827-8, when he took charge of the congregation at Leith. 
A talented classical as well as Gaelic scholar, Macdonald was employed to give the Latin significations of the words for two letters of the alphabet in the 'Dictionarium Scoto-Celticum: a Dictionary of the Gaelic language', published under the direction of the Highland Society of Scotland in 1828. He himself published 'Phingateis, sive, Hibernia liberata, epicum Ossianis poema, e Celtico sermone conversum, tribus praemissis disputationibus, et subsequentibus notis' (1820), dedicated to Augustus Frederick, duke of Sussex. Macdonald died at Crieff on 13 July 1837. 


@@@@@


doc= 17425


Macdonald, Alexander (1791?-1850), antiquary, was employed at an early age as a clerk in the General Register House, Edinburgh, where he assisted Thomas Thomson in the preparation of 'Acts of the Scottish Parliament' and other works. In 1824 he was elected a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries of Scotland, and in 1836 he was joint curator of the society's museum. For some years he had acted as curatorial assistant to James Skene, and had played an important part in the transfer of the society's collections to its new rooms in the Royal Institution building at the Mound. In 1836 he was appointed principal keeper of the register of deeds and probate writs or protests at Register House. 
Macdonald is said to have supplied a considerable amount of the material for Sir Walter Scott's notes to the 'Waverley' novels. Certainly it was his custom to provide scholars and men of letters with historical material extracted from the records in his care. In 1829, for instance, he transcribed for Scott lengthy extracts from the 'Orderly Book' of the duke of Cumberland's army in Scotland in 1745-6; and Scott indeed incorporated portions of this in 'Tales of a Grandfather'. (Macdonald's manuscript is in the National Library of Scotland.) Earlier, in 1825, Scott had stated that nothing could be more civil than the way Macdonald was superintending the work of gathering source material on King James VI and I. An invitation from Scott to Abbotsford in 1829 was clearly a great event in Macdonald's life. That year he had found an amanuensis for Scott. Many scholars acknowledged their debt to him. As Robert Chambers put it in 1826, by his assistance to him and to others Macdonald helped to advance the 'invaluable cause of antiquarian literature' (NL Scot., MS 3134, 219). 
It was, however, as editor of the publications of the Maitland Club that Macdonald rendered most service to historical research. The volumes edited by him were: 'The Register of Ministers, Exhorters, and Readers of the Church of Scotland' (1830); 'Maitland Club Miscellany' (vols. 1 and 2, 1834); Adam Blackwood's 'History of Mary, Queen of Scots' (1834); and 'Report on the State of Certain Parishes in Scotland' (1835). He also edited 'Letters to King James the Sixth' (1835), 'Papers Relative to the Royal Guard of Scottish Archers in France' (1835), and 'Letters to the Argyll Family' (1839). For the Bannatyne Club he edited 'Registrum honoris de Morton', published posthumously in 1853. Macdonald died at Edinburgh on 23 December 1850, aged about fifty-nine. His library at 5 Regent Terrace, rich in works on Scottish history and related matters, was sold by Tait and Nisbet on 7 May 1851. 


@@@@@


doc= 17426


Macdonald, Andrew (1757-1790), poet and playwright, was born at Edinburgh on 27 February 1757, the son of George Donald, a gardener, and his wife, Janet Elliot. He was educated at the grammar school in Leith and at Edinburgh University, under the sponsorship of Bishop Forbes of Ross and Caithness, who shared his father's Stuart sympathies. He received deacon's orders in the Scottish Episcopal church in 1775, when he lengthened his surname to Macdonald. After acting as a private tutor for a year to Oliphant of Gask's children, in Gask, Perthshire, he was appointed in 1777 to a charge in Glasgow. In 1782 he published 'Velina, a Poetical Fragment', and the following year, 'The Independent', a novel. Although apparently a good preacher, his income was diminishing with his congregation, and marrying the maidservant at his lodgings injured his prospects further. His tragedy 'Vimonda' had been performed in Edinburgh to much acclaim, and he resigned his charge to move there as a writer. After living beyond his means for a while, he left Edinburgh to seek his fortune in London, where he made many friends and his prospects brightened. 'Vimonda' was produced at the Haymarket on 5 September 1787, to an encouraging reception, and was printed in 1788. Macdonald's other dramatic efforts, however, were failures. As Matthew Bramble, he amused London for some time with poetical burlesques, cleverly modelled on John Wolcot (Peter Pindar), which brought him popularity but little remuneration. Macdonald's health quickly deteriorated and he died of consumption in Kentish Town, London, on 22 August 1790, leaving his widow and infant daughter destitute. A posthumous volume of sermons (1790) secured some further popularity, and Macdonald's 'Miscellaneous Works', including all his known writings, appeared in 1791. 


@@@@@


doc= 17427


Macdonald, Angus (1836-1886), obstetrician, was born in Aberdeen on 18 April 1836, the son of James Macdonald (died 1846), road contractor, and Margaret Bannerman. He had little schooling until after the death of his father, when his mother, a woman of character and intellect, moved with her young family to Grange in Banffshire; he then attended Grange parish school, being taught by an inspiring schoolmaster, Arthur Gerrard. Macdonald received only a total of two years of formal education, having to work as an agricultural labourer while studying; however, Gerrard gave him a thorough grounding in Latin, which enabled him to sit the bursary competition for King's College, Aberdeen, and to win an award at the comparatively late age of nineteen. Macdonald matriculated in arts in 1855 and followed the four-year course, tutoring during term-time and labouring at home in the summer and autumn. He graduated MA in 1859 and left Aberdeen to read theology at the Divinity Hall of the United Presbyterian church in Edinburgh. 
After one session of theology Macdonald found he was more interested in medicine, and in 1860 he entered the medical faculty of Edinburgh University, without abandoning his deeply held religious beliefs. His teachers included James Syme, John Goodsir, Robert Christison, J. Y. Simpson, and J. H. Bennett. Macdonald still had to augment his small funds with private tutoring in general and medical subjects, and he established a reputation as a teacher. He also found time for running and walking, which he enjoyed. In his midwifery finals he was examined on accidental haemorrhage and abortion. He graduated MD in 1864. Once qualified, he began in practice in Edinburgh, and lectured in the extramural school and at the Royal Infirmary on materia medica, midwifery, and the diseases of women. He published a revision of Scoresby-Jackson's materia medica with a supplement containing the new preparations introduced into the British pharmacopoeia of 1867. Another book, 'The Bearings of Chronic Heart Disease on Pregnancy', was published in 1878. 
In 1866 Macdonald married Annie Finlayson (1839-1917), daughter of an Edinburgh Presbyterian minister, Thomas Finlayson, and Janet Carrick Chrystal. The couple lived at 41 Northumberland Street, Edinburgh, where Macdonald practised with increasing success as he concentrated more on obstetrics. He was admitted a fellow of the Royal College of Surgeons of Edinburgh in 1865, and of the Royal College of Physicians of Edinburgh in 1869. As physician to the Royal Maternity Hospital he kept up assiduously with new developments in his subject. Operations for the removal of ovarian cysts and fibroid tumours of the uterus as well as extra-uterine pregnancy now became the mainstay of his practice, and some of his work showed a talent for bold innovation. His contributions to the 'Edinburgh Medical Journal' showed his development as a surgeon and his application to detail in the meticulous operations of which he became master. In 1882 the strain of overwork combined with a cold led to an attack of pleuropneumonia which forced him to stop work and to travel to the French riviera for warmth and rest. 
Macdonald's career had been unusually prosperous. He had moved both his home and his consulting rooms to the fashionable Charlotte Square (while retaining the plain, approachable manner of the northern Scottish doctor), and he was now the father of seven children: Thomas Finlayson, Jessie Chrystal, Angus, Robert John, Margaret Bremner, George Andrew, and Ranald, the last born in 1881. On his return from France in 1882 Macdonald cut his workload, but the pulmonary trouble flared up again early in 1886. He died in Edinburgh on 10 February 1886, and was buried nearby in the Grange cemetery. His widow died in Edinburgh in 1917. Their eldest son, Thomas, became a doctor, but died in 1896 at the age of twenty-seven. 
Macdonald's singular achievement was the remarkable advance he made in his chosen field in spite of early poverty and a late start in life. His writing, particularly in his papers for the Edinburgh Obstetrical Society, was noted for its clarity. He enhanced the reputation of the Edinburgh medical school, and greatly influenced the next generation of obstetricians. 


@@@@@


doc= 17428


Macdonald, Archibald (1739-1814), Benedictine monk and author, was born at Lochaber, Inverness, Scotland, the son of the Jacobite Ranald Macdonald (died 1745) and his wife, Mary Cameron. He was educated at St Gregory's, Douai, and joined the Benedictine community there in September 1756. He was the first Benedictine monk to serve the mission of St Mary's, Liverpool, in 1783, and from here he founded the Benedictine mission of St Peter's, Seel Street, Liverpool, five years later. 
Despite a busy (and at times controversial) pastoral life Macdonald published some literary works which had an extensive local circulation in their day and which represented a significant contribution to English Catholic devotional writing in the late eighteenth century. These included a number of small booklets designed to enhance the liturgy, which were popular with Benedictine missioners in the latter part of the century, and like contemporary Cisalpine authors he favoured a vernacular Catholic liturgy. Macdonald believed in the importance of congregational participation in Sunday afternoon devotions, arguing in the preface to one of his booklets ('The Layman's Afternoon Devotion', 1778) that it was 'equally pleasing to God and more edifying to the people when able to join their pastor with one voice as St. Chrysostom observes' (Gillow, 'Lit. biog. hist.', 4.370). Macdonald's Jacobite sympathies caused a fellow monk to advise against his appointment as chaplain to the Towneley family at Standish in Lancashire, observing that he had 'too much of the North-Britton' (Bulmer to Nayler). 
Macdonald is notable for his defence of the authenticity of James Macpherson's edition of the poems of Ossian against the attacks of Dr Johnson and Malcolm Laing. Macdonald himself translated some of Ossian's lesser poems in 1805, and in 1808 published 'Fingal: an Epic Poem Rendered into Verse'. He also published 'A Companion to the Altar, or, Prayers for Morning and Afternoon Service, on Sundays and Holydays' (1792), 'Moral Essays, Chiefly Collected from Different Authors' (2 vols., 1796), and 'Select Discourses on the Gospels for All the Sundays and Holydays throughout the Year' (1801). Macdonald was a controversial figure who continually quarrelled with any monks who were appointed to assist him. Paradoxically, given that he was a prolific writer, he was accused by his superiors of being a poor communicator. Despite this he was honoured by his brethren with the offices of definitor of the regimen in 1806 and cathedral prior of Rochester in 1810. He died at St Peter's, Seel Street, Liverpool, on 29 July 1814. 


@@@@@


doc= 17429


Macdonald, Sir Archibald, first baronet (1747-1826), judge and politician, was born on 13 July 1747 at Armidale Castle on the Isle of Skye, the third and posthumous son of Sir Alexander Macdonald, seventh baronet (1711-1746), and his second wife, Margaret (died 1799), daughter of Alexander Montgomerie, ninth earl of Eglinton. He must have begun his education in Scotland because in later life he referred to Thomas Erskine as 'my old school-fellow' ('State trials', 21.62) but in the aftermath of Culloden the government was anxious to limit Jacobite influence over the Macdonald boys and recommended that they be sent to England. Macdonald became a king's scholar at Westminster School in 1760 and was elected to a studentship at Christ Church, Oxford, in 1764, where he graduated BA in 1768 and MA in 1772. In this pattern of elite education he may have followed the example of another scion of the Scottish aristocracy, William Murray, first earl of Mansfield; like Mansfield he was entered at Lincoln's Inn, in 1765, and called to the bar, on 24 November 1770. 
Macdonald's connections provided early employment for him as junior counsel in some appeals to the House of Lords but the first important case that he argued in his own right was 'Campbell v. Hall', or the 'Case of the Island of Grenada', tried before Lord Chief Justice Mansfield in May 1775. The case was very important because it was designed to test the issue of the crown's right to impose a duty on the inhabitants of a colony by prerogative; it came on just as the American War of Independence was breaking out and the second continental congress was meeting at Philadelphia. Citing 'Calvin's case' and several civil law authorities Macdonald contended that no such tax could be imposed by prerogative after the cessation of hostilities, for in a settled colony the power of legislation was confined to king and parliament, as demonstrated by the 'Declaratory Act' of 1766. Mansfield commented that he had raised 'one of the greatest constitutional questions that, perhaps, ever came before this Court' ('State trials', 20.306). 
Although such praise must have assisted his progress the turning point of Macdonald's career came in 1777. In February of that year he was elected to the House of Commons for the borough of Hindon, in Wiltshire, probably by dint of large-scale bribery among its inhabitants; on 26 December he married Lady Louisa (died 1827), daughter of Granville Leveson-Gower, second Earl Gower, lord president of the council and leader of the Bedford whigs. With such political advantages Macdonald could hardly fail to be promoted and it was no coincidence that he was granted a patent of precedence at the bar less than a month later, in January 1778. Later the same year he was one of several counsel retained on behalf of the governors and officers of Greenwich Hospital on their application to the court of king's bench for an information alleging libel against Captain Thomas Baillie, who had accused them of corrupt administration. On this occasion he failed to satisfy Mansfield, who discharged the rule for an information on the grounds that the writing in question had not been published, in the full sense of the word, and that Baillie had already been punished by the governors. 
In parliament Macdonald dutifully followed the line of his father-in-law, even to the extent of public inconsistency and occasional apostasy. With Gower he supported the North administration's prosecution of the American war but he launched an artificially savage attack on North after Gower resigned in November 1779 and then abjectly apologized upon his father-in-law's signal of continued support for the North ministry. At the general election of 1780 he was returned for Gower's borough of Newcastle under Lyme and given a government place as second judge of the Carmarthen circuit in Wales. Becoming more confident in debate he assisted the administration's resistance to economical reform in 1781, despite having previously supported John Dunning's motion against the influence of the crown; and on the occasion of the younger William Pitt's motion for reforming parliamentary representation, debated on 7 May 1782, he declared 'that as the present form of the constitution had stood from Charles the 2nd's time, without any material alteration, he could see no reason for any amendment to it at present' (Cobbett, 'Parl. hist.', 22.1429). Like Gower he opposed the Fox-North administration from the start. In the debate of March 1783 on the Foxite motion pressing the king to install the new coalition he said that 'It did not deserve the respectable name of coalition; it was a perversion of words to call it so' (ibid., 23.674). Fox thereupon reminded the house of the sequel to his previous assault on North, but Macdonald had signalled his loyalty to the king's friends by declaring that 'He thought the democracy more to be feared than the regal power' (ibid., 675), and in November he argued strenuously against Fox's 'India Bill' as 'a trap... for the liberties of the nation' (ibid., 1298), thereby hitching his fortunes firmly to Pitt's rising star. He had his reward after Gower returned to government in Pitt's ministry, when he became solicitor-general at the dissolution of parliament in March 1784 and attorney-general four years later. He continued to represent Newcastle under Lyme until his elevation to the judicial bench, and as a principal law officer he spoke regularly on legal affairs. Most notably, in 1785 he introduced a bill promoting a new scheme for securing the peace in the City of London, Westminster, and Southwark, principally by establishing district police establishments under a metropolitan commission and increasing the frequency of the Old Bailey sessions. Though the bill was defeated by the vested interests of local authorities and traditional fears of centralized authority it anticipated later reforms and, in aiming 'to render detection certain, and punishment with a moderate degree of severity, unavoidable' (ibid., 25.889), Macdonald articulated advanced ideas. He also rendered valuable support to Pitt at the time of the regency crisis in 1788-9, arguing strongly for the power of parliament to determine the powers of a regent against the Foxite claims for automatic reversion to the prince of Wales. 
In his other capacity as a leader at the bar Macdonald proved to be competent rather than outstanding. Unusually for a law officer he maintained only a moderate private practice, principally in chancery and in the equity side of the exchequer. On being made attorney-general in June 1788 (when he was knighted) he became responsible for state prosecutions but his tenure predated the main crisis of government reaction to the French Revolution, and in the trials that he prosecuted he was distinguished mainly by his easy confidence and good humour. In December 1789 he prosecuted the bookseller John Stockdale for publishing a pamphlet critical of the impeachment proceedings against Warren Hastings. Although it was an 'ex officio' information the prosecution was not inspired by the government; it had been promoted by an address to the king originally moved by Charles Fox, on the basis that the publication was a libel against the House of Commons, and Macdonald's speech was correspondingly restrained. He opened by saying that 'The solemnity of the situation in which I am placed on this occasion, obliges me to address the intellect both of the court and the jury, and neither their passions or their prejudices' ('State trials', 22.249). In the event his speech was completely overshadowed by Erskine's oration for the liberty of the press, which secured an acquittal, and later in his career he complained that 'He had more than once prosecuted, in obedience to the commands of the House, when he knew a conviction could not be expected' (Cobbett, 'Parl. hist.', 30.132). A year later he led for the crown in 'R. v. John Frith', who was indicted for high treason after throwing a stone at the king's coach. On this occasion he had little to do, since the defendant was found unfit to plead on grounds of insanity, although Lord Chief Justice Kenyon praised his characteristic moderation and indulgence to the prisoner ('State trials', 22.310). But he was much less forbearing when prosecuting Thomas Paine for a criminal libel in December 1792. The case against Paine had the full support of the government, who were alarmed by the wide circulation of the second part of his 'Rights of Man', and Macdonald clearly identified his personal convictions with the prosecution. In loyal and patriotic tones he spoke up forcefully against Paine's 'gross, contemptible, and abominable falsehood' on the constitution (ibid., 385-6) and became righteously indignant over the author's sarcasm at the capacity of the king and his sons for government. The jury's hostile reaction to Erskine's exculpation of Paine for the defence showed that he had caught the public mood, and they gave a verdict for the prosecution without withdrawing from court. 
Macdonald was appointed lord chief baron of exchequer on 12 February 1793, following Sir James Eyre's promotion to the court of common pleas. Cases in the exchequer were generally of limited significance and the promotion therefore constituted retirement from the front line of public affairs. But he was commissioned to take part in some important state trials, including the prosecution of Thomas Hardy for treason in late 1794, although Eyre presided and Macdonald said little. Macdonald presided himself at the trial of Colonel Joseph Wall for murder at the Old Bailey in January 1802. The case was one of considerable public interest because the alleged offence had taken place in 1782, when Wall was governor of the garrison of Goree off the coast of Africa, and it concerned the death of a sergeant after a punishment of 800 lashes, administered with a rope's end. In his defence Wall claimed that he had been confronted with a mutiny and had convened a summary court martial but the evidence was quite contradictory, and after reviewing it all very impartially Macdonald left the issue to the jury, who brought in a guilty verdict. He retired from the bench with a baronetcy in 1813, when his eyesight failed, but he maintained his interest in the reform of criminal law, appearing personally before a House of Commons select committee in 1819. On that occasion he argued again for the principle of certainty rather than severity in punishment, and advocated the restriction of capital punishment in favour of imprisonment with hard labour. 
Although he was a conservative in politics and one of a generation who were alarmed by the implications of the French Revolution, Macdonald never became a reactionary, unlike his contemporaries John Scott, first earl of Eldon, and Edward Law. Indeed an unwillingness to participate in repressive measures may account for his sidelining in 1793, just when the Pitt government began to move decisively against popular radicalism. Near the end of his career he said that when he drew penal statutes as solicitor- and attorney-general 'I was always an exceedingly strong advocate for the milder course' ('Select committee on criminal laws', 48); and as a judge in criminal trials that 'I would always desire to give the prisoner the benefit of every thing that I could discover in his favour... I always felt it my duty to be counsel for 'him'' (ibid., 50). Macdonald died at his home in Duke Street, Westminster, on 18 May 1826, and was buried in Kensington parish church. He was survived by his wife, who died eight months later, and by three children, James (1784-1832), who succeeded to the baronetcy, Louisa (1781-1862), and Caroline Diana (1790-1867). 


@@@@@


doc= 17430


Donald MacDonald (d. 1420x25), the eldest son of his father's marriage to Margaret Stewart, who succeeded as second lord of the Isles 'with the consent of his brethren and the nobles of the Isles' according to one family annalist, 'but contrary to the opinion of the men of the Isles' (Cameron, 161). As well as their own kindred, the lordship now comprised great clans like the Macleans and MacLeods, and lesser ones such as the MacKinnons and MacQuarries, and both groups had a share in the administration as well as in the territory of the Isles. Three of Donald's charters apparently composed in feudal form to his brother-in-law Lachlan Maclean of Duart (1390) and one to his nephew Hector Maclean (1409) are known through later crown confirmations; but the most singular survival in the original manuscript is the only specimen of a charter of the lord of the Isles (here signing McDomhnaill with no other designation) in the Gaelic language and traditional phrasing, granting lands in Islay to Brian Vicar Mackay in 1408. Donald's marriage to Mary, a daughter of Euphemia, countess of Ross in her own right, and her husband, Sir Walter Leslie, led to a claim to the Ross earldom in which Donald was opposed by the powerful Albany family, leading to the memorable but indecisive battle of Harlaw (1411) near Aberdeen. 
Although the earldom remained in the hands of the crown after the elimination of the Albany Stewarts in 1425, Donald's son and successor 


@@@@@


doc= 17431


Macdonald, Duncan George Forbes (1827/8-1884), agricultural engineer and writer, was the youngest son of John Macdonald (1779-1849) and his second wife, Janet, eldest daughter of Kenneth Mackenzie, of Millbank. Initially he devoted himself to the study and practice of agriculture on his father's extensive glebe, before starting business on his own account in 1848, as an agricultural engineer in London and Dingwall, Ross-shire. He also worked as a civil engineer, in addition to acquiring practical knowledge of farming. 
Macdonald was a prolific writer, producing publications on a multitude of different aspects relating to British agriculture and on his visits to the colonies. His first work, 'What the Farmers may Do with the Land', appeared in 1852; the subtitle, 'Practical Hints for their and its Improvement', effectively summarized the content of the text. Later Macdonald went to British Columbia, where he became a member of the government's survey staff and one of the commissioners responsible for adjusting the boundary line of British North America. This led, following his return to Britain, to the publication of 'British Columbia and Vancouver Island'. The text provided a detailed analysis of the physical characteristics and climate of the area, in addition to assessing the manners and customs of the native people. Rather controversially, in this work he opposed immigration to the area on the grounds that the land was not as rich and fertile as his contemporaries believed. His views were also reiterated in subsequent lectures on the topic. 
After the deposition of Napoleon III Macdonald wrote a pamphlet entitled 'Napoleon III, the Empress Eugenie, and the Prince Imperial'. The rest of his life was devoted to agricultural and similar interests. He became drainage engineer of improvements under the control of the enclosure commissioners for England and Wales, and engineer-in-chief to the inspector-general of highland destitution. Macdonald was a fellow of the Geological Society and of the Royal Geographical Society; he also became a justice of the peace, and was made LLD. He died on 6 January 1884 at 23 West Hill Road, Brighton. 


@@@@@


doc= 17432


MacDonald, Flora (1722-1790), Jacobite heroine, was born at Milton on the island of South Uist, Outer Hebrides, the third and last child of Ranald MacDonald (died 1723), tacksman or leaseholder of Milton and Balivanich on South Uist, and his second wife, Marion (died before 1771), daughter of the Revd Angus MacDonald and his wife, Flora. Flora is an Anglicization of the Gaelic name Fionnghal, and sometimes she signed herself Flory. The day and month of her birth are unknown, and her birthplace has been demolished, but a cairn marks its site just off the main north-south road on the island. Flora was not a poor peasant girl as legend often presents her, but came of a good family, and was raised and continued to practise as a Presbyterian. Her father was a cousin of the chief of the MacDonalds of Clanranald, and was related to the powerful Argyll Campbells. Her mother could claim connection to the MacDonalds of Sleat, the lords of the Isles. Flora had two older brothers: Angus, who eventually inherited the Milton tack, and Ranald, who died in an accident as a young man. 
Their father died in 1723, and Marion remarried in 1728. Her second husband, Hugh MacDonald of Sartle in Skye, who could claim connection to two chiefs, MacDonald of Sleat and MacLeod of Raasay, was a great swordsman and had led an adventurous life as a young man. He was known as Uisdean Cam, or One-Eyed Hugh, because he had lost an eye either in a childhood accident or while serving with the French army. 
Flora grew into a cultured young woman, who sang well, played the spinet, and danced. There is no evidence, however, to support a claim of early biographers that she went to school in Edinburgh, or that the Clanranald or Sleat chiefs' wives helped with her education. 
By 1745, when Prince Charles Edward arrived in Scotland, Flora's brother had taken over the tack of Milton, and Flora had moved to Armadale in Skye with her mother and her stepfather. Skye remained untouched by the 1745 campaign because the chief of Sleat refused to join the prince, but raised an independent militia regiment among his clansmen in support of the government. One-Eyed Hugh became one of its captains. After Charles Edward's defeat at Culloden in April 1746, his flight took him to the friendly Clanranald island of South Uist, where Flora happened to be visiting her brother. On learning of the prince's presence in the Outer Hebrides, government forces began a systematic search of the islands, which came close to capturing him. Unknown to Flora, a plan was devised to spirit Charles off the outer isles and back to Skye disguised as her Irish maid, Betty Burke, and the first she learned of the scheme was when the prince was brought to her secretly on the night of 20 June at a hut on a shieling or summer pasture on Sheaval Hill, where she had been sent to tend her brother's cattle. He was accompanied by one of Flora's kinsmen, Neil MacEachain, and by Captain Felix O'Neil, who each gave differing accounts of the meeting, but from Flora's account it would appear to have been the prince himself who asked her to help him. She agreed reluctantly. 
Who planned the escape has never been explained, but her stepfather must be the chief suspect. He commanded the militia at the ford between South Uist and Benbecula at the time, and ordered the release of Flora and MacEachain when they were captured at the crossing. The journey was arranged with suspicious ease, and it was Hugh who supplied the pass to permit Flora to make the journey to Skye, accompanied by 'one Bettie Burke, an Irish girl, who, she tells me, is a good spinster' (Forbes, 2.32, 46). Lady Clanranald helped to make the Betty Burke dress, and the prince and Flora set sail from Benbecula to Skye on the night of 28-9 June in a small boat crewed mainly by militiamen. Many tales were told afterwards about the escape, but Flora's favourite was the one in which she said she forbade Charles to carry his pistols under the petticoat of his dress, telling him that, if searched, they would give him away. 'If we shall happen to meet with any that will go so narrowly to work in searching as what you mean, they will certainly discover me at any rate', the prince replied (ibid., 1.111). 
Charles Edward landed at Trotternish in Skye, close to Monkstadt, home of MacDonald of Sleat, who was away at Fort Augustus at the time. Flora brought the prince to Sleat's house where the chief's wife, Lady Margaret MacDonald, gave him a meal and sent him south to the Sleat factor's house at Kingsburgh. Unfortunately the boatmen were sent back to Uist, where they were arrested and confessed. Flora and the factor were arrested, but the prince fled first to Raasay and then to the mainland, where he remained in hiding until he was picked up by two French ships on 19 September. 
Flora was taken aboard the 'Furnace' and questioned by Major-General John Campbell of Mamore, whom she faced with great courage and apparent openness, but her answers concealed as much as they revealed. Like many other prisoners she was sent to London, but Campbell ordered that she should be treated well during the voyage aboard the 'Bridgewater'. Unsubstantiated tradition claims she was held in the Tower of London for a few days, but for most of her imprisonment she was at the house of a messenger-at-arms, along with other important prisoners, until her release some days after the general amnesty was declared in July 1747. She remained a further few days with the Jacobite sympathizer Lady Primrose, who raised a subscription of $1500 for her, then left for Edinburgh, where she arrived on 2 August. Flora did not travel back to the Hebrides immediately, apparently unable to face returning to the islands, but spent the winter of 1746-7 in Edinburgh, taking lessons to improve her handwriting. The Revd Robert Forbes, who at this time was collecting first-hand accounts of those involved in the rising of 1745 (subsequently published in 1895-6 as 'The Lyon in Mourning'), tried hard to persuade her to tell her story, but she did so reluctantly through an intermediary, John Burton. She returned to Skye in July 1747 but was back in London before the end of the year, apparently to arrange her finances. 
On 6 November 1750 Flora married her kinsman Allan MacDonald (1722-1792) of Kingsburgh, a good-looking, amiable young man with advanced farming ideas but with a poor business sense, and they farmed at Flodigarry until Allan succeeded his father as Sleat factor. They had seven children, Charles (1751-1795), Anne (1754-1834), Alexander (1755-1781), Ranald (1756-1782), James (1757-1807), John MacDonald (1759-1831), and Frances ('b'. 1766). The Flodigarry years swallowed up Flora's fortune, and Allan quarrelled with his chief, leaving them in sore financial straits. It was during this period that Samuel Johnson and James Boswell visited Kingsburgh, and Boswell described Flora, now fifty-one, as 'a little woman of genteel appearance, and uncommonly mild and well-bred'. Allan was 'completely the figure of a gallant Highlander'. Flora was taken with Johnson, and confided more of her story to him than she ever did to others: she even joked with him and told him that while she was on the mainland she had heard that Mr Boswell was on his way to Skye, 'a young English buck with him' ('Boswell's Journal', 159). Johnson was accorded the honour of sleeping in the bed Prince Charlie had slept in the night he stayed at Kingsburgh in 1746. 
In 1774 Allan and Flora emigrated to North Carolina, where members of their family were already living, and settled at Cheek's Creek in Anson (now Montgomery) County. However, before their seed was properly through the ground in the spring of 1775 the American War of Independence broke out, and neither Flora nor Allan doubted that their duty lay with George III. Flora encouraged highlanders to join the Royal Highland Emigrants 84th regiment, in which her husband, son, and son-in-law all served. The highland army was defeated by the patriots at Moore's Creek Bridge on 27 February 1776, and Allan was taken prisoner. Flora wrote that he 'and about 30 other gentlemen were draged ['sic'] from gaol to gaol for 700 miles, till lodged in Philadelphia gaol, remaining in their hands for 18 months before exchanged' (F. Macdonald to Sir John MacPherson, 21 Oct 1789, NL Scot.). Flora and her husband have been accused of involving themselves 'needlessly and recklessly' in the war (Maclean, 35), but Flora herself wrote, 'When the American Rebellion brock ['sic'] out, and [Continental] Congress, forcing her husband to joyne them, being a leading man among the highlanders, and seeing he would be obliged to joyne either party, he went in disguise to Fort Johnston on to mouth of the river Capefear, and there settled the plan of riseing the Highlanders in arms, with Governor Martin. (F. Macdonald to Sir John MacPherson, 21 Oct 1789, NL Scot.)' She suffered great hardship, and was brought before a patriot committee of safety during Allan's imprisonment, but was eventually allowed to travel to New York in April 1778 to be reunited with him. After he rejoined his regiment in Nova Scotia, Flora travelled to Fort Edward, near Windsor, to be with him, but she still had not recovered from her Carolina ordeal, and felt ill, lonely, and homesick. At the end of 1779 she returned to Britain. Her second son, Alexander (Sandy), who had been a prisoner with his father, was lost at sea in 1781, and only a year later her third son, Ranald, was drowned when his ship, the 'Ville de Paris', foundered off Newfoundland. Her health broken, Flora settled in Skye, where Allan joined her in 1785; he would have settled in Nova Scotia, but received only $440 plus $276 for loss of income in compensation for his war service and North Carolina losses -- too little to begin a new life in Nova Scotia. 
They ended their days at Penduin, near Kingsburgh, Skye, comfortably off, thanks to their son John, who made his fortune in the East. Almost the only clue Flora gave to her reason for agreeing to assist Prince Charlie's escape lies in the answer to George II's son, Prince Frederick, whom she met in London. When he asked why she had helped his father's enemies, she replied that she would have done the same for him had she found him in distress. Flora died at Penduin on 4 March 1790, and her husband, Allan, two years later, on 20 September 1792. Both were buried on Skye, at Kilmuir, 16 miles north of Kingsburgh. 
The journey over the sea to Skye became a legend from the day it was made, and even as a prisoner in London in 1746 Flora was treated as a heroine. But oral tradition in the Hebrides largely ignored her, and even Lady Nairne failed to use such obvious material for a pro-Jacobite song. In 1870 the heroine's granddaughter, Flora Frances Wylde, produced a highly coloured 'Autobiography' so full of obvious inaccuracies that it could not have been written by the heroine, and the Revd Alexander MacGregor's 'Life', written ten years later and said to have been based on information from Flora's daughter, Anne, had no more basis in truth. Flora's memory was better served by James Hogg, Robert Louis Stevenson, and many others, who were moved to write poems in her honour. However, it is Harold Boulton's 'Skye Boat Song' that has best caught the spirit of her adventure, although it makes no more than a passing reference to Flora. By the time that song was written in the 1880s the world had come under the spell of the Flora MacDonald legend, which was carried round the world by emigrant Scots. Nowhere was it more enthusiastically accepted than in North Carolina and Nova Scotia. In North Carolina, the most Scottish of all the states of the USA, schools and colleges have been named after her, and her memory is greatly respected in spite of her support for the British at the revolution. A great upsurge of Scottish interest followed in that state during the second half of the twentieth century, and highland games began to be held annually at Grandfather Mountain in 1956. All through Flora's story legend has insinuated itself into truth, but the words of Samuel Johnson when he visited her in 1773 sum up both the woman and her legend: 'A name that will be mentioned in history, and if courage and fidelity be virtues, mentioned with honour' (Johnson, 67). 


@@@@@


doc= 17433


Macdonald, Hugh (1699-1773), vicar apostolic of the highland district, son of Alexander Macdonald ('fl'. 1698-1726) of Morar and his second wife, Mary Macdonald of Kinlochmoidart, was born at Morar on 2 February 1699. In 1714 he entered the highland seminary at Loch Morar, then in 1716 went to Scalan seminary, where he was ordained priest on 18 September 1725. He served at Morar until 1730. On 12 February 1731 he was nominated titular bishop of Diana and vicar apostolic of the newly formed highland district. Having lived at the Scots College, Paris, from July 1730 to September 1731 preparing for his future duties, he received episcopal ordination at Edinburgh on 18 October 1731. His headquarters remained at Morar. 
At this time the Jansenist controversy divided the highland clergy deeply but eventually it died away. After Prince Charles Edward arrived in Scotland in July 1745 Bishop Macdonald, having failed to persuade him to return to France, blessed the prince's standard raised at Glenfinnan on 19 August 1745. Macdonald remained hidden in Morar after the defeat at Culloden, until in September 1746 he sailed for France, where he was given a pension for life by the French crown. Although he returned to Scotland in August 1749, he remained mostly outside his district. In July 1755 he was arrested at Edinburgh, and sentenced to perpetual banishment in March 1756, but the sentence was not enforced and he lived quietly in the north of Scotland, mainly in upper Banffshire, outside the highland district, then at Aberchalder, a few miles west of Fort Augustus. In 1758 he visited Paris. 
In 1761 Macdonald ordained his nephew, John Macdonald (1727-1779), as his coadjutor bishop and successor. He died at Aberchalder on 12 March 1773, one of only two men who had played a leading part at Glenfinnan to die peacefully in Scotland, and was buried in Kilfinnan cemetery on Loch Lochy side. Macdonald priests of a certain social rank, including several bishops, were to form a sort of caste and have great influence in the Roman Catholic church in the highlands for the next two centuries. 


@@@@@


doc= 17434


Macdonald, Hugh (1817-1860), journalist, born in Bridgeton, Glasgow, on 4 April 1817, was apprenticed, after a scanty education at a night school, to a block-printer. He subsequently kept a provision shop in Bridgeton, and ultimately returned to his trade in Paisley. He began to write verse in the 'Glasgow Citizen', to which he also contributed a series of letters defending Robert Burns from an attack by George Gilfillan. In 1849 he gave up his trade and joined the staff of the 'Glasgow Citizen', contributing to it, and to the 'Glasgow Times', the series of descriptive papers subsequently collected under the titles of 'Rambles Round Glasgow' (1856), and 'Days at the Coast' (1874). In 1855 he joined the 'Glasgow Sentinel', soon afterwards became editor of the 'Glasgow Times', and in 1858 literary editor of the 'Morning Journal', a post that he held until his death on 16 March 1860. In 1883 a rustic stone fount, with a medallion bust of Macdonald, was erected to his memory on the site of 'the bonnie wee well', which is the subject of one of his songs. All his literary work shows an intense love for nature, but his prose is better than his verse. His poetical works were published, with a memoir, in 1863. 


@@@@@


doc= 17435


John MacDonald (d. c.1387), who succeeded his father as king of the Hebrides, and was the first of four members of the family known to have adopted the designation 'dominus insularum', which he used in a letter to Edward III of England in 1336. His lands, with the custody of the royal castles of Cairnburgh Mor and Beg in the Treshnish Isles off Mull and Dunchonnuil in the Garvellochs, were confirmed to him by David II in 1343, and he consolidated the power of clan Donald over the other descendants of Somerled. This process was assisted by his two marriages, for which he obtained papal dispensations in 1337 and 1350 respectively. His first wife was Amie, sister of Ruairi of Garmoran, on whose death in 1346 she inherited all his lands, which were then joined with John's territories in Kintyre, Islay, and Mull, while the clan Ruairi was absorbed into clan Donald. In 1354 the possessions of John and his kinsman John (MacDougall) of Lorn were divided under an agreement that emphasized the latter's subordinate position. With Amie MacRuair, John had three sons, including Ranald (or Reginald) from whom the MacDonalds of Clanranald and Glengarry are descended. 
John MacDonald's second wife was Margaret, daughter of Robert Stewart (who became king as Robert II in 1371), and, while the MacRuairi lands went to Amie's son, it was 


@@@@@


doc= 17436


John MacDonald (c.1434-1503), possibly still a minor. John's early marriage to Elizabeth, daughter of James Livingston of Callendar (died 1467), chamberlain of Scotland, apparently took place with James II's encouragement shortly before her father's imprisonment in 1450, from which he escaped and took refuge with his son-in-law. The exact chronology of events is unclear, but it seems that John's revolt, during which he took the royal castles of Inverness, Urquhart, and Ruthven, strengthening the two former and demolishing the latter, took place on Livingston's behalf in the spring of 1451, when the king was already threatening the Douglases. This revolt was probably one of the causes, rather than the result, of the killing of the earl of Douglas on 22 February 1452, for which the bond between Douglas and MacDonald was the immediate excuse. There was no northern rising after the slaying, though raids in the Clyde region by John's cousin Donald Balloch may have taken place at this time at the request of the new earl of Douglas. James Livingston recovered his lands and office before the middle of 1454, as the king tried to build up support against the Douglases. The castles of Inverness and Urquhart were granted to Livingston for three years, and then to the lord of the Isles for life. 
The minority of James III saw unrest in Lorn and renewed pressure from the exiled earl of Douglas, who was used by the Yorkists in England when on the look-out for allies in the Wars of the Roses. Douglas promoted a treaty with John of the Isles (Donald Balloch and his son John being also associated) and Edward IV of England in 1461-2, by which the two Scots as vassals of King Edward agreed to divide Scotland between them. Three years later, after John had ravaged Inverness, a fifteen-year truce between the Scots and English left him free to make his peace with James III's government. When the truce with England was converted to a peace in 1474, the terms of the treaty of Westminster-Ardtornish (as it has been called) came to light, and John was forfeited, but on his renouncing the earldom of Ross, the lordships of Kintyre and Knapdale, and the sheriffships of Inverness and Nairn, he was pardoned, reinstated in 1476 in his other lands, and created a lord of parliament as lord of the Isles. Thereafter his hold on the lordship was uneasy. His only son, 


@@@@@


doc= 17437


MacDonald, John (c.1624-c.1710), Scottish Gaelic poet, the son of Donald MacDonald (died 1646?), was apparently descended from Iain Alainn, who succeeded to the chiefship of the MacDonalds of Keppoch 'c'.1497-8. He has a high reputation as a political and clan poet, commenting on the affairs of the Keppoch MacDonalds and on the turbulent political events of a long period from the mid-1640s to the union of the parliaments in 1707. Tradition reports that he went to the Scots College at Valladolid in Spain to prepare for the priesthood, but left after disagreement. The range of his interests and references would seem to support the idea that he had some extended educational opportunities. At various points he is found using English and Scottish words and phrases in the body of his verse. 
Among Iain Lom's earliest poems there is one on the battle of Inverlochy, during the Montrose wars, when the MacDonalds inflicted a humiliating defeat on the Campbells in 1645. Lom gloats over the Campbells' craven retreat, as he sees it. He is said to have given valuable advice, from his knowledge of the terrain, to Alasdair MacColla in the run-up to the battle. It was probably in the following year (1646) that he composed a lament for the young Keppoch chief who was killed in a skirmish at Sron a' Chlachain near Killin in Perthshire. The poet's father was also killed in this skirmish, but protocol required the main emphasis to be on the chief's death. There are three other laments composed by Iain Lom in this decade: for Alasdair MacColla in 1647, for the marquess of Huntly in 1649, and for the marquess of Montrose in 1650. 
Gaelic poets continued throughout the seventeenth century to have official or semi-official status within clans, whether they were trained poets using the classical Gaelic language or vernacular poets who had looser attachments to patrons, and in this context much of Iain Lom's poetry is connected with the public activities of his clan, their allies, and their enemies. A series of poems deals with the murder of the young chief of Keppoch and his brother in 1663, and the successful campaign to avenge these murders. There are poems in praise of allies, such as Maclean of Duart and the MacDonalds of Sleat and of Glengarry, and some elegies for chiefs of these septs or clans. As part of this continuing commentary there are poems about specific battles, for example that of Tom a' Phubaill ('c'.1680) and Killiecrankie (1689), and a poem on the massacre of Glencoe (1692). 
The latest poem ascribed to Iain Lom is one on the union of the parliaments in 1707. Some doubt has been cast on this ascription, but it shows the sharp, witty, satirical style in which Iain Lom excelled. The poet clearly accepted that bribery had played a part in this transaction, as appears from his reference to Lord Dupplin: '
Lord Dupplin, without delay 

the vent to your throat opened, 

a turbulence rose in your heart 

when you heard the gold coming; 

you swallowed the hiccoughs of avarice, 

your lungs inflated and swelled, 

control over your gullet was relaxed, 

and the traces of your arse were unloosed. 

' This is not simply a case of an old man's outspokenness, for we see him in 1649 reproaching the future Charles II for his 'sorry slumber' and listlessness. In 1660 he was to celebrate this king's coronation, and it is said that he enjoyed a royal pension for a short time. He died about 1710, and is thought to have been buried in the graveyard of Cill Choiril at Brae Lochaber. 
Iain Lom's surviving verse, running to about 3000 lines, provides a valuable commentary on political events and arguments. Characteristically, he employs vivid and figurative language across a wide tonal range from gentle adulation to fierce invective. His uncompromising, usually satiric, vision of these events also reveals a sharp, intellectual mind. 


@@@@@


doc= 17438


Macdonald, John (b. 1741), domestic servant and memoirist, was born in the parish of Urquhart, Inverness-shire, the son of a gentleman cattle dealer whose wife, from a Mackay family, died two years after Macdonald's birth. Macdonald's father fought with the Jacobite highlanders and was killed at the battle of Culloden in 1746. The orphaned John and his two small brothers, led by their fourteen-year-old sister, Kitty, and her 'heroic disposition' (Macdonald, 5), then walked 150 miles to Edinburgh within two months. There they found various positions in service, and Macdonald at the age of nine became the 'littlest postilion in Scotland or any other country' (ibid., 18). He was also taught to read by his employers. After Edinburgh he took up employment with various Jacobite families in Scotland. In the early 1760s he travelled around Ireland with a new master, and finished up in London in 1763. 
In London Macdonald joined the household of John Crauford of Errol, 'just come from Paris, one of the gayest young gentlemen and the greatest gambler that ever belonged to Scotland' (Macdonald, 82). With Crauford, Macdonald travelled around the continent, although he advised his master that the British Isles offered a richer source of amusement and instruction. Crauford was an acquaintance of Laurence Sterne, and is thought to have told him the story which Sterne transformed into the final chapter of 'A Sentimental Journey', 'The case of delicacy'. Back in London in 1768 Macdonald was sent by Crauford to enquire after the bedridden Sterne's health, and in fact witnessed the novelist's death. 
In 1769 Macdonald sailed to India with his new master, Alexander Dow, the close friend of James Macpherson and author of several accounts of Indian history. They seem to have spent several years in India and Macdonald's observations on Indian manners and customs are frank and tolerant. Following his return to Europe Macdonald, whose talents at dressing hair made him extremely desirable, continued to travel around Europe as valet to a variety of gentlemen, including Macpherson and James Coutts the banker. In London again, in 1778 Macdonald courted ridicule by sporting a new French accessory in the streets: nevertheless, the umbrella soon became 'a great trade in London' (Macdonald, 236). 
Macdonald himself returned to Toledo in Spain in the summer of 1778 to discover that a night of passion he had enjoyed with a certain Malilia the previous year had produced a son, John England. Thereafter he and Malilia married and settled in Toledo, and he found a job at the Hotel de Naples (Macdonald, 249) and wrote his memoirs, which were published in 1790 as 'Travels, in Various Parts of Europe, Asia, and Africa'. They not only provide all the biographical evidence available on Macdonald's own colourful life, but paint a vivid picture of the European beau monde, and indeed the Indian subcontinent, from the unusual perspective of a servant. His observations offer a wry commentary on aristocratic travelling habits. His own amorous exploits with servant girls (which may account for his frequent changes of employer) feature prominently in the 'Travels', to the disapproval of contemporary reviewers, one of whom expressed anxiety that the publication would only 'increase the assurance of footmen' ('Analytical Review', 8.63). Macdonald's date and place of death are unknown. 


@@@@@


doc= 17439


Macdonald, John (1727-1779), vicar apostolic of the highland district, was born at Ardnamurchan, Argyll, the son of Donald Macdonald of Ardnamurchan and Catherine Macdonald of Morar, and nephew on his mother's side to Bishop Hugh Macdonald. After attending the highland seminary at Guidal he entered the Scots College, Rome, in 1743, was ordained there in 1752 and returned to Scotland in April 1753. He officiated as missionary on the island of South Uist until 1761. A man of 'learning, and exceeding good nature and temper' (Blairs letters, 3/146/2), he was nominated titular bishop of Tiberiopolis and coadjutor to his uncle in February 1761, and was consecrated at Preshome on 27 September of the same year. On Bishop Hugh Macdonald's death in 1773 he succeeded him as vicar apostolic of the highland district of Scotland. He died on 9 May 1779 at Knoydart, Inverness-shire, and was buried there. 


@@@@@


doc= 17440


Macdonald, John (1759-1831), military engineer and cartographer, was born in Flodigarry, Isle of Skye, on 30 October 1759, the fifth and youngest son of Allan Macdonald of Kingsburgh, a captain in the 84th Royal Highland Emigrants, and Flora Macdonald (1722-1790), the Jacobite heroine. He attended the grammar school at Portree and then the Royal High School, Edinburgh. In 1780 he was granted a cadetship in the army of the East India Company and joined the Bombay infantry. Because of his interest in fortification he transferred to the Bombay Engineers on 6 April 1782 but, unhappy with the conditions of service, he travelled to Calcutta and, through the influence of a relative, was commissioned in the Bengal Engineers instead in September 1782 and resigned his Bombay commission. As an ensign his first appointment was as assistant engineer at Bencoolen, west Sumatra. 
In 1784 Macdonald was employed to survey the west coast of Sumatra from Batang Kapas to Padang. His survey work was of such significance that he was noted by the government as a 'young officer of great merit and highly deserving of encouragement' ('Memoir', 8) and given a brevet captaincy. The same year, at Fort Marlborough, he married Nancy Scott Bogle, 'nee' Salmon (1760/61-1786), the young widow of Lawrence Bogle, a Bengal civil servant, and the daughter of George Salmon. On account of the high standard of his work, the East India Company ordered Macdonald to Pulo Penang (Penang Island) in 1786 to carry out a survey, but on arrival he found that Captain Alexander Kyd (1754-1826) of the Bengal Engineers had already commenced the survey. He proceeded to Calcutta and, given revised orders, returned as military and civil engineer to Bencoolen, where he was given command of the artillery with permission to develop and test an experimental fuse he had designed, the results of which were sent to Calcutta on 4 October 1786. During the next twelve months the unhealthy climate at Bencoolen claimed his family: his wife died on 28 October 1786, shortly after giving birth to their second daughter, Nancy, who died fifteen days later; their two-year-old elder daughter died on 27 June 1787. Macdonald, however, continued to serve at Bencoolen, and was promoted lieutenant on 16 December 1794 (retaining his honorary rank of captain), and was on the Fort Marlborough establishment during an unsuccessful attack by the French that year. During his final years in Sumatra he produced a 'Plan of Fort Marlbro and its Environs', later published by Alexander Dalrymple (27 August 1797), and wrote a paper, 'Natural Productions of Sumatra -- Camphor, Coral and Copper', which was published in Calcutta in 1795. 
Macdonald returned to Scotland in 1796 on sick leave. During his voyage home in a small American vessel he remained for several months on St Helena and consolidated his earlier work on variations of the magnetic needle. The results were later published in the 'Philosophical Magazine', submitted to the Royal Society, and earned him election as a fellow of the society in 1800. Many of his maps and charts were later deposited in the British Museum. 
Macdonald was promoted captain on 8 January 1798 and, with the East India Company's permission, became a captain in the Royal Edinburgh volunteer artillery, a corps of pikemen formed from gentlemen of Edinburgh. During this service he wrote a treatise on the practice and theory of artillery. On 4 March 1799 he was commissioned as a major into Lord Macdonald's western fencibles, and served until June 1800. He took half pay on 30 July 1800, but was then promoted lieutenant-colonel in the Royal Clan alpine fencible artillery, and served with that unit in Ireland until its disbandment in 1801. 
Following the peace of Amiens Macdonald travelled to France; he later published translations of several French military works. On 24 October 1799 he had married Frances Maria Chambers (1774/5-1860), the eldest daughter of Sir Robert Chambers (1737-1803) and Frances Wilton; they had seven sons and two daughters. Macdonald's last military appointment was in 1804, when Pitt, as lord warden of the Cinque Ports, raised the Cinque Port Volunteers and granted him a commission as major. He held the post until the reduction of the unit in 1806. 
Macdonald's family latterly moved to Exeter, where, in addition to his charitable works, he used his military experience to write 'A treatise explanatory of a new system of naval, military and political telegraphic communication' (1817), which included his 'military anthropo telegraph for field service'. He died at his home at Summerlands Place, Exeter, on 16 August 1831 and was buried in the south transept of Exeter Cathedral, where his grave is marked with a brass plaque. He was an exemplary military officer and engineer who received little acknowledgement during his lifetime for his years of dedicated service. 


@@@@@


doc= 17441


Macdonald, John (1779-1849), Free Church of Scotland minister, was born at Reay, Caithness, on 12 November 1779, second son of James Macdonald or MacAdie (1735-1830) and his second wife, a daughter of John Mackay. His father, originally a weaver, was the local catechist. John was educated at the parish school and soon showed remarkable mathematical ability, being employed by the local farmers to help with their accounts. He went on to King's College, Aberdeen, graduating MA in 1801. He was licensed by the presbytery of Caithness in July 1805. In September, and at the request of Sir John Sinclair, he went on an expedition to research Ossianic traditions in the north-west highlands. He returned to serve as missionary at Achreny and Halladale for six months. In September 1806 he was ordained missionary minister at Berriedale. It was in that year that he married Georgina Ross of Gledfield, with whom he had three children before her death in August 1814. 
In January 1807 Macdonald became minister of the Gaelic chapel, Edinburgh, which was supported by the Society in Scotland for the Propagation of Christian Knowledge (SSPCK), and it was here that he established his reputation as a preacher. In September 1813 he was presented to the parish of Urquhart, Ross and Cromarty, by Duncan George Forbes of Culloden, in succession to Charles Calder. Using this as a base, he conducted an itinerant ministry in Caithness and Ross which, because of its implied criticism of them, was greatly resented by neighbouring ministers. This practice was condemned by the general assembly of 1818. It was on 11 May of this year that he married again, his second wife being Janet, eldest daughter of Kenneth Mackenzie of Millbank, with whom he had a further seven children, including Duncan George Forbes Macdonald. 
Macdonald's missionary impulses, which earned him the sobriquet 'Apostle of the North', were channelled to less controversial effect when he took an interest in the spiritual welfare of the remote island community of St Kilda. At the request of the SSPCK he visited the islands between 1822 and 1824, eventually raising sufficient money to keep a minister there, whom he introduced to the islanders in 1830. He also visited London in 1823, at the request of the London Missionary Society, where he met Samuel Wilberforce. In 1827 he was invited to visit Ireland by Robert Daly, rector of Powerscourt and later bishop of Cashel. He was able to adapt his Gaelic sufficiently for an Irish audience. In 1842 he was honoured with the degree of DD from the University of New York. 
Macdonald's influence and position were confirmed at the Disruption of 1843, where he was credited with much of the Free Church's success in the highlands. In David Octavius Hill's representational painting of that event he is a central figure, shown standing behind Patrick Macfarlan, waiting to sign the deed of demission. In 1845 he acted as Gaelic moderator when the Free Church general assembly met for a second time that year in Inverness. His publications included the diary of his visits to St Kilda (1830), sermons, and Gaelic verses (1848). He died at Urquhart on 16 April 1849 and was buried there beside his revered predecessor, Charles Calder, on 24 April. 


@@@@@


doc= 17442


Macdonald, Sir John (d. 1850), army officer, was distantly connected with Flora Macdonald, the Jacobite heroine. His military service began as an ensign in the 89th foot (15 April 1795), advancing in that regiment to lieutenant (2 February 1796) and captain (22 October 1802). He served with the 89th in Ireland during the 1798 rising, taking part in several encounters, including those at Ross and Vinegar Hill. After brief periods in garrison on Minorca and at Messina, the regiment took part in the siege of Valletta and capture of Malta (1799-1800). Macdonald also fought with it in Egypt in 1801, during the opposed landing on the 8th, skirmish on the 13th, and battle of Alexandria on 21 March, after which he received the military general service medal with campaign bar. On 28 February 1805 he became a half-pay major and shortly afterwards served as brigade major to Lieutenant-General Lord Cathcart in England before securing a majority in the 43rd foot (20 February 1806). He accompanied Cathcart as his military secretary when he commanded the King's German Legion in Swedish Pomerania during 1806-7, earning Cathcart's special praise. Macdonald acted in the same capacity with Cathcart during the expedition to Denmark and bombardment of Copenhagen in 1807. He became a half-pay lieutenant-colonel in the 1st garrison battalion on 17 March 1808, and the following year acted as deputy adjutant-general for Lieutenant-General the Hon. Sir John Hope's reserve, tasked to clear the enemy from south Beveland during the disastrous Walcheren expedition. On 24 February 1810 Macdonald was appointed deputy adjutant-general under Lieutenant-General Thomas Graham in southern Spain, first at Cadiz and then during the battle of Barossa (5 March 1811), where his 'unwearied exertions' were mentioned in dispatches (Forbes, 277). Towards the close of the action, Macdonald decisively ordered the 67th foot to clear enemy artillery from a prominent ridge dominating the British position. 
In March 1812 Macdonald became military secretary to Hope, commander-in-chief in Ireland, and from 25 September 1813 acted as his assistant adjutant-general in the Peninsula, taking part in the battle of the Nive (10 November 1813) and blockade of Bayonne early in 1814. When Hope was wounded and taken prisoner during an enemy sortie on 14 April 1814, Macdonald obtained permission to enter the French city to look after him. For his services in the Peninsula, Macdonald received a gold medal with one clasp for Barossa and the Nive. 
Macdonald became a brevet colonel and CB (4 June 1814), and from 14 August 1818 served for almost twelve years as assistant adjutant-general at the Horse Guards in London under three successive commanders-in-chief of the army, the dukes of York and Wellington and Lord Hill. Hill remained in office until 1842, when Wellington returned as commander-in-chief. Meanwhile, Macdonald had been promoted to adjutant-general (27 July 1830), and would retain that post until his death, representing continuous service at the Horse Guards of over thirty-one years, advancing to major-general (27 May 1835) and lieutenant-general (28 June 1838). He was appointed KCB (13 September 1831) and GCB (24 September 1847). As adjutant-general, Macdonald was directly responsible to the commander-in-chief for military discipline in the cavalry and infantry (the ordnance forces then being a separate command under the master-general of the ordnance), and, after consulting the judge-advocate-general, advised him on courts martial. The adjutant-general arranged the passage of troops going overseas, dealt with problems of inter-regimental transfers, and supervised the establishment of regimental schools. He exercised responsibility for army clothing, taking note of the recommendations of the board of general officers appointed to oversee it, and ensured the supply of small arms to all regiments. His responsibilities in these matters extended to reserve forces (militia, yeomanry, and enrolled pensioners), and all military commanders in the United Kingdom and abroad (whether in garrison or on campaign) submitted regular reports to him. Scotland had a deputy adjutant-general in Edinburgh; Ireland, foreign stations, and overseas expeditions had their own adjutant-general. However, all these officers were answerable to the Horse Guards, as were assistant adjutants-general in military districts at home, who were appointed on the adjutant-general's recommendation. Questioned by Lord Ebrington's select committee on army and navy appointments in 1833, Macdonald explained that such a vast amount of work had been acquired since expansion of colonial possessions post-1815, that 'the great variety of details' prevented him from giving a comprehensive summary of departmental responsibilities (Sweetman, 81). By 1836 the establishment at the Horse Guards comprised four officers with subordinate military and civilian staff; ten years later its cost amounted to almost $13,000 per year. One enduring legacy of Macdonald's time as adjutant-general was outlined by the commander-in-chief's general order of 1 January 1836: 'An account of the services of every regiment in the British army shall be published under the superintendence of the adjutant-general' (Cannon, preface). 
Macdonald proved an able and effective adjutant-general: 'His official demeanour was courteous and kind, and his sincerity and candour were seldom found to border on abruptness or roughness, and never on rudeness or insult' ('Naval and Military Gazette', 30 March 1850). Macdonald was also a clear writer of minutes and orders. He had been appointed colonel of the 67th foot (25 August 1828), then of the 42nd foot (15 March 1844). He died at his residence in Bruton Street, London, on 28 March 1850, and was buried in Kensal Green cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 17443


MacDonald, John (1818-1889), Roman Catholic bishop of Aberdeen, was born in Ballicladich, Strathglass, Inverness-shire, on 2 July 1818, the son of William MacDonald and his wife, Hannah Fraser, both Catholics. He was educated locally, and later by the Benedictines at the Scottish seminary, St James's, Regensburg, in Bavaria (1830-37). He entered the Scots College, Rome, in June 1837. In ill health and accompanied by Bishop James Kyle, vicar apostolic of the northern district, he returned to Scotland as subdeacon in June 1840. In the following year, after attending Blairs College, he was ordained at Preshome by Bishop Kyle. He then served in the following missions: as assistant at Tombae, Banffshire (December 1841 - February 1842); alone at Glenmoriston, Inverness-shire, with Dornie Kintail, Ross-shire, as well for about a year (February 1842 - May 1844); Braemar, Aberdeenshire (May 1844-May 1845); as assistant at Inverness (May 1845 - May 1846) and later as sole priest (1846-8); Fassnakyle, Upper Strathglass, (1848-56); and Eskadale, Lower Strathglass (1856-68). At Eskadale he was chaplain to Simon Fraser, thirteenth Lord Lovat. 
MacDonald was chosen as coadjutor by Kyle, and accepted in Rome, with the title of bishop of Nicopolis, on 11 December 1868. The appointment of a Scot, amid the bitter Irish-Scottish Catholic internecine feuding, was a relief to Kyle and the other Scottish bishops. Unfortunately Kyle died the previous day and so MacDonald immediately became vicar apostolic. As he was only the second bishop consecrated in Aberdeen since the Reformation, his installation aroused considerable public interest: the ceremony took place at St Mary's Aberdeen, and the Irish-born bishop John Lynch of the western district was not invited. 
In 1869-70 MacDonald attended the First Vatican Council in Rome. On the restoration of the Scottish hierarchy in 1878 he was translated to the diocese of Aberdeen. During his episcopacy, Rome restored Wick and Caithness as well as Orkney and Shetland, some 262 miles distant, to his diocese (in 1860 they had been taken from Scottish episcopal jurisdiction and placed under the Arctic mission). Kincardine and part of Inverness-shire were also added to the former north district vicariate territory to make his new diocese. After an initial residence in Eskadale, he settled in Aberdeen in February 1869, making St Mary's Aberdeen his cathedral from 1886. 
Reputedly the tallest man at the Vatican Council, MacDonald was a handsome and imposing figure, but possessed a shy, retiring, and diffident character. He was very conscientious in his religious duties but played very little part in public affairs. In 1868 his appointment represented a return to quiet competence; less assertive than Kyle, he was also unlike the enthusiastic and zealous Archbishop Gillis of Edinburgh or the tempestuous Bishop Lynch of Glasgow. 
MacDonald presided over a vast area, with only about 11,000 faithful, the vast majority of them poor, with hardly half a dozen considerable families of substance. During his episcopate, however, solid progress was made: the number of churches, chapels, and stations more than doubled to 88; the number of clergy grew from 35 to 53 priests; religious orders of women in the diocese increased more than threefold; and the number of convents more than quadrupled. He also encouraged Lord Lovat's foundation of the Benedictine abbey at Fort Augustus, and orphanages, homes for the elderly, and education received his attention. All this was accomplished without debts, or political or sectarian disturbance: his was a safe pair of hands. From 1875 MacDonald suffered increasingly from ill health; he deteriorated rapidly in late 1888 and died on 4 February 1889 at 20 Queen's Road, Aberdeen. He was buried in St Mary's Cathedral, Aberdeen. 


@@@@@


doc= 17444


Macdonald, Sir John Alexander (1815-1891), prime minister of Canada, was born in Glasgow on 11 January 1815, one of the five children (and the only male to reach adulthood) of Hugh Macdonald (died 1841), a merchant, and his wife, Helen Shaw. 
Although the origins of both his parents were in the Scottish highlands and Macdonald always spoke with a slight Scottish accent, he spent little of his youth in his native land. When he was five his parents emigrated to Kingston, near the eastern edge of Upper Canada. His father, who had left Scotland because his business ventures had failed, eventually acquired a small milling business in Prince Edward county, but never achieved much financial success and for a few years before his death in 1841 was employed as a bank clerk. Macdonald attended local grammar schools, where he acquired the habit of reading widely, particularly British fiction and constitutional history, but his formal education came to an end when at the age of fifteen he was articled to George Mackenzie, a Kingston lawyer. Macdonald had a quick mind and a natural aptitude for the law, and when he was only seventeen he was placed in charge of a branch office in the nearby town of Napanee. In August 1835 he opened his own office in Kingston and on 6 February 1836 was called to the bar. 
Macdonald came of age in exciting times. In December 1837 he served in the militia during the Upper Canadian uprising and took part in the attack on the rebels' headquarters in Montgomery's Tavern in York (later Toronto). Yet in 1838, when Upper Canada was threatened by raids from across the American border, he courageously, though unsuccessfully, acted as the defence counsel for the rebels involved in one of the raids. 
During the 1840s Macdonald concentrated on building up his Kingston law firm, became a specialist in commercial law, and purchased real estate and mortgages in many parts of the province, sometimes acting as the agent for British speculators. He invested in banks and road and shipping companies, acquired directorships in a number of Canadian and at least two British companies, and in 1864 became president of the British-backed St Lawrence Warehouse, Dock, and Wharfage Company in Quebec. None the less, money -- or rather the lack of it -- was a recurring problem for the young Macdonald. He lived well, but he had no inherited wealth and his income was unstable. In 1842, apparently using substantial winnings from gambling, he went on a six months' holiday to Britain, during which he had a whirlwind courtship with a Scottish cousin, Isabella, the daughter of Alexander Clark of Dalnavert, Inverness-shire. They were married on 1 September 1843 and were a happy couple, but after 1845 Isabella became an invalid. Despite her illness she gave birth in August 1847, but John Alexander jun. died after thirteen months. In March 1850 Isabella gave birth to a second son. Hugh John survived, but Isabella was racked with pain, mitigated only by massive doses of opium, until her death in 1857. Hugh followed his father into law, becoming his partner, and into politics, serving as member of the Canadian House of Commons for Winnipeg in 1891, briefly as minister of the interior in 1896, and as premier of Manitoba for a year in 1900, but Macdonald spent little time with his son and their later relationship was frequently troubled. During the late 1850s, as Macdonald focused on his political career, he resided in the capital of the united province of Canada, which alternated between Toronto and Quebec City until permanently transferred in 1865 to Ottawa. Like many of his contemporaries, Macdonald was a heavy drinker. His wife's prolonged illness added to his financial difficulties and he seems frequently to have sought solace in the bottle. After her death his social life revolved increasingly around drinking bouts with his political cronies. 
Macdonald's first political office was as secretary of a district school board in 1834. He was active in a host of religious and ethnic organizations in Kingston, including the Orange lodge, the masons and the Celtic and St Andrew's societies, and he served as an alderman from 1843 to 1846. In 1841 Upper and Lower Canada were amalgamated into the united province of Canada and in October 1844 Macdonald was elected to the assembly from Kingston, which would return him to parliament in ten elections between 1844 and 1874. In 1844 he campaigned as a Conservative and a supporter of Governor-General Sir Charles Metcalfe, and in the legislature he opposed the introduction of responsible government, the abolition of primogeniture, and an extended franchise, and he defended state support for the established church and for denominational schools. But he also showed a willingness to compromise, and he gravitated into the camp of the moderate Conservatives, led by William Henry Draper. In 1846 he was made a queen's counsel and in May 1847 Draper brought him into the cabinet as receiver-general. Macdonald held the post for seven months and then served for three months as commissioner of crown lands until the Reformers came to power in March 1848. 
The most controversial measure introduced by the Reform administration was the 'Rebellion Losses Bill', which became a test of responsible government. When Governor-General Lord Elgin signed the bill, his carriage was stoned and the parliament buildings in Montreal were burnt by Conservatives disgruntled by the bill and by the imperial parliament's decision to abolish the preferential tariff on Canadian timber and wheat. A number of Conservatives even signed a manifesto advocating annexation to the United States. Macdonald dissociated himself from the extremists by participating in the British North America League, which was committed to the imperial connection. Macdonald also sought to persuade the Conservatives to abandon some of their more unpopular policies, including their opposition to responsible government, and he applauded the decision of the Conservative leader, Sir Allan Napier MacNab, to enter into a new political alliance in 1854 with the French-Canadian Reformers, who formed the largest single bloc in the assembly. The English-Canadian Reformers saw responsible government not as an end in itself but as a step towards creating a more liberal society, a goal not shared by the increasingly conservative French-Canadian leadership. The new coalition, out of which emerged the Liberal Conservative Party, had a clear majority in the assembly, and in September 1854 Macdonald took office as attorney-general for Upper Canada, a position he held until 1862 and again from 1864 to 1867. In 1861-2 and 1865-7 he also served as minister of militia affairs. 
As attorney-general Macdonald was responsible for steering through the legislature much of the government's contentious legislation, such as the bill abolishing the clergy reserves and the 1855 act which entrenched Catholic separate schools in Upper Canada. He also presided over the expansion of the provincial penitentiary system and was largely responsible for the creation of separate provincial institutions for juvenile offenders and the criminally insane. Macdonald's influence was not entirely positive, since he believed that prisons should be more concerned with punishment than rehabilitation. In fact, he was a competent but hardly an innovative or outstanding administrator. His real forte was in the nitty-gritty of politics. He was a master in the art of distributing patronage, a formidable public speaker both in the assembly and on the hustings, and a likeable and popular politician. Although the united province had been created as a legislative union, Upper Canada and Lower Canada retained their separate identities, and cabinets were effectively headed by two premiers, one drawn from each section. In 1856 Macdonald helped to push MacNab into retirement and assumed the leadership of the Conservatives in Upper Canada. He became joint premier of the united province of Canada with Etienne-Paschal Tache, who was himself replaced in 1857 by George-Etienne Cartier. From 1857 until 1862, except for two days in 1858, Macdonald and Cartier remained joint premiers of the united province, and Macdonald again served as joint premier with Tache briefly in 1864. Even the temporary loss of power in 1858 was an accident. Because the politicians were unable to agree on where to locate the capital, Cartier and Macdonald decided to refer the question to Queen Victoria, who chose Ottawa. When the decision was announced the government was forced to resign. Two days later Macdonald and Cartier were back in power when the Reformers proved unable to sustain the support of a majority in the assembly. 
By the late 1850s the united province was increasingly divided along sectional and sectarian lines. The predominantly protestant and British Upper Canada was growing faster than the predominantly Catholic and French-Canadian Lower Canada. The Liberal-Conservative alliance was based on an acceptance of equal representation of both Canadas within the united province and a protection of minority protestant rights in Lower Canada and minority Catholic rights in Upper Canada. But the evangelical protestants of Upper Canada, led by George Brown, were angry that they were prevented from abolishing state-supported Catholic separate schools by the votes of French-Canadian Catholics in Lower Canada. To end the supposed domination of the union by the French-Canadian minority, the Reformers of Upper Canada demanded that the principle of equal representation be replaced by representation on the basis of population. Partly to head off this threat, the Liberal-Conservatives proposed the creation of a federal union of British North America when they came back into power in 1858, but neither the Colonial Office nor the maritime colonies showed any great enthusiasm for the measure. Nor did Macdonald. The Conservatives were the minority party in Upper Canada, and federation -- particularly a decentralized federation -- might permanently deprive them of power. Macdonald preferred the existing legislative union of the Canadas and opposed the introduction of representation by population. 
Only when the demand for constitutional reform had become irresistible did Macdonald throw his weight behind confederation. His conversion was motivated by a careful evaluation of political realities, but he was also influenced by the American Civil War. As Anglo-American relations deteriorated, in May 1862 as minister of militia Macdonald introduced a bill increasing the size and costs of the militia. The bill was defeated and the Conservatives resigned, but the new government headed by John Sandfield Macdonald held power only precariously after the election of 1863. On 30 March 1864 the Conservatives returned to power, but on 14 June they too were defeated. A way out of this political crisis was suggested by a parliamentary committee chaired by George Brown, which recommended that the united province be replaced by a federal union, either of British North America or, if that proved impossible, of the two Canadas. Macdonald, a member of the committee, refused to sign the report, but on 30 June 1864 he reluctantly agreed to join in a coalition with Cartier and Brown. As Macdonald made clear to his Conservative followers, he joined the coalition not out of enthusiasm for constitutional change, but because he believed that he had no choice. Macdonald still preferred the 'status quo', but if change was inevitable he preferred confederation to the other options available. Like his contemporaries he was also frightened by the implications of the victory of the North in the American Civil War. As attorney-general in the coalition he established a small secret-service unit to gather information in the United States, and after August 1865, as minister of militia, he was responsible for making preparations to defend Canada against the Fenian raids in 1866. 
Partly because of his political skill and partly because of his superior legal knowledge, Macdonald played a central role in the constitutional negotiations at the Charlottetown and Quebec conferences in 1864, and he chaired the meetings at the London conference in 1866-7. Thomas D'Arcy McGee claimed that Macdonald was the author of fifty of the seventy-two 'Quebec Resolutions' which formed the basis of the 'British North America Act' of 1867 which created the dominion of Canada. This undoubtedly exaggerates Macdonald's personal influence, for he could impose his will upon neither his colleagues in the coalition nor the maritime delegates, and the 'British North America Act' did not entirely embody his ideals. Macdonald would have preferred a legislative union similar to the union of England and Scotland, but he recognized that legislative union was unacceptable to the French Canadians and to many Canadians of British origin. He therefore sought to create a highly centralized federal union in which the provinces would be little more than municipal bodies. The division of powers between the federal government and the provinces reflected these intentions, as did the authority given to the federal government to appoint provincial lieutenant-governors and to disallow provincial legislation. 
Whether these were desirable achievements is controversial. Macdonald was not trying to create a highly centralized modern state which could manage the economy and provide a wide variety of social services; he was a nineteenth-century Conservative, who believed in a very limited role for government. His commitment to centralism was derived from his intense Conservatism. Macdonald feared the movement towards democracy, and sought to contain it by creating large electoral units and a second chamber composed of members appointed by the federal government for life. Intensely anti-American, he was convinced that the American Civil War was a product of weaknesses in the American constitution which gave too much authority to the states and to the people, and he believed British parliamentary institutions were superior because they included barriers against uncontrolled democracy. Ironically the constitution which Macdonald played such a major part in designing never functioned as it was supposed to. As minister of justice from 1867 until 1873, Macdonald sought to impose his will on the provinces, frequently resorting to the use of the power of disallowance. He was minister of the interior (1878-83), superintendent of Indian affairs (1878-87), and minister of railways and canals (1889-91), but he still kept a watchful eye on the provinces. His 'bete noir' was Oliver Mowat, the premier of Ontario and his own former law student. Mowat challenged and eventually constrained Macdonald's partisan use of the power of disallowance, effectively turning it into a rarely used emergency power. Mowat also persuaded the judicial committee of the privy council to hand down a series of important decisions favouring provincial rights. Contrary to Macdonald's fears, decentralization did not lead to the collapse of the federal union. 
Macdonald was more clearly successful in his political ambitions. He quickly established himself as the dominant partner in the 'Great Coalition', particularly after the resignation of George Brown in 1865, and he impressed the imperial authorities by his loyalty and constitutional knowledge. In 1865 he was awarded an honorary DCL by the University of Oxford, and on 1 July 1867 was appointed the first prime minister of Canada. He was created KCB, to the chagrin of colleagues given lesser honours. Macdonald was responsible for constructing the first federal cabinet and for turning the Liberal Conservative Party into the first national party and leading it to success in the first federal election in 1867. 
In 1867 Macdonald's party swept to victory in the newly created provinces of Ontario and Quebec, but did less well in New Brunswick, and disastrously in Nova Scotia, where seventeen of the eighteen members elected were committed to repeal of the union. Macdonald sought to appease the leaders of the repeal movement, especially Joseph Howe, by offering better terms, and in 1869 Howe, having been rebuffed in London, agreed to the terms, and entered the cabinet. In 1869 the Macdonald government also made one of the largest land purchases in history when it bought out the Hudson's Bay Company's vast territorial claims in western Canada. The negotiations in London proceeded smoothly, but the government did little to prepare those already living in the west for the transition to Canadian rule. In particular the government ignored the existence of a substantial community of metis, the offspring of marriages between European fur traders and native women, settled along the Red River. The metis reacted by establishing a provisional government headed by Louis Riel, turned back the Canadian-appointed lieutenant-governor, took control of the Hudson's Bay Company fort, and arrested all those who supported the Canadian take-over, including a number of surveyors sent out by Ottawa. They even executed one of the surveyors, an Ontario Orangeman named Thomas Scott, for refusing to accept the authority of the provisional government. The metis wanted their land titles confirmed, and demanded that Manitoba should be given immediate provincial status with guarantees for the equality of the French and English languages and for Catholic separate schools. Although Macdonald felt the grant of provincial status was premature, he agreed to the metis' demands, which were embodied in the 'Manitoba Act' of 1870. At the same time, faced with an angry outcry from Ontario against the execution of Scott, Macdonald dispatched a military force to Manitoba and refused to extend a full pardon to Louis Riel, who was forced into exile. The integration of the west into Canada enabled the federal government to open negotiations with British Columbia, which became Canada's sixth province in 1871, in return for the promise of a railway to the rest of Canada within a decade. In 1873 Macdonald also completed negotiations which culminated in Prince Edward Island's entry into Canada. Only Newfoundland proved unresponsive to Canada's siren call. 
In 1871 Macdonald served as one of the five British commissioners sent to Washington to settle various Anglo-American disputes which had arisen out of the American Civil War. Eventually the negotiations resulted in the treaty of Washington, a treaty Macdonald signed with great reluctance, since it gave the Americans access to Canada's Atlantic fisheries and to the St Lawrence River. Macdonald had opposed these concessions unless Canada received adequate compensation, preferably in the form of a renewal of the reciprocity treaty which the Americans had abrogated in 1866, but he could not prevail, and in the end was forced to accept the treaty in the interests of Anglo-American harmony. This decision proved a considerable handicap in the election of 1872, when he was accused of betraying Canada's national interests. Although the Conservatives did win a majority, it began to disappear following the election, when it was revealed that Macdonald and several of his colleagues had accepted enormous campaign contributions from Sir Hugh Allan, the head of the syndicate to be given the contract for building the Canadian Pacific Railway to British Columbia. Although Macdonald denied that he had benefited personally from the contributions and that the railway contract had been awarded to Allan for his generosity, he could not convince his own followers, and he was forced to resign on 5 November 1873 because of defections. In the election of 1874 his party suffered a disastrous defeat because of the Canadian Pacific Railway scandal. 
Macdonald was partly the author of his own misfortune. In 1864 his legal partner had died and he had found himself deeply in debt. Overworked and worried, he had begun to drink even more heavily. In 1866 the Canadian delegates were forced to delay their departure to London until Macdonald recovered from a binge, and in London he was almost killed when (presumably drunk) he fell asleep in his hotel room with the candle burning. The trip was not entirely a personal disaster. While walking in Bond Street he ran into Susan Agnes Bernard (died 1920), the sister of his private secretary. Born in Jamaica, the daughter of T. A. Bernard, an official in Jamaica, but brought up in Upper Canada, Agnes had moved to England in 1865. The two were married in Hanover Square on 16 February 1867. Two years later they had their only child, Margaret Mary Theodora. Mary was an invalid throughout her life and Macdonald was deeply attached to her. Agnes provided her husband with a secure and supportive home. Under her influence Macdonald, who was never a very devout Christian, abandoned the Presbyterian church and became a member of the Church of England. 
In 1870 Macdonald fell seriously ill when passing a gallstone and almost died. During his illness it became apparent that he was virtually bankrupt, and his friends raised a fund, which eased his financial problems by providing him with $4000 per annum. None the less, he again began to drink heavily, so heavily that he had only a hazy memory of what he had really promised the railway contractor Allan. After his defeat in 1874 he went into an intense depression. He was forced to return to the practice of law. He had moved his legal firm to Toronto in 1871 and he moved his residence there in 1874. Increasingly he left the management of party affairs in the hands of Charles Tupper, who had not been tainted by the Pacific scandal. It was widely rumoured that Macdonald's retirement was imminent, but the rumours were premature. Macdonald's defeat coincided with hard times and, as the popularity of the Liberals waned, he gradually regained his confidence, brought his drinking under control, and re-established his authority as leader. 
In 1876 Macdonald committed the Conservatives to a policy of raising tariffs to protect Canadian industries, mainly from competition from the United States, which had consistently declined all offers to renegotiate reciprocity. In 1878 the Conservatives swept back into power, promising a 'national policy' of tariff protection. Ironically Macdonald was defeated in Kingston, but he was elected in two western seats and chose to sit for Victoria, British Columbia (even though he had never been there). In 1882 he became the member for Carleton, Ontario, but in 1887 and 1891 returned to representing Kingston. 
In 1879 the Conservatives raised the Canadian tariff to new levels. There was a substantial growth in Canadian manufacturing after 1879, but during the 1880s the economy grew slowly, Canada held few of the immigrants it attracted and saw many of the native-born leave for the United States, and there was a growing demand for reciprocity with the United States. Equally controversial was the other national policy to which the Macdonald administration was committed -- the completion of a transcontinental railway. At first the government continued the policy of building the line themselves, but in 1880 Macdonald helped to negotiate a contract with the Canadian Pacific Railway Company (CPR), headed by George Stephen. The contract was a generous one, too generous in the minds of the opposition. Even so, the CPR returned in 1884 and 1885 to ask for large government loans to finish the project. 
Macdonald was sympathetic to the CPR's requests, but he might not have been able to convince even his own followers to agree to the second loan had there not been another rebellion in the north-west. Once again the chief cause of the rebellion was the discontent of the metis, particularly the French-speaking metis who had settled along the South Saskatchewan River. In 1885 they invited Louis Riel to return from the United States and lead their protest movement. Although the federal government promised to examine the metis' grievances, Macdonald believed that the metis had been adequately compensated for their land claims after the first rebellion, and when the protest turned into a serious armed insurrection he responded not with efforts at conciliation but by sending west a substantial force of Canadian militia to suppress the rebellion. Since the force went west on the CPR, Macdonald was able to persuade the Canadian parliament to grant the additional loan requested by the company. In 1886 Macdonald made his first trip west, travelling to British Columbia on the recently completed line. 
During 1885 the federal government also faced a series of scattered acts of native violence. In the case of the metis rebellion Macdonald's responsibility for the bloodshed was at least indirect, since he had handed over the ministry of the interior in 1883 to his old and increasingly inactive friend Sir David Macpherson. But Macdonald remained superintendent-general of Indian affairs. Although poorly advised by his subordinates, Macdonald ignored abundant evidence that the native peoples were facing starvation because of the disappearance of the buffalo. Macdonald's humanitarianism was always limited and he was completely unmoved by their appeals for assistance. He reacted with severity to the disorganized acts of violence that resulted from the native peoples' frustration, and all of those suspected of complicity received severe punishments. Macdonald was less vindictive towards the metis, but he did believe that Riel should be tried for treason. Riel's trial created enormous rancour between English Canada, which believed his actions merited the death penalty, and French Canada, which believed that there were sufficient mitigating circumstances, particularly Riel's mental instability, to merit a lesser sentence. Macdonald was at the centre of this controversy. His own lack of sympathy for Riel was clear, and he refused to yield to what he saw as political pressure from Quebec. Riel went to the gallows in 1885, but Macdonald was not forgiven by Quebec. He lost ground there in 1887 and after 1891 the Liberals dominated the province. 
Quebec's alienation was probably inevitable. During the 1880s and 1890s imperial enthusiasm grew stronger in Canada. Macdonald believed imperial federation was impracticable and undesirable, but he was genuinely committed to preserving the imperial connection. He had grown up in a community composed of United Empire loyalists and British immigrants, and he sought to transfer as many British institutions as possible to his adopted homeland. Many of Macdonald's contemporaries retired to Britain (as did his wife, who, after his death, was raised to the peerage of the United Kingdom as Baroness Macdonald of Earnscliffe). Macdonald might also have returned to Britain, for he visited it whenever he could. He admired British politicians, particularly Benjamin Disraeli, to whom he bore a striking physical resemblance, and he eagerly sought imperial honours. In 1872 he was appointed to the British privy council and in 1884 was awarded a GCB. On the other hand he saw little to admire in the United States, which he rarely visited. In 1890 he even ordered that all official documents use British rather than American spellings. Confederation in 1867 he viewed not as the creation of a new nation but as a consolidation of several smaller colonies into a larger one. He would have called it the kingdom of Canada if he had not been overruled by the imperial authorities, who feared antagonizing the United States, but he assured Queen Victoria that Canada would remain under the British crown forever. Macdonald did not support Canadian participation in imperial wars in Africa and Asia, but he was not opposed to imperial expansion. In fact, he argued that in building the CPR and in opening up the vast territories in the west to British settlers, Canada was making an important contribution to the empire, and he showed little sympathy for those, like the metis and the native peoples, who stood in the way of expansion across the continent. 
Macdonald's alliance with the French Canadians in the 1850s was born out of political necessity and was undoubtedly made easier by Cartier's own Anglophilia. After Cartier's death in 1873 none of Macdonald's French-Canadian colleagues possessed anything like Cartier's influence. Macdonald never learned to speak French. Although he was prepared to give French equal status in the federal parliament and courts and in Quebec, he only reluctantly consented to a bilingual Manitoba and he did nothing to assist the Acadian minority in New Brunswick in its struggles. During the discussions over allowing Quebec to acquire the territory in the north previously under Hudson's Bay Company jurisdiction, he expressed reservations about creating a barrier between the maritime provinces and Ontario. He refused to condone the activities of Dalton McCarthy's Equal Rights Association, and in 1890, when Manitoba stripped the Catholic minority of its state-funded separate schools, he promised to restore minority rights. But Macdonald was not enthusiastic about extending those rights where they had not existed before confederation, and he believed that Canada must be essentially a British nation and English the dominant language. 
By 1891 Macdonald's administration had lost much of its vitality and his health was rapidly deteriorating, but he was handed victory in the election of 1891 when the Liberals under Sir Wilfrid Laurier campaigned for unrestricted reciprocity with the United States. Appealing to Canadians to stand by 'the Old Man, the Old Flag, and the Old Policy', Macdonald used the loyalty cry to win a narrow victory at the polls. It was his last. Shortly after the election, on 6 June 1891, he died in Ottawa of heart failure. His body was transported in state by the CPR to Kingston, where he was buried beside his parents and first wife in Cataraqui cemetery. Seventeen months later a white marble bust was erected to his memory in the crypt of St Paul's Cathedral, London, inscribed with the slogan he had used during the 1891 election: 'A British Subject I was born, a British Subject I will die'. 
During his lifetime Macdonald aroused intense emotions. To his enemies (and they were many) 'Old Tomorrow' was a procrastinator without principles who gained and held office by the unscrupulous use of power and patronage. This was not entirely an unfair portrait. Macdonald grew up in a political environment where there was no clear conception of conflict of interest. He used his political influence to promote legislation to advance his own financial interests and those of his friends. He had no objection to using liquor and money to help voters arrive at the right decision, and, while he preferred not to appoint incompetents to the civil service, he was not above doing so out of political necessity. In fact, there was very little that he was not prepared to do out of political necessity, as he showed during the Pacific scandal and in 1885 when he ruthlessly gerrymandered the electoral districts in Ontario. Many of the reforms for which he might claim paternity, such as removing the common-law restrictions on labour unions in 1872, were based purely on partisan considerations and not on lofty principles. 
Macdonald's friends did not deny his weaknesses, but they defended him as a statesman who always kept in sight the greater good and who played a major part in the creation of Canada. Sir Joseph Pope, for many years Macdonald's private secretary, published the first important biographical defence of Macdonald as well as a selection from his voluminous private papers. The historian who did most to establish Macdonald's reputation was Donald Creighton, in an evocative two-volume biography in the 1950s, which portrayed Macdonald as a hero for the times, the man who defined the Canadian national identity by resisting the growth of provincial power and the imperial ambitions of the United States. While Creighton was perhaps the most influential historian in Canada in the 1950s and 1960s, his views were refined by a number of his students and admirers, including Donald Swainson and Peter B. Waite, both of whom published more popular biographies of Macdonald. Keith Johnson, who demonstrated the extent of Macdonald's personal ambition, did not deny his essential greatness, and he was co-author with Peter Waite of the sympathetic entry in the 'Dictionary of Canadian Biography' (1990). Even Macdonald's weaknesses -- his heavy drinking and his cynical approach to politics -- have come to be seen as positive virtues, signs of his basic humanity and willingness to compromise. Since he was the first prime minister of Canada and held the post for nearly two decades, it was probably inevitable that he became increasingly popular after his death. Yet his influence, while great, is easily exaggerated and was not entirely praiseworthy. Indeed, given his intense Conservatism, his cultural chauvinism, and his lifelong commitment to the promotion of British imperialism, he is in many ways a strange candidate to have become enshrined as the national hero of a country which has rejected so many of the ideals in which he believed. 


@@@@@


doc= 17445


Macdonald, Lawrence (1799-1878), sculptor, was born on 15 February 1799 at Bonnyview, Findo Gask, Perthshire, a younger son of Alexander Macdonald, a village violinist who was blind (or partially sighted), and his wife, Margaret Morison, a nurse. He was apprenticed to a Perth mason, Thomas Gibson, and in 1822 moved to Edinburgh where he worked as an ornamental carver. He entered the Trustees' Academy there on 26 February 1822; seven months later he left for Rome in the company of his patrons, the Oliphants of Gask. 
Macdonald set up as a sculptor of portrait busts in Rome, and in 1822-3 he was one of the founder members of the British Academy of Arts in the city. Macdonald, together with John Gibson and Richard James Wyatt, the leading British sculptors working in the neo-classical style in the nineteenth century, were to form the nucleus of the 'Anglo-Roman' school active in the mid-Victorian period. 
In 1826 Macdonald returned to Edinburgh. He exhibited at the (Royal) Scottish Academy in its early years and at the Royal Academy. His work was enthusiastically promoted by Scottish patrons and the press. In 1829 he held a special exhibition at the Royal Institution in Edinburgh of his colossal plaster group, 'Ajax and Patroclus', which was engraved on the front page of 'The Scotsman' (31 October 1829). A second private exhibition followed in 1830, when the 'Edinburgh Literary Journal' described him as 'our Canova'. In the early 1820s he was made an associate of the Royal Institution for the Encouragement of the Fine Arts in Scotland (RIEFAS). In 1829 he became academician of the Royal Scottish Academy but resigned in 1858 and was elected an honorary member. 
In 1832 Macdonald returned to Rome and settled there permanently. He moved into the sculptor Bertel Thorvaldsen's former studio in the piazza Barberini in 1844, by which time he had established himself as the leading bust portraitist for British visitors to Rome. According to the 'Art Journal', his studio was filled with 'the peerage done into marble, a plaster galaxy of rank and fashion' (Florentia, 351), and his sitters included the earls of Yarborough, the politician Sidney Herbert, the Liverpool merchant John Gladstone, the author Walter Scott, and the actress Fanny Kemble. He was assisted in the studio by John Macdonald, his older brother, and, from the 1860s, by Alexander Macdonald ('b'. 1847), his son. 
Macdonald continued to make ideal statues. Examples included 'Eurydice' for the sixth Viscount Powerscourt (1837; National Gallery of Ireland, Dublin) and 'Hyacinthus' (1852; Royal Collection) for Prince Albert. Perhaps his finest work is the reclining figure of the countess of Winchilsea (1850; Victoria and Albert Museum, London), formerly in Eastwell church, Kent. 
Macdonald's work was assured, carefully executed, and adherent to neo-classical principles of idealized form and high finish. His portrait busts were conventional and decorative rather than strongly individualized, combining the imagery of antique Roman portraiture with contemporary dress and hair-styling. He was described by Peter Robert Drummond as 'somewhat impassioned and self-asserting' in his youth, but later became 'an enthusiastic artist and genial companion' (Drummond, 112). In 1853 he wore a 'long brown beard, of orthodox Italian cut... His fingers were bedizened with gems, the gifts of his admirers; and his air was that of a man who moved amongst the upper ten thousand' (ibid., 126). Lawrence Macdonald died in Rome on 4 March 1878 and was buried in the protestant cemetery there; his son Alexander carved the marble medallion portrait on his tombstone. A marble bust of Macdonald, also by Alexander, is in the collection of the Accademia Nazionale di San Luca, Rome, and another (exh. RSA 1861) by John Hutchison is in the Royal Scottish Academy, Edinburgh. 


@@@@@


doc= 17446


MacDonald, Patrick (1729-1824), music collector and publisher, was born on 22 April 1729 in Durness manse, Durness, Sutherland, the eldest of four sons and seven daughters of the Revd Murdoch (Murdo) MacDonald ('b'. 1696) and his wife, Agnes Coupar (Cooper). Although a Presbyterian minister, Murdoch was also a musician and Gaelic scholar who provided translations of Alexander Pope and probably transcribed the poems of his neighbour, the Gaelic poet Rob Donn MacKay, whose elegy described Murdoch as '
Ged bu bheartach do chrabhadh, 

Bha do mheas air gach talann, 

'S tu a thuigeadh na dainte, 

'S am fear a dheanadh na rainn. 
(Although rich in piety 

You showed appreciation for every talent, 

And well did you understand the songs 

And the one who composed the verses.) ('MacDonald's Compleat Theory')' Murdoch, 'a most melodious and powerful singer' ('Fasti Scot.'), 'taught his children the principles of music, besides encouraging them in that art' (Glen). Patrick and his brother 
Patrick spent some time from 1737 with his grandfather in Pittenweem, Fife, then returned home, later attending the University of Aberdeen and becoming licensed as a preacher in 1756 before he became a missionary at Strontian, Ross-shire. Patrick, who was 'tall of stature, with a commanding figure, light blue eyes,... remarkable ability... and a striking figure in his district' ('MacDonald of Kilmore'), began his lifelong ministry at Kilmore, south of Oban, Argyll, in 1757, the same year he married Barbara MacDonald, a Roman Catholic, 'who attended neither public nor family worship with her husband' ('Fasti Scot.', 60). They had nine sons and four daughters. 
Patrick wrote his parish's account for Sinclair's 'Statistical Account of Scotland' (1791-9) and published the important 'Collection of Highland Vocal Airs' (1784), which contained music he had collected in Argyll, Perthshire, and, probably with Joseph (who visited Patrick there), in Ross-shire, while the Sutherland section, 'North Highland Airs', was Joseph's own; music from the Hebrides came from correspondents. The successful collection, which went into five editions, contains the first printed versions of various Scottish and Gaelic melodies, as well as music thought to be originally for bagpipe and clarsach (the highland harp), which influenced many later figures, including Robert Burns, who wrote some of his poems to its melodies. 
In contrast, Joseph, who at fourteen already spoke English, Gaelic, and French, and knew Latin, was sent to study in Haddington, then moved to Edinburgh, where he 'had an opportunity of being frequently in company with Signor Pasquali [Nicolo Pasquali, a violinist], and the other masters of that period, and thereby of extending his musical knowledge, and improving his taste', as his father wrote in 1753 ('MacDonald's Compleat Theory'). He also enjoyed painting, and included a picture of a young piper, perhaps a self-portrait, with his manuscript. Although Murdoch had hoped Joseph would become a professional musician, he joined the East India Company, leaving Scotland for Calcutta in 1760. He gave the music he had collected in Sutherland to his sister Florence, but took with him his own collection of bagpipe music, which he planned to publish. The manuscripts were lost after his death, aged twenty-four, from a malignant fever, in May 1763, until Sir John MacGregor Murray, a member of the highland societies of London and Scotland, rediscovered one part in India in 1784. 
The manuscript returned to Patrick, who, to his great credit, was finally able to publish Joseph's 'A Compleat Theory of the Scots Highland Bagpipe' in 1803. As far as is known, Joseph was 'the first piper to ever write on the subject or to attempt to record in notation the music [now known] as piobaireachd [pibroch]' ('MacDonald's Compleat Theory'). Patrick was also farsighted in the presentation of the music, having grace-note stems up and melody stems down, which later became standard pipe notation. The significance of Joseph's work was recognized only in 1948 when Archibald Campbell published a piobaireachd collection, the 'Kilberry Book of Ceol Mor'. Campbell quoted extensively from 'A Compleat Theory', now acknowledged as the earliest primary source, describing it as the 'first reliable written evidence about the Highland bagpipe and Highland bagpipe music, the work of the first practical piper to endeavour to put his knowledge into writing' (ibid.). 
Although Patrick's wealth at his death, on 25 September 1824, may have been substantial, since he had, according to Murdoch, 'one of the best livings in that country, as minister of Kilmore in Lorne', Joseph left, according to Cannon, 'three books of Highland music in Manuscript', '4 vols. of Correlli's Works', '3 Books of Highland Musick in manuscript partly blank', and '1 small box with a parcell of Old Bagpipes'. As Grimble perceived them, 'Patrick and Joseph were reared in a cultural tradition unstifled by political or religious prejudice, just as Rob Donn had been, and their contribution to it was complementary to that of the bard'; their lasting legacies are the invaluable cultural resources which their keen interest and research have provided. 


@@@@@


doc= 17447


MacDonald, Ranald (1756-1832), vicar apostolic of the highland and western districts, was born at Edinburgh, the son of Ranald MacDonald ('fl'. 'c'.1714- 'c'.1756) of Fersit and Margaret MacDonald of Cranachan. He received his education in the Scots College at Douai, and after ordination returned to Scotland in 1780. He was first stationed in Glen Gairn, Aberdeenshire; after two years he was transferred to Lochaber. In 1785 he was sent to Glen Garry, and in 1805 to South Uist, where he remained until 1820. 
MacDonald succeeded Dr Aeneas Chisholm as vicar apostolic of the highland district, his brief to the vicariate, and see of Arindela 'in partibus infidelium' being dated 24 August 1819. In 1827 he became the first vicar apostolic of the newly created western district of Scotland. He was blind in later life, and died at Fort William on 20 September 1832. Initially buried at Fort William, his body was later moved to the Cille Choreil cemetery, Lochaber, Inverness-shire. 


@@@@@


doc= 17448


Macdonald, William Bell (1807-1862), linguist, was born in Glasgow on 24 December 1807, the eldest son of Donald Macdonald, merchant, and his wife, Mary, daughter of William Bell of Rammerscales, near Lockerbie, Dumfriesshire. He was educated at the University of Glasgow, where he graduated BA in 1827. After studying medicine he served as surgeon in Sir Pulteney Malcolm's flagship in the Mediterranean from 1828 to 1831, and was afterwards a commissioner of supply. On 17 March 1839 he married Helen, third daughter of Thomas Johnstone of Underwood. 
Macdonald was a great linguist, making a special study of Coptic, and he could translate an old Scottish song into German, Latin, Greek, or Hebrew. Macdonald published 'Lusus philologici. ex museo Gul. B. Macdonald' (1851), 'Ten Scottish Songs Rendered into German' (1854), and 'Sketch of a Coptic Grammar Adapted for Self-Tuition' (1856). To the Ray Society in 1846 he communicated reports on zoology and botany translated from the German. 
On the death of an uncle named Bell, Macdonald succeeded to the estate of Rammerscales, where he collected a large and valuable library. He was noted for 'his love of learning and his genial hospitality' ('Dumfries Herald'). For some years he represented the burgh of Lochmaben in the general assembly of the Church of Scotland. Macdonald died at 114 West Campbell Street, Glasgow, on 5 December 1862, and was buried in Dalton churchyard. 


@@@@@


doc= 17449


Macdonald, William Russell (1787-1854), writer, was in early life editor and part proprietor of 'Bell's Life in London', the 'Sunday Herald', the 'British Drama', and the 'Literary Humourist', besides contributing largely to other periodicals. 'An entire change of opinion and sentiment', says his obituarist Thomas Butler, 'subsequently induced him to seek other channels for the exercise of his varied literary talents.' He wrote 'Christianity, Protestantism, and Popery, Compared and Contrasted' (1829), published anonymously, and several poems, including 'A Paraphrase of Dodsley's 'Economy of Human Life'' (1817) and 'Fudges in Ireland' among other more ephemeral poems. But the most useful of Macdonald's productions were his numerous books for the young, to which he devoted the latter period of his life until he lost his sight. Among them were 'The Book of Quadrupeds' (1838), 'First and Second Lessons for the Nursery', 'Simple Tales for the Young', and 'The Child's Cheerful Companion'. Macdonald died on 30 December 1854 in Great James Street, Bedford Row, London, leaving a widow and two sons. 


@@@@@


doc= 17450


MacDonnell, Alasdair Ruadh, of Glengarry (c.1725-1761), spy and chief of clan Macdonnell of Glengarry, was the eldest son of John MacDonnell (died 1754), chief of Glengarry, and his wife, the daughter of Colin Mackenzie of Hilton. Known as young Glengarry until he succeeded his father as clan chief, Alasdair was brought up in the Roman Catholic church. He was sent to France while still a boy, and became a captain in Lord John Drummond's Scots Royals regiment in 1743, when the French were planning to invade England under pretext of restoring the Stuarts. There he met Charles Edward Stuart, who had arrived from Rome unannounced to join the expedition, and was with him in Paris among the scheming pro-Charles and pro-Pretender factions after the invasion collapsed. He visited Scotland early in 1745, but returned to France to warn that clan chiefs would support a rising only if backed by French money and arms. By the time he reached France Prince Charles had sailed for Scotland. 
That autumn, young Glengarry sailed with the Scots Royals to reinforce the successful Jacobite army, but the 'Esperance', aboard which he was travelling, was captured off Deal and he was imprisoned in the Tower of London. On his release in 1747 he returned to Paris in dire poverty and in debt to the French government. Prince Charles and the Pretender both refused him financial help, and when he asked to be recommended to succeed Lochiel as colonel of the Scots-French Albany regiment, he was passed over. All the Pretender offered him was a duplicate of his grandfather's warrant as a Jacobite peer -- with an assurance that the document was genuine. 
By the end of 1749 young Glengarry was living in London in dire poverty, secretly trying to obtain permission to settle in Britain. Yet only months later he was in funds, having helped himself to the Loch Arkaig treasure, gold sent from France too late to be of use to the prince in 1746. Glengarry was accused of forging James's signature to obtain this money, and became caught up in the clan quarrels surrounding it, which took him to Rome to present his version of events to the Pretender. 
The historian Andrew Lang exposed the extent of the young Glengarry's treachery, which culminated in betrayal of the Elibank plot to kidnap the Hanoverian royal family in 1752 and the subsequent execution of Archibald Cameron. The British government had Cameron executed on an old warrant instead of bringing him to trial in order to avoid exposing their agent, who now went by the alias Pickle the Spy, from Tobias Smollett's novel 'Peregrine Pickle'. Pickle continued to spy until 1754, when his paymaster, Henry Pelham, died, and he succeeded to the Glengarry chiefship on his father's death in September of the same year. He never married, and on his death in Glengarry in 1761 was succeeded by his nephew, Donald, son of his brother, Aeneas. 
Why or when Pickle began his espionage career is not known, but it is probable that he was driven to it by poverty during his imprisonment in the Tower of London. Continuing lack of funds, clan feuds, and disillusionment with the Stuarts kept him loyal to his spymasters. His brother had been killed accidentally by a Cameron clansman at Falkirk, and he and his father had suffered imprisonment during the rising, yet afterwards neither Prince Charles nor the Pretender would provide financial support or career preferment. Although suspected, Pickle was never exposed during his lifetime; a fact that may owe something to his alignment with the prince's party and Charles Edward's stubborn refusal to accept criticism of members of his faction. Andrew Lang revealed his identity 150 years later with the help of one blindingly simple clue -- in his correspondence and reports Glengarry always wrote 'how' when he meant 'who' (Lang, 'Pickle the Spy', 147, 162). 


@@@@@


doc= 17451


Macdonell, Alastair, of Glengarry, Jacobite first Baron MacDonald (d. 1724), Jacobite army officer, was the eldest son of Ranald Macdonell of Scotus or Scothouse (died 1694), chief of clan Macdonnell of Glengarry, and Flora MacLeod, daughter of Alexander MacLeod of MacLeod. On the death in 1680 of his cousin Aenas Macdonell of Glengarry, Lord Macdonell and Aros, Ranald Macdonell succeeded to the estate of Glengarry and the chieftainship of the Macdonnell clan. Like his father an episcopalian and a loyal supporter of the Stuarts, Alastair Macdonell raised 300-400 men during Viscount Dundee's rising in 1689 and joined Ewen Cameron of Lochiel in Lochaber. Macdonell and Lochiel were considered the leading highland supporters of the rebellion. 
In June 1689 Macdonell refused the Williamite General Hugh Mackay's request to join the government side. At Killiecrankie on 27 July he was the first Jacobite leader to urge Dundee to attack Mackay's army, and carried the Stuart royal banner on the right of the first line amid a troop of thirty horsemen. The clan regiment served in the centre of the line. In battle the Glengarry Macdonnells lost more than sixteen men, including Donald, Alastair's son from his second marriage, to Lady Mary Mackenzie (died 1726), daughter of Kenneth, third earl of Seaforth. With Mary, Macdonell had four more sons; his first marriage to Anne Fraser, daughter of Hugh, seventh Lord Lovat, also produced one daughter, Anne, who married Robert Mackenzie of Applecross. 
On 24 August 1689 Macdonell signed the Jacobite bond of association at Blair Castle in which he promised to levy 200 men. On 3 January of the following year he was declared a rebel by the privy council, and by parliament on 14 June. 
Despite the Jacobite defeats at Dunkeld and Cromdale, Macdonell and his father opposed other Jacobite chiefs who now sought to make accommodations with the Williamite government. The intransigence of the Glengarry Macdonnells was inspired as much by their hatred of the Campbells, including the marquess of Breadalbane, as by their loyalty to James VII. On 15 May 1691 Colonel Hill, governor of Fort William, reported that Macdonell's residence, Invergarry Castle, was being fortified with an earthwork and palisade. This show of defiance, coupled with the remoteness of Invergarry, led Sir John Dalrymple to exclude the Glengarry Macdonnells from his expedition against some of the more notorious Jacobite clans. In fact, the Macdonnells' decision to surrender on terms before 31 December 1691 eliminated any pretext to include the clan as part of the expedition, with the result that Dalrymple's forces were concentrated on the Macdonalds of Glencoe. Following the Glencoe massacre of February 1692 Macdonell was active in gathering evidence against government forces for the Scottish parliament's commission to investigate Dalrymple's actions. 
The death of Ranald of Glengarry in 1694 gave Alastair Macdonell a free hand in running the Glengarry clan. However, his authority was in part circumscribed by the presence of a government garrison at Invergarry after 1692. None the less Glengarry was able to increase his income by cattle droving, which enabled him to purchase Knoydart about 1700. By 1703 Lord Tarbet reported that the 'popishly inclined' Glengarry Macdonnells could muster several hundred men (Brown, 131). On 3 August 1704 Glengarry petitioned the Scottish parliament for the removal of the garrison and for reparations. Though his petition failed, he now dropped his fanatical support of the Jacobite cause. Of all the Macdonald chiefs he alone, having allied himself with Atholl, refused to sign the engagement of 7 May 1707 in favour of the chevalier de St George (James VIII). 
In the wake of the Hanoverian succession Glengarry followed a course similar to that of the earl of Mar. Thus, having sent a letter to the earl promising allegiance to George I, he was one of Mar's first adherents when he raised the Jacobite standard at Braemar on 27 August 1715. In September he led 500 men to reclaim Invergarry Castle from a seventeen-strong garrison. At the battle of Sheriffmuir on 13 November his clansmen held a position to the right of the flank and, following the death of Allan MacDonald of Moidart, chief of Clanranald, Glengarry rallied his wavering clansmen with a call for revenge. Inspired by Glengarry, the Clanranald regiment quickly routed the left wing of the duke of Argyll's army. 
After Sheriffmuir Glengarry returned to Invergarry. However, he was soon a target for the newly zealous whig Simon Fraser, claimant to the chiefship of the Lovat Frasers and the title Lord Lovat. On 9 April 1716 Glengarry submitted at Inverness to the Hanoverian General Cadogan after negotiations with Robert Munro of Foulis the younger. Even so, the clan's refusal to surrender their weapons led government forces to burn down Invergarry on 24 August. As a reward for his loyalty, Glengarry was made Baron MacDonald by the Pretender on 28 September 1716 with descent limited to his heirs male. Among the Jacobite leadership, worried about retaining support after the failure of the 1715 rising, Glengarry became an exemplar of loyalty. 
Two years later the duke of Argyll purchased MacDonald's debts, but came to an accommodation with him instead of claiming his lands. The Jacobite rising of 1719 placed him under suspicion, especially after he refused to appear when summoned for questioning. MacDonald claimed that he feared wrongful arrest and was preoccupied by concern for his dying wife (who lived for several more years). His allegiance to the Stuarts continued, despite his failure to join the rising of 1719. In the following year he was named by the Old Pretender as one of his trustees for managing affairs in Scotland. Lord MacDonald died at Invergarry on 28 October 1724, 'a man of profound judgment and great courage... brave, loyall and wonderfully sagacious and long-sighted' ('Memoirs', ed. Drummond, 255, 261). 
MacDonald was succeeded in the chiefship and the Jacobite peerage by his son John (died 1754), who married a daughter of Colin Mackenzie of Hilton. Like his father he supported the Jacobite cause and offered to raise his clan during the rising of 1745, though he refused to go out himself. Arrested in 1746 during the pacification of the highlands, he was imprisoned at Edinburgh until he successfully petitioned against illegal imprisonment in October 1749. He died on 1 September 1754 and was survived by his eldest son, Alasdair Ruadh MacDonnell, also known as Pickle the Spy. 


@@@@@


doc= 17452


Macdonell, Alexander (1762-1840), vicar apostolic for Upper Canada and Roman Catholic bishop of Kingston, was born on 17 July 1762 in Scotland, somewhere between Inverness and Fort William. His father, Angus Macdonell, was a Roman Catholic; his mother, a member of the Cameron family, was a protestant, but after her husband's death she fulfilled his wish to have their son educated for the Roman Catholic priesthood. Macdonell studied at the Scots College in Paris from about 1775 to 1777 and at the newly organized Scots College in Valladolid, Spain, from 1778 to 1787. At Valladolid on 16 February 1787 he was ordained to the priesthood. 
From 1787 to 1791 Macdonell served as a highland missionary priest among the Gaelic-speaking Roman Catholics of Badenoch. Troubled by the economic distress of the highlands, he helped large numbers of Roman Catholic highlanders to settle in Glasgow as mill workers. Subsequently, when the mill economy slumped, he sought new employment for them by helping to form a regiment of Roman Catholic highlanders, called the Glengarry fencibles. Macdonell was appointed the chaplain of the regiment, contrary to the anti-Catholic laws in effect at that time. The Glengarry fencibles served uneventfully in Guernsey from 1795 to 1798; in Ireland, where they were located from 1798 to 1802, they took an active part in the suppression of the rebellion of 1798. When the regiment was disbanded after the peace of Amiens Macdonell's thoughts turned to schemes to help resettle the men as emigrants in Canada. 
Macdonell arrived in Canada late in 1804. After receiving the approval of his new superior, the French Canadian bishop of Quebec, he settled at St Raphaels in Glengarry county, Upper Canada. In Glengarry and Stormont counties (thus named in 1792) in this part of Upper Canada numbers of Roman Catholic highlanders, many of them Macdonells and some of them relatives of the chaplain, had settled as United Empire loyalists in the 1780s and afterwards as emigrants directly from Scotland: Macdonell was therefore among his 'own people'. According to legend and many printed sources, several hundreds of highlanders from the disbanded Glengarry fencible regiment accompanied him to Canada to settle in Glengarry county, but it seems likely, on the basis of the documentary evidence, that in fact only a limited number came to Upper Canada and very few to Glengarry county. 
At the time of Macdonell's arrival there was only one Roman Catholic bishop, that of Quebec, in the British colonies of North America, and only two priests in Upper Canada. He energetically toured the province, conducting services and encouraging the founding of parishes and the building of churches. Until 1832, he said, he seldom travelled less than 2000 miles a year. At St Raphaels, which remained his home until about 1832, he built a massive stone church which was opened for services in 1826 (destroyed by fire in 1970). As a step towards establishing a diocese of Upper Canada, Macdonell was made vicar apostolic for Upper Canada in 1819 and bishop of Rhesaena 'in partibus infidelium' in 1820. In 1826 he became bishop of Upper Canada with the title of bishop of Kingston or Regiopolis. 
Since his early days Macdonell had enjoyed courting the well born and powerful, among them the distant but distinguished connections of his own relatively obscure family. In Upper Canada he was a friend of the governors and the ruling elite; in 1830 he was named to the legislative council of the province, and he had important friends in the North West Company of fur traders. The bishop's firm toryism, which made him a pillar of the state in all emergencies, was coupled with the belief, often emphasized in his correspondence with men of power, that it was in the public interest to maintain and increase government financial support (begun just after his arrival in Upper Canada) for the growing Roman Catholic church. In the area of Scottish settlement in eastern Upper Canada he was a friend and patron of the humble, both Roman Catholic and protestant, and was always ready to lend a helping hand in case of problems with the complicated land-granting procedures. His relations with protestants, both lay and clergy, were marked by a friendliness and tolerance underlined in the memory of later generations by the long period of sectarian strife which set in soon after his death. As a highly visible public figure, loved especially by the highland Scots, who remembered him as the Big Bishop or Easbuig Mor, he merged into folklore in his lifetime, and innumerable legends and anecdotes about him survive. Macdonell was a most eloquent and emotional letter writer whose florid romanticism of literary style captured the character of the man himself. The town of Alexandria, Ontario, which grew up around a grist mill he founded about 1817, is named after him. He died at Dumfries on 14 January 1840, on one of his return journeys to Britain. The body was buried in Edinburgh, but in 1861 was removed and reinterred on 26 July in St Mary's Cathedral, Kingston, Canada. 


@@@@@


doc= 17453


Macdonell, Alexander Ranaldson, of Glengarry (1773-1828), chief of clan Macdonell or Macdonnell of Glengarry and soldier, was born on 15 September 1773 at Invergarry, Inverness-shire, the first of nine children of Duncan Macdonell ('c'.1744-1788), chief of clan Macdonell of Glengarry, and Marjory Grant (1744-1792), of Dalvey. General Sir James Macdonell GCB (d. 1857) was his brother. In July 1788 he succeeded as chief of clan Macdonell, one of the great branches of clan Donald, inheriting estates stretching from Glengarry in the Great Glen to Knoydart on the Atlantic coast. Traditionally his clan was Roman Catholic but the chiefly house had become protestant, allowing Macdonell to matriculate at University College, Oxford, in October 1790. 
In February 1793, following the outbreak of war with France, Macdonell received a captain's commission to recruit a company for the Strathspey fencibles, raised by his kinsman Sir James Grant. In August 1794, while still only twenty, he received a colonel's commission to raise the first fencible regiment of Glengarry Highlanders. Recruits were drawn principally from the Glengarry estates, threats of eviction being used where persuasion failed. His earlier attempt to raise an avowedly Catholic regiment failed because of official concern about whether such a unit would be publicly acceptable. Macdonell served with his regiment on garrison duty in Guernsey until August 1796, when he resigned command. His ambition for a career in the regular army was frustrated by opposition from the commander-in-chief, the duke of York -- possibly inspired by adverse reports from Macdonell's service with the Grant fencibles and by concerns about his character. 
When the Glengarry fencibles were disbanded in 1802 Macdonell's failure to honour his earlier pledge to find land for the men resulted in a mass emigration to Canada led by Father Alexander Macdonell, the regimental chaplain, later first bishop of Upper Canada. In 1803 Macdonell raised the 4th Inverness volunteer battalion, later to become the 2nd Inverness-shire local militia. He continued in command until the local militia units were stood down in 1814. 
Macdonell, whose Gaelic nickname Alasdair Fiadhaich (wild, or fierce, Alasdair) persuasively suggests his nature, was a man of violent disposition. In May 1798, following a quarrel at a ball, he fought a duel near Fort George, Inverness-shire, with Lieutenant Norman MacLeod of the 42nd foot. MacLeod died of his wounds and Macdonell stood trial for murder at the high court in Edinburgh in August 1798. He was acquitted, the jury's justification being his attempt to be reconciled to MacLeod before the exchange of shots. In 1807 he was found guilty of assaulting a tenant and ordered to pay $2000 damages, the court also questioning his fitness to continue as a justice of the peace and deputy lord lieutenant of Inverness-shire. 
Macdonell travelled on the continent in 1799-1800 and suffered a mental breakdown in Vienna, resulting in his temporary confinement in the Narrenturm, the city's asylum. Following his return home, on 20 January 1802 he married Rebecca (1779-1841), the second daughter of Sir William Forbes of Pitsligo, an Edinburgh banker. They had thirteen children; six of their seven sons died in infancy. The family homes were at Invergarry House, near Fort Augustus; Inverie, in Knoydart; and Garry Cottage, Perth. 
Macdonell of Glengarry -- Mac Mhic Alasdair to give him his Gaelic patronymic -- was a passionate advocate of a fast-vanishing traditional highland way of life, travelling with his 'tail' -- the traditional highland chief's band of retainers. He maintained a family bard, and in 1815 founded the Society of True Highlanders, a coterie of like-minded highland grandees. His apparently genuine attachment to Gaeldom and tradition did not however preclude his clearing much of his land for the introduction of large-scale sheep farming -- a policy inimical to preserving the traditional way of life for his tenants, whose numbers fell sharply during his period of control. Walter Scott, who knew him well and probably modelled the figure of Fergus MacIvor in 'Waverley' on him, described him as 'a kind of Quixote in our age... He seems to have lived a century too late' ('The Journal of Sir Walter Scott', ed. D. Douglas, 2 vols., 1891, 1.120). 
Macdonell pursued a bitter dispute over the title of chief of Clanranald with Ranald George MacDonald of Clanranald -- a controversy centring on the alleged illegitimacy of a sixteenth-century Clanranald. Macdonell vainly applied to the Court of Session to have Clanranald's arms declared invalid, and frequently signed himself Macdonell of Glengarry and Clanranald, asserting his house's claim to the headship of clan Donald. 
Although aggressive estate management had increased his rents, an extravagant lifestyle faced Macdonell with serious financial problems. On 17 January 1828 he was travelling to Edinburgh on the steamship 'Stirling Castle', to take legal advice about his finances, when it ran aground in Loch Linnhe. Macdonell, anxious for the safety of his two daughters, who had been taken ashore, jumped overboard, struck his head on a rock, and died later that day at Inverscaddle. He was buried in the family mausoleum at Kilfinnan, Inverness-shire, on 1 February. 
The trustees for his son, AEneas Ranaldson, a nineteen-year-old Edinburgh University student, found debts amounting to $80,000. Invergarry House was let; Garry Cottage in Perth was sold. In 1836 the Glengarry estate was sold, and later the adjacent Glen Quoich estate also was sold. Such was the complexity of Macdonell's finances that it was not until 1847 that an inventory of his personal estate was completed. 


@@@@@


doc= 17454


Macdonell, Sir James (d. 1857), army officer, third son of Duncan Macdonell (died 1788), chief of clan Macdonnell of Glengarry, and his wife, Marjorie Grant, and brother of Colonel Alexander Ranaldson Macdonell of Glengarry, was born at Glengarry House, Inverness-shire. He entered the army as ensign in an independent company in 1793. He became lieutenant in the 78th Ross-shire Buffs on its formation in 1794, captain-lieutenant in the 101st (Colonel Fullarton's) the same year, and captain in the 17th light dragoons on 1 December 1795, in which regiment he commanded a troop for nine years. In 1804 a new second battalion was formed for the 78th Ross-shire Buffs at Fort George, near Inverness, of which Macdonell was appointed one of the majors. He was with the battalion under Sir John Moore at Hythe, and served with it in Naples and Sicily, including the campaign in Calabria in 1806 and the battle of Maida, and in the unsuccessful expedition to Egypt in 1807, where he distinguished himself by surprising a Turkish battery near Alexandria. He became lieutenant-colonel in the 78th on 7 September 1809, and was briefly appointed to the Portuguese army staff. On 21 February 1811 he was made lieutenant-colonel of 2nd garrison battalion, and on 8 August of the same year he exchanged, as captain and lieutenant-colonel, into the 2nd foot (Coldstream) Guards. He served with the 1st battalion Coldstream Guards in the Peninsula from May 1812 to the end of January 1814, including the battles of Salamanca, Vitoria, Nivelle, and Nive, and commanded the 2nd battalion in the Netherlands from May to September 1814. He was made CB on 4 June 1815. 
The night before the battle of Waterloo Macdonell was sent with some companies of his regiment and the 3rd (Scots) guards to occupy the chateau of Hougoumont, the garden and orchard of which were defended by other companies under Alexander George Fraser, Lord Saltoun. Macdonell received the duke of Wellington's high praise for the determination with which he held that post -- the key of the duke's position -- during sustained attacks by the French in the early part of the battle. On one occasion, when the French were forcing their way into the courtyard, Macdonell, who was wounded, and a small party of officers and soldiers closed the gates on them by sheer physical strength. For these services he was made KCB (20 April 1838) and received the Waterloo medal. 
Macdonell served in the Coldstream Guards, of which he became regimental lieutenant-colonel and colonel in 1825, until he was promoted to major-general in 1830. He commanded the Armagh district from 1831 to 1838. He commanded the brigade of guards sent out to Canada when Lord Durham was appointed governor-in-chief there during the troubles of 1838. Macdonell succeeded to the command of the troops in Canada, which he held until promoted to lieutenant-general's rank in 1841. He became a full general in 1854, and was made GCB in 1855. He was a KCH (1837), had Austrian and Russian decorations, and was colonel in succession of the 79th (Cameron Highlanders) and 71st (Highland) light infantry. Macdonell died at 15 Wilton Place, London, on 15 May 1857. 


@@@@@


doc= 17455


Macdonell, James (1841-1879), journalist, was born on 21 April 1841 at Dyce, Aberdeenshire, and baptized there on 2 May, the eldest son of James Macdonell (1810-1858) of the Glengarry Macdonells and Rachel Allardyce. His father was a Roman Catholic and his mother a protestant. An exceptionally bright scholar in local parish schools in Dufftown and Rhynie, the death of his father in 1858 forced Macdonell from Bell's school, Inverness, into a clerkship at Messrs Piries' paper mills. He also doubled as an excise officer, his father's former occupation. Already a precocious book reviewer, in 1858 Macdonell was introduced to the mysteries of newspapers at the 'Aberdeen Free Press', an advanced organ of political Liberalism. Here, as a leader writer in embryo, he formulated the main studies of his life: ecclesiastical controversies and church dialectics. He became a lifelong passionate Francophile, admiring French literature, history, and character. 
Noted as an intensely earnest young man, easily carried away by his subject but blessed by a brilliant literary style, in 1862 Macdonell moved to the notoriously sectarian Edinburgh 'Daily Review'. After less than a year he saw himself as 'pitchforked... at a ridiculously early age' (Nicoll, 97) into the editorship of the 'Northern Daily Express' in Newcastle at $150 per annum. Circulation rose rapidly, but a buy-out by William Saunders in 1865 hastened his departure to Fleet Street. Macdonell had reacted fiercely to the decision to use syndicated news (including leaders, his own province), which had resulted in the paper's politics coming from London daily by train, in a box. In a letter to William McCombie dated 1 May 1865, the youthful editor objected to the London establishment owned by Saunders where 'a staff of journalists prepare the news of the day, and write leaders on the principal current topics. The matter thus obtained is put in type; then stereotyped... and then the blocks are sent by afternoon train to Plymouth, Hull, and other places in which the firm have papers of their own.... Not one single leading article will be written in this office.... For Mr Saunders thinks... that it is not the duty of a journalist to write strongly, or to commit his paper to the advocacy of any opinion or any principle. (Nicoll, 108-9)' Aged twenty-four, Macdonell reluctantly declined a senior post on 'The Scotsman' and thus sacrificed certain Scottish prominence in favour of an assistant editorship on the 'Daily Telegraph'. Thanks to his friend Hugh Gilzean Reid (1836-1911), the northern newspaper magnate, he secured the position of 'confidential helper' to Edward Levy (1833-1916), a son of the principal proprietor. His first article in a national daily appeared on 8 July 1865, inevitably on a Scottish topic. Well-versed in philosophy and church history, Macdonell brought a real highland charge to the 'Telegraph' from 1865 to 1875. Numbered by Matthew Arnold among the 'magnificent roaring of the young lions' of that paper (Nicoll, 199), his cogently argued leaders best met the needs of the day, perceived as perfectly formed literary gems in essay form. In addition to visits to war-threatened Paris in 1870 and 1871, he was at this time writing six leaders a week for his editor, another for the 'Leeds Mercury', and one for the 'Levant Herald'. 
Eager to find the widest possible recognition Macdonell, after a trial period beginning 26 March 1875 as a leader writer on 'The Times', parted from the 'Daily Telegraph' on 4 July of that year, moving immediately to Printing House Square. Within five days he brought his graceful literary style, scholarship, keen analysis, and cultural breadth to topics as diverse as Burma, Spain, Russia, Canada, and ironclad warships. Now the consummate journalist enjoying a European audience, occasionally Macdonell's pronounced radicalism proved intrusive. His powerful material on current affairs, moral theories, and religious trends in 'The Spectator', 'Fraser's Magazine', and the 'North British Review' between 1865 and 1873 had no place in 'The Thunderer'. But, unlike his previous employers whose edict against journalistic freedom was absolute, the editorial diaries kept by J. T. Delane reveal how leading articles were assigned to the writers best inclined to debate and liberal expression. Not always, however, was he in harmony with the paper's direction. Most notably, Gladstone's handling of the eastern question found sympathetic support from Macdonell, ardent to commit 'The Times' to a pro-Russian line. An irate Delane had to curtail a much needed holiday with the prince of Wales at Dunrobin Castle in October 1876 to telegraph that his chief foreign affairs writer should be 'shunted to safer topics' (Nicoll, 294). 
Macdonell married Anna Jemima, daughter of Daniel Harrison, on 22 August 1871 in Beckenham, Kent; they had three sons, including Sir Philip James Macdonell. Her sister, Agnes, in 1873 married his younger brother, Sir John Macdonell (1845-1921), a barrister and useful contributor concurrently to 'The Times' on legal and philosophical subjects. Macdonell died suddenly at his home, 78 Gower Street, London, on 2 March 1879, widely revered by his contemporaries in the media and politics. Even when ill, in the year running up to his death he wrote often for days without a break on French politics, and his posthumous volume of collected essays, 'France since the First Empire' (1879), edited by his politically aware and articulate wife, admirably summarizes his power of expression and high culture. He was buried on 6 March in Beckenham, Kent. 


@@@@@


doc= 17456


Mac Duinnshleibhe, Cormac (fl. c.1459), physician and translator of medical texts, was descended from a royal family of twelfth-century Ulster (modern counties Down and Antrim), who were overthrown by the Anglo-Norman invaders. A branch of the family migrated to Tir Conaill (modern co. Donegal) where they became hereditary physicians to the O Domhnaill. Mac Duinnshleibhe calls himself 'basiller a fisigeacht' ('bachelor of medicine'; BL, Arundel MS 333, fol. 113'v'25), a qualification recorded in a number of the scribal colophons that name him as translator, one of which (NL Ire., MS G 12, p. 30b13-19) also credits him with a degree in arts. The identity of the university from which he graduated is not specified. 
Nine translations from Latin into Irish are attributed to Mac Duinnshleibhe, all of them undated. British Library, Arundel MS 333, fols. 112-13, is a holograph copy of his translation of a section of the 'Diete particulares' of Isaac Judaeus (died 959), written for Deinis O Eachthigheirn, member of a Munster family, and belongs, apparently, to the second half of the fifteenth century. His translation of Gualterus Agilon's ('fl'. 'c'.1250) 'De dosibus medicinarum' (published as S. Sheahan, 'An Irish Version of Gaulterus 'De dosibus'', 1938), made for Diarmaid (mac Domhnaill) O Leighin, member of an important medical family in Munster, was completed by 29 March 1459, the date of the anonymous scribe's colophon to the copy of the work found in British Library, Harley MS 546, fols. 1'r'-11'r'. 
Three of Mac Duinnshleibhe's works comprise translations of treatises by the distinguished physician and professor of medicine in the University of Montpellier, Bernard de Gordon ('c'.1258- 'c'.1318). His rendering of Gordon's 'De pronosticis' (1295) (Dublin, Royal Irish Academy, MS 439 (3 C 19), fols. 241-88) had been completed by 'c'.1468, the date of writing of the digest of that work found in National Library of Ireland, MS G 11, pp. 425-38. His major work, a translation of Gordon's monumental 'Lilium medicine' (1303-5; Dublin, Royal Irish Academy, MS 443 (24 P 14), pp. 1-327), which achieved great popularity among the medical fraternity of the Gaelic-speaking world, was completed by 1482, the date of writing of the copy of the work contained in British Library, Egerton MS 89, fols. 13'r'a1-192'v'b13. The earliest extant copy of his rendering of Gordon's short treatise, 'De decem ingeniis curandorum morborum' (1299) (National Library of Ireland, MS G 12, pp. 23a1-30b19), is evidently of early sixteenth-century date. 
Four further works comprise: a translation of the first tractate of the French surgeon Gui de Chauliac's 'Chirurgia' (1363) (NL Ire., MS G 453, fols. 110-27; TCD, MS 1436, pp. 17a-35a), a brief extract from which occurs in British Library, Arundel MS 333, fol. 37'v'a17-21 in a scribal hand dated 18 March 1514 (fol. 35'v'20-29); a rendering of Bertrandus's 'Lucidarius, vel, Almagest', a unique copy of which is found in Oxford, Corpus Christi College, MS 129, fols. 56'v'14-57'v'2 (cf. Bodl. Oxf., MS Digby 79, fols. 176'r'1-177'r'16), written in 1527; a translation of a section of the 'Rosa Anglica' ('c'.1314) of John Gaddesden, the earliest extant copy of which (NL Ire., MS G 12, pp. 14-22) is evidently of early sixteenth-century date; and, finally, a translation of an opusculum of St Thomas Aquinas, 'De operationibus occultis naturae', a unique copy of which is found in the sixteenth-century manuscript (NL Scot., Adv. MS 72.1.12, fol.10'r'a1-10'v'b36). 


@@@@@


doc= 17457


MacDonnell, Alexander, third earl of Antrim (1615-1699), army officer and politician, was the younger son of Randal MacDonnell, Viscount Dunluce and first earl of Antrim (d. 1636), and Alice O'Neill (died 'c'.1664), and heir to his elder brother, Randal MacDonnell, first marquess of Antrim (1609-1683). Reared at Dunluce Castle in co. Antrim and fluent in both Irish and English, he apparently received no formal education though he spent three years (1636-9) touring France, Germany, and Italy. On his father's death in 1636 he inherited the barony and castle of Glenarm which, in return for 'a certain sum of money yearly for his maintenance', he handed over to his elder brother ('Fifth Report', HMC, 6). 
With the outbreak of the Irish rising in 1641 MacDonnell, who initially took no part in the insurrection, hurried first to Edinburgh and later to London in search of further instructions about how best to proceed. The following year he threw in his lot with the Irish confederates and raised a regiment for the Catholic cause (hence he became known as Colonel Alexander). In 1644 he helped to recruit troops for his brother's expeditionary force to Scotland and in 1645, again acting on his brother's behalf, promised to send 1200 men to Flanders in return for arms and munitions. However, as the 1640s progressed he became increasingly embroiled in confederate politics and, after 1644, was regularly returned to the general assembly and sat as the representative for Ulster on its executive body, the supreme council. He was considered a moderate and served as a member of the committee of treaty, whose job it was to broker a lasting peace with the king. Though he initially supported the papal nuncio Rinuccini's censure of the first Ormond peace (1646), he later threw in his lot (unlike his brother) with the peace party and in 1649 became a commissioner of trust mediating between Ormond and the disbanded confederates. After 1651 he served in the army of Ulster under the bishop of Clogher until Sir Theophilus Jones captured him. 
MacDonnell spent the early 1650s imprisoned in the Tower of London before returning to Ireland. Despite the fact that his co. Antrim estates had been confiscated and he had been granted -- in lieu of them -- 7000 acres in co. Galway, he appears to have spent the remainder of the 1650s at Glenarm struggling to pay off his brother's debts (for which he stood jointly liable). In 1665 the 'Act of Settlement and Explanation' finally restored him to his lands (35,345 statute acres) in the barony of Glenarm and the same year he married Elizabeth Annesley (died 1669), daughter of the staunchly protestant statesman Arthur, first earl of Anglesey (the marriage portion of $3000 was used to help pay off some of his brother's debts). The union proved disastrous. According to one account Elizabeth 'was most arrogantly rude with her husband, and he, of a pleasant humour, would onely and usually return in his Irish language, 'how can it be otherwise with a man that has maryed the daughter of the devil'' (Hill, 361). Elizabeth died in 1669 and later, aged sixty-five, MacDonnell married Helena (died 1710), daughter of Sir John Burke of Derrymaclaughney and a granddaughter of the sixth earl of Clanricarde, with whom he had a daughter, Mary, and a son and heir, Randal (later fourth earl of Antrim). 
On the death of his elder brother in 1683 MacDonnell became third earl of Antrim, inheriting an estate that Richard Dobbs described as 'impaired, mangled, and engaged in debts, mortgages, grants and otherwise' (Hill, 377). During the brief reign of James II he enjoyed prominence as a privy councillor and lord lieutenant of co. Antrim and during the 'Wars of the Three Kings' he sided with the Catholic monarch. Late in 1688 the king ordered him to garrison his troops in Londonderry, but the sight of Antrim's redshanks (many of them over 6 feet tall) so terrified the inhabitants of the city that thirteen young apprentices shut the gates. In fact this 'vast swarm of Highland and Irish Roman Catholics' was commanded by MacDonnell's illegitimate son Daniel (who, after Limerick, served in France) and not the aged MacDonnell who did, however, take his seat in the 1689 parliament (R. Simpson, 'The Annals of Derry', 1847, facs. edn, 1987). In 1689 he was outlawed in England but his confiscated estates were finally restored to him in 1697 under the terms of the second article of Limerick. For much of the 1690s he acted as the London agent for the remaining Catholic Irish landowners. MacDonnell died on 11 June 1699 near the capital and was buried at Holywell, Flintshire, Wales. Though he lived most of his life under the shadow of his brother, he was an interesting and important figure in his own right and serves as an excellent example of a seventeenth-century Irish Catholic who survived the vicissitudes of two major civil wars with his lands intact. 


@@@@@


doc= 17458


Macdonnell, Alexander (1798-1835), chess player, born in Belfast, the son of Alexander Macdonnell (died 21 April 1843), a Belfast physician, was intended for a career in commerce, and carried on an extensive business at Demerara between 1820 and 1830. He became a vigorous propagandist for the slave-owning sugar planters in the West Indies, publishing an account of the condition of slaves in Demerara (1824), a defence of the corn laws, navigation laws, and commercial protection generally (1826), and a justification of the West Indian legislatures' handling of the slavery question (1826). Soon after 1830 he was appointed secretary to the West India Committee of Merchants, his duties being to watch the parliamentary progress of bills connected with the West Indies, notably the emancipation of slaves. 
Macdonnell was trained as a chess player by William Lewis, but, once he had got over the odds of 'pawn and move', Lewis refused to meet him on equal terms, and from the foundation of the Westminster chess club in 1831 Macdonnell was tacitly admitted to be the best English player. 
In June 1834 Louis Charles Mahe de Labourdonnais, secretary of the Paris chess club, and a pupil of the old French champion Alexandre des Chapelles, visited Britain and challenged Macdonnell's supremacy. Then commenced at the Westminster club in Bedford Street a match that was 'a landmark in the history of the game... analysed by leading masters to an extent not previously known' (Hooper and Whyld, 56). Labourdonnais spoke no English and Macdonnell no French, and the only word that passed between them was 'check'. The struggle began with three drawn games of great length, thanks to Macdonnell's frequent agonized pondering of a single move over an hour and a half. Slowly, however, the Frenchman obtained the advantage, and of some eighty-five games he won about forty-four, thirteen games being drawn (accounts of the details vary slightly). Commentators have generally criticized Macdonnell's openings, which in fact were so habitually dangerous that he generally lost when playing white. He gained, however, a period of advantage by adopting the Evans gambit, of whose inventor, Captain William Evans, he had been an early victim, probably in 1825 or 1826. The fiftieth game of the series 'may be called the greatest game ever won by a British player' (Matthews, 19). The duel was at length interrupted by Labourdonnais's recall to Paris. Before the antagonists could again meet, Macdonnell -- who was suffering from Bright's disease -- died, at the boarding-house in Tavistock Square where he had long lived, on 14 September 1835. He was buried in Kensal Green cemetery, where five years later his great opponent was also interred. Macdonnell was unmarried. The first great British player, he had scaled the heights after only a few years' serious acquaintance with chess, lending credence to George Walker's belief that a little more experience would have made him a match for Labourdonnais in what was effectively a world championship contest. The time, however, was not afforded him. 


@@@@@


doc= 17459


McDonnell, Sir Alexander, baronet (1794-1875), civil servant, eldest son of James McDonnell MD and his wife, Elizabeth, daughter of J. Clarke, was born at Belfast. He gained a king's scholarship at Westminster School in 1809, and was elected in 1813 to Christ Church, Oxford, where he held a studentship until 1826. He graduated BA in 1816 and MA in 1820, and won four university prizes -- those for Latin and English verse and for the Latin and English essays -- an accumulation of honours only once before achieved. He was called to the bar at Lincoln's Inn on 23 November 1824, went the midland circuit, attended the Leicester and Northampton sessions, and served as a commissioner of inquiry into public charities. He married in 1826 Barbara (died 1865), eldest daughter of Hugh Montgomery of Benvarden, co. Antrim, and widow of Richard Staples. They had no children. 
McDonnell was of an exceedingly sensitive temperament, and broke down in pleading a case before a committee of the House of Lords. Mortified beyond expression, he renounced the bar, returned to Ireland, and accepted the position of chief clerk in the chief secretary's office under Thomas Drummond (1797-1840). In 1839 he was appointed resident commissioner of the Board of Education, and quickly assumed an influential role. While himself an ardent protestant, he persistently sought to provide for his countrymen the religious instruction of their choice. He was made a privy councillor of Ireland in 1846, resigned his commissionership in December 1871, and was created a baronet on 20 January 1872. Study of the classics and history formed the chief solace of his retirement. He died at 32 Upper Fitzwilliam Street, Dublin, on 21 January 1875, and was buried at Kilsharvan, near Drogheda. A statue of him by Farrell stands in Marlborough Street School, Dublin. 


@@@@@


doc= 17460


Mac Donaill, Sean Clarach (1691-1754), Irish poet and scribe, was born near Charleville (Rath Luirc), in northern co. Cork. The epithet 'Clarach' was apparently descriptive of his large forehead, and not a toponym linking him with co. Clare. In his youth he lived in the parish of Baile an Teampaill, co. Cork, moving to a farm and mill at Killtoohig (Cill Tuathaigh), south of Charleville, after his marriage. He may subsequently have lived in Charleville itself. Traditional sources record that his wife, Agnes White, was a protestant, and that the marriage was not a success. No information about his family has been traced. 
Mac Donaill himself records that he was educated alongside Richard Walsh, who later served as Catholic bishop of Cork from 1748 to 1763 and was a patron of Gaelic scholars and poets. It has been speculated that both were educated at the school established in Charleville by Roger Boyle, earl of Orrery. Mac Donaill was certainly well educated and knew English, Latin, and Greek as well as his native Irish language. He was both a poet and a scribe. The few extant manuscripts in his hand contain historical material, including a 1720 transcript of Geoffrey Keating's 'Foras feasa ar Eirinn'. According to Sylvester O'Halloran, his former student, Mac Donaill was writing a history of Ireland in the Irish language towards the end of his life but illness prevented him from completing it. The bulk of his manuscripts were reputedly destroyed by the sheriff's men. 
Mac Donaill became chief of the court of poetry at Rath Luirc and maintained contact with similar assemblies at Carraig na bhFear, co. Cork, and at Lios na Righ in Bruree in the neighbouring county of Limerick. These assemblies were social gatherings as well as cultural and perhaps political occasions. Mac Donaill's poetic associates included Sean O Tuama, Aindreas Mac Craith, Nioclas O Donaill OFM, Liam Inglis, Liam Rua Mac Coitir, and Liam dall O hIfearnain. Over sixty of his Irish poetic compositions survive, and he features in more than a dozen poems by his contemporaries, including songs lamenting his death written by Sean na Raithineach, Sean O Tuama, and Eamonn de bhFal. Mac Donaill wrote political poetry in Irish in support of the Jacobite cause. Many of these poems were set to popular tunes and provided commentary, sometimes allegorical, on contemporary political developments. His vision poems continually expressed confidence in the Jacobite cause, even after the defeat at Culloden in 1746. He also used poetry to support the attempt by young Robert, earl of Clancarty, to regain the MacCarthy family's estates in 1735. He engaged in poetic controversy with Eoghan O Caoimh, a Cork poet many years senior to him, and later with another Munster poet, Tadhg Gaelach O Suilleabhain. He composed poems in praise of and laments on the deaths of prominent local clergy and fellow poets and wrote informed songs about the war in Europe in the 1740s. To the tunes of well-known Jacobite airs he rejoiced in the triumphs of Philip V, king of Spain. A satire written after the death of James Dawson drew the wrath of the Dawson family and forced Mac Donaill to leave his home temporarily about 1737-8. Some sources suggest that he spent time overseas, but a poem composed by Sean O Tuama and the evidence of manuscript annotations indicate that he may simply have pretended to have left his home. Two 'exile' poems were composed in co. Tipperary and co. Clare respectively. His reputed role as a recruiting officer for the Jacobites would explain the need for him to be secretive about his movements. 
After his death at Charleville on 7 January 1754 Mac Donaill was buried at Holy Cross cemetery, Ballysallagh, close to Charleville, where the Latin inscription on his tombstone recorded that he had been 'a poet of no common genius'. 


@@@@@


doc= 17461


MacDonnell, Randal, first earl of Antrim (d. 1636), chieftain and landowner, was the fourth of the five sons of Sorley Boy MacDonnell (b. in or before 1508, d. 1590), Scots-Irish chieftain, and his wife, Mary (died 1582), daughter of Con O'Neill, first earl of Tyrone. He was apparently called Arranagh owing to the fact that as a child he was fostered by the Stewart family of the Scottish island of Arran. In 1597 he helped his elder brother Sir James MacDonnell fortify Dunluce and defeat an English expedition commanded by Sir John Chichester, governor of Carrickfergus. In April 1601, on Sir James's death, MacDonnell became chieftain of the Glens and Route in preference to Sir James's teenage son. In December he joined Hugh O'Neill, second earl of Tyrone, on his march south with 400 men. Only thirty survived their defeat at Kinsale. In August 1602 he submitted to Lord Deputy Mountjoy, undertaking to serve against Tyrone with 500 foot and forty horse at his own expense, and was knighted. 
On 23 May 1603 MacDonnell was granted his territories as a personal estate by Mountjoy. Initially James I favoured the claim of the clan chieftain, MacDonald of Dunyvaig, but in 1604 MacDonnell's grant was confirmed and Rathlin included. Subsequently the Dublin administration reduced the grants to the Ulster chieftains, excluding church lands and significant strongholds. In 1606 Dunluce, Olderfleet Castle at Larne, three-quarters of the fishing rights on the Bann, and church lands, including the priory of Coleraine, were removed from MacDonnell, leaving him 333,907 acres stretching from Larne to Coleraine. Dunluce was returned to him in 1615. 
About 1604 MacDonnell married Alice ('b'. 1582/3, died in or after 1663), Tyrone's daughter with his second wife, Siobhan (or Joanna). He was acquitted of complicity in the 'flight of the earls' in 1607, and is notable for avoiding the embroilments which caused the flight or arrest of most Ulster chieftains by 1610, leaving almost six counties available for the plantation. This collapse of Gaelic society left MacDonnell as the greatest landowner in Ulster. He dealt astutely with the settlers, selling 2000 acres around Coleraine to the Irish Society and supplying them with building lime free of charge. In consequence he became an alderman, received a townhouse as a 'retreat for his life', and avoided further territorial encroachments. 
In 1614 Alexander and Sorley, the elder sons of Sir James MacDonnell, plotted with certain dispossessed Ulster families to overthrow the new order. The conspiracy failed, and Sorley fled into exile. MacDonnell broke discontent by generosity: he brought up Sorley's son in his household, and granted Alexander 15,000 acres. Long leases for large tracts of land were made to MacDonnell kinsmen, other highland families which had come to Antrim in the sixteenth century, and important local septs. Simultaneously he gave much land to incoming lowland Scots. Rabbit warrens, deer parks, salt pans, quarries, manor courts, and markets were established, and the horse collar and heavy plough, previously unknown in Gaelic Ulster, were introduced. There was also extensive building, initiated both by himself and by leading tenants. Fortified dwellings in a distinctly Scottish style, mills, roads, townships, bridges, and imposing residences at Dunluce and Glenarm were erected. His foster family, the Stewarts, became tenants and land agents, as did his Scottish cousins the MacNaughtens. Their understanding of developing Scottish society must have aided this transition from traditional Gaelic society into a modern monetary economy. 
MacDonnell inherited lands on Kintyre from his brother, lost them in 1607, attempted to acquire Islay about 1613, and again in 1627, and to buy Kintyre in 1635. This probably reflects an ambition to revive the clan Donald south under his leadership. In important respects he remained strongly part of native culture: his sons were brought up in the 'highland manner', wearing neither hats nor shoes, and speaking Irish; he gave estates to two bards who composed poetry and legally useful documents for him; and he was a staunch, if discreet, Catholic, erecting on his lands three churches for the Church of Ireland but only a chapel for the Franciscans. However, he also built chapels at the Catholic shrines of Brideswell, co. Roscommon, and Lough Derg, co. Donegal, to which he made pilgrimages, and validated the presence of priests on his lands by declaring them his chaplains. He supported a Franciscan mission to the western isles, and gave $300 to their Louvain college when his illegitimate son Daniel became its guardian. 
Two other illegitimate sons also joined the Franciscans at Louvain, while a fourth, Maurice, followed MacDonnell's nephew Sorley into the O'Neill regiment in Spanish Flanders. Links were thus maintained with the exiled Irish, and MacDonnell's two legitimate sons, Randal MacDonnell, the future marquess of Antrim, and his younger brother Alexander, toured the continent extensively before spending many years at the Stuart court, while an illegitimate daughter, Alice, married Sir Phelim O'Neill's brother, both men becoming prominent rebels in the 1640s. MacDonnell, however, always avoided confrontation with the authorities, and was anxious that his legitimate sons should be integrated members of Stuart society, encouraging them to find wealthy English or Scottish wives. 
MacDonnell was created Viscount Dunluce on 28 May 1618 and earl of Antrim on 12 December 1620. He died at Dunluce on 10 December 1636 and was buried at Bonamargey Abbey, Ballycastle. His will divided the estate between his legitimate sons. Randal inherited the baronies of Dunluce and Kilconway, and Alexander that of Glenarm. His five legitimate daughters were left $2800 each. Three married into important Old English Catholic families of the pale: Anne married Christopher Nugent, Viscount Devlin, then William Fleming, nineteenth Baron Slane; Mary married Lucas, Viscount Dillon, then Oliver Plunket, sixth Baron Louth; Catherine married Edward Plunket of Castlecor, co. Meath. By contrast Sarah, the third daughter, married Neale Oge O'Neill of Killileagh, then Sir Charles O'Connor Sligo, then Donald MacCarthy More. The youngest, Rose, married in 1642 Colonel George Gordon, brother to the earl of Sutherland, who had come to Antrim that year with the invading covenanting army. He helped her brother Randal escape from imprisonment at Carrickfergus in 1643. 
MacDonnell's career was highly unusual. Unlike Tyrone and many others, he successfully made the transition from chieftain to modernizing landowner. At his death, astonishingly, he left no significant debts. James I expressed his administration's general satisfaction when he remarked that MacDonnell's 'civil and orderly life' allowed the 'reformation and civilising of those rude parts' of Ulster (James I to Chichester, 6 May 1613, BL, Add. MS 4794, fol. 233). 


@@@@@


doc= 17462


MacDonnell, Randal, marquess of Antrim (1609-1683), politician, was the eldest legitimate son of Randal MacDonnell, first earl of Antrim (d. 1636), and Alice ('b'. 1582/3, died in or after 1663), daughter of Hugh O'Neill, second earl of Tyrone (c.1550-1616), magnate and rebel, and his second wife, Siobhan (or Joanna). He had one younger brother, Alexander MacDonnell (1615-1699), four illegitimate brothers (James, Alistair, Daniel, and Maurice), and six sisters (Anne, Mary, Sarah, Catherine, Rose, and Ellis). 
Reared at Dunluce Castle in co. Antrim and fluent in both Irish and English, MacDonnell was 'bred the highland way' wearing 'neither hat, cap, nor shoe, nor stocking' until he was seven or eight years old (Hill, 252). In 1625 he left Ireland to spend eighteen months in France to complete his education and to master the language. In the spring of 1627 as Viscount Dunluce -- described as 'a tall, clean-limbed, handsome man with red hair' (Clarendon, 'Hist. rebellion', 3.509) -- he returned from France and was presented at the English court, where he sought a suitable spouse. In 1628 he jilted Lady Lucy Abercorn (to whom he had been affianced in 1613) in favour of one of the sisters of James Stuart, fourth duke of Lennox. Nothing came of this match and so he turned to Honora Burke, a half-sister of the earl of Essex and the daughter of Frances Walsingham and the fourth earl of Clanricarde and St Albans, the most powerful Old English grandee in Connaught. After much wrangling the countess of St Albans dismissed the match as 'most inconvenient and dangerous' (BL, Add. MS 46188, fols. 124, 126). Undaunted he married, in April 1635, Katherine Villiers ('nee' Manners), duchess of Buckingham (1603?-1649) ['see 'MacDonnell, Katherine], the most eligible widow at court, and through her secured the patronage of -- among others -- Archbishop William Laud and the king himself. 
On his father's death in 1636 MacDonnell became second earl of Antrim and inherited the baronies of Dunluce, Cary, and Kilconway, co. Antrim, together with Dunluce Castle, and took control over his brother's estates in the barony of Glenarm. His empire covered nearly 340,000 acres, making him the largest landowner in Ulster and one of the greatest in Ireland. Determined to improve his estates he travelled to Ireland in 1637 and later boasted: 'I have compounded my affairs here with my tenants wherein I was not so inward to my [own] profit as to the general good and settlement by binding them to plant [trees] and husband their holdings so near as may be to the manner of England. (Sheffield Archives, Strafford MS 17, fol. 151)' Contemporary valuations suggest that he received an approximate annual rental from his Irish lands of between $6000 and $8300. 
Ultimately Antrim's power rested not on his estates but on the influence he exercised over a heterogeneous pool of people both in Ulster and along the western seaboard of Scotland. To begin with he commanded the loyalty and support of many of his co. Antrim tenants (especially the native Irish and highland Scottish ones) and the various branches of the Irish MacDonnells. He enjoyed extensive contacts in Scotland: the MacDonnells of Antrim, the MacDonalds of Dunyvaig and the Glens, of Clanranald, of Glengarry, of Keppoch, and of Sleat all shared a common heritage and outlook and were united by an overriding ambition to rid the Western Isles of their arch-rivals, the clan Campbell. The earl was also closely allied to the great Catholic Scottish house of Gordon and, as an opponent of Campbell hegemony, was supported by the Ogilvies, the Hamiltons, and the lesser clans of MacLeod of Lewis, MacNeils of Gigha, MacAllasters of Loup, and MacFies of Colonsay. These ties of blood and animosity were supplemented by bonds of marriage. Thanks to the carefully calculated marriages of his siblings the earl was allied with leading Old English families in the pale (the Westmeaths, Slanes, Dillons, and Louths), and native Irish ones in Munster (MacCarthy More) and in Connaught (the O'Connors). Their strongest connections were in Ulster, where they had intermarried with most of the leading Gaelic families (the O'Neills, O'Haras, O'Cahans, MacQuillans, and O'Donnells) and even with English protestant settlers such as Sir Moses Hill. Given these links and the English patronage networks he had access to through his wife, Antrim enjoyed the rare privilege of truly being a man of the 'three kingdoms'. 
After spending three years living at court 'in great expense and some lustre' (Clarendon, 'Hist. rebellion', 3.509), excessive debts forced the couple to move to Ireland in September 1638. Surviving figures suggest that Antrim's debts probably hovered between $40,000 and $42,000 during the late 1630s, and by the end of 1638 there was hardly a leading merchant or tradesman in London and Dublin to whom he did not owe money. Hence he mortgaged many of his own -- and his wife's -- properties, including the barony of Cary, the lordship of Ballycastle, Rathlin Island, and his English mansion in Hampshire, and other assets in order to raise money. Ironically, however, being in debt also had a positive side, and in Antrim's case his indebtedness -- particularly to leading landowners in Ulster and to members of the London business community -- helped to ensure his political survival. At the Restoration his creditors formed a powerful pressure group which lobbied for the earl's restoration principally to ensure that the money he owed them from the late 1630s might at last be repaid. In the long term, therefore, his debts bought him political and tenurial security, while in the middle term (1640s and 1650s) his indebtedness was relative since the majority of his class was similarly embarrassed. However, his debts had their dangers in the short term (the late 1630s) because they put him in severely straitened circumstances. Frequently he could neither meet his current expenses nor raise the capital he so desperately needed to support the king during the first bishops' war. 
In May 1638 the marquess of Hamilton -- who was eager to foster an anti-Campbell alliance -- recommended Antrim to the king and suggested using the MacDonnells on both sides of the north channel as bulwarks against the covenanters in western Scotland. Hamilton suggested that an army levied and paid for by Antrim, and supplemented where possible by Lord Deputy Wentworth, should be the first line of royalist offence in the west of Scotland. In return Charles promised the earl that 'whatsoever land he can conquer from them [the Campbells], he, having pretense of right, he shall have the same' ('Strafforde's Letters', 2.319). By spring 1639 Antrim had levied an army of 5000 foot and 200 horse. These men were drawn from the leading Irish families in Ulster: the O'Neills, O'Haras, O'Lurgans, Magennisses, MacGuires, MacMahons, MacDonnells, MacHenrys; or, as the lord deputy charmingly phrased it, 'as many Oe's and Macs's as would startle a whole council board' and 'in a great part the sons of habituated traitors' ('Strafforde's Letters', 2.300). Ultimately the expedition was frustrated by Charles I's inconsistent attitude towards it and by Wentworth's hostility to it. Yet the abortive expedition was not without significance. On the one hand, it destabilized affairs in Scotland by alienating support for the king and forcing Argyll and his followers into the covenanting camp. On the other, the king's willingness to conspire with an Irish papist against his protestant subjects (albeit Scottish ones) did little to dispel the rumours of popish plots which were circulating around London. 
Antrim played no part in the second bishops' war and from the summer of 1640 until the outbreak of the Irish rising he appears to have lived principally in Dublin, where Sir Adam Loftus, a senior government official, leased the couple his house. From here Antrim continued to plot with the king. According to his own account (made in May 1650), some time early in May 1641 Charles I sent Antrim and Ormond a messenger with instructions that Wentworth's new army should be increased to 20,000, 'armed out of the store of Dublin, and employed against the parliament' (Hill, 448-51). This Antrim plot came to nothing and it was the O'More-Maguire plot which gave rise to the insurrection of October 1641. With the outbreak of rebellion Antrim remained in Dublin and agreed to act as an intermediary with the 'discontented gentlemen' (as he termed the insurgents). In order to negotiate more effectively he moved to the earl of Castlehaven's house at Maddenstown in co. Kildare, where he harboured 'a great number of English protestants that had been robbed by the rebels' and then helped them find their way to safety (TCD, MS 813, fols. 285-285'v'). It was there that he learned that his followers in co. Antrim had joined the rising and that a Scottish army, under the command of Robert Monro, had occupied his patrimony. The need to recover his estates became his priority for the next twenty years, and he was prepared to do almost anything in order to secure their return. 
In an attempt to do so by forging a deal with the Scottish commander in Ulster, Antrim travelled to Dunluce, where he was captured in May 1642. Six months later he escaped when a friend procured a passport for an invalid to leave Carrickfergus Castle, and Antrim, disguised as an invalid, fled to a waiting ship bound for Carlisle; from there he journeyed to York, where he joined his wife some time in November. He spent most of his time at York plotting an invasion of Scotland with the queen, the details of which were made public in May 1643 when he was captured by a Scottish colonel off the coast of co. Down. Following another dramatic escape from Carrickfergus he hurried to Waterford, where the third general assembly of the confederate Catholics had just convened. Almost at once he secured the support of the general assembly for an invasion of Scotland. The confederates promised to raise and transport 2000-3000 men to the Western Isles to join forces with troops levied by the Scottish royalists under the command of the marquess of Montrose. The following June some 1600 fully armed soldiers under the command of Alasdair MacColla left Ireland to form the backbone of Montrose's very successful army. 
Delighted, the king rewarded Antrim with a marquessate in February 1645. However, the need to reinforce his brigade in Scotland now preoccupied him. Unable to secure additional aid from the confederates he turned to the Spaniards. In May 1645 he signed a contract with Manuel de Moura y Cortereal, marques de Castel Rodrigo, governor-general of the Spanish Netherlands, promising to recruit, from among his Irish and Scottish dependants, '2,000 men, of which he is to be the colonel' (B. Jennings, ed., 'Wild Geese in Spanish Flanders', 1964, 368). In return Castel Rodrigo gave him two Dunkirk frigates which he collected late in 1645. Rather than sail directly to Scotland, as originally planned, in November 1645 Antrim led his armada instead to Falmouth in Cornwall, where he rescued the prince of Wales and provided supplies, subsequently stored in Pendennis Castle, for the beleaguered royalist garrisons in Cornwall. Early in 1646 he returned to Ireland and set his frigates up as privateers. Within a short period he had acquired at least four other vessels which provided him with a lucrative, if erratic, source of income and enabled him to ship supplies and reinforcements to Scotland. 
In May 1646 Antrim arrived in the Western Isles with between 600 and 800 men. Even before he had disembarked his troops, the political situation in all three Stuart kingdoms was transformed when Charles I handed himself over to the Scots near Newark in Nottinghamshire on 5 May 1646. Almost immediately the king sent orders that all men in arms in Scotland in his name should disband their forces. Fired both by his desire to keep the traditional clan Donald heartland under his command and by the hope that his continued presence there would free his lands in co. Antrim from the Scottish army of occupation, Antrim refused. Then during the late summer and autumn of 1646 Antrim mooted 'a design to raise... 30,000 men... to reduce Scotland this winter... and from hence to march into England'. Their quarrel, royalists at the exiled court in France later reported to the king, 'is to be, to free your majesty from imprisonment' (Scrope and Monkhouse, 2.271). Antrim's military endeavours in Scotland were thus no longer merely an embarrassment, but rather a serious threat to any chance of securing a British peace. Only after Charles I personally intervened did the marquess order his army to disband, his compliance purchased by an express verbal undertaking that as soon as Argyll's estates in Kintyre could be forfeited he would receive all those lands that he claimed belonged to the MacDonnells. 
Antrim returned to Ireland in January 1647 and played a key role in the seventh confederate general assembly by leading the opposition to any peace with Ormond. In March the general assembly elected him president of the new supreme council and he became responsible for the day-to-day administration of the confederate armies, for the smooth running of the confederate provincial assemblies, and for the distribution of confederate material and financial resources. His eagerness to serve as a member of the supreme council and his enthusiastic adherence to the papal nuncio, Rinuccini, marked a new phase in his political career and illustrated his willingness to be formally associated with the Irish Catholic -- as opposed to the royalist -- cause. Despite his ties to the increasingly unpopular nuncio, Antrim was nominated by the eighth general assembly as part of a confederate delegation to treat with the royalist court in exile. He arrived at St Germain in March 1648 but was outwitted by Ormond during the subsequent negotiations. Furious and increasingly marginalized, Antrim resorted to armed rebellion in an effort to undermine Ormond (who returned to Ireland in September 1648 at the head of a pan-archipelagic royalist coalition). The plan ran awry from the start and the insurrection was quashed, forcing Antrim to flee late in 1648 to the safety of Owen Roe O'Neill's camp in Ulster. 
With the death of his wife in November 1649 Antrim's prospects looked increasingly bleak, yet in another remarkable volte-face he clandestinely threw in his lot with the Cromwellians. Though the details are obscure, he appears to have been in fairly close contact with the parliamentarian commander, Michael Jones, since he returned from France in the autumn of 1648 and quickly made contact with Henry Ireton, Cromwell's son-in-law, when he arrived in Ireland late in the summer of 1649. He demonstrated his willingness to serve the Cromwellians by securing the surrender of New Ross (19 October 1649), by persuading his former followers to surrender Carlow peacefully (July 1650), and by disrupting the Scottish royalists' war effort during the third civil war. The administration in Dublin, though it refused to restore his estates, rewarded him financially for his loyalty to the regime. In addition to an annual pension of $500 (later increased to $800), he received occasional additional contributions towards everyday expenses and the Cromwellians also paid off a number of his creditors. In 1653 Antrim married a protestant heiress, Rose O'Neill (1631-1695), daughter of Sir Henry O'Neill and Martha Stafford. Rose MacDonnell and her husband remained in east Ulster throughout the 1650s. 
With the restoration of Charles II, Antrim was immediately imprisoned in the Tower of London, where he languished until May 1661. However, thanks to an extraordinary combination of factors -- especially the tenacity of his creditors, and the support and generosity of his family, the queen mother, and members of her court, combined with the fact that his enemies were disorganized, disunited, and unprepared -- he finally regained his estates. In July 1663 Charles II declared the marquess 'innocent of any malice or rebellious purpose towards the crown' and ordered Ormond to assist him to recover his estates by making known the king's wishes to the commissioners of the court of claims (Hill, 467-8). Adventurers and soldiers -- led by Sir John Clotworthy, later Lord Massareene -- who had acquired farms on the Antrim estate during the 1650s immediately protested and the publication of a pamphlet entitled 'Murder Will Out' (August 1663) drew public attention to their grievances. But the marquess's tenacity was eventually rewarded and clause 173 of the 'Act of Explanation' (December 1665) granted him a full pardon and restored him to his property in co. Antrim. 
With this, Antrim's dramatic political career came to an end and he distanced himself from international and even national affairs -- dividing his time between Dunluce, his summer residence at Ballymagarry, and his wife's estate near Randalstown. He passed his time hunting, gaming, arranging suitable matches for his family and friends, interfering in county politics, socializing with other local grandees, and settling his debts. Just before he died he mortgaged his entire estate for thirty-one years so that his financial obligations to roughly 220 individuals -- some incurred nearly fifty years before -- could be honoured. On 3 February 1683 he died 'at his dwelling near Dunluce'. Since he had not produced an heir the marquessate died out and his younger brother Alexander succeeded him as the third earl. Antrim's body lay in state until 14 March 1683 when he was finally buried, after an elaborate funeral, alongside many of his ancestors in the family vault at the Franciscan friary of Bonamargy, near Ballycastle. 
Antrim's extraordinary career as a Caroline loyalist, Catholic confederate, Cromwellian collaborator, and Restoration pragmatist caused him to be vilified by his contemporaries and by later historians. There was undoubtedly an unsavoury, greedy, myopic side to Antrim's character and he was willing to twist ruthlessly every opportunity to his own advantage. However, there was also a very positive (and overlooked) dimension to his personality. He remained loyal to his family and kinsmen, devoted to Catholicism, and was charming, determined, dynamic, enterprising, and resourceful. These qualities, combined with the fact that he was an important political power broker in a remote and unstable corner of the three kingdoms, ensured that he survived the upheavals of the mid-seventeenth century with his inheritance, religion, political influence, and head intact. 


@@@@@


doc= 17463


Macdonnell, Sir Richard Graves (1814-1881), colonial governor, was born in Dublin on 3 September 1814, the eldest son of Dr Richard MacDonnell (died 1867), later provost of Trinity College, Dublin, and his wife, Jane, daughter of Richard Graves, dean of Ardagh. He was educated at Trinity College, Dublin, from which he graduated BA in 1835, LLB in 1845, and LLD in 1862. He was called to the Irish bar in 1838, and to the English bar, at Lincoln's Inn, in 1841. He married in 1847 Blanche Ann, daughter of Francis Skurray of Brunswick Square, Brighton. 
On 20 July 1843 Macdonnell was appointed chief justice, and on 1 October 1847 governor, of the Gambia. Here he explored the interior from the Gambia to the Senegal rivers and quelled tribes hostile to European river traders. In 1852 he was nominated governor of St Lucia, but proceeded instead on 10 January 1853 to St Vincent as lieutenant-governor. In June 1855 he became governor of South Australia, where he encouraged further exploration and settlement, and became embroiled in controversy over the readiness of that colony for responsible government. He took a strong line on the effective authority of the governor, which he took with him to his next appointment, in Nova Scotia, in May 1864, after two years of inactivity. Sent to foster the idea of union between the maritime communities, Macdonnell was profoundly critical of proposals for a wider Canadian confederation, and was embarrassed when the British Colonial Office took up that scheme. He departed for Hong Kong in October 1865, where he exercised his final governorship; he retired in 1872. In Hong Kong, as elsewhere, Macdonnell's abrasive personality made him deeply unpopular: Rutherford Alcock apparently described him as 'coarse, bumptious, and exceptionally uncouth and uncourteous' (Coates). 
Macdonnell had become CB in 1852, was knighted in 1856, and was created KCMG in 1871. He died at Hyeres, France, on 5 February 1881, and was buried in Kensal Green cemetery on 14 February. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 17464


McDonnell, Robert (1828-1889), surgeon, born in Dublin on 15 March 1828, was the second son of John McDonnell (1796-1892), surgeon, and his wife, Charity, 'nee' Dobbs. He was a grandson of Dr James McDonnell, of Belfast, and a descendant of Ian Vohr of Isla and Kintyre, whose great-grandson was Alaster MacColl Macdonald. After a private education McDonnell entered Trinity College, Dublin, in 1844. In the following year he was apprenticed to Richard Carmichael, on whose death in 1849 he was transferred to Robert Moore Peile. McDonnell graduated BA and MB in 1850, obtained the licence of the Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland on 22 February 1851, and was admitted a fellow on 24 August 1853. He afterwards visited Edinburgh, Paris, and Vienna. In 1855, during the Crimean War, he was attached to the British hospital at Smyrna, and he volunteered as civil surgeon to serve in the general hospital in the camp before Sevastopol. For his services he received the British medal and clasp and the Turkish medal. 
In 1856 McDonnell became demonstrator of anatomy in the Carmichael school of medicine; he later lectured there on anatomy and physiology. In 1857 he became MD at the University of Dublin, and in 1864 he was admitted to the degree of MD at the Queen's University of Ireland. He was appointed surgeon to Jervis Street Hospital in 1863, and three years later he was elected surgeon to Dr Steevens' Hospital and professor of descriptive anatomy in its medical school. In 1865 he married Mary McAuley (died 1869). He later married Susan McCausland (died 1891); they had at least one son. 
In 1857 McDonnell was appointed medical superintendent of Mountjoy prison. In carrying out his official duties he came into collision with the prison's board over questions of the food supply and general treatment of the prisoners under his charge. He held that the medical officer should exercise an unfettered discretion in such matters. As the board decided otherwise, he resigned in 1867. Some demur was made to granting him a pension, but in the interests of his profession he fought out the battle, eventually obtaining the pension. The money thus acquired he contributed annually to the Medical Benevolent Fund. 'One must embrace the profession with ardour, and pay it no divided allegiance', McDonnell told his students (Buckley, 66). 
On new year's day 1847 John McDonnell was the first Irish surgeon to use ether; and according to J. D. Widdess the first recorded transfusion of blood to a human in Ireland was performed in Jervis Street Hospital on 20 April 1865 by Robert McDonnell, using his own blood (Widdess, 13). The patient, a victim of tetanus, died, but in February 1870 McDonnell transfused blood to a 24-year-old woman exsanguinated by post-partum haemorrhage. She survived. The donor on that occasion was the lady's husband; fortunately their bloods were compatible, for blood groups were then unknown. McDonnell wrote no book but was a member of the Royal Irish Academy and a fellow of the Royal Society; his remarkably varied contributions to surgical and scientific literature were so numerous that they fill a column of the Royal Society's 'Catalogue of Scientific Papers'. He edited a volume of the works of Abraham Colles for the New Sydenham Society in 1881. 
McDonnell died suddenly from heart disease at his home, 89 Merrion Square, Dublin, at 1 a.m. on 6 May 1889, and was buried at Kilsharvan, the family cemetery, near Drogheda, co. Louth. 


@@@@@


doc= 17465


MacDonnell, Sorley Boy (b. in or before 1508, d. 1590), chieftain, was traditionally said to have been born and to have died at Dunanynie near Ballycastle Bay, co. Antrim, Ireland, the sixth and youngest son of Alastair or Alexander MacDonald of Dunyvaig and the Glens (d. 1536x9), chieftain, of clan Iain Mhoir or clan Donald south in Scotland, and his wife, Katherine or Caitirfhiona, daughter of John MacIan, lord of Ardnamurchan. He was called Boy (Gaelic, Buidhe) because of his fair hair. During Sorley's youth his father, a cousin of John MacDonald, fourth lord of the Isles, built up a power base for his family in both Scotland and Ulster, receiving land grants on Islay, Colonsay, and Kintyre from Colin Campbell, third earl of Argyll, and his brother in 1519 (confirmed by James V in 1531). 
After Alexander MacDonald's death his eldest son, James MacDonald of Dunyvaig and the Glens, the new chieftain, made his third brother, Colla (died 1558), captain of his Antrim possessions. Sorley was Colla's active partner, and about 1550 was imprisoned in Dublin Castle for the constant encroachments of the Antrim Scots in the 'Route' of Antrim and the Glens; he remained there for over a year until he was exchanged, in September 1551, for men captured by James and Colla during the abortive raid of the lord deputy, Sir James Croft, on Rathlin Island during the summer. Sorley then attacked Carrickfergus and captured Walter Floddy, the castle constable, before releasing him on payment of a ransom. 
During the 1550s Colla and Sorley extended the family territory westwards, seizing from the MacQuillans the coastal strip of the lordship of the Route from Ballycastle to Coleraine and capturing the greatest stronghold north of Carrickfergus, Dunluce Castle. A Southern Clandonald foothold was also established in Lecale, co. Down. On Colla's death in 1558 James offered the captaincy to his brothers in order of seniority, and as the others declined, the position fell to the youngest, Sorley. In 1560 Sorley made overtures to the English authorities, and in January 1561 he and James made an agreement with Elizabeth I's government. The MacDonnells -- the name by which the MacDonalds of the Glens became known to Irish history written in English -- undertook to deploy their forces against any 'rebels' between Carrickfergus and Lough Foyle in return for a grant of their lands for twenty-one years. This agreement was largely directed against Shane O'Neill (c.1530-1567), who was regarded by the government as a greater threat, though positions soon changed. In March 1563 the English attacked the MacDonnells holding Lecale, and two of Sorley's cousins were killed. Shane then signed a treaty with the English in September, and announced his intention of expelling the MacDonnells from Antrim. 
In spring 1565 Shane attacked the Glens, burnt Red Bay Castle, and marched northwards, to defeat the MacDonnells at Glenshesk near Ballycastle, co. Antrim, on 2 May. Sorley and James were captured. Another brother, Eneas, was killed, and James died of his wounds, though it was rumoured that Shane hastened his end. However, by 1567 Shane was in such difficulties that he applied through his prisoner, Sorley, for reinforcements from the Scottish MacDonalds. On 2 June, after first sailing to Carrickfergus to parley with the English authorities there, they met Shane at Cushendun, co. Antrim, lured him out of sight of his own men, and murdered him. Sorley was freed at the same time. 
Sorley next went to Scotland, gathered a force of 600-700 fighting men, and landed at Ballycastle Bay in November 1567. Rory Oge MacQuillan, who had recovered his family's territory after Glenshesk, opposed their landing. According to tradition they fought three successive battles, the first at Bonamargy Friary, close to the shore, and the others in Glenshesk, as a result of which Sorley expelled the MacQuillans from the Ballycastle area, and Rory Oge's three sons were killed. However, before the year's end, and to the English government's alarm, peace was established between the three warring families of O'Neill, MacDonnell, and MacQuillan. In 1569 Turlough Luineach O'Neill, the new O'Neill, married Lady Agnes Campbell (d. in or after 1590), James MacDonald's widow, on Rathlin Island. Sorley had already married Shane's sister Mary (died 1582), daughter of Conn Bacach O'Neill, first earl of Tyrone, and his second wife, Sorcha, earlier in the 1560s, and MacQuillan married Turlough Luineach's daughter. 
In 1571 Sir Thomas Smith proposed to colonize northern Ulster and expel the Scots. Sorley brought over reinforcements, and in February 1572 he attacked Carrickfergus, where he was wounded. He then petitioned Elizabeth, asking for legal recognition of his possessions. Smith's efforts achieved little, and on 14 April 1573 Sorley was offered a patent of denization in return for active support against any opponents of the crown in Ulster. But the situation altered as the government encouraged English plantation as a better means of bringing order to Ulster than negotiation with the Scots and Irish. Walter Devereux, first earl of Essex, received a grant of Clandeboye, the Glens, the Route, and Rathlin Island, and landed at Carrickfergus in August bringing 400 colonists with him. He joined forces with Smith and negotiated (unsuccessfully) with Sir Brian mac Phelim O'Neill of Clandeboye. Sorley offered his submission again, and 1574 was spent in complex negotiations, until in November mac Phelim O'Neill and MacQuillan were seized by Essex during a parley and killed. Sorley, however, remained, as the outstanding conveyor of 'redshanks' (mercenaries from western Scotland) to the Ulster chieftains, and Elizabeth insisted that all the MacDonnells must be expelled. 
On 27 July 1575 Essex made peace with Turlough Luineach, who submitted. He had won a battle against Sorley near Toome earlier in the month, and launched a naval attack commanded by John Norris against Rathlin Island from Carrickfergus. Sorley had 'put most of his plate, most of his children and the children of his gentlemen with their wives' on the island for their safety (TNA: PRO, SP 63/52/70). Norris brought 300 foot and eighty horse on three frigates, and the people on the island fled into a castle held by fifty of Sorley's men. The castle surrendered after a two-day siege, and Norris slaughtered the 500-600 people on the island and garrisoned the castle. This catastrophe did little to damage the MacDonnells' fighting strength. In November Sorley attacked Carrickfergus, took the townsmen's cattle, and killed 100 soldiers. On 28 September Sir Henry Sidney, the lord deputy, reported Sorley's country to be 'full of corn and cattle' and Sorley himself 'very haughty and proud by reason of the late victories he hath had' (Collins, 1.77). However, he agreed to end hostilities, and again asked for legal recognition of his position. Sidney returned Rathlin Island to him and proposed that the Glens should be held by Sorley rather than by Angus MacDonald of Dunyvaig and the Glens, the clan chieftain, son of Sorley's brother James and Lady Agnes Campbell. 
It was a constant anxiety for the English government that Sorley would bring in large numbers of Scots to extend his areas of control, or that Lady Agnes Campbell would strengthen Turlough Luineach's position by importing redshanks either through her nephew, Colin Campbell, sixth earl of Argyll, or else through Sorley. A certain number of redshanks did come across every year, and in 1582 Sorley brought 2000 men for an O'Neill-O'Donnell expedition to support a rising in Connaught. At this point the English administration decided to eject the MacDonnells completely. The consequent expedition of 1583 consisted of a mixed force of Clandeboye O'Neills, MacQuillans (anxious to retake their territory in the Route), and English soldiers. O'Neill of Clandeboye and seventy English musketeers attacked the men in the Glens led by Sorley's nephew, Angus of Dunyvaig, forcing them to flee to Scotland. They then regrouped, marched northwards through the Route, and tried to cross over a pass near Orra Mountain into the northern Glens so as to join forces with some discontented clansmen. However, Sorley had been forewarned and had prepared a trap. The invaders were tricked into charging into boggy ground, where O'Neill and MacQuillan were slain with many of their men, as well as the seventy English soldiers and their two captains. Sorley himself had been too old to fight, and watched the battle from a distance. 
In 1584 the new lord deputy, Sir John Perrot, tried to reverse this defeat. In August and September he moved through Antrim with another mixed force of English companies and O'Neill and MacQuillan fighting men. Sorley quickly moved west of the Bann river, and Perrot took Dunluce after a brief siege. The most notable booty he found there was 'Holy Columkill's Cross, a god of great veneration with Surley Boy and all Ulster' (TNA: PRO, SP 63/111/94). Perrot then garrisoned both Dunluce and Dunanynie. Sorley meanwhile sailed to Scotland for reinforcements. He returned briefly in November, and at the beginning of January 1585 brought 2000 redshanks to Cushendun. This rescued Angus of Dunyvaig and his brother Donnell Gorm, whose territory was being threatened by English detachments under Sir William Stanley and Sir Henry Bagenal. Bagenal retreated to protect Carrickfergus, and on 5 January the MacDonnells attacked Stanley and his men, who had stationed themselves inside Bonamargy Friary. Donnell Gorm torched the building, and Sorley sailed south to Red Bay to prevent Bagenal returning from Carrickfergus. Stanley staunchly retained his position at Bonamargy, and on 5 February Sorley again offered to submit, promising a son as a pledge if his strongholds were returned and legal recognition granted. However, by March the MacDonnells' situation had deteriorated. Angus of Dunyvaig took most of his men back to Scotland, while another English expedition forced Sorley to retreat to Toome, where he found the Bann crossing blocked by Turlough Luineach's troops. On 22 March Perrot reported that the MacDonnells were a broken force; Sorley and Donnell Gorm had sailed for Scotland, he had established an English garrison on Rathlin Island, and only Sorley's son Alexander and 120 redshanks remained. Elizabeth told Perrot to halt all military operations in Ulster, and in April Angus of Dunyvaig submitted to James VI in Edinburgh, promising to prevent 'undesirable Scots' from going to Ireland (TNA: PRO, SP 63/109/37). 
Nevertheless, by August Sorley was back with more men. They re-established control over the Glens, recaptured Dunluce in early November, and in February 1586 it was reported that Angus of Dunyvaig was going to bring over another 2000 redshanks. Sorley's eldest son, Alexander MacDonnell, described as his right arm by Perrot, was killed in a skirmish with an English detachment in March, but the attempt to eject the MacDonnells had clearly failed. Sorley had tried to negotiate throughout the winter of 1585-6, and in April he again asked for terms from Perrot, who was ordered by Elizabeth to make 'some reasonable composition' with Angus of Dunyvaig and Sorley (TNA: PRO, SP 63/122/no. 94). Angus of Dunyvaig submitted, through his mother, to the Dublin authorities in May, and received a grant of the Glens, and in June Sorley came in himself. He entered the cathedral on 18 June, 'threw his sword before your Majesty's picture, kissed the same and swore his allegiance' (TNA: PRO, SP 63/139/7). Sorley received a patent of denization, a grant of the territories between Ballycastle and Coleraine, and constableship of Dunluce Castle. The Route was divided between himself and MacQuillan. Eneas or Angus MacDonnell (died after 1607), Sorley's fifth son, remained at Dublin as a pledge of his obedience. 
For some months Angus of Dunyvaig continued to act aggressively. He attacked MacQuillan in Antrim and Sir John O'Dogherty in Donegal, and sent 600 men under two of his sons to support the Burkes' uprising in western Ireland. This ended after his two sons and many of their men were killed at Ardnaree in co. Mayo on 22 September 1586. Sorley, meanwhile, had some dealings in autumn 1586 with Hugh O'Neill, second earl of Tyrone, who had previously fostered his son Eneas. Sorley warned him that the MacLeans intended to land in Lough Foyle to assist his rivals, the sons of Shane, and he also supplied the earl with troops commanded by his son James MacDonnell (died 1601). 
In October 1588 a spy in Turlough Luineach O'Neill's company reported that an Armada ship had sunk near Dunluce, and that three survivors had come with Sorley to Strabane in Tyrone, 'where they certified of the late shipwreck' ('CSP Ire.', '1588-92', 64). Sorley went there in order to 'get O'Neill's daughter to wife', despite being over eighty, and having 'incisions made in his forehead for the recovery of his sight, which he hath almost lost' ('Perrot papers'). Mary, his first wife, had died in 1582 and he married an O'Neill in October 1588. In July 1589 Sorley commissioned a Scot to 'weigh the ordnance' of the Armada wreck, which was also supposed to have 'a great store of Gold and silver' (G. Hill, 190). Sorley died in January 1590, and according to tradition was buried at Bonamargy Friary. He had five sons with his first wife, two of whom predeceased him: Donnell, fighting Turlough Luineach in 1577, and Alexander in 1586. Sir James MacDonnell succeeded Sorley, and died suddenly at Dunluce on 13 April 1601, after which his brother, Sir Randal MacDonnell (d. 1636), became head of the family. The fifth son, Eneas, died soon after 1607. There was an illegitimate son, Ludar, who took part in a conspiracy against Randal in 1615. Sorley and his first wife also reportedly had five daughters. 
Despite the best efforts of the government over forty years, it proved impossible to eject the Antrim Scots from Ulster by force. Sorley was central to the continued entrenchment of his family in Ireland. 


@@@@@


doc= 17466


Macdougall, Allan (1750?-1829), poet, was born in Glencoe, Argyll. As a boy he was apprenticed to a tailor, who, according to the local custom, travelled between farms wherever his services were called for, and on his working peregrinations Macdougall was able to acquire a deep knowledge of Gaelic song and story. His blindness, according to tradition, was the result of an attack upon him by a fellow apprentice who took umbrage at Macdougall's habitually sarcastic tongue; he was thereafter known as Ailean Dall ('Blind Allan'). Following his incapacitation, Macdougall turned particularly to music and became a competent fiddle player, earning a scanty living entertaining at country celebrations. About 1790 Macdougall moved with his family to Inverlochy, near Fort William, where a man named Stewart who owned a large farm granted him the use of a small property on his land. In this neighbourhood Macdougall's reputation as a poet and entertainer grew and, with the assistance of Ewan Maclachlan, a fellow poet and tradition-bearer, he collected together poems and poem versions of his own (along with some work of Maclachlan's), material which was published in Edinburgh as 'Orain Ghaidhealacha' (1798). After the good reception of this volume, Colonel Alasdair Ronaldson MacDonell of Glengarry employed Macdougall as his family bard. In 1828 Macdougall travelled the counties of Argyll, Ross-shire, and Inverness-shire seeking (and obtaining 1000) subscriptions for a new, enlarged edition of 'Orain Ghaidhealacha', but he died the following year while his project was in press. He was buried at Kilfinan, Argyll. 
Macdougall specialized in poetic pieces of a panegyric and ribald nature, as well as in song. One of his most notorious and resonant poetic gambits was his attack on lowland shepherds whose brand of farming signalled, for Macdougall, the depopulation of the highlands. 


@@@@@


doc= 17467


Macdougall, Sir Duncan (1787-1862), army officer, son of Patrick MacDougall of Soroba, near Oban, Argyll, and his wife, Mary, daughter of Duncan M'Vicar, was born at Soroba. Educated at Edinburgh, he entered the army as ensign in 1804, and served in the 53rd and 85th regiments on Cape Colony frontier, at the Cape, and in the Peninsular War. He took part in the third siege and in the capture by storm of Badajoz on 6 April 1812, and in the capture on 27 June of the forts of Salamanca. In the battle of Salamanca on 22 July he gallantly saved the colours of his regiment and was severely wounded. He was present at the siege of Burgos in September and October 1812 and the subsequent retreat, at the siege and capture on 31 August 1813 of San Sebastian, at the passage of the Bidassoa in October, at the battles of Nivelle (10 November) and Nive (9-13 December), and at the investment of Bayonne. 
Macdougall took part in the Anglo-American War in 1814; he was present at the battle of Bladensburg on 24 August, the capture of Washington, and the attack on Baltimore on 12 September, when he was aide-de-camp to Major-General Robert Ross, who was killed. He also served in the operations against New Orleans in December 1814 and January 1815, was aide-de-camp to Lieutenant-General Sir Edward Pakenham, who was killed at the assault on 7 January, and took part in the siege of Fort Bowyer in Florida. Following service in France, Ireland, and Nova Scotia, Macdougall assumed command of the 79th highlanders in 1832, and quelled civil disturbances in Montreal. In 1835 he relinquished the command of his regiment and retired from the active list in order to join the British Auxiliary Legion of Spain as quartermaster-general and second in command under Sir De Lacy Evans. For his services in Spain he received from Queen Isabella II the order of knighthood of St Ferdinand. 
On 18 July 1838 he was knighted at St James's Palace. He was twice married: first, in 1817, to Anne, daughter of Colonel Smelt, governor of the Isle of Man, with whom he had a son, Patrick Leonard MacDougall, and, second, in 1844, to Hannah, widow of Colonel Nicholson of Springfield House, Liverpool. In later years Macdougall raised the Lancashire artillery militia and became a prominent figure in the volunteer movement. He presided at the great meeting at St Martin's Hall, London, at which the movement was inaugurated. His publications included the pamphlet 'Hints to Volunteers on Various Subjects' (1860) and 'The History of the Volunteer Movement' (1861). He died on 10 December 1862 at his home, 112 Eaton Square, London, and was buried in St Paul's Cathedral, London, where a monument with a bust by Adams was erected to his memory. 


@@@@@


doc= 17538


Robert Ronald McIan (1803?-1856), actor and illustrator, was by his own account the son of Robert McIan, a sheep farmer of Inverness-shire. Baptized a Roman Catholic, he was educated in Liverpool and Shropshire. He abandoned apprenticeships to become, as Mr Jones, an actor and scene-painter in Glasgow, and afterwards toured with Belville Penley's company. In 1827 he joined the Theatre Royal, Bath, where he made his debut as Dougal in 'Rob Roy': Sir Walter Scott thought 'the character stepped from the novel on to the stage' ('The Era', 11). 


@@@@@


doc= 17630


Magnus Makculloch (fl. 1477-1484), who was probably born at Tain, Ross-shire, and is recorded as a student at Louvain in 1477. In 1481 and 1483-4 he made full copies of Bower's work for the Augustinian abbey of Scone and Archbishop William Scheves of St Andrews respectively. On the strength of two pages of additional annals relating to the reign of James II (1437-60) which were copied into the latter of these manuscripts, Makculloch has sometimes been given the scarcely deserved status of continuator of Bower's work; but he was a professional scribe rather than a scholar. 


@@@@@


doc= 17694


Daniel Macmillan (1813-1857) and 


@@@@@


doc= 17699


John Murray (1737-1793), bookseller and publisher, who was born at Edinburgh on 1 January 1737, the only surviving son of Robert McMurray (1698-1768), lawyer, and Jean ('bap'. 1703, died 1742), daughter of James Ross of Dundee and Elizabeth Philips. There were three elder daughters, Elizabeth, Janet, and Robina. In 1768 when Murray established himself in business at London he dropped the prefix 'Mc' from his name. He matriculated at Edinburgh University for one term in 1752. In the following year he began a career in the marines that led to a commission in July 1762. Little is known of his service during the Seven Years' War, after which he retired on half pay. On 3 March 1763 he married, at Chatham, Nancy ('bap'. 1745, died 1776), daughter of Captain William Weemss and Ann Weber of Brompton, near Chatham. There were no children from the marriage. 
Murray's search for gainful employment separated him from his wife and brought him to the north of Scotland to work on the Gordonstoun estate and afterwards to Edinburgh, where job opportunities eluded him. He occupied himself in writing a short novel, 'The History of Sir Launcelot Edgevile', published in the 'Court Miscellany', and a pamphlet on the Edinburgh theatre, but realized that he lacked the talent to pursue a literary career with any chance of success. In the spring of 1766 he returned to England and reluctantly was reinstated in the marines at Chatham. 
In October 1768 Murray learned that the well-established London bookselling business of William Sandby at 32 Fleet Street could be bought for $1000. With $700, the sum of his wife's dowry, and the additional funds borrowed from friends, he ventured upon a career about which he knew little or nothing. To the poet William Falconer, who declined to be a partner, he remarked: 'Many blockheads in the trade are making fortunes' (Murray letter-book, 16 Oct 1768). Murray's first publication was the fifth edition of Lyttelton's 'Dialogues of the Dead', a title Sandby had first published in 1760. From his bookshop Murray also sold stationery, and at different times dealt in medicines, lottery tickets, Irish linen, Tassie's gems, beer, wine, and game birds. 
The House of Lords decision of 1774 on literary property enabled Murray to exploit the market for reprinting. He produced inexpensive editions of the poems of Thomas Gray in 1776 and James Thomson in 1778, both enhanced with illustrations and critical assessments. He also bought into such large-scale ventures as the 'Works of the English Poets', edited by Samuel Johnson. A legal dispute in 1777 with the Revd William Mason over the copyright in three short poems in the Gray edition led Murray to defend himself in public with 'A Letter to W. Mason Concerning... the Practices of Booksellers', but in the court of chancery he lost the case. 
In 1775 an inheritance of more than $2000, his share of the proceeds from the sale of an Irish estate belonging to his maternal uncle, enabled Murray to expand his business. He had published a dozen titles in 1772, a figure which rose to over forty by 1778 and continued to increase. Murray published about 1000 titles during a twenty-five-year career. More than one-third contain his name alone in the imprint. The others reflect deals he made with traders either in London or in cities such as Edinburgh and Dublin. 
Murray published in many fields, but medical and scientific titles account for one-quarter of his output. The names of William Cullen, Gilbert Blane, C. B. Tyre, and James Wood were foremost in his lists. He also published translations of important continental books, such as those by Karl Scheele and Torbern Bergman. The 'Medical Commentaries', a quarterly publication edited by Andrew Duncan, was established by Murray in 1773 and achieved a wide circulation for many years. One of Murray's most ambitious and successful undertakings was his edition of Lavater's 'Essays on Physiognomy', published in forty-one parts and sold by subscription over a period of ten years beginning in 1788. It was a lavish production with hundreds of engravings by the leading artists of the day, including Gillray and Blake. 
The real money Murray made from fiction, poetry, and drama came from buying shares with other booksellers and reprinting the works of such writers as Shakespeare, Milton, Defoe, Fielding, Sterne, and Smollett. In the historical line he published several Scottish writers including John Millar, Gilbert Stuart, and Sir David Dalrymple, but it was his regret that a history as popular as those written by Hume, Robertson, or Gibbon eluded him. 
As a means of promoting his own publications, and as investments in their own right, Murray involved himself in several periodical publications. The most successful of these was the 'English Review'. Edited by Murray himself, it was established in January 1783 and continued monthly until 1797, when it merged with Joseph Johnson's 'Analytical Review'. Although essentially a literary journal, Murray included a political article each month that was a cogent summary of national and international affairs. William Godwin wrote this article until Murray dismissed him, and in other departments of the 'English Review' Murray employed such men as Thomas Holcroft and Thomas Beddoes. 
Whenever an issue arose about which Murray felt strongly, his instinct was to write about it, either in a letter to a newspaper or magazine or in a separate pamphlet. Disputes with authors and other traders occupied his pen, but on other occasions he felt moved to write on such topics as the Hume-Rousseau controversy and the affairs of the East India Company. As well as the 'Letter to W. Mason' (2nd edn, 1788), he wrote three separate publications: 'A Letter... Occasioned by the late Theatrical Disturbances' (1766); 'An Author's Conduct to the Public, Stated in the Behaviour of Dr. William Cullen' (1784); and the 'Defence of Innes Munro' (1790). 
During his marriage to Nancy Weemss, Murray fathered a child with another woman. He supported this boy, named Archibald, and later established him in a career at sea. Murray's wife died of consumption in September 1776, and on 23 February 1778 he married her younger sister Hester Weemss ('bap'. 1746, died 1815), who had lived with the Murrays in London at different times. With Hester he had seven children, three of whom survived to maturity. The first, John [ii] ['see below'], who carried on the business, arrived just nine months after their marriage. A daughter, Jane, followed in 1780 and another girl, Mary Anne, was born in 1787. In May 1782 Murray suffered a life-threatening stroke. Since his days in the marines, evenings of sometimes excessive drinking in such London establishments as the Peacock Tavern in Gray's Inn Lane and at Munday's Coffee House had taken a physical toll. However, he regained his health and by heeding this warning lived ten further years. 
Murray died on 6 November 1793 after an illness of several months. He was buried across the street from his shop at St Dunstan-in-the-West. Under the name of his widow, Hester, the business was run by Murray's long-serving shop assistant, Samuel Highley. Hester Murray is listed in several imprints in 1794 and 1795, but she published little of consequence. At his death Murray's estate was valued at more than $12,000, but a legal dispute with his partners in Lavater's 'Essays on Physiognomy' reduced this figure by nearly $4000. His correspondence and other papers are preserved in the firm's archive. 



@@@@@


doc= 17781


Mageoghegan, Conall (fl. 1596-1644), historian, was the son of Niall Mageoghegan (died 1596), chieftain, of Lismoyny, co. Westmeath, and grandson of Rosa Mageoghegan, a firm supporter of the English, who had been murdered in 1580; his uncle, also Rosa Mageoghegan, became a Dominican friar and was later bishop of Kildare from 1629 to 1644. Nothing is known of Mageoghegan's date of birth or his early life. He is best known for his translation into English of the so-called annals of Clonmacnoise, a collection of literary, hagiographical, and historical material laid out in annalistic format and purporting to extend from the earliest times to 1408. The original work in Irish is now lost, although there were reports in the middle of the nineteenth century that it was in the possession of Sir Richard Nagle, who was related to the Mageoghegans. Mageoghegan, who undertook the translation for his kinsman Toirdhealbhach Mac Cochlain of Delvin, co. Westmeath, penned the preface to 'Terenc Coghlan' at Lemanaghan, King's county, on 20 April 1627, while the entire work was completed on 30 June. Mageoghegan's own copy of the annals is not extant but there are four seventeenth-century copies, the two earliest dating from 1660 and 1661 respectively, and Sir James Ware made two pages of excerpts in the 1640s. An edition of the work published in 1896, based on a corrupted manuscript, is unsatisfactory, being incomplete and inaccurate. 
Soon after completing the annals, Mageoghegan was associated with Michel O Cleirigh who began writing his 'Reim rioghraidhe na hEireann accus senchas a naomh' (otherwise 'Seanchas riogh Ereann accus genealuigh na naomh nEreannach', later edited by Paul Walsh under the title 'Genealogiae regum et sanctorum Hiberniae', 1918) in Mageoghegan's house at Lismoyny in 1630. On 4 November of that year Mageoghegan appended a note of approbation to O Cleirigh's work in which he testifies that he, a gentleman, had seen the source materials from which the book was compiled. On 11 October 1636 he furnished a similar testimonium for O Cleirigh's copy of the hagiographical poem 'Naomhsheanchus naomh Innsi Fail'. 
Mageoghegan was also in communication with James Ussher, the scholarly protestant primate. In August 1636 he had the great Connaught manuscript, the 'Book of Lecan' (dating from about 1400), on loan from Ussher and transcribed some portions of it; the manuscript containing those transcripts is now lost but it was copied in September 1644 by Pol O Colla in Mageoghegan's house in Lismoyny. It has been suggested that Mageoghegan may have furnished Ussher with translations of Irish texts and that his translation of the annals of Clonmacnoise may well have been prompted by the archbishop. An important fifteenth-century Irish manuscript (BL, Add. MS 30512) was in Mageoghegan's possession for a time and contains colophons penned by him in 1630, 1631, and 1635; one of these recounts a phenomenal shower of hailstones in the counties of Westmeath, King's county, and Meath which occurred on 25 March 1635. The date of Mageoghegan's death is unknown. 


@@@@@


doc= 17782


Magill, Robert (1788-1839), minister of the Presbyterian General Synod of Ulster and poet, son of George Frederic Magill and Sarah Boyd, was born on 7 September 1788 in the village of Broughshane, near Ballymena, co. Antrim. When he was ten years old the United Irish rising broke out, and his manuscript autobiography contains some vivid pictures of the scenes which he witnessed. After attending local schools, he himself became a teacher, first at Ballyportre, near Loughguile, in his native county, and afterwards in Broughshane. In 1811, having determined to study for the church, he placed himself under the tuition of the Revd John Paul (1777-1848), of Carrickfergus. In 1813 he entered the University of Glasgow, walking, according to the custom of Ulster students of that day, to Donaghadee, a distance of over 30 miles; after a twelve-hour passage to Portpatrick, he spent three days walking to Glasgow. He graduated MA at the university in 1817, and in addition to his proper professional studies attended several of the medical classes. His poetical gifts had already manifested themselves, and two poems which he wrote while at college, 'The Fall of Algiers' and 'Currie's Elegy', were thought worthy to be recited by the public orator. During the long vacations he taught in Broughshane. 
On 11 August 1818 Magill was licensed by the presbytery of Ballymena, in connection with the synod of Ulster, and on 20 June 1820, having received a unanimous call after four Sundays on 'trial', was ordained in Antrim as assistant and successor to Alexander Montgomery, minister of Mill Row Presbyterian Church. He soon acquired the reputation of being a talented preacher. 'He had a vivid imagination, and certain tones of his voice were so exquisitely tender that when touching on particular subjects he could almost at once melt an auditory into tears' (Reid, 3.555). His congregation increased greatly under his care, and a very large new church had to be built. Magill was married, on 11 December 1823, to Ann Jane ('b'. 1803), daughter of Samuel Skelton. They had a son and a daughter. His wife died on 14 September 1832 and he subsequently married Ellen, daughter of James Liggat, on 11 June 1838. 
In the church courts, which were then agitated over the Arian controversy, Magill sided strongly with the orthodox party. At the suggestion of Dr Henry Cooke, the leader of the evangelicals, he wrote 'The Thinking Few' (1828), the work by which he is best known. It is a satirical poem of considerable power, directed against the Arians, and had a very large circulation. It was published anonymously. Six years later he published his 'Poems on Various Subjects, Chiefly Religious' (1834), some of which are marked by a deep vein of poetic sentiment. He died in Antrim on 19 February 1839, and was interred in the churchyard of Donegore after an initial burial in Templepatrick. 


@@@@@


doc= 17783


Maginn, Edward (1802-1849), Roman Catholic bishop, the son of Patrick Maginn, a farmer, and Mary, 'nee' Slevin, was born at Fintona, co. Tyrone, on 16 December 1802; his uncle was a Catholic priest. He was educated at the Irish College in Paris from 1818 and in 1825 returned to Ireland, where he was ordained priest and appointed to the curacy of Moville, co. Donegal. Some time afterwards he took part in a public debate held at Londonderry between protestant and Catholic champions. In 1829 he was appointed to succeed his uncle as parish priest of the united parishes of Fahan and Deysertegny, co. Donegal. During this period he ardently supported Daniel O'Connell and joined in the agitation for the repeal of the union. On 18 August 1845 Maginn was appointed coadjutor to John MacLaughlin, bishop of Derry, and was nominated to the see of Ortosia, in the archbishopric of Tyre, 'in partibus infidelium'. The election was confirmed by the pope on 8 September and Maginn was consecrated in the cathedral at Londonderry's Waterside on 18 January 1846. 
A politically minded bishop, Maginn promoted all the nationalist and clerical movements of his time. He gave evidence to Lord Devon's commission on the occupation of land in Ireland, wrote a series of letters on tenant right, and published 'A Refutation of Lord Stanley's Calumnies Against the Catholic Clergy of Ireland' to defend the loyalty of Catholic subjects against an anti-Catholic polemic of 1847 which had stressed the 'dual allegiance' of Catholics to pope and crown and suggested that the confessional was pernicious, arguing in effect that Roman Catholicism undermined the safe and peaceful governing of Ireland. Maginn died of typhus on 17 January 1849 at St Columb's College, Londonderry, and was buried in Buncrana, co. Donegal, on 22 January. He was eulogized in 'A Life of... Maginn... with Selections from his Correspondence' by T. D'Arcy McGee, the only biography, published in New York in 1857. 


@@@@@


doc= 17784


Maginn, William (1794-1842), writer and poet, was born on 10 July 1794 in Dean Street, Cork, near the cathedral of St Fin-Barre, the first child of the six children of John Maginn ('c'.1750-1819), classics master at the diocesan school, and Anne, 'nee' Eccles, daughter of William Eccles of Ecclesville, Tyrone. His father quickly discovered a star pupil, and stories circulated in Cork for years about the young William's brilliance. At eleven (1806) he entered Trinity College, Dublin, ranking near the top of examinations in Latin and Greek, and taking the premium in Hebrew. Under the tutelage of Samuel Kyle (later provost of Trinity College, Dublin, and bishop of Cork) and the formidably eccentric John Barrett, he acquired some dozen additional languages, living and dead, though the college reception of his Latin poem 'AEneas Eunuchus' left something to be desired. He was awarded an LLD in 1819, reputedly the youngest to be so honoured. His background and education gave him strong unionist and establishment views. 
After Maginn took his BA in 1811, his father opened an academy at 8 Marlboro Street, the family home, and dragooned his teenage son as classics master. The new school rapidly gained a reputation for academic excellence, while the young William raked about town and earned a reputation as a mimic, jokester, and master of lampoons. The closest he came to the church career envisioned for him was through ghost-writing sermons for clerical friends. He moved in both the protestant and Catholic middle classes, and with his fluent Irish mingled freely with the poor. He first published in a local satiric paper, 'The Freeholder', and joined the Cork Literary and Philosophical Society, though a slight stutter kept him from starring as a debater. Using a remarkable variety of pseudonyms, Maginn began sending contributions abroad about 1818, first to London and William Jerdan's 'Literary Gazette', and then in 1819 to Edinburgh and 'Blackwood's Magazine' ('Maga'), where his first efforts were a parody of Wordsworth titled 'Don Juan Unread' and a clever rendering of the ballad of 'Chevy Chase' into a rustic Latin (November 1819). (Maginn frequently 'embalmed' folk poetry in classical languages.) Known by Blackwood only as Ralph Tuckett Scott, Maginn was encouraged to expand a squib on Edinburgh University professor John Leslie into 'Leslie 'versus' Hebrew' (February 1820); the publisher rued his suggestion throughout a lengthy libel case. 
On the death of his father in 1819, Maginn became master of the school, while his sisters opened a female academy in a house next door. Leaving all thoughts of the ministry behind, he dutifully supported his family and prepared his brother John for Trinity. Though far away and harassed by pedagogy, he quickly became one of the inner coterie of 'Maga', along with John Wilson, John Gibson Lockhart, and Thomas Hamilton, and during the summer vacation of 1821 he ventured to Edinburgh on a surprise visit to meet the rest of the gang. Turning up in William Blackwood's Princes Street shop, he demanded in his thickest brogue to know the name of the prolific Cork contributor. Blackwood hemmed and hawed until Maginn pulled out Blackwood's own letters and said 'I am that gentleman'. Amused by his youth and learning, his new friends dubbed him the Doctor. 
While Lockhart initiated 'Blackwood's' most popular feature, the collaborative 'Noctes Ambrosianae', Maginn shortly after enlisted with Wilson and gradually became associated by the public with one of its characters, Sir Morgan Odoherty. Odoherty's speciality was the celebration of drink, cigars, and the convivial life -- epitomized in the 'Maxims of Mr Odoherty' in 1824 (reprinted in book form, 1849). Despite attempts to lure him to Scotland, after a scouting trip to London during which he met Jerdan, L. E. L. (the poet Letitia Landon, to whom Maginn may have made a proposal), and Theodore Hook, he determined to move there as soon as possible. When his brother John graduated from Trinity and could replace him at the academy, he made new arrangements, both professional and matrimonial. To the astonishment of his Cork cronies, he married Ellen Ryder Bullen (died 1859) at Christ's Church, Cork, on 31 January 1824. She was the daughter of a clergyman and her brother had been Maginn's student. Enticed by an offer of employment ($20 a month) with Theodore Hook on an expanded 'John Bull' newspaper, Maginn with his new wife and his sister Margaret arrived in London the next month. 
In London he renewed his acquaintance with fellow Corkmen and associated with Jerdan, Landon, Thomas Barnes (of 'The Times'), publisher John Murray, and the critic John Wilson Croker. The flow of writing to 'Blackwood's' continued, regularly remunerated now for the first time, and Blackwood's and Lockhart's visit to London in the spring revealed a man in his element, ensconced in the Salopian Coffee House and surrounded by the gentlemen of the press. In the summer, however, he made a mistake by editing 'John Bull Magazine', a short-lived monthly advertised as written by 'plain People' who 'drink ale with their cheese, and ask twice for their soup if they want it' ('Examiner', 27 June 1824, 414). It was launched with a forged 'wedding night' episode of Byron's burnt memoirs, and Maginn immediately lost 'ton', being charged with a 'familiar intimacy with all the blackguard publications of the age' ('London Magazine', June 1826, 208). John Murray, who had toyed with the notion of selecting Maginn to edit Byron's letters, redirected that project to Thomas Moore. 
In the autumn the Maginns moved lodgings to Brunswick Square, where their first child, Ellen, was born. By the next year, however, Maginn was in financial difficulties; an attempt to secure a post on a new commission to regularize the state papers was rejected by J. W. Croker, who nevertheless alerted home secretary Robert Peel to Maginn's possible value as tory propagandist. The autumn of 1825 saw him busily attempting to write his way out of debt, when he was rescued by Benjamin Disraeli, then a twenty-year-old with a scheme to use Murray's backing to start a new tory daily ('The Representative'). Maginn accepted the post of Paris correspondent ($500 per annum). After William's trip to Ireland on family business, the Maginns moved to France, where a few days after their arrival in late December Ellen gave birth to Anne, a 'sickly yonker' (Cooke, 627), in their lodgings at Hotel d'Hungerford (31 rue Caumartin). Maginn sent the odd column back to London, but chiefly polished his French (including Parisian thieves' argot) and translated a humorous farrago on food, 'Physiologie du gout'. 'The Rip' was badly managed, however, and Murray recalled Maginn in March to salvage things. While his editing produced a more lively and consistent paper, its losses could not be sustained and 'The Rip' was merged with the 'New Times' after the summer election. Maginn transferred to this paper, probably as a sub-editor. 
In the late 1820s Maginn continued to write sporadically for 'Blackwood's', collaborating with Lockhart on several new 'Noctes'; he also translated Vidocq's memoirs, worked with Crofton Croker on his 'Fairy Legends', contributed a few fine tales to the annuals, and in 1827 published 'Whitehall: or, Days of George IV' (a spoof of historical novels). In that year as well his family was completed by the birth of a son, John. He may also have written a true crime version of a famous murder, 'The Red Barn' (1828). But his chief livelihood came from the evening 'Standard', a daily launched to support the ultra-tory side after the pro-Catholic emancipation George Canning became premier in 1827. The paper was named after a tag from Livy that also gave Morgan Odoherty the sobriquet the Standard-Bearer, and was edited by Stanley Lees Giffard, a staunch Orangeman whom Maginn knew from Trinity College. After the 'Catholic Relief Act' was passed in 1829, 'The Standard' vociferously accused Peel and Wellington of 'ratting'. Maginn served as sub- or co-editor until the late 1830s, drawing an income of more than $400 per annum, and wrote many of the leaders. 
Late in 1829 Maginn decided that London needed its own 'Maga'. William Blackwood had grown shy of controversy, and Maginn's tendency to 'run-a-muck' in 'personalities' (Gordon, 309) was unwelcome. With a lawyer friend, Hugh Fraser, providing the ready money, Maginn convinced James Fraser (no relation) to make his publishing debut with 'Fraser's Magazine for Town and Country' (February 1830; nicknamed 'Regina'). The story goes that they were perambulating Regent Street when Maginn spied a bookshop at no. 215 and said, 'Fraser! here is a namesake of yours -- let us try him' (Kenealy, 87). While not technically the editor, Maginn was chiefly responsible for its direction and content, and wrote a high percentage of its articles. After a slow start it became an original and powerful organ, combining a rollicking scurrility -- not above the occasional hoax or libel -- with advanced and intellectually challenging new writing. It was the first to publish, for instance, Thomas Carlyle's 'Sartor Resartus'. The most popular feature was a long-running 'Gallery of illustrious literary characters' (collected in book form, 1873) that featured brief and biting prose sketches by Maginn and portraits by Daniel Maclise, a young artist from Cork whom Maginn had befriended. Nine of the first ten writers profiled were Scots or Irish, and the magazine as a whole relied on a Celtic pool of talent. Somewhat later it was enhanced by a young discovery named Thackeray, who later based Captain Shandon in 'Pendennis' partly on Maginn. 
At the heart of 'Fraser's' was a round table in James Fraser's back parlour, where the Fraserians gathered to put together the magazine, write squibs on Lytton Bulwer, or Robert 'Satan' Montgomery, and drink whiskey punch in bacchanalias that were then exaggerated in the magazine. It is no surprise that the chief accusation spread about Maginn by his enemies was that he was constantly inebriated, and this was no doubt true. Odoherty's twenty-fifth maxim was that 'A man saving his wine must be cut savagely' ('Blackwood', May 1824, 604), and Maginn ran no risk of being cut. He wrote dozens of drinking-songs and once found thirty-seven rhymes for 'a jug of gin-twist'. In defence, it was noted that he did not tipple more than other men; he was just unable to hold it, and this is probably true as well. His 'A Story without a Tail' ('Blackwood', April 1834) perfectly embodies a life of feckless feasting and reckless drinking. 
Maginn was now one of the best-known and most influential literary figures in London, though he deliberately avoided publishing books and preferred anonymity. But despite a substantial income, his liabilities continued to mount and in 1834 he fled to Belgium while Lockhart collected a subscription to settle about $3000 of debt. His reputation was also damaged by rumours that he had not only been writing leaders for 'The Age', but also co-operating with its editor, Charles Molloy Westmacott, a blackmailer. A more personal trouble occurred at about the same time. Maginn was a fond father and husband, though frequently absent from his home at 55 Stanford Street, hiding from duns (often in the Irish-speaking slum of St Giles). In 1834 Landon, who since about 1822 had been the secret mistress of Jerdan, became engaged to John Forster. Rumours flew that she had been or was the lover of Bulwer, Maclise, and Maginn as well. Although the evidence is thin, Ellen Maginn apparently searched her husband's belongings, found letters from Landon that seemed to indicate intimacy, and brought them to Forster's attention, thus breaking off the marriage. Maginn was able to convince his wife that the letters were innocent, but their marriage suffered. Landon was devastated and a few years later made an odd marriage to George Maclean, who took her to his colonial outpost in Africa. When she died there under mysterious circumstances, Maginn was publicly distraught. L. E. L. and Maginn certainly enjoyed a long friendship and close working relationship, though friction occurred when Landon entered the circle of Bulwer and his 'New Monthly Magazine'. There is no firm evidence, however, that Maginn was her lover, and much evidence against posthumous allegations that he blackmailed her or sent her anonymous letters. 
Oddly enough, Maginn, whom Daniel O'Connell dubbed 'that hoary headed libeller' (Kenealy, 93), caused only two suits against 'Fraser's'. The first came when Alaric 'Attila' Watts, dubbed the 'principal fribble among the namby-pambies of the Annuals' ('Fraser's', July 1831, cover), took umbrage over Maclise's drawing of him sneaking downstairs with pictures under his arms, and Maginn's jibes about his backbiting propensities. Watts won a partial victory (5 December 1835) after Fraser's defence was thrown out on a technicality. The second case was the more serious. Maginn skewered the honourable Grantley Berkeley's egotistical novel, 'Berkeley Castle', in 'Fraser's' (August 1836). Grantley, accompanied by his brother Craven, surprised James Fraser alone in his shop, and nearly killed him with a lead-weighted riding crop. They were arraigned at the Marlborough Street station and released on bond -- though Fraser later decided to seek damages in civil court, and Berkeley counter-sued him for libel. 
Maginn claimed that in Ireland 'for dueling purposes' a gentleman was a man 'who wore a clean shirt once a week' ('Fraser's', 'Defence', 14. 368), and he generally found the Code Duello ridiculous. 'Bob Burke's duel with Ensign Brady of the 48th' is one of the great comic takes on duelling ('Blackwood', 1834). Nevertheless, hearing of the assault he immediately sent his card to Berkeley House. The encounter between the sportsman and crack shot and the tipsy journalist was fought in a field off the Harrow Road on the evening of 5 August. Aim, steady or not, was taken thrice, with both parties missing each time; Maginn's second, Hugh Fraser, then interceded. As they entered Fraser's carriage to return to town, the Berkeley brothers shouted insults after them. 
After the duel Maginn wrote a signed 'Defence' for 'Fraser's', and seems to have decided, at long last, to write for posterity. While he contributed to 'Fraser's', his friendship with the publisher understandably cooled, and when Richard Bentley began a new magazine with Charles Dickens at the helm, Maginn was part of the team. After 1836 he wrote much of his best work: the 'Shakespeare papers' in 'Bentley's Miscellany' and in 'Fraser's' the 'Homeric Ballads', translations from Lucian, and a number of scholarly essays (for example, 'Farmer on the learning of Shakespeare'). Unfortunately, his financial situation sank as fast as works flew from his pen, and he also scribbled for the weekly papers (notably 'The Age' and 'The Argus') and briefly edited the 'Lancashire Herald' (Liverpool, 1838-9). From debtor's prison itself he contributed to 'Fleet Papers', 'The Town', 'The Squib', and the new 'Punch' (their respective editors were briefly fellow inmates). 
Sir Robert Peel had brought in a Conservative government in 1841, and despite his lampooning of Peel, Maginn had hoped for some reward for his partisan services. A number of his political essays in 'Fraser's' had been popular as pamphlets, and like Peel he urged the development of a post-Reform 'conservative' party. When no government offers surfaced, he believed that Peel held a personal grudge. In fact, Peel had funnelled $100 to Ellen Maginn through Giffard, but she elected not to tell her husband for fear he might turn it down. With money running out after Maginn's death a public subscription was announced (the king of Hanover gave a further $100), and Francis Mahony saw that the Literary Fund Society made a grant. On the form under 'Causes of distress' Mahony entered 'The casualties of a life wholly dependent on literature' (Royal Literary Fund archives, case 1054). 
In person Maginn was invariably in good temper, would break into a tune in the middle of conversation, and enjoyed the company of coal-heavers and navvies over that of lords and swells. He was grey-haired by his late twenties, though otherwise youthful in appearance, and when too drunk to walk could get home by breaking into a brisk jog. He was apparently never too drunk to write. Friends commented on his remarkable lack of personal rancour towards the political opponents and literary figures he 'squabashed', and on his extraordinary memory and ability to write accurately and well while carrying on a conversation on a different topic. Even when sick and in the Fleet he impressed Richard Oastler, the 'Factory Act' campaigner, with his witty conversation, cheerfulness, and radical tory politics. As Thackeray noted, however, for the Victorians he was chiefly 'a famous subject for moralizing' ('Letters', 2. 140-41). 
Maginn's final attempt at fiction was 'John Manesty, Liverpool Merchant', completed by Charles Ollier and published posthumously (1844). He had frequently been urged to collect his best articles in more permanent form. But when he did so, the project was under-capitalized and under-puffed, so a publication in parts called 'Magazine Miscellanies' (1841) went mostly unpurchased. With its failure he was sued, and once again lodged in the Fleet prison, where his tuberculosis accelerated. After release on humanitarian grounds, Maginn was reluctantly induced to take advantage of the 'Insolvent Debtor's Act' (18 June 1842). Lacking the funds to travel to the warmer climate his doctors recommended, the Maginns went instead to a little village in Surrey. On 11 August 1842 he wrote to his old Cork friend, Crofton Croker: 'Here I am at Walton-on-Thames, coughing my heart up. The doctors think I am going to die' (Thrall, 205). In the wee hours of Sunday morning, 21 August, the doctors were proved correct, and he died in an upstairs room at Cypress Lodge surrounded by his family. He was buried on 29 August in a pauper's grave in the churchyard of the church of St Mary, Walton-on-Thames; during the service and interment remarkable peals of thunder rang out from a clear blue sky. 
Maginn remains important to historians of the press, especially for his role in 'The Standard', but he is chiefly remembered for his work in 'Blackwood's' and 'Fraser's', where for over twenty years he stirred the pot with learned, witty, and frequently scurrilous essays, reviews, parodies, burlesques, and pasquinades, almost all anonymous or pseudonymous. Politically he supported only the tories; later accusations that he wrote for both whigs and tories are not true, and seem to have arisen from his own satire of such newspapermen in 'The Tobias correspondence' ('Blackwood', 1840). He brought a unique sensibility to this work: tory, but allergic to any form of aristocratic pretension; proudly Irish, but strongly pro-Union and protestant; anti-bourgeois and a champion of the labourers, because convinced the working classes were naturally conservative; and deeply learned, though rarely pedantic. His debts seem to have accrued through the daily accumulation of not knowing how to say no, and his house was open to any Corkman who found the door. Kenealy, however, believed that the extravagance of Ellen Maginn contributed to his ruin. 
Maginn would no doubt be better known if he had spent his critical forces and formidable powers of ridicule on Carlyle, Tennyson, Browning, Dickens, and Thackeray, instead of working with them or praising their work. After all, his friend Lockhart -- who wrote a famous epitaph on 'bright, broken Maginn' -- is now chiefly remembered for ridiculing Keats and the cockney school. Instead, while the Victorians disowned this brilliant though dissolute Corkman, his unsparing assault on the dominant mediocrities popular in the 1830s helped clear the ground for the greater literature to come. 


@@@@@


doc= 17785


Maglorius (fl. late 6th cent.), ascetic, is commemorated on 24 October. There is, however, no contemporary or near-contemporary evidence for his existence. According to his life, he was born in south Wales, to parents named Afrella and Umbrafel and was educated at Illtud's monastery of Llantwit Major. The life also claims that he was the cousin of St Samson; a different tradition makes him cousin of St Malo (Machutus). He was reputed to have been consecrated deacon by Samson, and to have accompanied the latter when he left Britain for Brittany. Maglorius's life asserts that Samson, dying, appointed Maglorius to succeed him as 'archbishop' of Dol but that the saint soon thereafter resigned the office and retreated to a remote monastery, which seems to have been on the island of Sark. He died on Sark and a post-mortem cult subsequently developed there. Maglorius's relics are known to have been translated to Lehon, near Dol, in the middle of the ninth century, and to have been transferred to Paris at the time of the viking invasions of Brittany 'c'.920. 
Almost everything about Maglorius is problematic. The name itself is the Latinized form of a Brittonic name, the Welsh form being Meilyr and the Breton Maeler, but the saint is not attested as such. His earliest life was written before 'c'.1000, probably in Brittany in the late ninth or early tenth century. It has never been fully published; of the various manuscripts in which it survives, none contains the complete text. Its author clearly knew very little indeed about his subject. The claim that Maglorius was 'archbishop' not bishop of Dol reflects the unsuccessful bid to secure metropolitan status for the see of Dol in the 860s, but there are grounds for doubting whether Maglorius was ever bishop of Dol at all, and whether he ever had any contact with Samson, for he is not one of the two immediate successors of Samson mentioned in that saint's early life. There is a good case for arguing that Maglorius was an ascetic on the island of Sark, and that after his remains reached Lehon, his name and cult were appropriated by the clergy at Dol in the later ninth century for their own political purposes. 
The author of the life also wrote accounts of some of Maglorius's miracles, and a description of the translation of his remains to Lehon. These are a valuable indication of the literary culture of Carolingian Brittany, for the author shows his familiarity with Christian Latin authors and with Virgil as well as with the 'Bible'. An account of the relics' removal to Paris survives in a twelfth-century form. The life was rewritten in Old French, in both prose and verse, the former in 1315 and the latter in 1319, both in conjunction with the translation of the saint's remains to a new reliquary. John Tynemouth provided an epitome of the Latin life in his 'Sanctilogium Angliae, Walliae, Scotiae et Hiberniae'. 
The centre for Maglorius's cult was the church in Paris which housed his relics, originally St Barthelemy but renamed St Magloire. From here, liturgical commemoration of his feast day (24 October) spread to a few other churches in the Ile-de-France and to places with particular links with St Magloire. His feast is also noted in a handful of late medieval English martyrologies. In Brittany, he is the patron of the churches at Mahalon in Plomodiern (Finistere) and at Chatelaudren (Cotes-d'Armor). It has been suggested on philological grounds that his cult may have become confused with that of the Breton saint Meloir and/or that of the saint attested in Cornwall as Melor and in Brittany as Melar. The truth cannot, however, be established and it remains the case that there is no certain evidence of any church dedication to Maglorius nor onomastic commemoration of him anywhere in the British Isles. 


@@@@@


doc= 17786


Magnus, Thomas (1463/4-1550), administrator and diplomat, was born in Newark-on-Trent, Nottinghamshire, the son of John Magnus and his wife, Alice. His early education is obscure, but he rose in consequence of the patronage of Thomas Savage, archbishop of York, beginning royal service as chaplain to Henry VII and establishing himself as an important figure in northern diplomacy and administration. He had achieved sufficient favour to receive the archdeaconry of the East Riding of Yorkshire from 1504, and he worked as a treasurer with the northern armies, sending diplomatic reports back to the council from Scotland and the north of England. He established a close personal relationship with Henry VIII's sister, Margaret Tudor, queen of Scotland, who describes him as counsellor and chaplain in letters to her brother, and he served on a number of diplomatic missions to Scotland, including commissions to negotiate Anglo-Scottish truces. He was incorporated at Oxford in 1520, having already obtained a doctorate abroad, and was with the king that year at the Field of Cloth of Gold, serving also as a member of the council. Magnus was a notable example of the civil service pluralist who was instrumental, through assiduous royal service, in consolidating the Henrician Reformation. 
Rewards heaped on Magnus for loyal service included a canonry at Windsor from 1520 to 1547, and the prebend of North Kelsey in the diocese of Lincoln from 1521 to 1522 and of Corringham from 1522 to 1549. In 1524 Wolsey, fearing the influence of the pro-French lobby in Scotland, entrusted Magnus with the task of reconciling Margaret with her second husband, Archibald Douglas, fifth earl of Angus. The mission proved unsuccessful owing to Margaret's unrelenting antipathy towards Angus. Four years later Magnus was instructed to attempt a reconciliation between James V, following his assumption of royal authority in 1528, and his former chancellor the pro-English Angus. When, early in 1529, James gave Magnus his version of the events of 1528, the latter took the opportunity to deliver a warning to the young king about the dangers of using 'yong consaill', citing as an example the fate of James III in a lecture impertinently threatening to a crowned monarch and inaccurate in its content. Impetus was lent to Magnus's efforts by the fear that James would contract a foreign marriage alliance. In the face of this threat Wolsey was adamant that Angus should be reinstated in order to act as Henry's agent in Scotland. To strengthen the earl's position Magnus was instructed to deny rumours that Angus had ever intended to kidnap James at the instruction of the English king. However, the complexities of Scottish border and national politics rendered it virtually impossible for the earl to regain his influence with James. 
In 1525 Henry sent his illegitimate son Henry Fitzroy, duke of Richmond, to head the council of the north. Magnus served as the council's surveyor and receiver-general, devoting great effort to the reorganization of its poorly ordered accounts and records. As a royal agent, he also pressured the northern clergy to pay a large fine to the king to avoid charges under the 'Statute of Praemunire', and in 1533 he assisted Rowland Lee, bishop of Coventry and Lichfield, to induce the northern convocation to accept the unpopular royal divorce. Henry's gratitude meant that by the mid-1530s Magnus held the masterships of St Leonard's Hospital at York, the college of St Sepulchre, near York Minster, and Sibthorpe College, Nottinghamshire, in addition to being vicar of Kendal, Westmorland, and rector of Bedale, Kirkby in Cleveland and Sessay, all in the North Riding of Yorkshire. It is a measure of his importance that his eight benefices in the diocese of York alone yielded $814 per annum. 
On 21 April 1533 Magnus wrote to Thomas Cromwell, the king's secretary, stating that he had sent to Nottinghamshire for his horses to go north to the convocation at York although he had been sick, his 'old body now so oft clogged with infirmity and unwieldiness' ('LP Henry VIII', 6.361). Nevertheless, he lived for another seventeen years, serving on royal commissions, as JP for all three ridings of Yorkshire from 1538 to 1550, and on the council of the north. He was present in 1535 when Lee preached a sermon supporting Henry's break with Rome and, in a report dated 1 July 1535 concerning the conformity found in the charter house and parish church of Hull, Magnus states that there 'is not a more quiet jurisdiction than my archdeaconry' ('LP Henry VIII', 8.968). 
In 1536 Thomas Darcy, Baron Darcy, wrote to the king mentioning the assistance given to him by Magnus concerning the insurrection in Lincolnshire and the East Riding, and the archdeacon was also involved in the suppression of the monasteries. In a plea to the king from Thomas Howard, third duke of Norfolk, on 16 June 1537 to strengthen the council of the north, he referred to Magnus as a good old man, although less able every day. Indeed, infirmity in the form of a bad leg prevented Magnus from going to see the king in December 1537. He continued to take part in the council, his signature appearing in its records over the next few years, but on 1 December 1539 he surrendered the mastership of St Leonard's Hospital and all his possessions in York in exchange for a pension, a dwelling house, the grange of Beningborough in Yorkshire, and other grants. He was cultivated by the new regime of Edward VI. Edward Seymour, duke of Somerset and lord protector, paid him an annuity of $15 11's'. 2died in 1547-8 out of his own purse. 
In 1529 Magnus founded a grammar school and chantry to pray for the souls of his father, mother, and sisters, but his intention was rendered void by the dissolution of chantries in the late 1540s. He died aged eighty-six at Sessay on 28 August 1550 and was buried beneath a portrait brass in the chancel of the parish church there, notwithstanding his wish, expressed in his will, to be buried in York Minster beside his erstwhile patron, Savage. 


@@@@@


doc= 17787


Mac Craith, Seaan mac Ruaidhri (fl. mid-14th cent.), historian, was a member of the Mac Craith family of hereditary bardic poets, which appears in the sixteenth-century 'Fiants' of Queen Elizabeth I as settled near Pallas Green in east co. Limerick and Clogheen in south co. Tipperary. The death of 'the son of Mac Raith, the 'file'' (or learned poet), is recorded in the annals of Inisfallen as early as 1097. The annals of the four masters, under the year 1098, add that he was 'arch-poet of Munster'. The next representative of the line to appear in the annals was Ruaidhri Mac Craith (died 1343), described by the four masters as 'ollamh le dan' or 'master-poet' to the southern half of Ireland. This Ruaidhri is depicted in the elaborate historical narrative 'Caithreim Thoirdhealbhaigh' ('The triumphs of Toirdhealbhach'), which celebrates Toirdelbach O Briain (died 1306), as lamenting the slain warriors after the battle of Corcomrua Abbey, which took place in 1317 between rival factions within the O Briain dynasty. The 'Caithreim' (which survives in copies at the Royal Irish Academy and Trinity College, Dublin) takes as its main themes the power struggle within the Ui Briain from the mid-thirteenth century, promoting the cause of the Clann Toirdelbaig over that of the Clann Briain Ruaid, and the relationship of the Ui Briain with the Anglo-Norman Clares, whom it vilifies. According to the heading in a copy of 'Caithreim Thoirdhealbhaigh' which was written in 1721 by the co. Clare scribe Aindrias Mac Cruitin, the tract was composed by Seaan mac Ruaidhri Mac Craith in 1459. However, literary and historical critics since T. J. Westropp in 1904 have agreed that on internal evidence the tract was composed in the mid-fourteenth century, most probably for the chief Diarmait O Briain (died 1364), the 1459 date being either a misreading by Mac Cruitin, or applying to an intermediary copy of the original text. A mid-fourteenth-century date for the tract's composition increases the likelihood that the author, Seaan, was a son of the poet Ruaidhri who is twice mentioned in the tract itself. 
Other Mac Craith poets who flourished in the fourteenth century were Murchadh gan Crios ('the Beltless'), who addressed a poem to Sir William Bermingham (died 1332?), Maolmhuire Bacach ('the Lame'), who eulogized the chiefs Muircheartach O Briain (died 1343) and Aodh Reamhar O Neill (died 1364), and Eoghan an t-Orthoir ('the Gilder') who composed an ode to Art Mac Murchadha Caomhanach (died 1417), paramount chief of Leinster. The family continued to supply professional court poets to the aristocracy of Munster and Leinster up to the early seventeenth century, one of the later members, Eoghan, son of Donnchadh Maol ('the Bald') Mac Craith, also being the author of a number of religious poems. 


@@@@@


doc= 17788


Magrath, Meiler (c.1523-1622), archbishop of Cashel, was born the eldest son of Donough 'Gillegrowmoe' Magrath (died in or after 1589), chieftain, on the borders of counties Donegal and Fermanagh. For generations the Magrath sept or clan had been erenaghs, or hereditary wardens, of Termon Magrath, an ancient ecclesiastical district in the parish of Templecarn in co. Donegal. Donough Magrath came into possession of Termon Magrath and other nearby ecclesiastical lands upon acceding to the Magrath chieftaincy some time in the mid-sixteenth century. 
Little is known of Meiler Magrath's early years, but he became a Franciscan friar about 1540, was ordained priest in 1549, and travelled the continent for many years before arriving in Rome. On 12 October 1565 he was appointed bishop of Down and Connor by papal provision and shortly thereafter returned to Ireland. However, the see to which he was appointed had come under the control of Shane O'Neill, who was then in open rebellion against Elizabeth I. Through the Roman Catholic archbishop of Armagh, Richard Creagh, whose acquaintance he may have made in Rome, Magrath dined with Shane in August 1566 and appeared ready to support the powerful chief in his struggle against the queen. Following Shane's defeat, however, Magrath surrendered himself at Drogheda, co. Louth, to the lord deputy, Sir Henry Sidney, and expressed a willingness to renounce the pope, Pius V, and hold his bishopric of the queen. 
The government, hoping to exploit a native bishop willing to conform, summoned Magrath to England in spring 1570 and (in the hope that his example would be followed by other Gaelic clerics) appointed him bishop of Clogher on 18 September. On 3 February 1571 he was made archbishop of Cashel and bishop of Emly, though he remained the nominal bishop of Clogher until 1605. His relocation to the more prominent see of Cashel coincided with James Fitzmaurice's rebellion. By summer 1571 Magrath had incurred the rebels' enmity following his imprisonment of several Cashel-based friars, who had allegedly preached against the queen. Undaunted, Magrath furnished the government throughout Fitzmaurice's rebellion with valuable information on rebel activity in Munster. He continued to monitor the activities of rebels during the 1570s. His unfounded accusations levelled against Gerald Fitzgerald, eleventh earl of Kildare, and Thomas Butler, eleventh earl of Ormond, in 1572, however, led Sir William Fitzwilliam, the lord deputy, to deem Magrath's writings to be 'but fancy rather than truth' (TNA: PRO, SP 63/37/3). However, despite Fitzwilliam's distrust, Magrath remained one of the few visible successes of a religious reform movement that had made little real progress among Gaelic clerics. His high-profile position was an embarrassment for Rome and on 14 March 1580 the pope, Gregory XIII, finally deprived him of Down and Connor, 'ob crimen haeresis et alia multa scelera' ('for the crime of heresy and many other offences'), which he had held concurrently with the archbishopric of Cashel for nine years (Brady, 1.265). 
With letters of recommendation from the Irish privy council, Magrath travelled to England in October 1582, where he complained of the impoverished state of his archbishopric; he also delivered a letter to Elizabeth urging her to require any judge, jury, or witness in Ireland to swear an oath of allegiance to her before passing judgment on known protestants. He was well received and in November was awarded, 'in commendam', the revenue of the temporalities and spiritualities of the bishoprics of Lismore and Waterford to help offset his financial difficulties. In July 1584 Magrath petitioned to have his ancestral lands in Ulster granted to his ageing father, with remainder to his legitimate male heirs, to hold of the queen. By this time Magrath had married Anne, or Aine, O'Meara (died in or after 1622), of Lisany, co. Tipperary, with whom he had at least four sons and several daughters. For the rest of the decade Magrath, who had received a grant of English liberty in May 1578, devoted himself to the spread of protestantism and the extension of English law. In 1584 he arrested Maurice O'Brien, Roman Catholic bishop of Emly, and in March 1589 he wrote strongly in favour of the Kerry planter, Sir William Herbert: 'truly I think it were better for Her Majesty to have six like him in this realm to win the people's heart and good will, and to bring them into true and loyal subjection than 6,000 soldiers' (TNA: PRO, SP 63/142/17). Yet his religious devotion and loyalty were continually under suspicion. Rumours of his complicity in the rebellion of Gerald fitz James Fitzgerald, fourteenth earl of Desmond (between 1579 and 1583), and his alleged religious ambivalence -- fuelled, perhaps, by the continued adherence to Catholicism of his wife and children, and his cousin Dermod Magrath's position as Roman Catholic bishop of Cork -- were not easily dismissed. His accumulation of wealth, moreover, led Fitzwilliam to declare that he 'mislikes his greedie mynde to heape together large possessions and contentious nature always bent to quarell with such as were his neighbours' (TNA: PRO, SP 63/158/53). However, Thomas Weatherhead's nomination as bishop of Waterford and Lismore on 21 March 1589 deprived Magrath of a lucrative source of income and in 1591 he travelled to England, without licence, to seek remuneration. 
During his absence, the rumours surrounding Magrath developed into accusations of treasons, felonies, simony, and extortion. Fitzwilliam, who had emerged as Magrath's most vocal opponent, played no small part in the opposition. Opposition, however, was not limited to English officials: Magrath's religious conversion and his acquiescence in the Tudor state had left him alienated from the Gaelic world. A poem vilifying Magrath and several other clerics who had adopted the new religion was composed by Eoghan O Dubhtaigh: 'An chliar -- sa anois tig anall, cliar dhall ar a ndeachaidh ceo, ni mo leo Muire na dog; dar by God, ni rachaidh leo' ('These clergymen who have come by the other side -- blind clergy enveloped in fog, respect a dog more than Mary and, by heaven, they should not get away with it'; Mhag Craith, 133). This clever usage of English terminology to satirize Magrath and his colleagues reflects the degree to which the Gaelic learned classes associated acceptance of the new religion with acceptance of English culture. However, Magrath remained popular at court and was restored to Waterford and Lismore following Weatherhead's death in 1592. In May of that year the queen commanded that he produce a tract concerning the state of Ireland with a plan for its reformation. Employing his intimate knowledge of Gaelic Ireland, Magrath wrote and delivered a book to Elizabeth, declaring the state of Ireland, with the means to increase the revenues, amend the government, and withstand Spanish practices. In a letter to Sir Robert Cecil dated June 1593, he responded to the allegations levelled against him. He claimed his enemies: 'have joyned hartes and handes togeather to overthrow and destroy my poore selfe well knowne to be (of that cuntrey birth) theire onlie ey sore and chiefest preventer and detecter of all their mischievous practizes and thirsted for invacon' (TNA: PRO, SP 63/170/4). Ultimately it was Fitzwilliam's recall in August 1594 that caused much of the opposition to subside. 
Magrath was briefly taken prisoner by Conn, son of Hugh O'Neill, second earl of Tyrone, early in 1599. Tyrone, eager to broaden his confederation beyond Ulster and believing Magrath's loyalty to be firmly rooted in the region, ordered his immediate release. Tyrone's rebellion, however, had upset Magrath's financial interests and in late 1599 he travelled to England to offer his advice on how best to suppress the rebellion. Magrath, who boasted 'although they [the rebels] mislike much of mee in matters of religion, yet they love mee naturally', believed that he could play an integral part in negotiating an end to the rebellion (TNA: PRO, SP 63/206/24). Cecil, finding him 'a most turbulent spirit', declined to employ his services against Tyrone, but granted him a pension in 1600. Magrath, approaching eighty, continued to perform his ecclesiastical duties into James I's reign, although he came under criticism in February 1604 when Sir John Davies noted that he was 'an example of pluralities', holding 'in his hands four bishoprics... and three score and ten spiritual livings' ('CSP Ire.', '1603-6', 143). Magrath, in his own time, had become synonymous with ecclesiastical corruption and greed; in 1607 he was forced to relinquish his right to the revenue of Waterford and Lismore and was granted 'in commendam' (though he did not come fully into their possession until 1611) the remote, and poor, bishoprics of Killala and Achonry in Connaught instead. 
The political reorganization and plantation of Ulster that followed Tyrone's defeat in 1603 brought Magrath, who spent the preponderance of his later years on his Ulster lands, into conflict with the growing number of English-born planters arriving in Ireland. In 1609 George Montgomery, bishop of Derry, Clogher, and Raphoe, claimed patrimony of Termon Magrath, but Magrath refused to recognize the claim and successfully saw the lands granted to his son the following year. In 1611 differences arose between Magrath and Davies, who claimed possession of certain lands adjacent to Termon Magrath. Though Magrath ceased to wield any political influence in London or Dublin and stood increasingly as an obstacle to both ecclesiastical and political reform, the government found it difficult to curtail his powers. Some attempt was made to limit his influence in Cashel when in 1610 William Knight was appointed coadjutor of the bishopric. However, Knight's stay was a disaster; it became apparent that he shared Magrath's fondness for whiskey and, after appearing pixilated in public, departed in disgrace. In February 1612 the lord deputy, Sir Arthur Chichester, while condemning Magrath's abuses, warned Cecil (now first earl of Salisbury) 'not to discontent that heady Archbishop... for he is a powerful man amongst the Irish of Ulster, and able to do much hurt by underhand practices, in which he is well experienced' ('CSP Ire.', '1611-14', 241). Magrath sat in the House of Lords in the 1613 parliament and remained in possession of his bishoprics until his death on 14 November 1622, aged nearly one hundred. He was buried in his cathedral at Cashel and left a sizeable inheritance (amassed from years of widespread alienation of ecclesiastical lands) to his four living sons and four daughters. The Catholic tradition holds that Magrath was not buried at Cashel, but was reconciled to Rome and buried, in full Roman vestments, elsewhere. His cryptic epitaph lends some credibility to this belief: 'Hic ubi sum positus non sum, sum, non ubi non sum; sum nec in ambobus, sum sed utroque loco' ('Here, where I am placed, I am not, and thus the case is, I am not in both, yet am in both the places'; Lowry-Corry, 107). In early 1612 the Franciscans expected his conversion and appointed a priest to receive Magrath into the church, but whether in the end he re-embraced Catholicism is of purely personal significance, as he did not disavow his marriage or relinquish the bishoprics which he held of the king. 
For the Tudor government, Magrath's Gaelic background, coupled with his exceptional intelligence and ability to communicate fluently in English, Gaelic, and Latin, made him the perfect candidate to advance religious reform in Ireland; and, initially, he eagerly promoted the new religion and the state which he believed would eventually come to dominate Ireland. However, he underestimated the size of the task before him and his campaign against the old religion faltered. Magrath had fallen between the two worlds that he was meant to bridge, and this, together with his avarice, simony, and various other abuses, greatly damaged the protestant cause in Ireland and earned him an infamous reputation among English and Irish alike. 


@@@@@


doc= 17789


Mac Maghnusa, Cathal Og (1439-1498), historian, was the son of Cathal Og Mac Maghnusa (died 1480) and, presumably, of his wife, Grainne (died 1462), the daughter of Tomas Og Mag Uidhir, king of Fermanagh (died 1480), and grandson of Cathal Mor Mac Maghnusa (died 1433). He is best known as the compiler of the annals of Ulster. He was born in February 1439 and in 1488 he was inaugurated as head of the Mac Maghnusa sept, distant relations of the Mag Uidhir dynasty, the greater part of whose royal mensal lands were held by the Mic Mhaghnusa, 'free from all common charges and contributions of the country, because they yielded a large proportion of butter and meal and other provisions for M'Guire's table', as Sir John Davies observed in 1607 (Morley, 368). The hereditary Mac Maghnusa title was 'biatach' ('food-provider') or 'brughaidh' ('hospitaller'), referring not only to their obligations towards the king of Fermanagh, but also to their provision of public hospitality by maintaining a guest house for travellers, and especially for bardic troops, a customary charity in medieval Ireland. 
Mac Maghnusa's estates were centred on Belleisle (Seanadh Mic Mhaghnusa) on Lough Erne, but he also entered the church (the bishop of Clogher diocese from 1448 to 1483 was his maternal uncle). He became parson of Iniskeen on Lough Erne, canon choral of Armagh and Clogher cathedrals, rural dean of Lough Erne (a deanery containing twelve churches), and episcopal vicar-general for the same area during a period of vacancy and disputed succession in Clogher diocese from 1483 to 1498. An eighteenth-century tradition that he held these ecclesiastical posts as a layman may be based on his being the proud father of a number of children: these included two daughters called Catherina ('b'. 1475 and 1477) and one named Grainne (died 1497), sons Cathal Og (1476-1494), Edward ('b'. 1479), Cormac ('b'. 1482), Cuchonnacht ('b'. 1485), and Magonius 
(Mathghamhain or Maghnus; 'b'. 1486)
, and his heir, Tomas Giolla-Baodain, the 'official', or ecclesiastical judge, of Clogher diocese. However, approving references to 'wives' and children of the higher clergy abound in Mac Maghnusa's own annals and either he himself or his son Tomas was married to Siobhan (died 1515), daughter of Bishop Mag Bradaigh of Kilmore diocese. 
Apart from its frank and detailed record of society in fifteenth-century Fermanagh, the original manuscript of the annals of Ulster (Trinity College, Dublin, MS H.1.8), whose entries begin with the first century of the Christian era and continue after the death of Mac Maghnusa to 1504, is remarkable for its comparatively accurate dates and the scrupulous care taken to distinguish between the text of a series of annal entries of early Christian origin and additional material derived from later sources -- an enormously useful decision. An entry for 1497 records Mac Maghnusa himself destroying the cave of St Patrick's purgatory in response to papal orders. The complaints about extortions from pilgrims which gave rise to this decree may include Mac Maghnusa among the accused, though it erroneously refers to the 'bishop' (rather than vicar-general) of the vacant see of Clogher. Predictably, the notice of his death (from smallpox) as it appears in the brief continuation of his own annals for 23 March of the following year, gives him an elevated character quite incompatible with this suggestion. 


@@@@@


doc= 17790


Maguire, Connor, second baron of Enniskillen (c.1612-1645), conspirator, was born in co. Fermanagh, Ireland, the eldest of four sons (there were also four daughters) of Brian Roe Maguire, first baron of Enniskillen ('c'.1589-1633), and Rose ny Neale, daughter of Art Mac Avernan O Neile, of co. Armagh. This branch of the Maguires supported the English during the Nine Years' War and was granted the Magherastephana barony in co. Fermanagh, which Maguire still owned in 1641, making him one of the most substantial surviving Gaelic landowners in Ulster. In his youth Maguire attended school with John Clotworthy, and he reputedly spent some time at Magdalen College, Oxford. He was certainly fluent in both Irish and English. Upon the death of his father in 1633 he inherited the title baron of Enniskillen. Related to many of the leading Ulster Irish families, by 1633 Maguire was married to Mary, daughter of Thomas Fleming, of Castle Fleming, co. Cavan; they had several sons. 
Maguire attended the Dublin parliaments of 1634 and 1640-41. About February 1641, while in Dublin, Roger Moore initiated him into a plot of the Irish gentry to redress Irish Catholic grievances, playing on the baron's huge debts and valuing his influential kinship ties both in Ulster and (through his wife) in the pale; the activation of such ties seems to have been Maguire's chief role in the plot. With his brother Rory (subsequently Irish leader in co. Fermanagh) Maguire was one of the Irish notables who in May 1641 sent an emissary to his uncle Owen Roe O'Neill in Flanders, asking him to support their plan. In August, Maguire first learned of the plan to take Dublin Castle. At his later examination he alleged that his intention in the plot was to exert pressure in favour of remedying grievances of Roman Catholics, including gaining toleration of their religion. In Ulster and in his native co. Fermanagh, Maguire solicited the support of the Irish gentry for the plot. However, his cousin Brian Maguire was clearly reluctant to become involved: the baron wrote to him, noting his partiality towards the English, and making threatening remarks about those who would not support the Irish action. About 21 October 1641 Fergus O'Howen, follower of Brian Maguire, came to John Carmick in Enniskillen Castle to warn him about the plot to take Dublin and Enniskillen; Carmick told Sir William Cole, who sent word to the lords justices. This report was confirmed by Flartagh McHugh, who was sent by Brian Mac Conaght Maguire to Enniskillen Castle to warn Sir William Cole. 
Meanwhile, a day or two earlier Maguire, together with Hugh Mac Mahon and a number of gentlemen from co. Fermanagh and co. Monaghan, had set out for Dublin. The conspirators were to meet in the lodging of Mac Mahon. On the night of 22 October Owen Connolly, servant of Sir John Clotworthy, informed Lord Justice Parsons of the plan to take Dublin Castle; later that evening, Mac Mahon was captured, and a watch was set on the house in Castle Street where Maguire, with about twelve followers, was lodging. A number of weapons was found and linked to Maguire's group. The following morning Maguire was apprehended in Cooke Street, behind the locked door of a cockloft. As an indication of the peer's standing in the conspiracy, and in contrast to the opinion of Sir Henry Bruce, who in the following month referred to the baron as 'but a drunken fellow of no importance' (Ches. & Chester ALSS, MS DCC 47/9), it was alleged that after the Irish took Charlemont Castle, co. Armagh (22 October), they desired to exchange Toby Caulfeild for Maguire; this did not happen, however, and Caulfeild was subsequently killed. 
On 26 March 1642 Maguire was examined by order of the lords justices and made a voluntary statement. On 12 June 1642, along with Mac Mahon and Lieutenant-Colonel John Reade, he was transferred to Westminster and lodged in the Tower of London. In February 1643 the prisoners were removed to Newgate prison, where there were complaints about their poor treatment. On 18 August 1644, using saws procured by a Scotswoman, Maguire and Mac Mahon escaped from the Tower; by 13 September they, together with two accessories to the escape, were traced to the Spanish ambassador's house; the escapees were recaptured on 18 September having taken refuge in the house of Mrs Leviston (or Levinsteyn), a Flemish Catholic, where the French envoy resided. The Spanish ambassador, Don Alonso de Cardenas, denied any involvement in the escape bid, while admitting that the accomplices, two priests (one Irish, one English), had been part of his household. 
In November 1644 Maguire and Mac Mahon were arraigned before Justice Bacon at the court of the king's bench, and charged with high treason. Mac Mahon was tried first, found guilty, and executed. However, Maguire pleaded that his Irish peerage entitled him to a trial by his peers in Ireland. This was the subject of legal wrangling which entailed that the trial was deferred until February 1645. William Prynne was the leading prosecutor, who argued that trial in England for treason committed elsewhere was valid, citing the precedents of the O'Rourke case (1591), and the trial of Sir John Perrott (1592). Judge Bacon ruled against Maguire's plea, holding that a baron of Ireland was triable by a jury in England. Thereafter the English parliament endorsed Bacon's judgment. Maguire was found guilty, thereby forfeiting his title and lands; he petitioned the Commons to avoid being hanged, drawn, and quartered, citing his dignity as a peer, but the petition was rejected. In court Sir John Clotworthy spoke for the condemned, referring to their schooldays together, and recalling letters of Maguire in which, allegedly, he expressed remorse. 
In his will, composed shortly before his execution, Maguire left $50 to be divided among the Franciscan friaries of south Ulster, and entrusted his will to Lisgoole friary. On 20 February 1645 Maguire was drawn by sledge from the Tower to Tyburn. Denied the services of a Franciscan friar, he faced persistent questioning from Sheriff Gibbs and Dr Sibbald, a puritan divine, asking if he were sorry for the deaths of the Irish protestants. Before the crowd Maguire forgave his enemies, and affirmed his adherence to Roman Catholicism and his trust in Jesus Christ. While he was hanging, an officer cut the rope, letting Maguire drop alive, and commanded the executioner to open him. A struggle between condemned and executioner ensued, and, to spare him, the executioner cut the peer's throat. 


@@@@@


doc= 17791


Maguire, Sir Hugh, lord of Fermanagh (d. 1600), chieftain and rebel, was the eldest son of Cu Chonnacht Maguire, lord of Fermanagh (died 1589), Irish chieftain, and his wife, Nuala, or Fionnghuala, daughter of Manus O'Donnell, lord of Tyrconnell. Although Hugh Maguire was recognized by his father as his heir, his succession to the position of Maguire was challenged on Cu Chonnacht's death in 1589. Rival branches of the Maguire kin group nominated Connor Roe Maguire as lord 'according [to] all the customs and ceremonies in the country' (TNA: PRO, SP 63/170/11). Maguire's claim prevailed, however, because he received support from the O'Donnells and from the Irish privy council, which had courted Cu Chonnacht and hoped to maintain friendly contact with his son. Government recognition of Maguire was confirmed in 1591 when he was knighted in a ceremony in Christ Church in Dublin. 
Maguire's inauguration as chief coincided with a period of considerable instability in the north-west. From 1585 Sir Richard Bingham, president of Connaught, steadily extended his control in the region, establishing crown garrisons and appointing English-style local government officials. The beaching of ships from the Spanish Armada on the northern coast in 1588 led to an intensification of his military rule as rumours circulated that Gaelic lords, including Maguire and Brian O'Rourke, were liaising with the Spaniards and petitioning them to return with a second armada. In 1589 Bingham's brother George Bingham launched an attack on O'Rourke's country of Leitrim which bordered Maguire's territory to the west. O'Rourke fled Ireland but Maguire offered protection to his son Brian Og O'Rourke, who subsequently married Maguire's sister. Maguire also expressed his support for the MacMahons, whose lordship of Monaghan lay to the east of Fermanagh, and also witnessed increased government interference in 1589 when the ruling MacMahon was executed and plans were initiated by Sir William Fitzwilliam, the lord deputy, to subdivide the entire lordship. While the Monaghan land settlement was being finalized, Bingham entered Fermanagh and, according to Maguire, killed men, women, and children and took away large preys of cattle and horses. 
The ruthlessness of the Bingham regime in the north-west was a major factor in the subsequent conflict in Ulster and Maguire's pivotal role in it. Maguire later claimed that he supported the Nine Years' War not 'in respect of any combinations with any foreign enemy or of any malice towards Her Majesty but through the occasion of his hard usage' from English officials and, in particular, from the Binghams (TNA: PRO, SP 63/186/96). In 1592 Maguire signalled his opposition to government policy when he welcomed Hugh Roe O'Donnell to Fermanagh following the latter's escape from Dublin Castle. One of O'Donnell's first actions on his return home was to expel the English sheriff, Captain Humphrey Willis, from his territory. 
The growing hostility to government policy in north Connaught and Ulster was compounded by the actions of members of the hierarchy of the Catholic church. Maguire was a patron of Edmund MacGauran, titular archbishop of Armagh from 1587 to 1593. At an episcopal meeting in O'Donnell's country in the winter of 1592, MacGauran reported on his recent visit to Spain and the plans of Philip II to send a second armada to England and Ireland. His report was followed by letters from Maguire, O'Donnell, and others to the Spanish king requesting military aid. The spring of 1593 was a crucial time for Maguire and for the developing crisis in Ulster. Much to Maguire's anger, Willis was appointed sheriff of Fermanagh following his expulsion from Tyrconnell. He asserted in vain that he had given Fitzwilliam 300 cows as a bribe to keep English officials out of his lordship. Willis entered Fermanagh in the early months of 1593 with 100 soldiers and as many women and boys, all of whom lived on the spoil of the country. Maguire claimed that Willis's men 'having killed one of the best gents in the country named the son of Edmund Mac Hugh Maguire whose head they cut off they hurled it from place to place as a football' (LPL, Carew MS 617, fol. 286). Maguire confronted Willis and his followers, forcing them to take refuge in a church from which they only escaped with their lives when Hugh O'Neill, second earl of Tyrone, intervened to secure them a safe conduct out of Fermanagh. 
It was also in late spring 1593 that Maguire was reported to have married one of Tyrone's daughters, whose name is unknown, the marriage forming part of the labyrinthine network of family connections which the earl created in Ulster. This alliance coincided with an escalation of Maguire's resistance to the Bingham regime. In May 1593 Maguire's troops, led by his brother Shane Maguire, raided George Bingham's headquarters at Ballymote Castle, co. Sligo. The attack was followed up in June by the burning of the territory around Tulsk, co. Roscommon, where Sir Richard Bingham was encamped. Brian Og O'Rourke and the O'Hagans, Tyrone's foster brothers, accompanied Maguire's soldiers in their expeditions into Connaught, as did MacGauran, who was killed in the raid on Tulsk. Maguire's military network convinced Bingham that he was not acting alone but had the support of O'Donnell and Tyrone. 
In summer 1593 the Irish privy council still believed, however, that its best hope of restoring stability in Ulster lay with Tyrone. He was appointed commissioner to conclude a peace settlement with Maguire. The negotiations appear to have stalled on Maguire's demand for reassurance that the Binghams would have no jurisdiction in Fermanagh. Tyrone's failure to reach an agreement with Maguire resulted in the latter being proclaimed a traitor in September and in a military campaign into Fermanagh commanded by Sir Nicholas Bagenal, marshal of the army, aided by Sir Richard Bingham. Tyrone assisted this campaign, which had its most noticeable success in February 1594, when Enniskillen Castle was seized by government troops. 
The capture of Enniskillen was followed by a siege of the castle by Maguire, in the company of O'Donnell and Cormac Mac Baron O'Neill, Tyrone's brother. The besiegers won a significant victory in the summer when they attacked a relief force near the River Arney, south of Enniskillen, called thereafter Beal Atha Na mBriosgadh ('the ford of the biscuits') because of the large quantities of biscuit supplies left behind by the fleeing troops. Through the subsequent year Maguire and O'Donnell maintained their military resistance, raiding Longford in April and retaking Enniskillen Castle in May. Although Maguire's actions between early 1593 and May 1595 were crucial in initiating the conflict in Ulster, he never held a dominant position among the rebels. The suspicion of Bingham and other English officials that he was used as a 'forerunner' for Tyrone was probably correct ('CSP Ire.', '1592-6', 485). When Tyrone assumed the leadership of the rebellion in June 1595 Maguire's subsidiary role became clear: he was assigned the position of cavalry commander under the earl's overall direction. Maguire was included in the negotiations between Tyrone and O'Donnell and crown officials in 1595-6 and 1597 but he was always a junior partner. His requests focused on limiting government involvement in his lordship and, in particular, on keeping Fermanagh free from English troops. 
Maguire's subordinate status was also emphasized in the early months of 1598 when the new president of Connaught, Sir Conyers Clifford, received the submission of Brian Og O'Rourke. Tyrone, concerned that Maguire might be tempted to join with Brian Oge, apprehended him for a short period. By August, however, Maguire was firmly back in Tyrone's camp as he led the cavalry troops at the battle of the Yellow Ford, the rebels' most significant military victory of the war. He also fought in the midlands in 1599 and was among those who accompanied Tyrone when he met with Robert Devereux, second earl of Essex, in September. 
In 1600 Maguire travelled with Tyrone to Munster and it was during this expedition that he was killed. He led a troop of cavalry to scour the countryside for prey and on his return made a surprise attack on Sir Warham St Leger of Mollingborne, governor of Leix (Laois), on 18 February, near the town of Cork. In the ensuing skirmish 'Sir Warham St Leger discharged his pistol, and shot the traitor [Maguire]; and he was striken with the other horseman's staff in the head, of which wounds either of them died; but none else on either side was slain' (Carew, 1.14). Giolla Brighde O hEodhasa (O'Hussey) composed a poem in honour of Maguire's journey to Munster in 1600. This was later translated by James Clarence Mangan. Maguire was succeeded by his brother Cu Chonnacht (died 1608), who accompanied Tyrone and Rory O'Donnell, first earl of Tyrconnell, to the continent in 1607. 


@@@@@


doc= 17792


Maguire, John Francis (1815-1872), Irish newspaper proprietor and politician, was the eldest son of John Maguire, a merchant of Cork, where he was born. He was called to the Irish bar in 1843, and the same year he married Margaret, the daughter of Robert Bailey of Cork. They had seven children and Margaret outlived him. He had already established the 'Cork Examiner' in 1841, as an organ of O'Connellite nationalism. He unsuccessfully contested the small borough of Dungarvan as a repealer in 1847 and 1851 before winning it for the new Independent Irish Party built upon the Tenant League of 1850. He held the seat until 1865, after which he represented his native city until his death. Following the demise of his party, he sat as a Liberal from 1859. In its last years he did more than anyone to keep the Independent Irish Party in being, using its dwindling strength to bargain with the transient governments of the 1850s. These tactics elicited abortive land bills falling far short of the league's original demands, and minor concessions in the Catholic interest. Maguire embodied the strong Catholic element in O'Connellite nationalism, and was a prominent defender of the contemporary papacy and its threatened temporal power. Pope Pius IX, to whom he was known, rewarded him with the order of St Gregory for his book 'Rome and its Ruler' (1856). 
As a Liberal, Maguire continued to press for land reforms, and voiced the growing self-confidence of Irish Catholicism in its uneasy relationship with the protestant state. He joined other Irish Liberal MPs with an O'Connellite background in the National Association of Ireland, set up in 1864 and nicknamed 'Cullen's Association' because of its domination by Paul Cullen (1803-1878), the archbishop of Dublin. This initiative was designed to offer a moderate alternative to the attractions of Fenianism, which repudiated O'Connell's constitutional methods, and to exploit the changing attitude of British Liberals to the Irish problem in the 1860s. Maguire obtained in 1865 a select committee of inquiry into Irish land law for which he had first asked two years earlier. As its chairman, he was unable to secure agreement on even a modest diminution of landlord rights ('Parl. papers', 1865, 11.343) but the question was back on a Liberal government's agenda. His book 'Ireland in America' (1868), the fruit of six months in the United States and Canada, influenced W. E. Gladstone by its argument that industry and order were the characteristics of an Irish population liberated from the accumulated injustices of centuries. Although Maguire gave priority to the land question, he played a full part in agitating for disestablishment of the Anglican church in Ireland. His Commons motion on the state of Ireland in March 1868 provided the occasion for Gladstone's declaration against the church. While his newspaper carried less weight than the Dublin 'Freeman's Journal' of another old O'Connellite, Sir John Gray (1816-1875), Maguire was closer than Gray to Gladstone (Lord Derby, 'A Selection from the Diaries... 1869-1878', ed. J. R. Vincent, 1994, 81-2), who listed him as one of the three Irish Catholic Liberals he trusted to convey the reactions of their countrymen to his reforms. 
In his correspondence with Gladstone, Maguire depicted himself as a spokesman not for 'Fenians... [but for] honest and logical nationalists', as he said when insisting that only 'irremovability', the real meaning of tenant-right, would still endemic agrarian unrest and demonstrate that 'national improvement and redemption' were possible under the union (Maguire to Gladstone, 7 Oct 1869, BL, Add. MS 44422). Gladstone could not go so far in his 'Land Bill' of 1870, and Maguire's nationalist logic pointed to home rule. He enrolled in the Home Government Association of Isaac Butt in August 1871, and canvassed for the home-rule candidate at the Mallow by-election a year later, shortly before his death. Those actions signalled the end of the attempt to reconcile O'Connellite nationalism with British Liberalism. For most of his career, Maguire's well-defined loyalties had never been exclusive. One of Lord Palmerston's cabinet ministers observed that an article in the 'Cork Examiner', arguing against rebellion in support of a rumoured French invasion, was worth any number of prosecutions for sedition (Lewis to Palmerston, 6 Oct 1860; U. Southampton L., Broadlands MS GC/LE/135). The queen and other political opponents contributed to the national subscription for Maguire's wife and children, left in straitened circumstances. 
Maguire was prominent in the civic life of Cork: serving as mayor in 1853 and again in 1862-4, he used his parliamentary influence to promote the construction of a naval harbour in the port and tried to introduce the linen industry into the south of Ireland. The setback to the post-famine recovery of the Irish economy from a run of poor seasons in the early 1860s led him to solicit some special help for his country from government, with limited success. He was, however, instrumental in securing a mitigation of the Irish poor law that cut to six months the qualifying period of settlement required of applicants for relief. Amid all this activity he found time to make a name for himself as a man of letters. In addition to the two important books previously mentioned, of which 'Rome and its Ruler' went to a third and enlarged edition (1870), he wrote: 'The Industrial Movement in Ireland' (1852); a biography of the 'apostle for temperance' entitled 'Father Mathew: a Biography' (1863); a three-volume novel, 'The Next Generation' (1871); and the posthumously published 'Young Prince Marigold and Other Fairy Stories' (1873). It was the varied output of a professional writer with, perhaps, more industry than talent. 
Contemporaries remembered Maguire as the founder of the 'Cork Examiner', the leading nationalist paper outside Dublin; as an effective publicist for his church; and, not always gratefully, as the archetype of those who endeavoured to be true to O'Connell's memory in Irish politics through the discouraging period that followed the famine and the collapse of repeal and Young Ireland. In the later twentieth century, historians reassessed the Independent Irish Party and the National Association of Ireland and, at least implicitly, conceded their legitimacy in the context of the continuing national struggle: Maguire's reputation benefited as a result. He died in Dublin on 1 November 1872 and was buried in St Joseph's cemetery, Cork. 


@@@@@


doc= 17793


Maguire, Nicholas (1458/9-1512), bishop of Leighlin, was born at Tulmogima, co. Carlow, and was the natural son of a priest. He 'studied in Oxford, although it was but 2 yrs and 3 months, yet he profitted so much in logik, philosophie, the seven liberall sciences and divinitie that in his latter days he seemed to excel' ('Annals of Ireland', ed. Butler, 32). He was prebendary of Ullard, co. Carlow, from about 1487 and in consequence also a canon of the cathedral; and from about 1489 he was perpetual vicar of Kiltennel. At Ullard he is said to have 'preached and delivered great learninge' (ibid.). He was elected bishop of Leighlin by the dean and chapter some time before 21 April 1490, aged only thirty-one. Dowling's assertion that 'the King and nobilitie of Leinster' took part in the election points to the dispute that attended his appointment. The election was initially nullified, the pope having reserved the see of Leighlin; but Maguire was later provided by the pope, in deference to local wishes. At the time of his elevation it was discovered he had not received all the dispensations from his illegitimacy necessary to hold his previous cures. He was, however, rehabilitated and allowed to hold them during such time as he was bishop. 
According to Sir James Ware, 'he began many Works, but Death prevented him from putting the finishing Hand to any; except his Chronicle' ('Whole Works', 3.91-2). This chronicle, which can no longer be located, was stated by the Very Revd Richard Butler in 1849 to be copied in the 'Book of Leighlin'. It was used by Thady Dowling, chancellor of Leighlin, in compiling his annals of Ireland. The latter writer says Maguire was commended 'for his hospitalitie and the number of cowes that he grased without losse (so well was he beloved) upon the woodes & mountaines of Knockbrannen' ('Annals of Ireland', ed. Butler, 32). Harris, in his edition of Ware, says that Maguire also wrote a life of Milo Roche, his predecessor as bishop of Leighlin. Maguire died at Leighlin in 1512 and was buried in the cathedral there. His life is said to have been written by Thomas Browne, his chaplain, 'about the Year 1513'. 


@@@@@


doc= 17794


Maguire, Robert (1826-1890), religious controversialist, was born in Dublin on 3 March 1826, the son of William Maguire of Dublin, inspector of taxes there. He was educated at Trinity College, Dublin, where he graduated BA in 1847, MA in 1855, and BD and DD in 1877. In 1849 he was ordained to the curacy of St Nicholas's parish, Cork. In 1852, in the wake of the controversy over the 'Ecclesiastical Titles Act', he moved to London and became clerical secretary to the Islington Protestant Institute, which had for its object 'the awakening of Protestant Christians to the progress of Popery'. Maguire's efforts increased the number of members from 600 to 1400. In a controversy with Frederick Oakeley, Roman Catholic priest of Islington, and his schoolmaster, William Weale, Maguire published 'The Early Irish Church Independent of Rome till A.D.' 1172 (1853), which had a large sale. 
In July 1856 Maguire was elected Sunday afternoon lecturer at St Luke's, Old Street, and in the following October perpetual curate of St James's, Clerkenwell, one of the few livings in which the parishioners themselves had the right of presentation. His election led to legal proceedings, and he was not inducted until 3 May 1857. While at Clerkenwell he soon became popular as a preacher and lecturer. His extensive writings in the 1850s were highly controversial, disputing the claims of Roman Catholics and Tractarians alike, but he also distinguished himself in 1859 during a debate at Exeter Hall with J. B. Langley of the National Sunday League. In 1864 he was appointed morning lecturer at St Swithin's, Cannon Street. After the Fenian explosion at Clerkenwell (13 December 1867) Maguire was appointed chairman of the relief committee, raising more than $10,000 for the victims. In 1875, on Disraeli's recommendation, he was presented to the rectory of St Olave, Southwark. His later writings were more expository and devotional. His editions of Bunyan's 'Pilgrim's Progress' (1859) and 'The Holy War' (1863) were very popular, the former being translated into German. His first wife, Effie, died on 13 June 1864, and he married on 5 August 1869 Margaret Mary, daughter of Edward Erastus Deacon, barrister. Maguire died at 6 Lesmore Road, Eastbourne, Sussex, on 3 September 1890, and was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 17795


Maguire, Thomas (1792-1847), Roman Catholic priest, polemicist, and Irish patriot, was born in the parish of Kinawley, co. Fermanagh, near Swanlinbar, the son of Thomas Maguire, farmer, and his wife, Judith, 'nee' Maguire. His maternal uncle was Patrick Maguire, coadjutor-bishop of Kilmore. He attended a classical school in Ballyconnell, but was at least twenty when nominated to St Patrick's College, Maynooth, in 1813 by the bishop of Kilmore, Dr Fergal O'Reilly. He was ordained priest in September 1816 in the church at Kildoagh, co. Cavan, which his uncle had built as parish priest. He remained his uncle's curate until July 1818, when he was appointed parish priest at Drumreilly in co. Leitrim. In early 1825 he became parish priest of nearby Inishmagrath, where he ministered to a poor and largely Irish-speaking population. He moved to Oughteragh, Ballinamore, co. Leitrim, in August 1835, where he became dean of Kilmore. 
Maguire rose to national prominence through his support for Daniel O'Connell's campaign for Catholic emancipation and his linked opposition to the 'Protestant crusade' against Irish Catholicism launched in 1822 by the archbishop of Dublin, William Magee. Maguire's remarks at a political meeting at Carrick-on-Shannon on 22 April 1826 led to a debate with the Revd Richard T. P. Pope at the Dublin Institute in Sackville Street held between 11 a.m. and 3 p.m. over six days (19-25 April 1827), Daniel O'Connell serving as one of the Catholic chairmen, and Admiral Oliver and John Dillon for the protestants. Maguire's easy and passionate eloquence, with its 'flavour of the Leitrim bogs' ('The Devil is a Jackass', 158), and the help of 'his father', the publisher Richard Coyne, in anticipating his opponent ensured that Maguire got the better of the argument: Coyne had discovered that Pope was cribbing from a work by Charles Leslie of 1713, and supplied Maguire with the Catholic Robert Manning's reply to it of 1716 (this reply was republished by Coyne in 1827, with a dedication to Maguire as 'the Bossuet of the British Churches'). 
O'Connell was said to have given Maguire a victory present of plate worth $1000 (Bowen, 107), but Maguire had to pay $50 in damages to Power le Poer Trench, the protestant archbishop of Tuam, when in 1827 the Dublin press reported Maguire as claiming that the archbishop had offered him $1000 and a living worth $800 a year to turn protestant. Later in 1827 he was defended by O'Connell when charged by a protestant innkeeper from Drumkeerin, co. Leitrim, Bartholomew McGarahan, with fathering his daughter's stillborn child, and Maguire had to pay 6died in costs. 
Maguire was now embarked on a career as one of the most popular orators of his age, and from 1829 until 1843 he addressed huge crowds and packed congregations in churches and at venues throughout England and Ireland. In 1829 he preached a series of Lenten sermons in St Teresa's Church in Dublin where, in 1835, his charity sermon helped pay for the three churches he built in his parish. His sermon at Waterford on 5 June 1842 attracted a collection of $550. Between 29 May and 7 June 1838 he had another celebrated polemical exchange with the Revd Tresham (by nickname Thrash'em or Trashy) Dames Gregg, chaplain at the Swift's Alley church, Dublin, a learned eccentric who was at war with his own archbishop, Richard Whately, and ended up claiming to be immortal. Gregg afterwards published his own version of his exchange with Maguire to replace their agreed text of the controversy. Bishop Ullathorne recalled 'the wonderful amount of freshness and vigour which Father Tom, as [Maguire] was familiarly called, gave to old and familiar texts', and his habit when, after a lecture, soaked in perspiration, he would drink a glass of whisky hissing from a red hot poker, and then engage with his friends in 'a flow of wit and learning such as I never witnessed before or since' ('The Devil is a Jackass', 158). Ullathorne was less admiring of Maguire's habit of pocketing half the entrance money. 
Much of this speaking was political. At the County Clare election of 1828, which returned O'Connell: 'Fitzgerald's own (Catholic) tenants seemed to hang in the balance until... Maguire's stentorian appeal: 'You have heard the tones of the tempter and charmer, whose confederates have through all ages joined the descendants of the Dane, the Norman, and the Saxon, in burning your churches, in levelling your altars, in slaughtering your clergy, in stamping out your religion. Let every renegade to his God and his country follow Vesey FitzGerald, and every true Catholic Irishman follow me'. (O. MacDonagh, 'The Hereditary Bondsman', 1988, 254)' On 15 August 1833 Maguire convened a great meeting for the repeal of the union on Sheena Hill near Drumkeerin. At a meeting in Castlebar in 1843, in the presence of O'Connell and Archbishop MacHale, Maguire explained repeal as 'the consideration next in importance to eternity itself for the Irish people' (McGovern, 281). 
Maguire suddenly dropped from public view in 1843, devoting himself to a legendary hospitality and to other country matters as, by his own boast, 'the best shot, the best courser, the best quoit-player, the best breeder of greyhounds, pointers, and spaniels, and the best brewer of 'scaltheen' in the whole county of Leitrim', as his obituary in the 'Gentleman's Magazine' recalled. His translation of Moore's 'Nora Creina' into Latin for the Dublin 'University Magazine' won him free copies of the journal for life. He died on 2 December 1847 at Munroe Lodge, Ardrum, Ballinamore, allegedly of gout. His oration was preached by Dr James Browne, bishop of Kilmore, to 'the most numerously and respectably attended funeral ever witnessed in that part' (McGovern, 285), and parishioners dragged the funeral carriage 6 miles to Kilnavart cemetery in Templeport, where he was buried on 6 December. The sudden deaths of Maguire's brother- and sister-in-law, Terence and Anna, who had lived with him led to the exhumation of his body on 14 January 1848, and the discovery that, like his in-laws, he had been poisoned by arsenic. An inquest brought a charge of murder against his housekeeper Mary Reynolds and an accomplice, Hugh Quinn, but they were acquitted at the Leitrim assizes in 1848. Reynolds and John and Pete Reilly were tried for Terence's murder, and Reynolds was again acquitted, but the Reilly brothers were sentenced to hanging. 
Ullathorne described Maguire as 'a tall man with a high, tapering forehead, broad jaws, florid features and a small mouth with tall teeth and, for his proportions, narrow shoulders' ('The Devil is a Jackass', 158). His career as polemicist and politician embodies one aspect of the nineteenth-century Irish clergy, as a tribune for their people, but as a 'cheery, joyous, independent and... 'rollicking' sort of priest' ('Irish poetry', 66). 


@@@@@


doc= 17796


Maguire, Thomas (1831-1889), classical scholar and philosopher, was born in Dublin on 24 January 1831, the son of Thomas Maguire, a Roman Catholic merchant, subsequently stipendiary magistrate in Mauritius. After attending a school in Dublin, at the age of fifteen Maguire went with his family to the colony, but returned to enter Trinity College, Dublin, in 1851. He obtained a sizarship, but being a Roman Catholic he could not hold a scholarship or fellowship. He gained high honours in classics and metaphysics, including the Wray prize in the latter (1853), and the Berkeley medal in Greek literature and composition (1857). In 1855 he graduated BA as senior moderator in classics and in philosophy. In the same year the board of Trinity College endowed non-foundation scholarships for the relief of those labouring under religious disabilities. Maguire competed, and was elected. In 1861 he obtained the law studentship at Lincoln's Inn, and in 1862 was called to the English bar. Although highly commended by Lord Westbury, he soon ceased to practise, and, returning to Dublin about 1866, set up as a private teacher in Trinity College. In 1868 he was presented by the college with the degree of LLD, the payment of the usual fees being remitted as a mark of favour. In 1869 the chair of Latin in Queen's College, Galway, became vacant, and Maguire was appointed to it. In 1873 'Fawcett's Act' for the removal of religious disabilities in Trinity College and the University of Dublin was passed, and Maguire at once prepared to compete for a fellowship. 
Maguire was elected the first Roman Catholic fellow of Trinity College, Dublin, on Trinity Monday, 24 May 1880, being then forty-nine years and four months old. His accession to the fellowship was hailed with universal rejoicing. He was personally known to all the fellows and to most of the students who had passed through the college since 1851. He was held in high esteem for the courtesy of his manners, and was socially a charming companion. A special chair of classical composition was immediately created for him, and in 1882 he vacated this to take the professorship of moral philosophy. Although no active politician, Maguire took some part in the transfer to 'The Times' of the Pigott letters, which were published by 'The Times' in a series of articles called 'Parnellism and crime' in 1887 ['see 'Pigott, Richard], and he went to London early in 1889 to give evidence before the commission appointed by parliament to inquire into the truth of the statements made in those articles. He was fully convinced of the authenticity of the Pigott letters, but died, apparently unmarried, at Eaton Place, London, on 26 February 1889 before his examination in court took place. He was buried on 2 March in Dean's Grange, Dublin. 
Maguire was a thorough idealist in philosophy, Plato and Berkeley being his chosen masters. He published sets of essays on Plato in 1866 and 1870, an edition of Plato's 'Parmenides' in 1882, and a set of philosophical lectures in 1885. He contributed largely to 'Hermathena' and 'Kottabos', and many of his translations in the latter appeared in the volume of 'Dublin Translations' edited by Professor R. Y. Tyrrell. 


@@@@@


doc= 17797


Mahomed, Frederick Henry Horatio Akbar (1849-1884), physician, was born at 2 Black Lion Street, Brighton, on 11 April 1849, the son of Frederick Mahomed (1818-1888), the keeper of a turkish bath, professor of gymnastics, and fencing master, and his wife, Sarah ('nee' Hodgkinson). He was the grandson of Sake Deen Mahomed (1759-1851). He began medical studies at an early age at the Sussex County Hospital, and from there went to Guy's Hospital, London, where he won several prizes. He became a member of the Royal College of Surgeons in 1872, and soon after became resident medical officer at the London Fever Hospital. He married Ellen Chalk ('b'. 1847/8), daughter of Charles Chalk, solicitor, in Brighton on 14 June 1873. In 1875 he gained the degree of MD at Brussels and was elected medical tutor at St Mary's Hospital, before returning to Guy's as medical registrar in 1877. Realizing that further progress in the medical profession would not be achieved without a degree from an English university, he matriculated at Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge in 1877 and travelled to Cambridge every evening by the last train in order to perform the pernoctation essential for keeping a term, returning to London by an early morning train. In 1881 he graduated MB at Cambridge, taking no other degree, and in the same year he was elected assistant physician to Guy's Hospital. In 1880 he was elected a fellow of the Royal College of Physicians. 
Employed by the British Association, Mahomed became involved in organizing a system for the registration of diseases, and worked laboriously at this collective investigation. He made many contributions to the 'Transactions of the Pathological Society' (vols. 26, 28, 32, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38), the most important being the sphygmographic evidence of arterio-capillary fibrosis; and he wrote a long series of papers on the results of the use of the sphygmograph in the investigation of disease in the 'British Medical Journal'. To the 'Transactions of the Medico-Chirurgical Society' he contributed a valuable paper on the early stages of scarlatinal nephritis (vol. 57, 1874), and also published many observations in the 'Guy's Hospital Reports'. 
Mahomed was a tall, muscular man, of dark complexion, and possessed an enormous enthusiasm for his work, which sometimes led him to act impulsively. He died of typhoid on 22 November 1884 at his house, 24 Manchester Square, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 17798


Mahon, James Patrick (1800-1891), politician and financial speculator, was born into a prominent Catholic family at Ennis, co. Clare, on about 17 March 1800, the eldest of four children. His father, Patrick Mahon of New Park (died 1821), who took part in the rising of 1798, inherited an estate in co. Clare. His mother, Barbara, a considerable heiress, was the only daughter of James O'Gorman of Ennis. Mahon was one of the earliest pupils at Clongowes Wood College, where he was a contemporary of Maurice, eldest son of Daniel O'Connell. After school he entered Trinity College, Dublin, where he took his BA in 1822 and proceeded MA in law in 1832. Until his father's death in 1821, he was sent an annual allowance of $500; afterwards, he inherited half the family property, becoming also a magistrate for co. Clare. A tall, striking man, he cut an impressive figure at Trinity and then in the Dublin social scene. He adopted at this time the style the O'Gorman Mahon, a conjunction of his parental surnames. He became acquainted with Tom Steele and through him joined the Catholic Association. He was called to the Irish bar in 1834, but never practised. Mahon was instrumental in convincing O'Connell to contest the by-election for County Clare against William Vesey Fitzgerald in 1828, and played a conspicuous part in the ensuing electoral campaign that contributed directly to the Wellington ministry's concession of Catholic emancipation in the following year. As his obituary in the 'Freeman's Journal' (17 June 1891) observed, his 'political career could not have opened more brilliantly or with such promise of success in Ireland, where courage and daring, youth and comeliness, physical strength, a noble Irish name, and eloquence -- qualities and gifts possessed by The O'Gorman Mahon -- are so much admired.' In 1830 Mahon married Christina, daughter of John O'Brien of Dublin. She was an heiress and had property valued at $60,000 in her own right, which gave Mahon the resources to seek parliamentary honours. The couple spent little time together, and she died apart from him, in Paris in 1877. They had one son, St John, who died on 22 September 1883. Mahon was returned for County Clare at the general election of 1830 but was unseated on petition on a charge of bribery. During the election he quarrelled with O'Connell, causing a rift which never healed. At the next general election in 1831, he was easily outdistanced by Major M'Namara and Maurice O'Connell in the race for the representation of County Clare, a struggle that further estranged him from O'Connell senior. Between 1831 and 1835 he resided chiefly at Mahonburgh, becoming a deputy lieutenant of his county, and a captain in the West Clare militia. His most fruitful political period was at an end. 
In 1835 Mahon began the travels which gave him a quixotic aura. First he went to Paris, where he made the acquaintance of Talleyrand and became a favourite at the court of Louis-Philippe. From Paris he proceeded to several European capitals, travelled in Africa and the East, and was for a short time in South America before returning to Ireland in 1846. He was returned unopposed for Ennis in the general election of 1847. His political leanings were unclear; he made no mention of repeal of the 'Act of Union' in his election address, terming himself a whig and pledging to follow Lord John Russell. He lost favour in Ireland by supporting Russell's measures against the Young Irelanders, for whom he had no sympathy, in 1848 and because of his subsequent abstention on the 'Ecclesiastical Titles bill' of 1851. However, in Dod's 'Peerage, Baronetage and Knightage of Great Britain and Ireland' (1850) he affirmed his support for repeal. During this period he made a wide circle of acquaintances in London, including the author William Thackeray. His spendthrift habits depleted his financial resources and in 1851 he was forced to sell most of his co. Clare estates. At the next general election, in July 1852, his attempt to be re-elected for Ennis ended in failure. 
On leaving parliament, Mahon was soon off on his foreign travels once more. As earlier, the details are only partially verifiable, and depend upon his own recollections. Reportedly, he returned to Paris, where he was involved in financial, literary, and journalistic projects; proceeded to St Petersburg, where the tsar appointed him a lieutenant in his international bodyguard; subsequently, he hunted bear in Finland with the tsarevich, fought against the Tartars, travelled in China and India, and served under the Turkish and Austrian flags. He went to South America in late 1858 and returned to Europe in late summer 1861. Meanwhile his financial situation worsened. During the next years he moved about extensively, allegedly serving as a general in the government forces during the civil war in Uruguay, commanding a Chilean fleet in the war with Spain, serving as a colonel under the emperor of Brazil, and fighting for the Union in the American Civil War. On returning once more to Paris, in 1866, Louis Napoleon made him a colonel in a regiment of chasseurs. He then, in 1867, went to Berlin, where he established close relations with Bismarck and the crown prince as well as mixing widely in society. During this time he was again plagued by debts and sought to repair his finances through speculative ventures. 
Mahon reappeared in Ireland in 1871 and by the next year business liabilities brought him to the verge of bankruptcy. As a consequence of his dealings, he ended up before the central criminal court in London but was acquitted. He then took part in the national conference in November 1873 which established the Irish Home Rule League. His ambition to re-enter parliament was rekindled. At the general election of 1874 he unsuccessfully contested Ennis as a home-ruler and he was defeated in the County Clare by-election on 13 August 1877, when he again stood as a supporter of Irish self-government. Persistence was rewarded when Mahon captured the County Clare seat at a by-election on 15 May 1879, then came at the head of the poll in the same constituency at the general election of 1880. He was a popular figure even with those who differed with his politics. He nominated Charles Stewart Parnell for the chairmanship of the Home Rule Party in 1880 and remained on cordial terms with the Irish leader. He introduced Captain O'Shea to Parnell and acted as an informal channel of communication with the government in 1882, when the Irish leader was in Kilmainham prison. Despite being a nationalist, Mahon sometimes refused to follow party directives and voted with the Liberal government. His independence of mind and whiggish politics made him unacceptable as a nationalist parliamentary candidate in 1885, but Parnell restored him to the House of Commons when the seat at Carlow fell vacant in August 1887. Even then, he insisted upon standing as a Liberal home-ruler and was not obliged to take the party pledge. He retained this seat until his death at his home, 12 Sydney Street, South Kensington, London, on 15 June 1891. Almost his last act was to repudiate Parnell's leadership during the divorce crisis. 
Mahon's dashing reputation was enhanced by his fame with the duelling pistol. Precise details are elusive but he may have participated in between thirteen to eighteen affairs of honour. It is known that he once sent Parnell his card though the difference of opinion was patched up and the Irish chief bore him no grudge, either then or after being abandoned by Mahon over the divorce crisis. Indeed, Parnell attended Mahon's funeral and burial at Glasnevin cemetery, within the O'Connell circle, on 21 June 1891. 


@@@@@


doc= 17799


O'Mahony, Connor (1594-1656), Jesuit and political controversialist, was born in Muskerry, co. Cork. On 17 March 1621 he entered the Society of Jesus in Portugal; Cornelius a Sancto Patricio was the name by which he was known in the society. He was professor of theology at Evora (about 100 kilometres east of Lisbon), and he appears to have been a noted moral theologian in Lisbon, where he was associated with the Jesuit church of Sao Roque (hence his additional subsidiary name, de Rocha). Acquaintances described him as brave and pious, and he is said to have rendered great services during an earthquake and volcanic eruption on the island of St Michael in the Azores. 
Patrick Plunkett, titular bishop of Ardagh and subsequently of Meath, made O'Mahony's acquaintance in Lisbon between 1651 and 1660, as did John Serjeant, an English secular priest who studied at Lisbon. O'Mahony claimed to both Plunkett and Serjeant that he was the author of a controversial book on Ireland, and to the former he gave a copy. The volume contains two texts: 'Disputatio apologetica de jure regni Hiberniae pro Catholicis Hibernis adversus haereticos Anglos' and 'Accessit ejusdem authoris ad eosdem Catholicos exhortatio'. Although the book purports to have been published in Frankfurt, it is clear that Lisbon is the actual place of publication. The date of publication is 1645. The book was a conscious, and partisan, intervention in the Irish civil unrest initiated by the Irish rising of 1641. In these two treatises O'Mahony argued that the four main arguments adduced in support of English rights over Ireland -- conquest, papal gift, submission, and prescription -- were all false. Even if they were true, the fact that the kings of England were now protestant heretics meant that their claims were null and void. He urged the Catholics of Ireland to continue killing all the protestants in their midst, as well as any Catholics who refused to abandon their allegiance to the English throne, and to establish a new Catholic monarch who should be a 'vernacular or natural' Irishman. In 1647, or perhaps earlier, some copies of this inflammatory book reached Ireland through France or direct from Portugal. Its presence served to highlight deep divisions between the main political forces in Ireland. Stuart partisans were outraged by its assumptions, landowners felt that it undermined the basis of their property rights, while its call for a native king was interpreted both as support for the putative regal ambitions of Owen Roe O'Neill, and as questioning the legitimacy of the Anglo-Norman ('Old English') position in Ireland (though in fact O'Mahony wished to overcome ethnic differences between Irish Catholics). A copy was found with John Bane, parish priest of Athlone, and the nuncio Rinuccini was called upon by the confederate Catholics at Kilkenny to punish him: the nuncio refused to do this, but the book was burned by the common hangman, and rigorous search was made for copies at Galway. Peter Walsh, by the command of the supreme council, preached nine sermons against it at Kilkenny Castle. The book also ran into trouble in Portugal. O'Mahony had drawn a parallel between Portugal's recent rejection of its Castilian overlord in favour of a native prince and the situation in Ireland. Complaints of O'Mahony's book were lodged at Lisbon by an English priest (perhaps John Sergeant). King John IV, incensed by its attack on a fellow monarch, condemned it in December 1647, and it was made penal to possess a copy. O'Mahony died in Lisbon on 28 February 1656. 


@@@@@


doc= 17800


Mahony, Francis Sylvester (1804-1866), satiric poet and journalist, was born at Cork on 31 December 1804, the second son of Mary Reynolds and Martin Mahony (1763/4-1834), a woollen manufacturer who owned and operated a mill near the town. Francis Mahony claimed descent from an old Irish family, the O'Mahonies of Dromore Castle, co. Kerry. With his brother Nicholas, he attended the Jesuits' college at Clongowes Wood, co. Kildare from 1815 to 1819, when they entered the Jesuits' college of St Acheul at Amiens. Determining to become a Jesuit, in spite of his father's desire that he should study law, Francis was soon transferred to the seminary in the rue de Sevres in Paris, and having spent two years of his noviciate there, he proceeded to the Jesuits' college at Rome to study philosophy (1823-5). A gift for written and spoken Latin attracted the notice of his teachers, but an impatience with discipline made others question his vocation. The Abbe Martial Marest de la Roche-Arnaud, who seems to have met Mahony at Rome, credited him, on the other hand, in his work 'Les Jesuites modernes' (1826), with all 'the fanaticism, the dissimulation, the intrigue, and the chicanery' deemed by him to be Jesuitical characteristics. 
In August 1830 Mahony was appointed prefect of studies at the Jesuits' college at Clongowes Wood, and in October he was promoted to be master of rhetoric. His pupils included John Sheehan, a popular journalist who wrote under the pseudonym of the Irish Whisky-Drinker, and Francis Stack (afterwards Serjeant) Murphy. In November Mahony went on a trip to Maynooth with his seminarians. They stopped at Sheehan's family home at Celbridge, and Mahony offended the parish priest, Daniel Callinan, with criticism of Daniel O'Connell (whom Mahony was later to pillory in an essay as 'Dandeleon'). A night of drinking with his students led to Mahony's resignation as prefect. After a short stay at the Jesuits' college at Freiburg he went to Florence where he was informed by the provincial of the Jesuits that his association with the order was at an end. Although deeply affected, Mahony showed no animosity against his former colleagues, whom he subsequently defended from conventional accusations in an essay called 'Literature and the Jesuits' (Prout, 'Reliques'). 
No longer a Jesuit, Mahony sought to become a secular priest. For two years he attended theological lectures at Rome, and was ordained at Lucca in 1832. In that year he joined the Cork mission, and displayed courage and devotion as chaplain to a hospital in Cork during the cholera epidemic. Anxious to see the construction of a new church, to be administered by himself, he argued with his bishop over funding and other matters, and left Cork and went to London, soon after this abandoning the active exercise of his profession. On a few occasions he preached and conducted mass in the Spanish ambassador's chapel, but his tone of thought and conversation was unclerical. His interests were mainly literary, and, befriended by William Maginn, he readily adopted the bohemian mode of life, including frequent nights of drinking, which then characterized London literary society. 
In April 1834 Mahony sent to 'Fraser's Magazine' an article entitled 'Father Prout's Apology for Lent, his Death Obsequies, and an Elegy'. A real Father Prout, parish priest at Watergrasshill, co. Cork, called by Mahony's brother Nicholas 'a man of quiet, simple manners' (Jerrold, 91) was well known to Mahony in his boyhood, and had died in 1830. But Mahony's Father Prout, although also located at Watergrasshill, was a creation of Mahony's imagination, suggested to some extent by Goldsmith's 'Vicar', and described by Mahony as the child of Jonathan Swift and Stella. For two years (1834-6) Mahony regularly contributed his 'Reliques of Father Prout', accounts of fictitious episodes in Prout's career, with his views on life and literature. In entertaining comments on current literature, Mahony, following the example of Christopher North (the pseudonym of John Wilson) of 'Blackwood's', introduced Sir Walter Scott in conversation with Father Prout and his friends, defended Harriet Martineau from her critics, and explained his contempt for Bulwer-Lytton. He also freely interspersed the papers with his original poems and playful translations into Latin, Greek, French, and English verse. In a paper called 'The Rogueries of Tom Moore' Mahony rendered some of Moore's best-known verses into Latin or French, and then wittily charged Moore with plagiarism. His serious translations into English verse, from Horace, Beranger, and Victor Hugo, for instance, are less pleasing. Here he often degenerates into a wordy jingle, which does injustice to his originals, and in his own lyrics, of which 'The Shandon Bells' is the best-known example, the same defect is apparent. The brilliance of the papers, however, secured a wide reputation for their author; Mahony even signed his name for strangers 'Prout Mahony'. He regularly attended the meetings, at taverns or clubs, of the 'Fraserians', the contributors to the magazine, and he came to know many distinguished men of letters of the day. In 1836 he collected the 'Reliques', under the name of a fictitious editor, Oliver Yorke, with illustrations by Maclise. 
In 1837 Mahony switched from 'Fraser's' to the new 'Bentley's Miscellany', with Charles Dickens as editor, and on the first page of the first number Mahony's poem 'The Bottle of St Januarius' appeared. To the same number he contributed a French rendering of Wolfe's 'Burial of Sir John Moore', which he entitled 'Les funerailles de Beaumanoir', and pretended to regard as the original of Wolfe's poem. Mahony's English parody of Chatterton, with translations into both Pindaric and Horatian verse, also appeared in this issue. Some seventeen or eighteen poems followed in succeeding numbers. Although Mahony enjoyed the convivial society which he found in the literary clubs of London, at Lady Blessington's house at Kensington, and especially with his friend Thackeray, he was always of restless and uncertain temper. Towards the close of 1837 he abandoned London. In January 1838 'A Poetical Epistle from Father Prout to 'Boz'' appeared in 'Bentley's', sent from Genoa. After that date he made a long tour through Hungary, Greece, and Asia Minor, and only reached the south of France on his return journey in 1841. From Bordeaux he sent further verse to 'Bentley's Miscellany', and in 1842 he took the publisher's part in the dispute between Bentley and Harrison Ainsworth. Despite his previous friendly relations with Ainsworth, Mahony now attacked him in a mock-heroic poem entitled 'The Cruel Murder of Old Father Prout by a Barber's Apprentice: a Legend of Modern Latherature, by Mr Duller of Pewternose' ('Bentley's Miscellany', 1842, 11.144). This attack earned scorn for Mahony when he printed in his notes excerpts from private letters by Ainsworth asking Mahony to 'puff' his fiction. 
After a short sojourn in London and a visit to Malta, in 1846 Mahony set out for Rome to act as correspondent for the 'Daily News'. His contributions ceased at the end of 1847, and he published them in a volume entitled 'Facts and Figures from Italy', under the pseudonym of Don Jeremy Savonarola, Benedictine monk, and addressed to Dickens as an 'appendix' to his 'Pictures from Italy', as Dickens had originally commissioned Mahony to write for the paper, in his brief period as editor. The conservatism which had characterized his papers in 'Fraser's Magazine' was here exchanged for liberalism, and he declared himself in full sympathy with the Italian patriots, and with new movements in the church and the papacy. Mahony was well known to English visitors in Rome, and frequently attended Mrs Jameson's Sunday evening parties; he also became friendly with the Brownings, and visited them in Florence. 
About 1848 Mahony returned to London from Rome, and spent time there and in Paris, where he settled in the early 1850s. Except for rare visits to England, he remained in Paris until his death, living in an 'entresol' in a hotel in the rue des Moulins. He was long a familiar figure in Galignani's reading-room in Paris, where many travelling English literati recorded his increasingly eccentric manners. William Allingham was taken by Thackeray to visit him in his room, where they found him 'loosely arrayed, reclining in front of a book and a bottle of Burgundy' ('William Allingham', 77). Mahony's moods apparently varied; while there are reports of rudeness and unsociability, others found an amusing and unique cicerone to the sights of Paris. He is described in his best days as a brilliant, witty talker. Mahony owned some shares in 'The Globe' newspaper, and in 1858 he became Paris correspondent to the journal, continuing his daily contributions until within a fortnight of his death. He contributed an inaugural ode to the first number of 'Cornhill Magazine', in January 1860, and he was also an occasional writer in the 'Athenaeum'. 
Mahony became somewhat more religious later in life, and in 1863 he drew up, in scholarly Latin, a petition to Rome asking permission 'to resort thenceforth to lay communion'. The petition was granted, together with a dispensation enabling him, in consideration of failing eyesight and advancing age, to substitute the rosary or the penitential psalms for his daily office in the breviary. He died in Paris in the rue des Moulins of bronchitis and diabetes on 18 May 1866, after receiving extreme unction from his friend Monsignor Rogerson. His sister, Mrs Woodlock, was present during his last illness, and he was buried in the vaults of Shandon church in Cork on 27 May. 
Mahony's conversation and works were characterized by a satiric bite. His friend James Hannay described Mahony as 'full of all sorts of anecdotes' who retailed gossip 'flavoured with droll sarcasm' (Hannay, 52-3). It was probably from Mahony, for instance, that Browning picked up the inside information about Cardinal Wiseman which found its way into 'Bishop Blougram's Apology'. Some of his works, such as the Prout paper on 'Dean Swift's Madness', show that he was capable of exploring pathos in an eloquent manner. He himself claimed to be 'a rare combination of the Teian lyre and the Irish bagpipe; of the Ionian dialect, blending harmoniously with the Cork brogue; an Irish potato seasoned with Attic salt' (Hannay, 53). The particular mixture of polylingual learning and multicultural topical reference, combined with a sense of fun which in both his prose and verse brought him to the verge of nonsense, bewildered many Victorian readers. The same factors make Mahony's works largely unread now except by a few scholars. 


@@@@@


doc= 17801


Maidment, James (bap. 1793, d. 1879), antiquary, was born in London and baptized in St Swithin's parish on 26 October 1793, the son of James Maidment, a solicitor, of Chase Side, Middlesex, and his wife, Jean or Jane Ann Woolley. His father was descended from a Northumberland family, and an ancestor of his mother was the Dutch patriot John van Olden Barneveldt. 
Following attendance at arts and law classes at Edinburgh University between 1810 and 1816, Maidment was called to the Scottish bar on 17 June 1817. He soon took a high position as an advocate in cases involving genealogical inquiry, and was much engaged in disputed peerage cases. On general legal cases he was also much consulted, and his written pleadings in the court of session were models of their type. His written style was held to be far superior to his verbal performances. He married Isabella Jane Stewart or Stuart (1820-1862) and with her had two children, a son, James John Barneveldt (died 1884), and a daughter, Blanche Wilhelmina Grace (died 1875). The death of his daughter at the age of fifteen affected him greatly: it is said that he never left his house after this event. 
Maidment early showed a taste for antiquarian and historical research, and it was mainly this that led to his friendship with Sir Walter Scott, Charles Kirkpatrick Sharpe, and other men of letters. His publications, mainly of editions of Scottish historical, literary, genealogical, and antiquarian material, were very numerous. Many were anonymous, and as most were privately printed in small editions, some at least for their bawdy or erotic content, they soon became rarities. A more or less comprehensive annotated list of seventy-nine items was issued with memoirs reprinted from contemporary newspaper obituaries in 1883, by Thomas George Stevenson, who, with his father John before him, had in fact published most of them. The most substantial of Maidment's works was one of the last, 'Dramatists of the Restoration' (14 vols., 1872-9), in the editorship of which he was assisted by William Hugh Logan. Titles of some others demonstrate the main areas of his productions: 'Reliquiae Scoticae: Scotish Remains in Prose and Verse' (1828); 'Fragmenta Scoto-dramatica, 1715-1758' (1835); 'Analecta Scotica' (2 vols., 1834-7); 'Court of Session Garland' (1839); 'A Book of Scotish Pasquils, 1568-1715' (1868); 'A Packet of Pestilent Pasquils' (1868). He also edited works for the Spottiswoode Society and for the Maitland, Abbotsford, Hunterian, and Bannatyne clubs. At his death, he was the only remaining founder member of the last named club. To support these literary activities, Maidment built up a library of over 5000 titles, plus a fine collection of prints. He is believed to have sold part of his library anonymously in 1869 at a London sale. He died at his home, 25 Royal Circus, Edinburgh, on 24 October 1879, and was buried in the Dean cemetery on 31 October. The auction, in 5059 lots, of what books he possessed at the time of his death, was undertaken by Thomas Chapman & Son in Edinburgh, in April and May 1880. The sale occupied fifteen sessions and raised about $4500. The 1883 Stevenson bibliography reprints a detailed account of these sales, taken from 'The Scotsman' newspaper. Lord Crawford purchased Maidment's peerage collections privately in July 1880, and some at least of these are held by the National Library of Scotland. Other goods were sold later in the year. 


@@@@@


doc= 17802


Maidstone, Clement (c.1389-1456), Bridgettine monk and liturgical writer, was the son of Thomas Maidstone, esquire, of Isleworth, Middlesex, and his wife, Elizabeth. His father was a former yeoman-purveyor of Edward III's household, who sat as an MP for Middlesex on several occasions during the 1390s. Clement Maidstone entered Winchester College in 1403 and graduated 'ad religionem', entering the small house of Trinitarian friars at Hounslow. He was ordained subdeacon there on 20 September 1410, and deacon on 10 December of the same year. While still at Hounslow he came in contact with monks from the Swedish mother house of the Bridgettine order at Vadstena and, at some point between 1428 and 1432, transferred to the Bridgettine double house of Syon, founded by Henry V in partial expiation of his father's part in the execution of Archbishop Richard Scrope of York in 1405. He became one of the deacons, or theological instructors, of the community there, where he died and was buried on 9 September 1456. 
Maidstone's reputation was as a liturgical expert. He saw the celebration of the divine office as the defining priestly task, and set himself to remove any grounds for criticism or scandal by an exact exposition of the form such celebration should take. His chief concern was to popularize and explain the intricacies of the Sarum use, and, in particular, to remove the discordances between the actual practice of the cathedral church of Salisbury -- 'which used to be the bright candle of the whole of England' (Wordsworth, 'Tracts of Clement Maydeston', 10) -- and of other churches adhering to the Sarum use. His 'Directorium sacerdotum' was a revision of the existing Sarum ordinal which corrected errors and paid particular attention to the liturgical anomalies surrounding the feast of Corpus Christi. A later work, the 'Defensorium directorii', justified at greater length the practice set out in this treatise, and Maidstone also contributed to a composite commentary on the rubrics of the Sarum use known, in its printed editions, as the 'Crede mihi'. In addition, Maidstone compiled an account of Archbishop Scrope's death, a topic of natural interest to the Syon community, known as the 'Martyrium Ricardi archiepiscopi', for which he drew heavily on the recollection of the Oxford theologian, Thomas Gascoigne. A composite volume of liturgical and devotional material, including Walter Hilton's 'Scala perfectionis', was copied by Maidstone himself and sent as a gift to Vadstena (now Uppsala University Library, MS C 159). 
Although his account of Scrope's martyrdom was notably hostile to Henry IV, Maidstone's writings in general fit easily within the project of ecclesiastical regeneration associated with the Lancastrian episcopate. This laid emphasis both upon the reformation and standardization of the liturgy, encouraging the adoption of the Sarum use throughout the province of Canterbury, and upon the importance of such acts of communal public worship as the feast of Corpus Christi in the defence of orthodoxy. The Henrician foundations at Syon and Sheen were to become forcing-houses of liturgical and devotional change during the fifteenth century. Clement Maidstone played an important part in establishing the intellectual traditions of the Syon community. 


@@@@@


doc= 17803


Maidstone, Richard (d. 1396), Carmelite friar, theologian, and poet, joined the order in Aylesford, Kent. He undertook his early studies in the order's London house, where he was ordained priest on 20 December 1376. He continued to study theology at Oxford, and was a BTh of the university during the late 1380s, when he composed his most popular work, a paraphrase in English verse of the penitential psalms. On 24 March 1390 he was licensed to preach and hear confessions in his home diocese of Rochester. He was promoted DTh, probably soon after. During his time at Oxford, Maidstone was engaged in arguing against Lollard or Wycliffite beliefs and he wrote two sets of 'determinationes', one against heretics and another on the role of the priest. However, it was after some provocative sermons by John Ashwardby, the vicar of St Mary's, Oxford, attacking the ideal of poverty as practised by the mendicant friars, that Maidstone was moved to write his major theological work, 'Protectorium pauperis' ('In defence of poverty'). Ashwardby and Maidstone evidently engaged in a series of sermons against each other, but only one later sermon by Maidstone survives, preached in St Mary's Church, Oxford. The details of this controversy are only known through Maidstone's 'Protectorium pauperis' and his surviving sermon, neither of which contains any reference as to when it took place. However, as Ashwardby is addressed in both as doctor, and as it is likely that Maidstone would have been a doctor too, the date of the exchange was probably about 1390-92. In 1393 Maidstone wrote a long Latin poem celebrating the reconciliation of Richard II and the city of London. The detailed description of the festivities and the banquet held to celebrate the event, which took place in August 1392, suggest that Maidstone was in London and witnessed them firsthand. Maidstone died on 1 June 1396, and was buried in the cloister of the Carmelite house at Aylesford. 
Maidstone was confessor to John of Gaunt, duke of Lancaster, probably during the 1390s, and hence would have been a member of his entourage at the festivities in 1393. Giovanni Grossi, the Carmelite prior-general who visited England in 1413, included a short entry on Maidstone in his catalogue of Carmelite writers, noting that he was Gaunt's confessor and a celebrated preacher, both at Oxford and in court circles. Sadly, apart from the isolated example preached against Ashwardby, none of Maidstone's sermons survives, although John Bale preserves the incipit of a collection of sermons preached at Oxford, which he saw in Queen's College Library, another of sermons for saints' days and the seasons, and a third of eleven preached to the clergy. One other work of Maidstone's survives (BL, Royal MS 12 E.xviii), a commentary written in 1394 on the 'Annulus philosophicus', a perpetual church almanac, of the Carmelite John Avon (John Northampton). Bale saw two more compositions, notably a 'little work' on the 'Sentences' of Peter Lombard and a collection of extracts from St Augustine's 'City of God'. 
Maidstone's 'Protectorium pauperis' and his sermon give evidence of his ability to argue concisely and effectively as a theologian. He was clearly, like many of his Carmelite brethren, an able defender of the mendicant ideals, and his sermon shows that he could make some telling points. He accuses Ashwardby of preaching his controversial opinions to the laity in English, whereas he himself had responded in Latin, to an academic audience: Maidstone clearly believed that the forum for discussion of disputed theological points was in the university before those who had studied theology. As for his poetry, Maidstone's Latin ode on Richard II is competent, laudatory, Latin verse, marked more by good intentions and length rather than by any poetical skills. His ability shows better in his paraphrase on the penitential psalms, where he expresses his deep religious feelings in simple, direct English verse. The work clearly spoke to his contemporaries, for twenty-seven manuscripts survive, and excerpts from it were a popular addition to prayer books compiled for both clergy and laity. 


@@@@@


doc= 17804


Maihew, Edward (1568/9-1625), Benedictine monk, was born at Dinton, near Salisbury, Wiltshire, into a firmly Catholic family. As a boy he was sent, in 1583, to the English College, then at Rheims, from where he proceeded in 1590 to Rome, being admitted to the English College there on 23 October. Ordained about 1595 he spent twelve years on the English mission. Talented and well read, he became attracted to the Benedictine order and was professed as a member of the Cassinese congregation by Anselm Beech. Thomas Preston, leader of the first English monks to come from the Italian monasteries of the Cassinese congregation, gave him the monastic habit and took him, with another priest, Robert Vincent Sadler, to meet Sigebert Buckley, last survivor of the Marian community of Westminster Abbey. The meeting probably took place in Buckley's lodgings, somewhere in London and not, as sometimes alleged, in the Gatehouse prison. In a famous scene, on 21 November 1607, Buckley aggregated them to himself not only as the sole member of Westminster Abbey but also of what Augustine Baker considered 'the whole old Congregation of the Order in England' (Connolly, 'Buckley affair', 62). Baker thought that this was planned while the monks were still in Italy. 
When the Westminster monks were given an equal share in the property of St Laurence's at Dieulouard, near Metz, in Lorraine, Maihew withdrew from the mission and soon afterwards, in 1614, became prior (superior) of the monastery. His Cassinese background placed him among the supporters of strict observance who went to Dieulouard, and his enthusiasm for old ways may have irritated those of other opinions. He played a considerable part in the negotiations for the uniting of the various groups of English monks into a 'restored and if need be renewed' ('Ex incumbenti', 1619) English Benedictine congregation, acting as one of the nine definitors elected in 1617 to this end. 
As a young man in the English College in Rome (1590-94) Maihew wrote some saints' lives, borrowing text from the Jesuit William Good, the recently deceased college confessor, who as a boy had served mass at pre-dissolution Glastonbury. These he later used when he wrote his 'Congregationis Anglicanae ordinis sanctissimi Benedicti trophaea' (4 vols., 1619-25), a paean of praise for what he regarded as the old English congregation from the time of St Augustine. This was subjected to a fierce counter-attack by the brilliant and wayward John Barnes, a Benedictine of the Spanish party, teaching in anti-Spanish France. His 'Examen trophaeorum congregationis praetensae Anglicanae' claimed that historically English monasteries had always been under the congregation of Cluny, to which he was now attached. His work in turn promoted the principal manifesto of the renewed Benedictine mission to England, the 'Apostolatus Benedictinorum in Anglia' (1626) by Baker and Leander Jones and edited by Clement Reyner. 
Maihew had strong views on strict observance of monastic tradition and the rule, and Dieulouard under his leadership gained an impressive reputation. In 1623 he was appointed to be vicar to the nuns at the new English Benedictine convent at Cambrai, near Lille. He died there on 14 September 1625 aged fifty-six, and was buried in the church of St Vedast. He had edited 'Sacra institutio baptizandi' (1604), the administration of the sacraments according to the Sarum usage published with his notes, and wrote 'A Treatise of the Grounds of the Old and New Religion' (1608), 'A Paradise of Prayers and Meditations' (1613), and possibly other works. 


@@@@@


doc= 17805


Maeldub (supp. fl. mid-7th cent.), abbot, may have been the eponymous founder and first abbot of the monastery of Malmesbury. He is a shadowy figure whose very existence is questionable. The earliest reference to him is by Bede, who in his 'Historia ecclesiastica' states merely that Aldhelm (died 709/10) was abbot of the monastery 'quod' 'Maildubi' 'Urbem nuncupant' ('which they call the 'urbs' [that is, monastery] of Maeldub'; Bede, 'Hist. eccl.', 5.18). Maeldub is clearly an Irish name, and Bede might seem to imply that Maeldub was the founder of a monastery there; an implication seemingly supported by place-name forms such as 'Meldubesburg'. An anonymous Irishman, in a letter to Aldhelm, states that Aldhelm had been 'nourished by a certain holy man of our race' ('Aldhelm: Prose Works', letter 6). Subsequent authors such as William of Malmesbury deduced from such evidence that Aldhelm had been taught at Malmesbury by an Irish scholar named Maeldub, who happened to be the monastery's founder. But Aldhelm nowhere mentions any Maeldub, and other forms of the name, such as that attested in a charter deemed by some scholars to be trustworthy -- namely 'Meldunesburg' ('AS chart.', S 71) -- suggest that the eponymous founder was named Maeldun rather than Maeldub. Nothing further is known of Maeldun and his relation to Aldhelm cannot be ascertained. The fact remains, however, that there are various Old Irish words in the 'Epinal-Erfurt glossaries' ('c'.700), which some scholars have associated with Malmesbury. If Maeldub's existence could be proved beyond doubt, the fact of an Irish abbot in a monastery in Wessex in the seventh century would be of the greatest significance. 


@@@@@


doc= 17806


Main, Robert (1808-1878), astronomer, the son of Thomas and Elizabeth Main and the brother of Thomas John Main, was born at Upnor in Kent on 12 July 1808. He was educated at Portsea grammar school, became assistant master in the grammar school at Bishop's Waltham, Hampshire, and saved out of his stipend funds for a university career. Having obtained a foundation scholarship at Queens' College, Cambridge, he graduated as sixth wrangler in 1834, was elected to a fellowship, took holy orders, and proceeded MA in 1837. He married in 1838 Mary ('b'. 1809), daughter of Revd Philip Kelland, curate of Dunster, Somerset; they had three sons. 
In August 1835 Main was appointed chief assistant at the Royal Greenwich Observatory under Sir George Airy, whom he served with loyalty and efficiency for twenty-five years. At Main's appointment, Airy compared the work to that of 'a head clerk in a bank', and demanded 'punctuality and regularity in a routine of very dull business'. For this service Main received a salary of $300 per annum (plus a tent allowance of $50), which by 1860 rose to $500 (plus $70). He found time, however, to apply the results obtained from the Greenwich observations to the elucidation of several points of scientific interest and to the correction of the fundamental constants of astronomy. On 9 June 1837 he presented to the Royal Astronomical Society the first of a series of papers on the 'Elements of the planet Venus', and on 8 May 1840 he contributed a critical and historical essay 'On the present state of our knowledge of the parallax of the fixed stars'. He established in 1849, from his own micrometrical measures, the elliptical symmetry of Saturn's figure and in 1855 the unvarying dimensions of its rings. In 1850 and 1858 he deduced the proper motions of 1440 stars common to F. W. Bessel's 'Fundamenta astronomiae' (1818) and the Greenwich catalogues; in 1855 and 1860 he investigated the constants of aberration and nutation and the annual parallax of greekLettergamma Draconis; he tested the accuracy of Bessel's table of refractions, and in 1856 communicated the results of twelve years' determinations of the planetary diameters with Airy's double-image micrometer. For these important works he was rewarded in February 1858 with the gold medal of the Royal Astronomical Society. Main's membership of the society dated from 1836; he served for thirty-nine years on the council and acted successively as its secretary and president. He was elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1860. 
Main succeeded Johnson as Radcliffe observer on 19 June 1860, and resided at Oxford from 1 October 1860. Correspondence preserved in the Greenwich observatory archives suggests, however, that the Radcliffe trustees had taken a long time in settling for Main, for he was first considered for the post on 1 April 1859. Perhaps his twenty-five years as Airy's assistant had led some to suspect that he had been too long under Airy's shadow to be an independently creative observatory director in his own right. But the efficiency and prestige of the Oxford establishment was fully maintained by him. He edited in December 1860 the first Radcliffe catalogue, compiled the second Radcliffe catalogue of 2386 stars (1870) from observations made in the years 1854 to 1861, and began a new series of observations, intended for a third catalogue, which, however, he did not live to complete. He issued a total of sixteen volumes of 'Radcliffe Observations', including a valuable series of double-star measurements of position (to check proper motions and parallaxes) made with the heliometer. He also sent to the Royal Astronomical Society for publication his observations of Jupiter's satellites, of the great comet of 1861, of the dimensions of the disc of Mars during the opposition of 1862 -- made with the same heliometer, by Repsold of Hamburg, which Johnson had obtained for the Radcliffe Observatory in 1848 -- and of the meteoric shower of 13 November 1866. He also wrote and translated various astronomical and religious works, contributed to Weale's 'London in 1851' a chapter on observatories, and re-edited in 1859 Herschel's 'Manual of Scientific Enquiry'. Besides being a fair classical scholar, he read fluently nine modern languages. He died at the Radcliffe Observatory, after a short illness, on 9 May 1878. 


@@@@@


doc= 17807


Main, Thomas John (1818-1885), mathematician, was the son of Thomas and Elizabeth Main and a younger brother of the Revd Robert Main. He entered St John's College, Cambridge, on 14 February 1834, graduating in 1838 as senior wrangler and first Smith's prizeman. Elected a fellow of his college that year, he proceeded MA in 1841. He joined the Royal Astronomical Society on 10 January 1840. He took orders and was appointed as a chaplain in the Royal Navy in 1842, serving on HMS 'Excellent', a ship moored permanently in Portsmouth harbour, which was used as a school for instruction in gunnery for officers and men. He was placed on the retired list in 1869. He also served as professor of mathematics for thirty-four years at the Royal Naval College, Portsmouth. He wrote, with Thomas Brown RN, 'The Indicator and Dynamometer' (1847; 3rd edn, 1857), 'The Marine Steam Engine' (1849; 5th edn, 1865), which was translated into German in 1868, and 'Questions on Subjects Connected with the Marine Steam Engine' (1857 and 1863). He married, on 30 June 1842, Emma Louisa Berry, the daughter of Sir John Theophilus Lee of Mount Radford. He died at his home, 15 Elsworthy Road, Hampstead, on 28 December 1885, aged sixty-seven. At least two sons survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 17808


Maine, Sir Henry James Sumner (1822-1888), jurist, the son of James Maine MD, of Kelso, and his wife, Eliza, daughter of David Fell of Caversham Grove, Reading, was born at Hockliffe, Bedfordshire, on 15 August 1822. 
Maine's early years were passed at first on Jersey and then at Henley-on-Thames. When he was still a child his father left home and Maine was cared for exclusively by his mother. He attended the school of a local teacher in Henley, Mrs Lamb, until in 1829 his godfather, John Bird Sumner, then bishop of Chester and afterwards archbishop of Canterbury, nominated him for a place at Christ's Hospital school. A delicate child, Maine suffered throughout life from weak health. He was unhappy at school but was promising as a pupil, and in 1840 he won an exhibition to Pembroke College, Cambridge. He proved to be the best classical scholar of his year, winning the Browne medal in 1842 and 1843, and the chancellor's medal in 1842, and he was senior classic in 1844 as well as a senior optime in the mathematical tripos. His health was always uncertain and he devoted his energies to intellectual matters; he was a member of the Apostles club and formed lifelong friendships with contemporaries such as James Fitzjames Stephen. 
In 1845 Maine accepted a junior tutorship, without a fellowship, at Trinity Hall, Cambridge, and in 1847 at the age of twenty-five he was appointed regius professor of civil law. On 20 December of the same year he married Jane Main (1827-1920), his first cousin. He was called to the bar at Lincoln's Inn in June 1850. It was during these early years that Henry Maine linked his classical interests to the historical study of law and also became committed to improvements in legal education. There is little clear evidence about the development of Maine's legal ideas at this time, but it is likely that he was reading historical studies such as those by Sir William Jones and J. M. Kemble which sought to explain law by reference to its past and placed a particular emphasis on the analysis of language. Whatever the nature of his early speculative reading, by the 1850s Maine had begun to lose interest in the teaching of law at Cambridge: in July 1852 he was appointed the first reader in Roman law and jurisprudence at the Council of Legal Education which had been established in that year by the inns of court in London; consequently in 1854 he resigned his chair at Cambridge. 
Following his move to London, Maine developed a strong interest in writing for the press. In 1851 he had contributed to the Peelite 'Morning Chronicle', edited by John Douglas Cook. With Cook he became, in November 1855, a founding editor of the newly established 'Saturday Review'. This was to acquire a distinguished reputation for literary and political articles, of which Maine was a frequent contributor until 1861. At the same time he began to practise at the bar, concentrating at first on the common law courts and then turning to chancery. He rapidly came to dislike both types of work and became increasingly critical of his profession and its ideas. His interest in legal thought became stronger, and he started to establish a reputation for the high quality of his lectures on jurisprudence which he now delivered at the inns of court for prospective barristers. No record remains of what he said in his lectures: this omission is perhaps the most unfortunate of all in respect of the information that has been lost on nineteenth-century legal thought in England. However, there is evidence in his published syllabus, in his article 'Roman law and legal education' in 'Cambridge Essays' (1856), and in later incidental observations on the part of those who attended his lectures, which suggests that he was developing themes that were to appear in his first and most famous book, 'Ancient Law' (1861). 
Those who neither attended Maine's lectures nor read his book sometimes assumed that he was an authority on Roman law. In fact 'Ancient Law' reveals that he was not greatly interested in Roman law for its own sake; he sought rather to integrate his analysis of the subject into general historical explanations of legal change in societies around the world. He produced these generalizations about law in the course of considering numerous sources of information. Any particular chapter could contain observations on modern politics mixed with comments on statute law, poetry, philosophy, literature, Greek thought, the caste system in India, Roman agriculture, the duties of nineteenth-century bank managers, the nature of scientific theories, American social values, the political influence of women, and many other topics. 
For the most part Maine used his sources to explain the history of laws in Indo-European societies. In his view, the first laws of these societies were imposed by individuals who justified their power by reference to divine authority. Their laws were followed by customs (for Maine, custom followed law rather than preceded it), which gradually came to be controlled by minorities such as aristocracies. In the course of time the minorities were deprived of power through revolt, and the authorities which replaced them sought to assert their rule through the creation and development of codes. In some rare cases it was possible for societies to progress further through using fictions, equity, and legislation as successive agencies of legal change. The substance of these later progressive legal phases was described by Maine in his famous phrase as involving a movement from 'status to contract'. For example, the slave had his or her status determined at birth, whereas the citizen of the modern state should be able, under the law, to negotiate with employers and others in such a way as to shape his or her life through the exercise of independent judgement. Early law might concentrate in particular upon the family, and the status of men, women, and children within it; but later law was focused on individuals and the exercise of their rights in accordance with what they saw to be their own interests. 
To mention these ideas in this brief manner is to do no justice to Maine's persuasive power. He spoke with clarity and wit and he wrote excellent prose. Maine was all the more attractive to his Victorian audience because of his capacity to integrate popular themes into his arguments. 'Ancient Law' was published too soon after the appearance of Darwin's 'Origin of Species' for the latter to account for Maine's book; but Maine was sensitive to the ideas produced by geological theorists in the 1840s and 1850s who stressed the possibility of evolutionary change over immense periods of time. To Maine the link with jurisprudence was plain: 'If by any means we can determine the early forms of jural conceptions, they will be invaluable to us. These rudimentary ideas are to the jurist what the primary crusts of the earth are to the geologist. They contain, potentially, all the forms in which law has subsequently exhibited itself. The haste or the prejudice which has generally refused them all but the most superficial examination, must bear the blame of the unsatisfactory condition in which we find the science of jurisprudence. (H. Maine, 'Ancient Law', 1861, 1-2)' Within the framework of such generalizations Maine persistently asked the question: does law change society or society law? In his view other English jurists, such as Bentham and Austin, had failed to address this question. In considering it he came to believe that lawyers deluded themselves if they saw law as an effective instrument of social change. On the contrary, social developments usually determined both the content and the form of the law, and if law was to be understood it had to be seen in social terms. When he discussed society Maine was candid in stating many of his assumptions. He argued that 'social necessities and social opinion are always more or less in advance of law' (H. Maine, 'Ancient Law', 1861, 24). Fortified by assumptions such as these Maine was prepared to pronounce on the comparative achievements of different groups. For example, he believed that there were inescapable limits to what the ancient Greeks could achieve in legal thought: 'The Greek intellect, with all its mobility and elasticity, was quite unable to confine itself within the straight waistcoat of a legal formula... it confounded law and fact... questions of pure law were constantly argued on every consideration which could possibly influence the mind of the judges. No durable system of jurisprudence could be produced in this way. (ibid., 75-6)' But Maine's confidence in arguing why some societies had failed properly to develop law was not linked to any assured explanation of progress. Progress could be found in the movement from status to contract but why this movement occurred in certain societies and not others was inexplicable. 'The difference between the stationary and progressive societies is... one of the great secrets which inquiry has yet to penetrate' (ibid., 23). 
Despite this Maine was certain that he could reveal many of the 'lessons' of history for Victorian politicians and administrators. In respect of the impact of British law on Indian customs and the caste system he used his historical arguments to suggest that there was no question of British law being able to preserve old ways. Even a British law which declared that ancient customs should be recognized would inevitably ensure that the social role of these customs was changed because, by reason of the new law, they would lose their capacity to adapt over time to new social conditions. Legal recognition fixed them at one moment in time. It followed that informed historical judgement and considerable caution were desirable attributes for a colonial administrator. History was just as useful as a guide to an understanding of rights in modern Western societies. Arguments in favour of the law of nature, or of rights arising out of some supposed ancient social contract, were often treated with hostility and even contempt by Maine. They could not be justified in historical terms. 
Maine was more sustained, more subtle, but ultimately no less dismissive, in his analysis of the chief traditions of English legal thought. For him so much of what English lawyers believed was founded on historical misapprehensions. For example, it was nonsense to describe the modern common law as being in some sense unwritten. Such historical errors were of the first importance because they could seriously impede desirable reforms. Undue veneration for the common law obscured the merits of statutory codification. In going beyond the common law and considering the system of equity, Maine argued that: 'it is easily seen by English lawyers that English equity is a system founded on moral rules; but it is forgotten that these rules are the morality of past centuries -- not of the present -- that they have received nearly as much application as they are capable of, and that though of course they do not differ largely from the ethical creed of our own day, they are not necessarily on a level with it... (H. Maine, 'Ancient Law', 1861, 69-70)' Again and again Maine questioned the historical assumptions of English lawyers. He was as critical of theorists as of practitioners. He respected the clarity of analysis to be found in the works of Jeremy Bentham and John Austin, but he also believed that through their ignorance of the historical relationship between law and society these major utilitarian jurists had arrived at incorrect conclusions about the nature of law. He criticized any attempt to account for law through the use of concepts dear to the utilitarians: he was distrustful of the use of terms such as 'sovereignty' and 'command' without regard to their precise historical and social context. For Maine, Bentham and Austin failed to see that the concepts they were using could not explain changes in the ancient laws of India where such notions had little or no place. A twentieth-century jurist, Sir Carleton Allen, suggested that it was in his lectures of the 1850s that Maine first made the distinction between analytical and historical schools of English jurisprudence (C. Allen, 'Legal Duties and other Essays in Jurisprudence', 1931, 14). The former concentrated on conceptual analysis and sought brief definitions of law. The latter recognized law as a social product and explained it as the creation of contrasting societies evolving over long periods of time. Maine's ideas were a reaction against what he believed was a narrow vision of law reflecting merely modern English experience. 
Maine's explanation of law was distinctive. He was not following the views of professional lawyers who believed in what they took to be the immemorial virtues of the common law. Nor was he following the recognized jurists of the day with their emphasis on the demands of utility and the capacity for using law as an instrument of social reform. Instead he was using history to explain law as the product of time and place and, having done this to his own satisfaction, he was always seeking to commend one course of action rather than another. The result was a series of arguments which did little to flatter lawyers. Maine stated that it was the task of a good lawyer to respond constructively to social change rather than produce it. In substance, he asserted that the task of both the practising lawyer and the legal theorist was to clarify the law and to ascertain whether or not it met current social need; if it did not do so, the lawyer should suggest appropriate reform. For Maine it was as if the focal point of legal analysis ceased to be the professional world, or the conceptual work of utilitarian jurists; instead the lawyer was the reflective observer of social change. In a loose sense, he saw the law as a facet of cultural evolution, always and everywhere its improvement requiring historical understanding on the part of the reformer. 

'Ancient Law' was probably the best-selling English law book of the nineteenth century: it sold around the world, sometimes in translation. The mixture of analysis and exhortation was attractive: it seemed to many that Maine was offering the prospect of ordered change at a time when old certainties were being questioned. Evolutionary ideas which many found disturbing in other contexts were being put to use in arguments which justified reflection, comparative analysis, and cautious change, in favour of an enhanced role for individual decision-making. What was more, the informed citizen could contribute to legal debate confident in the knowledge that legal minds had only an instrumental rather than a definitive role in the production of reform. 
The publication of 'Ancient Law' was the central event of Maine's life. The book established his reputation as a jurist and attracted more attention than anything else he wrote. Soon after it appeared, in March 1862 he accepted Sir Charles Wood's offer of the position of legal member of the governor-general's council in India. Assisted there by his friend M. E. Grant Duff, he was involved in giving advice and drafting bills. Between 1863 and 1869 he was also vice-chancellor of the University of Calcutta, and in this capacity he combined a liking for comparative observations on Eastern and Western thought, with some alarm about the possible political roles of the increasing number of Indian law graduates. On his return to England in 1869 he became corpus professor of jurisprudence at Oxford until, in December 1877, he was elected master of Trinity Hall in Cambridge. In these later years he did little to advance the cause of legal education; for example, he did not try to support joint degrees in law and history which were being discontinued at Oxford at this time. Instead he advised successive governments on colonial issues, engaged in political journalism, and published further books which were mostly collected essays, including 'Dissertations on Early Law and Custom' (1883). 
Maine's reputation as a scholar with an interest in public life achieved wide recognition. In 1871 Maine became Sir Henry when he was gazetted KCSI, and in the same year he was appointed to a seat on the Indian council in London. In 1866 he had been made a member of the American Academy. He became a member of the Dutch Institute about 1876, of the Accademia dei Lincei in 1877, of the Madrid Academy in 1878, of the Royal Irish Academy in 1882, of the Washington Anthropological Society in 1883, and of the Juridical Society of Moscow in 1884. He became corresponding member of the Academie des Sciences Morales et Politiques in 1881, and foreign member, in place of Emerson, in 1883. He was a fellow of the Royal Society, and was elected an honorary fellow of Pembroke College, Cambridge, in 1887. In that year he had succeeded Sir William Harcourt as Whewell professor of international law at Cambridge. His lectures were edited after his death by Frederic Harrison and Sir Frederick Pollock. At various times in his life he declined other offers: the chief justiceship of Bengal, the permanent under-secretaryships of both the Home Office and the Foreign Office, and the principal clerkship of the House of Commons. 
Neither in India nor, later, in England did Maine take the opportunity of further detailed study of ancient systems of law and their social contexts in village and urban life. He never learned Sanskrit and he carried out only minor forms of empirical work. Large parts of his later books constituted general responses to the work of other scholars such as Max Muller, William Stubbs, J. F. McLennan, and Andrew Lang. In the course of considering the ideas of other people he would comment on topics as diverse as the sociological ideas of Herbert Spencer, the ancient Brehon laws of Ireland, French medieval history, ancestor-worship around the world, the dangers of democracy, advances in comparative philology, social change in India, and, as always, the failings of English lawyers. The reader of works such as 'Village Communities' (1871), 'Lectures on the Early History of Institutions' (1875), and 'Popular Government' (1885) could enjoy a lively and very well written excursion through ideas of current concern to educated Victorians. Classical observations were nicely combined with current preoccupations: 'Except the blind forces of Nature, nothing moves in this world which is not Greek in its origin. A ferment spreading from that source has vitalised all the great progressive races of mankind, penetrating from one to another, and producing results accordant with its hidden and latent genius, and results of course often far greater than any exhibited in Greece itself. It is this principle of progress which we Englishmen are communicating to India. We did not create it. We deserve no special credit for it. It came to us filtered through many different media. But we have received it, so we pass it on. There is no reason why, if it has time to work, it should not develop in India effects as wonderful as in any other of the societies of mankind. (H. Maine, 'Village Communities', 4th edn, 1885, 238)' 
'Popular Government', four essays which had previously appeared in the 'Quarterly Review', in particular sold well, was much discussed, and attracted criticisms by John Morley and E. L. Godkin. But it did little to sustain Maine's standing as a scholar. He warned of the dangers of democratic politics, and compared the actions of Gladstone's government to the excesses of the French revolution. He claimed that democracy would become rule by the mob, and that technological progress would be threatened because innovation was opposed by most people, not least by women, who were always suspicious of change. One possible remedy, he believed, might be a written constitution similar to that of the United States of America; this would allow excesses of popular activity to be focused on merely political change, while it would leave individuals free to pursue their own interests in everyday economic life and guarantee the preservation of private property. Maine avoided endorsement of any political party but, in anonymous articles for the 'St James's Gazette', he expressed support for disillusioned Liberals who were alarmed at extensions of the franchise and novel plans for imperial reform such as those furthered by Viscount Ripon in India. His pessimism blended with late Victorian worries as to the nature of democracy. 
Maine's grand generalizations were popular but they exposed him to numerous criticisms by scholars which, often unanswered, accumulated as the years went by. Even 'Ancient Law' came to be criticized with increasing force: for many authorities there was no convincing evidence to justify Maine's analysis of the phases of legal change, or of the nature of early ownership, or of the role of codes, or of many other topics. His friends, such as James Bryce, privately expressed concern about Maine's preparedness to write about topics on which he was not fully informed. Leslie Stephen observed that 'his inability for drudgery shows itself by one weakness of his books, the almost complete absence of any reference to authorities' ('DNB'). Maine's most earnest defender was his only rival as a historical jurist, Sir Paul Vinogradoff. Speaking of those who questioned Maine's achievements he stated that 'Those who indulge in such cheap criticisms should rather try to realise what accounts for his having been a force in European thought, a potentate in a realm where parochial patronage and a mere aptitude for vulgarisation are not recognised as titles to eminence' ('Law Quarterly Review', 20, 1904, 119-20). There was substance in this bitter response, for the general ideas in 'Ancient Law' (such as those on status and contract) had acquired a strong reputation in Europe and had attracted the attention of major theorists such as Ferdinand Tonnies and Emile Durkheim. 
For the greater part of the twentieth century the British response to Maine's work remained unfavourable. Anthropologists and authorities on Roman law were particularly critical of his ideas, and teachers of law gave his works little attention. Stanley Baldwin recalled that he had been taught about Maine's ideas at Cambridge, but the extent of the latter's influence was apparent in Baldwin's observation: 'From Status to Contract -- or was it the other way around?' Legal historians looked to Maitland for inspiration, not Maine. Jurists gave little attention to historical issues. In Herbert Hart's major work, 'The Concept of Law' (1961), there is no mention of any of Maine's works. Only the quality of Maine's prose and his succinct generalizations ensured that he was occasionally remembered. 
In the last quarter of the twentieth century Maine's reputation began to revive. In part this arose indirectly out of increasing British interest in the ideas of the continental theorists who had respected Maine. In the 1990s this indirect influence was supplemented by scholars in eastern Europe who pointed out that in the middle of the twentieth century Maine's works had been a precious reminder of the possibility of non-Marxist explanations of legal history: sometimes intellectuals in St Petersburg, Cracow, Budapest, or Sofia instructed their British counterparts in Maine's ideas. But chiefly his enhanced standing arose out of the revival of interest in explaining law by reference to its social context. With this change in perspective Maine ceased to be seen as an inadequate theoretician and became instead the perceptive source of ways of looking at the social reality of legal change. There was praise for his suggestive work in areas including linguistics, sociology, political science, legal history, and jurisprudence. Increasingly he came to be recognized not as a failed 'system-builder' but as a creative innovator who encouraged new forms of enquiry. 
Maine died on 3 February 1888 at Montfleury Hotel, Cannes, France, leaving a widow and two sons, the eldest of whom, Charles Sumner Maine, clerk of assize on the south Wales circuit, died soon after his father. Maine was commemorated in Westminster Abbey, but his burial at Cannes was more appropriate as a guide to the standing of his thought. The least parochial of English jurists, after the publication of 'Ancient Law', his ideas became a part of continental thought. 


@@@@@


doc= 17809


Maynwaring, Arthur (1668-1712), politician and author, was born at Ightfield, Shropshire on 9 July 1668, the son of Charles Maynwaring ('bap'. 1636, died 1690) and Catherine (died 1702), a daughter of Charles Cholmondeley. After attending grammar school in Shrewsbury he went up to Christ Church, Oxford, in 1683, but left before graduating. From Oxford he went to Cheshire, where he spent several years with his maternal uncle Francis Chomley, and visited regularly another relative, Sir Philip Egerton. Both men were nonjurors, and in his early years he followed their views, extolling the tories in his earliest satires in 1689. 'Tarquin and Tullia' was attributed to John Dryden, but Dryden revealed the true author, which gave Maynwaring early celebrity. From Cheshire he went to his parents' lodgings in Essex Street, London, while he studied law at the Inner Temple. Through the earl of Cholmondeley he became acquainted with the leading whig grandees and gradually converted to their political principles. Through Dryden he became acquainted with William Congreve, whose play 'The Double-Dealer' he edited and revised (1693). He quickly developed a reputation as a critic and wit. About 1700 his whig and literary credentials earned him entry into the Kit-Cat Club, and he became one of its chief ornaments. His father died in 1690 leaving his estate heavily encumbered. Maynwaring raised some $4000 upon it and lived for a time as a man of fashion, travelling to Paris in 1697 after the treaty of Ryswick, where he met Boileau and La Fontaine. On 18 November 1701, through the intercession of Charles, Lord Halifax, he was appointed a commissioner of the customs, where he distinguished himself by his ability and probity. 
Not long after the accession of Queen Anne, Maynwaring met Anne Oldfield (1683-1730) through a fellow Kit-Cat member, John Vanbrugh, who had discovered her dramatic talents. Oldfield, who first went on the stage at the age of sixteen, was barely twenty when Maynwaring became her admirer and then lover. Her later success was attributed by her anonymous biographer to his grooming and teaching. Her career also prompted Maynwaring to write more than a dozen epilogues and prologues to be spoken by her. In 1703 he was credited with writing 'The Golden Age Restored', which was actually by his friend William Walsh. It nearly cost him his place when the tory secretary of state, the earl of Nottingham, complained to Lord Treasurer Godolphin. Godolphin, respecting Maynwaring's ability and integrity, assured him he could keep his place but found him a better one: in May 1705 the treasurer purchased for Maynwaring the office of an auditor of the imprests, an accounting office in the exchequer, which he retained until his death. Befitting his new eminence, at the end of 1706 he was elected in a by-election to parliament for Preston and was re-elected in 1708. He lost his seat in the tory landslide of 1710 but was returned for West Looe, a seat controlled by Bishop Trelawny, for which he sat until his death. 
By 1704 Maynwaring had begun writing whig attacks on the tories, although only one, a poem, 'The History and Fall of the '['Occasional']' Conformity Bill' (1704), has been identified in print. At some stage in the early years of the century he was admitted into the circle of friends of Sarah, duchess of Marlborough. It may have been in the summer of 1704, which he spent with Anne Oldfield at Windsor; the duchess was ranger of Windsor Great Park and the lodge there her favourite residence. Over the next several years Maynwaring became her confidante and aide, and was eventually rewarded with the title of her secretary. The earliest surviving letter from Maynwaring to the duchess dates only from 4 September 1707, but thereafter more than 200 survive, including a few from her, that continue right up until his death. The duchess, for several decades Queen Anne's closest friend, had isolated herself from the court after the death of her only surviving son in 1703. Moreover, her outspoken championing of the whigs gradually estranged her from the tory-inclined sovereign and led by 1707 to a complete alienation. The whig leaders assumed she could influence the queen in their favour, not recognizing the growing bitterness between the two women. Maynwaring gradually entered into an ever more critical relationship with the duchess, who depended upon him and his friends for companionship and entertainment. He encouraged her to lobby for the whigs with the duke of Marlborough and Godolphin, and drafted letters for her to send to the queen and even to her husband. 
In 1708 Maynwaring's writings began to take a more serious turn. His 'Advice to the Electors of Great Britain', written in conjunction with the duchess, was highly successful; no other tract survives for that year. He was indifferent to literary success, and much of his earlier material probably circulated only in manuscript. But the political crises of 1710 turned him from an occasional writer into a dedicated pamphleteer and propagandist. The queen resented the importunities of the whig leaders and their insistence on a growing presence in the ministry. At the impeachment of Dr Henry Sacheverell, a high-flying tory cleric, the strong show of public support for Sacheverell, and the growing disenchantment with the government for the long-drawn-out and expensive war with France, emboldened the queen, acting on the advice of Robert Harley and his confederates, to begin turning out the whigs. The dismissals became a rout, capped by the removal of Godolphin in August and the dissolution of parliament in September. Maynwaring gradually assumed the role of director of the press for the whigs and devoted the remaining two years of his life to defending their policies and those of Marlborough and leading the attack on the now dominant tories led by Harley. 
Maynwaring's first important effort was 'Four Letters to a Friend in North Britain'. Appearing in August 1710, it branded the high-church party with Jacobitism and popery. It was followed by 'A letter from Monsieur Pett'['ecu']' -- to Monsieur B'['uy']'s', which warned against a change of the ministry as it would lead to Marlborough's resignation and a decline in support for the war. The latter tract was the focus of the first three issues of a new ministerial organ, 'The Examiner', soon to be directed by Jonathan Swift. Maynwaring rebutted by starting first the 'Whig Examiner', written by Joseph Addison, and, when that proved ineffectual, recruiting John Oldmixon to produce 'The Medley', much of which was written by Maynwaring. A flood of poems, broadsides, tracts, and books followed. It is impossible to identify all his handiwork, but Oldmixon, who had possession of his papers after his death, is the best authority in his 'The Life and Posthumous Works of Arthur Maynwaring' (1715). 'The Medley' succeeded in fulfilling his aim, for 'The Examiner' suspended publication in July 1711, prompting Maynwaring to terminate 'The Medley' soon afterwards. Towards the end of the year illness brought on by the consumption from which he had suffered for over a decade sapped his energies. Somehow he was able to edit two sets of tracts by Francis Hare, Marlborough's chaplain-general, who had accompanied the duke on his marches since 1704 and was privy to his thoughts. Four 'Letters on the Management of the War' appeared during the winter of 1711-12, followed by a second set of four, 'The Allies and the Late Ministry Defended'. In late 1711 the government made a sweep of the opposition press, incarcerating fourteen printers and publishers for seditious writing. Maynwaring had close connections with virtually every one, and he had no doubt that he was a principal target in the government's efforts to stamp out its opponents. Indeed, he was so informed, directly and indirectly by Harley, now lord treasurer and earl of Oxford. Several vindications and defences of Marlborough written by Hare or Maynwaring himself appeared early in 1712. Maynwaring answered Swift's 'British Academy'; he wrote a statement of the conditions behind the controverted election in Bewdley. 
After Marlborough was cashiered by Oxford at the end of 1711, the duke, fearing for his life, contemplated exile, and the death of Godolphin on 15 September 1712 only confirmed him in his decision. Maynwaring, now gravely ill, performed one last service for the Marlboroughs, interceding with Oxford for passes to permit them to go abroad. His petition was successful and the duke, to be followed by the duchess, departed on 28 November, shortly after Maynwaring's death in London on 13 November 1712. He was buried with his forebears at Chertsey, Surrey. Owing to the heavy debts of his father, which he had been repaying, and his own lack of attention to money matters until late in his life, his estate was small. What remained was divided between a sister, Grizel, and Anne Oldfield, who used it to bring up their son, Arthur. 
Although his production was small, Maynwaring's influence among both politicians and writers was great. He befriended and promoted Congreve, Richard Steele, Robert Walpole, and a host of actors, writers, and minor politicians. He was part of the inner circle of the Godolphin ministry, and his influence with the duchess was extraordinary. It was largely Maynwaring who persuaded her to remain in office until she was forced to resign at the end of 1710. The draft biography and apologia of Marlborough he was working on at the time of his death was turned over, along with his correspondence and literary remains, to Steele by the duchess after his death. Steele completed the draft, coupled it with a life of Prince Eugene, and published it in 1714 as 'The Lives of Two Illustrious Generals'. Maynwaring was an accomplished classicist (the catalogue for the auction of his books in 1713 testifies to his love of the classics and the breadth of his knowledge), a poet, a musician who sang and accompanied himself at the harpsichord, and a famous wit and conversationalist. But he was also a devoted lover, friend, and patron of men of letters and the stage. 


@@@@@


doc= 17810


Mainwaring, Matthew (1561-1652), author, was born on 26 February 1561, the second son of Thomas Mainwaring (died 1573) of Nantwich, Cheshire, and Margaret, daughter of Randall Crewe of the same place. On 10 December 1594 he married Margaret Mynshull (1573-1652), half-sister of Richard Mynshull, to whom he dedicated 'Vienna, where in is storied the valorous atchievements, famous triumphs, constant love, greate miseries, and finall happines, of the well-deserving, truly noble and most valiant knight, Sir Paris of Vienna, and the most admired amiable princess the faire Vienna', a translation, or rather adaptation, of a romance of Catalonian origin. It was licensed on 25 May 1628 and was published that year, with a second edition possibly published in 1632, and another in 1650. 
W. C. Hazlitt describes a copy of an early edition which contained a dedication of the book by 'T. M.' to Lucy, countess of Bedford. 'Vienna', published under the initials M. M., has been assigned to Richard Mynshull, but it contains two anagrams and a reference to the arms (those of Mainwaring) in the engraved title, which leave no doubt as to the real author. There are commendatory verses by the playwright Thomas Heywood, various members of the Mainwaring family, and Thomas Croket, from which last it appears that Matthew Mainwaring was already an old man when he wrote 'Vienna'. Geffray Mynshull, his nephew, dedicated to him in 1618 his 'Essayes and Characters of a Prison and Prisoners'. Mainwaring died in January 1652, having nearly completed his ninety-first year. He was buried on 19 January at Nantwich church. 


@@@@@


doc= 17811


Mainwaring, Sir Philip (1589-1661), government official, was born in 1589, probably in Cheshire, the fourth and youngest son of Sir Randall (or Randle) Mainwaring (died 1612), of Over Peover, Cheshire, and his wife, Margaret, daughter of Sir Edward Fitton, president of Connaught. In 1609 he was a student of Gray's Inn and on 29 August 1610 he matriculated from Brasenose College, Oxford. He may have been the Philip Mainwaring who graduated BA on 8 February 1613. His upbringing and career suggest that his protestant beliefs were mainstream. 
Mainwaring appears to have served as a useful contact at court for provincial gentry, being described in 1610 as 'my Lord Chancellor's man' (V. Larminie, 'Wealth, Kinship and Culture', 1995, 131). In the second half of the 1610s he worked in the Netherlands as an agent for Thomas Howard, earl of Arundel, some of his correspondence with whom on political affairs has been printed. The possibility that he brought the earl Sebastiano del Piombo's painting 'Ferry Carondolet and Attendants', purchased in 1617, has been noted, as also that Mainwaring's knowledge of this work might have influenced the style of the Van Dyck portrait of himself and Thomas Wentworth, earl of Strafford, painted in 1639 or 1640 (Howarth, 69). It is possible that his work for Arundel brought him into contact with Wentworth, who was on good terms with the earl during the 1620s and early 1630s, and who brought Philip's brother Edmund Mainwaring (b. 1579, d. in or after 1643) on to the council of the north and the northern recusancy commission. 
By 1629 Mainwaring had begun to report court news and foreign affairs to Wentworth and to keep him abreast of developments that might concern Wentworth's interests, but a bid in July 1632 to serve under Wentworth in a northern office -- apparently an ambitious attempt to gain the vice-presidency of the council of the north -- was unsuccessful. Mainwaring spent part of 1633 travelling in France. Wentworth's decision in 1634 to appoint him to the post of Irish secretary as a replacement for the elderly Sir Dudley Norton was very much against the advice of one of his allies, Francis, Lord Cottington. Although willing to approach the king with Wentworth's request, Cottington reminded Wentworth that he had himself been critical of Mainwaring in the past. Wentworth's key ally, Archbishop Laud, was less hostile, but was sufficiently concerned to inform Wentworth of Cottington's words on this matter. Mainwaring's appointment on 16 June 1634 brought him membership of the Irish privy council and a knighthood a few weeks later, on 13 July: he evidently served Wentworth well -- their portrait is testimony to a good relationship. 
Mainwaring was not returned as MP for Steyning, Sussex, in 1621 and 1624, despite Arundel's best efforts, but he sat for Boroughbridge, Yorkshire, in the parliaments of 1624, 1625, and 1626, possibly due to duchy of Lancaster influence, and for Derby in 1628. In 1625 he was a member of a Commons committee handling a bill for the sale and settlement of the late earl of Dorset's estate. He was returned as MP for Clonakilty, co. Cork, in the Irish parliament of 1634 and for Carysfort, co. Wicklow, in 1640. He sat for Morpeth, Northumberland, in the Short Parliament of 1640, and spoke on 23 April, urging the Commons to follow the Irish parliament in its generosity towards the king. He remained in office following Strafford's execution and was resident in Dublin until at least August 1641. 
Mainwaring spent the first half of 1642 in London embroiled in a contest with Viscount Mountnorris over the office of secretary and in a dispute with Viscount Loftus regarding land entrusted to Mainwaring, among others, in 1638. He left London in June 1642 and settled in Oxford, where he served Charles I as a receiver of revenue. He claimed to have had no military involvement in the civil war. His entire estate was lost during the rebellion and war in Ireland, but he continued to be pursued by Loftus's heirs until the Restoration. He spent part of 1650 and 1651 in prison following his return to London. In 1660 Mainwaring petitioned Charles II for the mastership of the Charterhouse, but was only awarded the reversion on the death of Sir Ralph Sydenham, the successful candidate. In 1661 he was returned as MP for Newton borough, Lancashire, while living with relatives at Baddiley, Cheshire, but he died in London on 2 August of that year. He never married, although rumour briefly linked him with the widowed countess of Berkshire (Gruenfelder, 83). 


@@@@@


doc= 17812


Mainwaring, Rowland (1783-1862), naval officer, born on 31 December 1783, possibly at Whitmore Hall, Whitmore, near Newcastle under Lyme, Staffordshire, was the second of seven children of Rowland Mainwaring (1745-1817), an army officer, of Four Oaks Park, near Sutton Coldfield, Warwickshire, and his second wife, Jane Latham (died 1809), daughter of Captain Thomas Latham RN. He probably was educated by a private tutor, and in June 1795 he entered the navy as a first-class volunteer on the 'Jupiter'. He served later as a midshipman in the 'Majestic' at the battle of Abu Qir Bay and in the 'Defence' at the battle of Copenhagen before being promoted lieutenant of the 'Harpy' in 1801. On 31 December 1810 he married Sophia Henrietta Duff (1788?-1824), the stepdaughter of Captain George Tobin RN; they had nine children. By December 1810 he had served continuously throughout the decade, including four years as first lieutenant of the 'Narcissus'. In his privately published autobiography, 'The First Five Years of my Married Life' (1853), he wrote an interesting account of his subsequent service in the 'Menelaus' and as a commander of the 'Kite' and the 'Paulina' seeing out the war, under the aegis of Sir Edward Pellew, chasing and blockading privateers in the Mediterranean. He moved to Bath when the war ended, and though he did not see active service again, he was promoted captain on 22 July 1830 and was placed on the list of retired rear-admirals on 27 September 1855. 
Mainwaring's first wife died in October 1824, and he married, on 15 November 1826, Mary Ann Clark (1786?-1835); they had one child, a daughter. He became very active in the community affairs of Bath, being appointed the honorary secretary of a number of charitable societies. A supporter of the Liberals in later life, on 13 October 1831 he chaired a large open-air meeting of supporters of the 'Reform Bill' in Bath. An energetic man, who once set out to walk from Gosport to Bath (reaching Frome on the third day), he was also a competent artist and a friend of the marine painters Thomas Luny and George Tobin. He published an anthology of writings on painting and several accounts of the affairs of Bath. After the death of his second wife, in January 1835, he decided to settle in Mannheim, Germany. Within a short while he married, on 11 November 1836, Laura Maria Julia Walbugha Chevillard (died 1891), the only child of one of Napoleon's colonels killed at Leipzig, and the adopted daughter of the baroness de Heygendorf. They had seven children. 
In 1837 Mainwaring succeeded his first cousin, Miss Sarah Mainwaring, in the estates of Whitmore Hall, near Newcastle under Lyme, and Biddulph, Staffordshire. His daily diary, kept from 1819 until his death, records the life of an active country gentleman, justice of the peace, and deputy lieutenant of Staffordshire. He died on 11 April 1862 at Whitmore Hall from the effects of a heart attack and was buried on the 21st in the family vault in the parish church of St Mary and All Saints in Whitmore. A memorial tablet was erected in the church. 


@@@@@


doc= 17813


Mainwaring, Sir Thomas, first baronet (1623-1689), antiquary and local politician, was born in Cheshire on 7 April 1623, the third, and oldest surviving, son of Philip Mainwaring (1589?-1647) of Baddiley and Over Peover and his wife, Ellen (died 1656), daughter of Edward Minishull of Nantwich, and the great-nephew of Philip Mainwaring (1589-1661), the future secretary to the earl of Strafford. He matriculated on 28 April 1637 from Brasenose College, Oxford, a college favoured by north-western families, and entered Gray's Inn on 15 February 1638 with his elder brother Randle and a Walley cousin. As is evident from his strangely dispassionate diary, begun in 1648, he relied throughout his life on just such an extended circle of kin and friends. From his father, an active county gentleman, who as sheriff in 1639 had to implement unpopular royal policies, and from his contemporaries at the inns, Mainwaring early developed antipathy to Charles I. On 26 May 1642 he married, in Wybunbury, Mary (died 1671), daughter of Sir Henry Delves of Doddington and a distant cousin; they had five sons and six daughters. 
During the civil war Mainwaring's father was a captain of horse in the parliamentary forces, and Mainwaring himself took the covenant while still at Gray's Inn. In 1647, he inherited the family estates, and thereafter divided his time between Baddiley and Over Peover. He was assiduous in local committee work, becoming a JP in 1649, sitting as a commissioner for assessment, the militia, and the regulation of ministers, and serving as sheriff in 1657-8, but kept well clear of the wider political scene. He had lifelong leanings towards Independency, but, while patently mistrusting the Stuarts, as a political and social conservative, he came to dislike even more the godly regime which replaced them. Here he echoed his kinsman George Booth, who seems to have been a mentor as well as a friend, and whose career his own paralleled, if on a lesser scale. He was almost certainly involved in Booth's rising in 1659. Like Booth he sat (for Cheshire) in the Convention Parliament, although he proved an inactive member. After the Restoration he was reappointed to his local offices, nominated to the order of the Royal Oak, and, on 22 November 1660, created baronet. 
Like his father, Mainwaring loved books and cultivated learning. Between 1673 and 1679 he and his kinsman Sir Peter Leycester exchanged insults and arguments in print over the illegitimacy of their remote common ancestress, Amicia, daughter of Hugh of Cyfeilog, earl of Chester, alleged in Leycester's 'Historical Antiquities' (1673) and denied by Mainwaring. Eventually their arguments ranged over much of the social and political life of the twelfth century, and in so doing represented a milestone in historiography. These antagonists -- both possessed of legal training, antiquarian zeal, and significant personal muniments -- were able to urge each other, and occasionally themselves, to interpret twelfth-century material from the viewpoint of a twelfth-century nobleman, and not as a quaint aberration. 
Between 1675 and 1681 Mainwaring served as a deputy lieutenant for Cheshire, but when Charles II moved to purge local government of puritan sympathizers in 1680 Sir Thomas was removed from the commission of the peace. Representations as to his effectiveness and impartiality led to a temporary restoration to the bench, but he was soon deprived again. He and his son John (1656-1702) associated publicly with the duke of Monmouth during the latter's progress through Cheshire in 1682, and after the Rye House plot he was disarmed and bound over at the assizes. Having actively supported John's unsuccessful candidature for a county seat in the 1685 election, Mainwaring was listed as in opposition to James II. On 29 November 1688 he accompanied George Booth's son Henry, Lord Delamere, when he went with a large party to seize arms at Newcastle under Lyme 'in Defence of the protestant Religion' (BL, Add. MS 41805, fol. 234). Within weeks Mainwaring was restored to his deputy lieutenancy. 
Mainwaring died at Over Peover in 1689 and was buried there on 28 June in the family vault. Having greatly enhanced the estate bequeathed to him by his father, he left about $25,000. John, his fourth but oldest surviving son, succeeded to the baronetcy and sat as a whig in six parliaments between 1689 and 1701, but was no more an active member than his father. He died in debtors' prison on 4 November 1702. 


@@@@@


doc= 17814


Mainzer, Joseph (1801-1851), music teacher, was born in Trier on 21 October 1801. He was educated as a chorister at Trier Cathedral, and learned to play several instruments. He was employed for a time as an apprentice in the Saarbrucken coal mines with a view to becoming an engineer, but was ordained a priest in 1826 and was subsequently made an abbe. He continued his musical studies and was appointed singing-master at the seminary at Trier, for which he wrote his 'Singschule' (1831). Forced to leave Germany on account of his political opinions, which originated in his experience of the poor conditions in the mines, Mainzer renounced the priesthood and fled in 1833 to Brussels where he wrote an opera, taught, and acted as musical editor of 'L'Artiste'. Late the following year he moved to Paris. He gave free singing classes in 1835 and contributed musical articles to various journals. Mainzer's classes attracted hundreds of adult labourers and brought his methods to the attention of a much wider audience, including an English one. In fact, similar classes were set up in London in May 1841 following his arrival there in 1839, the authorities in Paris having banned his classes. A textbook, 'Singing for the Million' (1841), appeared in numerous editions (the title was apparently taken by Hood as the subject of a humorous poem) and presented his system, which was based on continental 'fixed' sol-fa. The classes, in competition with Hullah's, which had themselves been inspired by Mainzer's work in Paris, were also successful. He established the paper 'Mainzer's Musical Times' soon after he arrived in London, and this became the 'Musical Times' when taken over by Novello in 1844. In November 1841 Mainzer competed unsuccessfully against Henry Bishop for the chair of music at Edinburgh University. Having settled in Edinburgh, he established classes and published 'The Musical Athenaeum' (1842) and 'Music and Education' (1848). About 1848 he moved to Manchester. 
Mainzer's compositions, including operas, some church music, songs, and choruses, are insignificant, but his system of teaching singing in classes, although superseded after his death, was highly influential and widespread and greatly assisted the development of music among amateurs. Exhausted by overwork, he died in Manchester on 10 November 1851. 


@@@@@


doc= 17815


Maire, Christopher (1697-1767), Jesuit, son of Christopher Maire of Hartbushes, co. Durham, and Frances Ingleby of Lawkland, Yorkshire, was born on 6 March 1697, and entered the English College at St Omer about 1714. He was admitted to the Society of Jesus on 7 September 1715 at the novitiate at Watten. In 1718 he moved to the college at Liege to study philosophy. After a course of teaching at St Omer he returned to Liege for his theology studies and was ordained priest about 1727. He lectured in mathematics and logic there, returning to St Omer in 1733 as prefect of studies for a year. Back at Liege he taught Hebrew and theology until in 1739 he was appointed to the English College in Rome, becoming rector in 1744. He held that office until 1750. He returned to St Omer in March 1757, and died at the English Jesuit house in Ghent on 22 February 1767. 
Alban Butler calls Maire 'an able mathematician'. At Liege, Maire had begun a study of astronomy and to make observations, and while in Rome was able to devote himself to this study. Pope Benedict XIV entrusted to him and Father Boscovich the task of making several precise meridian measurements together with a detailed map of the Papal States, their report being published in Rome in 1755, which concerned the shape and size of the earth as well as the geographical map of the Papal States, 'De litteraria expeditione per pontificiam ditionem ad dimetiendos duos meridiani gradus et corrigendam mappam geographicam, jussu et auspiciis Benedicti XIV pont. max.' Between 1744 and leaving Rome in 1750 Maire published a number of other astronomical works as well as a tract on the blessed Trinity in manuscript written in 1737. 


@@@@@


doc= 17816


Maire, William (1704-1769), Roman Catholic priest, was born on 3 January 1704, the fifth son of Thomas Maire (1672-1752) of Hardwick, co. Durham, and Lartington Hall, North Riding of Yorkshire, and his wife, Mary Fermor of Tusmore, Oxfordshire. He entered the English College, Douai, on 16 August 1719, was ordained priest at Tournai on 23 December 1730, and became professor at Douai, first of rhetoric and afterwards of philosophy. He was chaplain at Lartington 1735-41, and served briefly at Gilesgate, in the city of Durham, before moving to the adjacent mission in Old Elvet in 1742. He was appointed vicar-general to Bishop Francis Petre in 1759 and was nominated as Petre's coadjutor in the northern district in 1767. He was consecrated bishop of Cinna 'in partibus' on 29 May 1768. He was in ill health by this time and in November he retired to Lartington Hall, where he died on 25 July 1769. He was buried in the family vault in the parish church of Romaldkirk, and a memorial plaque was later installed in the mausoleum in the grounds at Lartington Hall. He published a translation of Charles Gobinet's 'Instruction de la jeunesse en la piete chretienne' (1687) in London in 1758 under the title 'A Treatise of the Holy Youth of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ'. 


@@@@@


doc= 17817


Anthony Maitland, tenth earl of Lauderdale (1785-1863), naval officer, was born on 10 June 1785 at Walthamstow, Essex, and entered the navy, aged ten, as admiral's servant on the 'Victory'. A midshipman under Admiral St Vincent in 1798, he was wounded in Nelson's attack on the Boulogne flotilla in 1801. He next served in the Mediterranean and East Indies and from 1811 captained the 'Pique' in other stations, seizing an American privateer. As captain of the 'Glasgow' he took part in the bombardment of Algiers in 1816, for which he was made CB. He had been elected to parliament on the family interest for Haddington burghs on 16 July 1813 and in the intervals of service voted with the opposition. He gave up his seat in 1818 and resumed service in the Mediterranean until retiring on half pay in 1821. He had been made KCMG on 26 February 1820 and re-entered parliament, for Berwickshire, in 1826, where he gave a general support to government. On 24 March 1831 he defended an anti-reform petition from Berwickshire. In August 1830 he had become naval aide-de-camp to William IV and he was made KMG on 6 April 1832. That year he lost his parliamentary election. He retained his aideship under Queen Victoria until 1841 when he obtained flag rank. He became an admiral in 1857 and on 22 August 1860 succeeded his brother James as tenth earl of Lauderdale and third baron. He became GCB on 10 November 1862 and died unmarried at Thirlestane Castle on 22 March 1863, thereby extinguishing the barony. He was succeeded in the earldom by Thomas Maitland (1803-1878). 


@@@@@


doc= 17818


Maitland, Charles, third earl of Lauderdale (c.1620-1691), politician and judge, was the third son of John Maitland, second Lord Maitland of Thirlestane (died 1645), created earl of Lauderdale in 1624, and his wife, Lady Isabel (1594-1638), daughter of Alexander Seton, first earl of Dunfermline; John Maitland, later duke of Lauderdale (1616-1682), was his elder brother. Little is known of his early life. On 18 November 1652 he married Elizabeth, younger daughter and heir of Richard Lauder, thereby acquiring the sizeable estate of Hatton in Edinburghshire. Shortly after Charles II's restoration Maitland was made master and general of the Scottish mint, and on 15 June 1661 was sworn a privy councillor. Despite having no previous legal training or judicial experience, he was admitted an ordinary lord of session on 8 June 1669, assuming the title Lord Hatton, and that year was also elected a parliamentary commissioner for the shire of Edinburgh and chosen as one of the lords of the articles. As he entered the highest levels of Scottish politics, his elder brother had acknowledged his reservations to the earl of Tweeddale the previous November, but relied upon his 'hope [that] he will mend his faults' ('Letters', ed. Paton, 169), since 'he promises me to be a very good bairn' (NL Scot., MS 7023, fol. 299). 
In February 1671 Hatton was appointed treasurer-depute and on 12 May 1672 created a baronet. After Lauderdale quarrelled with Tweeddale in 1674 Hatton assumed an increasingly prominent position, taking sole responsibility for the administration of Scottish affairs during his brother's absences in London. Widely unpopular, he became the focus of intense criticism and Tweeddale himself later commented that during the 1670s Hatton's power was so immense that 'the liberties, lives and fortuns of the wholl kingdom depended mor upon him & wer mor at his disposal then ever they have upon any Commissioner or favourite, yea almost any of our Kings' (NL Scot., MS 3134, fol. 119). In 1675 a Scottish informant provided the earl of Shaftesbury with an account of Hatton's controversial attempts to influence town council elections in Edinburgh, but acknowledged that he could also have 'wearied yow with a thousand passages of the Impertinent, passionat Carriage of the Lord Hatton... in whom there is as much folly, Insolency and bossines as ever met in one breast'. Hence the informant wondered why Lauderdale 'will needs mak a Statesman of him', even 'tho God and nature had made him a mad foole' (TNA: PRO, PRO 30/24/5/291). The following year William Douglas, third earl of Queensberry, wrote to the duke of Hamilton believing that since 'all complain off him and ar censible of his baisnes', the Scottish political establishment should not delay in 'pitching upon him as the sacrefeis', confident that all political grievances would be removed by that 'single act of justeice to the nation off destroying him' ('Hamilton MSS'). 
During the duke of York's temporary Scottish residence in the late 1670s and early 1680s Hatton lived in Canongate House (now Queensberry House), Edinburgh, and aimed to extend his family's political influence by having the property extensively redesigned to incorporate a prominent belvedere tower oriented towards the palace of Holyroodhouse. Following the decline of his brother's political influence, his fortunes began to change, however, and he was found guilty of perjury by the Scottish parliament in 1681, relating to a previous miscarriage of justice in the case of the covenanter James Mitchell in 1678, and further allegations insinuated his likely involvement in bribing witnesses in other covenanting trials. In June 1682 Hatton was also deprived of his office of general of the mint when he was convicted of embezzlement and adulteration of the coinage, having not only circulated a defective silver coinage and issued a light copper coinage, but also having purchased the nation's superior coinage at a vastly reduced rate to use as bullion, culminating in the decision to close the mint itself until 1687. 
On his brother's death on 20 or 24 August 1682 Hatton succeeded as third earl of Lauderdale, but did not acquire the additional titles of duke of Lauderdale and marquess of March, which then became extinct. With Sir John Falconer he was found guilty of malversation the following year, but their original fine of $72,000 was reduced to $20,000 by Charles II and on 11 March 1686 Lauderdale was readmitted as a privy councillor. During the revolution of 1688-9 he was sent to Edinburgh Castle 'upon information and refusing to swear allegiance' (Melville, 180), but no further action was taken and he was probably released soon afterwards. He and his wife had two daughters and six sons, of whom the eldest, Richard Maitland (1653-1695), became fourth earl of Lauderdale when his father died on 6 June 1691. Their second son, John Maitland, became the fifth earl. 


@@@@@


doc= 17819


Maitland, Charles (1815-1866), author, was born at Woolwich in Kent, on 6 January 1815, the eldest son of Charles David Maitland (1785-1865) and his wife, Elizabeth Adye Miller, and nephew of General Sir Peregrine Maitland. His father was at one time a captain in the Royal Artillery, and served with some distinction at the end of the Napoleonic wars. After graduating BA in 1824 from St Catharine's College, Cambridge, however, he was ordained and for the last forty years of his life was minister of St James's Chapel at Brighton. Like many others in the early nineteenth century, he took up the study of biblical prophecy, writing two works on the subject, probably while still in the army, and pursuing his interest in it when he became a minister. This interest was obviously passed on to his son, Charles, who was educated first at a large private school at Brighton, and afterwards, when he chose medicine for his profession, in the house of a general practitioner in London. He studied in Edinburgh for three years, and graduated MD in 1838, the title of his inaugural essay being 'Continued fever'. After visiting Malta, Italy, Greece, and Egypt in company with a patient, he returned to England and was admitted an extra-licentiate of the London College of Physicians in July 1842. On 5 November 1842 he married Julia Charlotte ['see 'Maitland, Julia Charlotte (1808-1864)], writer and traveller, widow of James Thomas (died 1840), an Indian judge in the Madras presidency. Her maiden name was Barrett, and her mother was a niece of Fanny Burney, Madame D'Arblay. 
Maitland practised for a few years at Windsor, but his interests drew him more towards theology. He matriculated at Magdalen Hall, Oxford in 1848, graduated BA (with a second class in classics) in 1852, and was ordained deacon in the same year, and priest the following year. He was at first curate at All Saints, Southampton, then at Lyndhurst, Hampshire, and afterwards in the Forest of Dean, Gloucestershire. But his mind gave way, and after being for some years separated from his family, he died at his home, 81 Upper Stamford Street, London, on 26 July 1866, and was buried in the Brompton cemetery. 
While at Rome, Maitland was attracted to the catacombs, and, being a good amateur artist, made numerous drawings. In 1846 he published 'The church in the catacombs: a description of the primitive church of Rome, illustrated by its sepulchral remains'; a second revised edition followed in 1847. This was apparently the first popular book on the subject, and reflected Maitland's opinion that the Roman church of his day bore little resemblance to that of the Apostolic era. In 1849, while at Oxford, he published 'The Apostles' School of Prophetic Interpretation: with its History Down to the Present Time'. This work was clearly premillennial in outlook, although Maitland was somewhat critical of the futurists of that time for what he perceived to be their relative lack of interest in early church figures such as Barnabas and Irenaeus. In this emphasis he appears to have differed somewhat from his father, whom he none the less cited in his study with considerable approval. 


@@@@@


doc= 17820


Maitland, Edward (1824-1897), author and spiritualist, was born on 27 October 1824 at Ipswich, the second son of Charles David Maitland (1785-1865) and his wife, Elizabeth Adye Miller. His father had been a captain, Royal Artillery, serving in battle at the end of the Napoleonic War, a Cambridge graduate, and from 1828 until his death a perpetual curate at St James's Chapel, Brighton. Maitland was the younger brother of Charles Maitland (1815-1866) and Brownlow (1816-1902) and nephew of General Sir Peregrine Maitland (1777-1854), a distinguished soldier and colonial governor. His family were evangelicals and his adverse reaction to their strict principles of belief appears to have coloured his thinking later in life. Maitland was educated first at Morris's large private school in Brighton (1839-43) and at Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge, from 1843 to 1847 (BA 1847). Although intended by his father for the church, he was beset by doubt and emigrated to America in 1849, where he settled for a time in California among the goldminers ('forty-niners'), and eventually to Australia where he became a commissioner of crown lands. He married Esther Bradley (1834-1856) in 1855, in New South Wales, but within a year was widowed and left with an infant son, Charles (1856-1901); Charles Maitland eventually became a surgeon-major in the Bombay medical service, but Maitland apparently took no part in his upbringing. 
Maitland returned to England in 1858, having delivered a lecture in Sydney on 9 January 1858 entitled 'The meaning of the age: a farewell lecture', which was later printed in Brighton, Sussex. He intended to devote himself to literary work and searching for a perfect system of thought by which to rule his life. The ensuing ten years are undocumented, but by the late 1860s he emerged to become a contributor to several journals, including 'The Spectator', 'The Examiner', 'The Athenaeum', the 'Edinburgh Review', the 'Fortnightly Review', and the 'Westminster Review'. In 1868 he published 'The Pilgrim and the Shrine, or, Passages from the Life and Correspondence of Herbert Ainslie, B. A., Cantab.', a largely autobiographical novel which was well received. This resulted in his moving into society where he was favourably regarded by his contemporaries Richard Monckton Milnes, first Baron Houghton, and Sir Francis Hastings Doyle. 'The Higher Law' followed in 1869, a religious romance, and 'By and By: an Historical Romance of the Future' (1873) which emphasized mystical material and was set in an African utopia. 

'By and By' attracted the attention of Anna Kingsford (1846-1888), a 27-year-old woman with advanced views on vegetarianism, anti-vivisection, and women's rights, but also possessed of strong poetical tendencies; she invited him to visit her and her husband, Algernon Kingsford, at their home at Atcham in Shropshire, where Algernon was a curate and later vicar. In 1874, Anna Kingsford successfully sought permission to study medicine at the University of Paris, and after escorting her there her husband invited Maitland, a connection of the Kingsford family, to be her protector in France. Maitland was a large man with a high domed head and Florence Fenwick Miller recorded in her autobiography that he was, at the time of his Paris sojourn, 'old (55 or so), plain, heavy, and dull of conversation' (Miller, 303). During the next six years Maitland began to explore the mystical side of his nature. In 1876 he first saw the apparition of his father, then he experienced other visitations from the dead, which convinced him he was a mystic and had a special spiritual sensitivity. This led him to believe that he had had many past lives, that he had lived in trees and animals, and that in previous incarnations he had been the emperor Marcus Aurelius, St John the Evangelist, and the prophet Daniel. As evidence for these phenomena he relied on a strange medley of so-called inspirations, revelations in dreams, passive writing, and harking to spiritual voices. In 1880, at the conclusion of Anna Kingsford's medical studies, the two returned to London, where she successfully practised medicine for a time, but continued, under Maitland's influence, to explore the supernatural. They published together 'The Perfect Way: on the Finding of Christ' (1882), based on a course of Maitland's lectures. She and Maitland joined the British Theosophical Society, of which Kingsford soon became president, but after a philosophical altercation with Madame Blavatsky, the founder of nineteenth-century theosophy, they broke away and founded the London lodge of the Theosophical Society. In 1885 they founded the Hermetic Society, relying on mystic revelations, as opposed to the occult of Blavatsky, and specifically refuting her concept of Mahatmas. In the same year Maitland published 'The Hermetic Works', a translation of the works of Hermes Trismegistus. 
After Anna Kingsford's death in February 1888, Maitland lived alone in studios at 1 Thurloe Square, London, where he claimed to receive continual 'illumination' from her, and devoted himself to founding the Esoteric Christian Union, and editing 'Clothed in the Sun, being the Book of the Illuminations of Anna (Bonus) Kingsford' (1889); 'The New Gospel of Interpretation' (1892); and 'Anna Kingsford: her life, letters, diary, and work, by her collaborator... with a supplement of post-mortem communications' (2 vols., 1896). The latter was not well received. Florence Fenwick Miller, who knew them both well, wrote in the 'Woman's Signal' (14 October 1897) that the book was more about Maitland and his spiritual revelations than about its subject, and that 'the Anna Kingsford that I knew, the clever, intelligent woman... was absolutely non-existent in the book'. 
After the biography Maitland experienced a physical and mental breakdown; in 1896 he went to stay with Colonel Currie at The Warders, Tonbridge, Kent, where he suffered the loss of speech, and died on 2 October 1897. In her obituary notice Fenwick Miller quoted from, and agreed with, 'The Athenaeum's' assessment that 'He was a man of fine feeling and much intellectual power, but he lacked balance and drifted into various crazes' ('Woman's Signal', 14 Oct 1897). Maitland was buried in Tonbridge cemetery on 5 October 1897. 


@@@@@


doc= 17821


Maitland, Edward Francis, Lord Barcaple (1808-1870), lawyer, was born on 16 April 1808 in Edinburgh, the fifth son of Adam Maitland (died 1843), landed proprietor, of Dundrennan, Kirkcudbrightshire, and his wife, Stewart McWhann. He was educated at the high school and then the University of Edinburgh and was called to the Scottish bar in March 1831. His eldest brother, Thomas Maitland (1792-1851), also entered the legal profession, rising, as Lord Dundrennan, to be a court of session judge. 
Initially Edward was not very successful as an advocate and considered giving up the profession. He had the advantage of family connections, but was apparently gruff and unwilling to flatter or hide contempt. Although never entirely briefless, he had spare time which he spent on literature. He was one of the originators of the Free Church periodical the 'North British Review', contributed several articles to it, and was its editor for a time in 1845 and 1846. 
On 21 July 1840 Maitland married Anne Roberts (1813-1854), daughter of William Roberts, a banker in Glasgow. Together they had a family of four sons and two daughters. 
A change in the tempo of Maitland's legal career began with his appointment as an advocate-depute in 1847. Maitland came from a whig background, his brother Thomas was MP for Kirkcudbrightshire from 1845 until 1850, and this and his later appointments were made by whig administrations. He was appointed sheriff of Argyll in July 1851 and was solicitor-general for Scotland between 1855 and 1858 and again from 1859 until 1862. Especially as holder of the latter office, he was able to build a reputation for conscientiousness and as an earnest and persuasive pleader, though his oratory was not of the kind to attract popular attention. Most notable in bringing Maitland to public attention was probably his conduct, together with the lord advocate James Moncreiff, of the prosecution at the famous trial of Madeleine Smith for murder in 1857. His humour was reportedly subtle and his intellect had a tendency to over-refinement and rigidity. These flaws, however, did not prevent him eventually enjoying a large income at the bar. 
Maitland was not attracted by a political career. It was said he would have objected to exercising patronage according to the needs of party rather than in line with his conscience. This aversion did not extend, however, to university politics. After holding office as curator and assessor at Edinburgh University and being awarded an LLD in 1860, Maitland was elected in the same year as the first rector of Aberdeen University, newly created as a result of the union of King's and Marischal colleges. Maitland was put up as the 'peace candidate' in a bitterly contested election overshadowed by the quarrel between supporters and opponents of the union. 
In November 1862 Maitland accepted a position as one of the judges of the outer house of the court of session. He took the title Lord Barcaple from a property he had recently purchased from a brother near Dundrennan, the family estate in Kirkcudbrightshire. Reportedly, he soon regretted this step. On the bench his income was significantly reduced and the conscientious thoroughness which had seen him overworked as solicitor-general was to have fatal consequences when he was a judge. The rule in Scottish courts that a litigant could choose the lord ordinary before whom a case was to be heard meant that a popular judge attracted a lot of business. Maitland's occasional tendency to miss the plain view of a case, the result of characteristic over-refinement, did not help and his roll became longer than he could manage. In addition, he was appointed a commissioner on the courts of law in 1868, and the government failed to fill a vacant chair on the court of session. This workload led to a breakdown in his health at the end of 1869, from which he did not recover. Barcaple died at his Edinburgh residence, 3 Ainslie Place, on 23 February 1870 and was buried on 28 February in the Dean cemetery, Edinburgh. 


@@@@@


doc= 17822


Maitland, Frederick (1763-1848), army officer, born on 3 September 1763, was the youngest son of General Sir Alexander Maitland, first baronet (1728-1820), colonel 49th foot, and his wife, Penelope (died 22 December 1805), daughter of Colonel Martin Madan MP and sister of Martin Madan, bishop of Peterborough. Charles Maitland, sixth earl of Lauderdale, was his paternal grandfather. On 1 September 1779 Frederick was appointed ensign in the 14th foot. He served with a company of his regiment doing duty as marines on the 'Union' (90 guns, Captain J. Dalrymple) in the channel in 1779-80, became lieutenant on 19 September 1782, and was on board Admiral Darby's fleet at the relief of Gibraltar in October 1782. He afterwards served for fifteen months in Jamaica. 
In 1784 Maitland was transferred to the 30th foot, and placed on half pay; he devoted his leisure time to study. After returning to the West Indies in 1787 he was for a time assistant quartermaster-general in Jamaica. He married at Barbados, in November 1790, Catherine, daughter of John Prettijohn of that island. They had nine children. He had obtained his company in the 60th Royal Americans in 1789, and brought the dispatches announcing the capture of Tobago in April 1793. The sloop 'Fairy' (18 guns, Captain John Laforey), in which he came home, was engaged during the voyage with a French 32-gun frigate, which escaped. Maitland was brevet major and aide-de-camp to Sir Charles Grey ['see 'Grey, Charles, first Earl Grey] at the relief of Nieuport and Ostend in 1794, and deputy adjutant-general, with the brevet of lieutenant-colonel, at the capture of Martinique, Guadeloupe, and St Lucia in the same year. He was promoted major, 9th foot, in 1794, and lieutenant-colonel in 1795, when he was transferred to the 27th Inniskillings. He went back to the West Indies in 1795, as military secretary to Sir Ralph Abercromby, with whom he served at St Lucia, St Vincent, Puerto Rico, and elsewhere, in 1795-7. While returning home in the 'Arethusa' (38 guns, Captain T. Woolley), he was present and commanded the cabin guns of the frigate at the capture of the French corvette, 'La Gaiete', south-east of Bermuda, on 20 August 1797. He afterwards served on Abercromby's staff in Scotland, and in the expedition to the Netherlands in 1799. 
As a brevet colonel Maitland returned once more to the West Indies in 1800, and was quartermaster-general there for six years. He commanded a brigade at the capture of the Danish, Swedish, and Dutch West India islands in 1800-01. He was transferred as lieutenant-colonel from the Inniskillings to the 29th, was appointed brigadier-general in 1804, and commanded a brigade at the capture of Surinam. He became a major-general in 1805, and in 1807 was second in command, under General Bowyer, at the recapture of the Dutch and Danish islands, which had been restored at the peace of Amiens. At St Thomas's he received the sword of the governor, Van Schogen, at the spot on which he had received it six years before. He commanded a brigade at the capture of Martinique in 1809 and the subsequent operations at Les Saintes. 
Maitland had been appointed lieutenant-governor of Grenada in 1805, and except when absent on active service, as in the West Indies, administered the civil government of the island. This he did until 1810. He was an upright and painstaking administrator. Although his legal knowledge was self-acquired, his decisions as vice-chancellor were never reversed save in a solitary instance on a technical point of law. Privately he was opposed to the abolition of slavery. He became a lieutenant-general in 1811, and on 1 January 1812 was appointed second in command in the Mediterranean under Lord William Bentinck ['see 'Bentinck, Lord William Henry Cavendish- (1774-1839)]. In that capacity he commanded the Anglo-Sicilian army sent from Sicily to the east coast of Spain to make a diversion on Suchet's left flank. The situation in Sicily prevented Bentinck from detaching a force of the strength expected by Wellington, and the motley corps of 9000 British German Legion, Swiss, Sicilians, and Neapolitans, with which Maitland arrived off Palamos on 31 July 1812, was too ill-provided with commissariat and field-train to justify a landing there. Maitland proceeded to Alicante, landed his troops, and opened communication with the Spanish generals in Murcia. After some desultory movements he began to entrench his camp at Alicante at the end of August 1812. But his health was broken, and at the beginning of November, having done nothing, he resigned the command to General Mackenzie, and returned home. He received the lieutenant-governorship of Dominica on 30 June 1813 in recognition of his past services. 
Maitland, a full general in 1825, had been appointed in 1810 colonel in succession of the 1st Ceylon regiment and in 1833 he became colonel in succession of the 58th foot. A memoir by him on the defences of Mount's Bay, Cornwall, is extant ('Dispatches of... the Duke of Wellington', 7.149-51). He died at Tunbridge Wells on 27 January 1848, aged eighty-four. His wife, and three of their children, survived him; his eldest brother, Sir Alexander Maitland-Gibson (or Gibson-Maitland), second baronet, deputy governor of the Bank of Scotland, survived him by only a few days. 


@@@@@


doc= 17823


Frederick Lewis Maitland (1730-1786), sixth son of Charles, sixth earl of Lauderdale. Maitland's father, the godson of Frederick Louis, prince of Wales, commanded with distinction the 'Lively' in 1760, the 'Elizabeth' in 1778, and served under Rodney in 1782. Between 1763 and 1775 he commanded the royal yacht. He was promoted rear-admiral in 1786, but died before the news reached him. Maitland's mother was Margaret Dick (died 1825), heir in tail general to James Crichton, Viscount Frendraught, who was heir of the family of Makgill of Rankeilour. Maitland's elder brother Charles (died 1820) inherited the estates of his mother's family and assumed the surname Makgill; he and his wife, Mary Johnston, had a son David Maitland-Makgill-Crichton (1801-1851), who assumed the name Crichton in 1837 as heir to his ancestor James Crichton. He was called to the Scottish bar in 1822, and took a prominent part in the formation of the Free Church of Scotland. 


@@@@@


doc= 17824


Maitland, Sir Frederick Lewis (1777-1839), naval officer, born at Rankeilour in Fife on 7 September 1777, was the third son of Captain 
Maitland joined the navy, and, after serving some time in the sloop 'Martin' with Captain George Duff and with Robert Forbes in the frigate 'Southampton', in which he was present at the battle of 1 June 1794, he was promoted lieutenant of the 'Andromeda' on 3 April 1795. He was shortly afterwards moved into the 'Venerable', flagship of Admiral Duncan in the North Sea, and in April 1797 went out to the Mediterranean to join Lord St Vincent, by whom he was appointed to the sloop 'Kingfisher'. In her he assisted at the capture of several privateers with such courage that the ship's company subscribed $50 to present him with a sword. In December 1798 the 'Kingfisher' was wrecked as she was leaving the Tagus. Maitland, who was in temporary command, was court-martialled and honourably acquitted. Immediately afterwards he was appointed flag lieutenant to Lord St Vincent, then residing at Gibraltar. 
On 7 July 1799, as the combined fleets of France and Spain were retiring from the Mediterranean, Maitland was sent by St Vincent to order the hired cutter 'Penelope' 'to go, count and dodge them'. As the lieutenant of the cutter was sick, Maitland took the command, but the next day, owing, it was said, to the cowardice and disobedience of the men, the 'Penelope' was captured by the Spaniards and taken into Cadiz. The Spanish admiral Mazaredo, having learned that her commander was the flag lieutenant of Lord St Vincent, to whom he was under some obligation of courtesy, sent Maitland back to Gibraltar free, without exchange. Maitland was promoted by St Vincent to be commander of the sloop 'Cameleon', the promotion backdated to 14 June; he went out to join his new ship, then on the coast of Egypt, under Sir Sidney Smith, and after the signing of the convention of al- 'Arish (24 January 1800) was sent home overland with dispatches. He returned almost immediately, and continued in the 'Cameleon' to the end of the year. On 10 December 1800 he was appointed by Keith to be acting captain of the store ship 'Wassenaar'. As she was then at Malta unfit for service, Maitland obtained permission to accompany the expedition to Egypt. His good service in command of the boats appointed to cover the landing of the army, and to support the right flank in the actions of 13 and 21 March 1801, was specially acknowledged by the commanders-in-chief, on the report of Sir Sidney Smith, and won for him his promotion to post rank, dated 21 March. Maitland was then appointed temporarily to the 'Dragon' (74 guns), but in August was moved into the 'Carrere', a recent prize from the French, which he took to England and paid off in October 1802. 
St Vincent, then first lord of the Admiralty, immediately appointed Maitland to the 'Loire', a large 46 gun frigate, which, on the renewal of the war, was employed on the west coast of France and the north coast of Spain. In April 1804 he married Catherine (died 1865), second daughter of Daniel Connor of Ballybricken, co. Cork; their only child died in infancy. 
During the three years after his appointment to the 'Loire', Maitland captured or destroyed many large privateers and coastal batteries, especially on 4 June 1805 in Muros Bay, south of Cape Finisterre, where his courage and success won him the thanks of the City of London, the freedom of Cork, and a sword from the Patriotic Fund. He also assisted in the capture of the French frigate 'Libre' on 24 December 1805. In November 1806 he was moved into the frigate 'Emerald' (36 guns), on the same service as the 'Loire', and with similar success. In April 1809 she was with the fleet outside Basque Roads, under Lord Gambier, and on the 12th was one of the few ships so tardily sent in to support the 'Imperieuse'. 
In 1813 and 1814 Maitland commanded the 'Goliath' (58 guns) on the Halifax and West Indian stations, and in November 1814 was appointed to the 'Boyne' (98 guns) under orders for North America. At the beginning of 1815 he was collecting a fleet of transports and merchant ships in Cork harbour, but a succession of strong westerly winds prevented his sailing, until, on the news of Bonaparte's return from Elba, his orders were countermanded, and he was appointed to the 'Bellerophon' (74 guns), in which he sailed from Plymouth on 24 May under the immediate orders of Sir Henry Hotham. Maitland, as well as Hotham, had a long experience of the Bay of Biscay, and the 'Bellerophon' was stationed off Rochefort to keep watch on the ships of war there. On 28 June the news of Waterloo reached Maitland, and on the 30th a letter from Bordeaux warned him that Bonaparte would attempt to escape from there to America. Maitland, however, considered he would more probably make for Rochefort; and though he sent two small craft, one to Bordeaux and the other to Arcachon, he himself, in the 'Bellerophon', remained off Rochefort. Hotham, in the 'Superb', was in Quiberon Bay, and frigates, corvettes, and brigs kept watch along the whole extent of the coast. Hotham ordered Maitland that if he intercepted Bonaparte he should take him to England. 
On 10 July negotiations with Maitland were opened on behalf of Bonaparte, who had then reached Rochefort. Maitland rejected the proposal that he should be allowed to sail to the United States, but offered to take him to England. After four anxious days, Bonaparte, with his staff and servants, embarked on the 'Bellerophon' on 15 July. On 24 July the ship reached Torbay; thence she was ordered round to Plymouth to await the decision of the government. She put to sea again on 4 August, and on the 7th, off Berry Head, Bonaparte was removed to the 'Northumberland'. To counteract misrepresentation, Maitland wrote for his friends a detailed 'Narrative' of Bonaparte's time on the 'Bellerophon', which he subsequently published in 1826. 
In October 1818 Maitland was appointed to the 'Vengeur' (74 guns), in which in 1819 he went out to South America. In 1820 he carried Lord Beresford from Rio de Janeiro to Lisbon, and went on to the Mediterranean, where he was sent to Naples to take the king of the Two Sicilies to Leghorn. On landing on 20 December, after a rough passage of seven days, the king invested Maitland with the insignia of a knight commander of the order of St Ferdinand and Merit, and presented him with his portrait, set with diamonds, in a gold box. The 'Vengeur' returned to England in the following spring, and Maitland was appointed to the 'Genoa' (74 guns), guardship at Portsmouth, which he left in October on the completion of his three years' continuous service. From 1827 to 1830 he commanded the 'Wellesley' (74 guns) in the Mediterranean. He attained his flag on 22 July 1830. He had been made a CB in 1815; on 17 November 1830 he was advanced to KCB. From 1832 to 1837 he was admiral superintendent of the dockyard at Portsmouth; in July 1837 he was appointed commander-in-chief in the East Indies and China, with his flag in his old ship the 'Wellesley'. In February 1839, when co-operating with the army on its advance from Bombay towards Afghanistan, he captured the town and fort of Karachi, and covered the landing of the troops and stores. Afterwards, on the news of some disturbances at Bushehr, he went there and, under the protection of the marines of the squadron, brought away the resident and his staff without punishing the rioters, conduct which the Anglo-Indian press criticized as injudiciously lenient. 
Maitland died at sea, on board the 'Wellesley', off Bombay, on 30 November 1839. He was buried at Bombay, where, in the cathedral, a monument to his memory was erected by subscription. Lady Maitland died in 1865 at Lindores, Fife. 


