@@@@@


doc= 17825


Maitland, James, eighth earl of Lauderdale (1759-1839), politician and political economist, was born on 26 January 1759 at Hatton House, Ratho, Edinburghshire. He was the eldest surviving son of the six sons and six daughters of James Maitland, seventh earl of Lauderdale (1718-1789), landowner and army officer, and his wife, Mary Turner (1733/4-1789), only child of Sir Thomas Lombe (1685-1739), a silk manufacturer and London alderman. 
Styled Viscount Maitland from birth, he was educated at Edinburgh high school and at Edinburgh University. His tutor Andrew Dalzel took him to Paris in 1774, and in 1775 he spent a term at Trinity College, Oxford. In 1777 he proceeded to Glasgow University, where he studied under John Millar, and entered Lincoln's Inn. He became an advocate in Edinburgh in July 1780 and had scarcely practised when in September 1780 he was returned to parliament for Newport, Cornwall, on the duke of Northumberland's interest. On 15 August 1782 he married an heiress, Eleanor (1761/2-1856), only surviving daughter of Anthony Todd, secretary to the Post Office, and Ann Robinson. Described by the writer Elizabeth Grant as 'a nice little painted doll, a cipher as to intellect' (E. Grant, 'Memoirs of a Highland Lady', ed. J. M. Strachey, 1898, 293), Eleanor brought Maitland a dowry of $50,000 and her father's pledge of $10,000 on the birth of each of their children, of which they had four sons and five daughters. 
On entering the Commons, Maitland attached himself to Charles James Fox, then in opposition, who valued him. He gave his maiden speech, on 26 February 1781, in favour of Edmund Burke's reforms to the civil list and deplored the extravagance of the war with the American colonies. He praised Fox's East India bill and defended the outgoing coalition ministry in December 1783 against the royal preference for William Pitt. From 1784 he sat for Marlborough on the Wilkins interest and supported the opposition, except when in May 1787 it accused his father-in-law of abuses in administering the Post Office. In the same month he mooted a bill enabling the eldest sons of Scottish peers to sit for Scottish burghs. He was one of the managers of Warren Hastings's impeachment and opposed the exclusion of the prince of Wales from the regency council. He upheld the rights of slave owners in opposing abolition of slavery on 21 May 1789; he reiterated these views in the Lords in 1794 and changed over to the abolitionists only in 1806. His succession to the earldom in August 1789 terminated his Commons career. 
In 1790 Lauderdale was elected a Scottish representative peer, and he first spoke in the Lords on 11 April 1791 against the war in India. In the debate on the proclamation against seditious writings on 31 May 1791 he mocked Pitt, the duke of Richmond, and Benedict Arnold for their desertion of parliamentary reform. Richmond replied heatedly and Lauderdale challenged him to a duel, which was averted. A duel did take place between Lauderdale and Arnold on 1 July, in which neither was injured. In August 1792 he travelled to Paris with Dr John Moore, leaving for Calais during the September massacres and returning in December. A founder member of the Society of the Friends of the People at home, he styled himself Citizen, affected Jacobin costume, and befriended the revolutionary Brissot. Back in the Lords, he twice intemperately attacked the 'Aliens Bill' and on 1 February 1793 attributed French hostilities and atrocities to counter-revolutionary pressure. He subsequently opposed the war with France and the British government's repression of civil liberties. He championed the Scottish reformers Thomas Muir and Thomas Palmer, imprisoned for seditious libel, and visited them aboard the hulks, but was undermined in debate by Lord Mansfield on 15 April 1794. 
Having opposed voluntary subscriptions to the war effort, Lauderdale was alleged by government sources to be handling French propaganda funds; he was examined at the Home Office about dealings with William Stone, a supposed French agent. On 30 April he condemned allied endeavours to overthrow the French regime and subsequently supported the duke of Bedford's motions for peace. He led opposition to the suspension of habeas corpus by the British government and in November opposed the bills against treasonable practices and seditious meetings, accompanying Fox to a protest meeting in Westminster. He claimed credit for thwarting government plans to apply the law of treason to utterances and for mitigating the penalties for second offences. In March 1796 he joined Bedford in attacking Edmund Burke's pension, suggesting that the pension fund should be diverted to public works. Burke responded with 'A Letter to a Noble Lord', which targeted Bedford and virtually ignored Lauderdale. On 13 May he and Lord Lansdowne produced fifteen resolutions subverting government versions of public accounts. These, like most of his motions, failed without a division. 
Lauderdale's politics, illustrated in his 'Letters to the Peers of Scotland' (1794), written when he was the only Scottish peer left in opposition, prevented his re-election to the Lords from 1796 onwards. Frustrated, he encouraged Fox's secession from the Commons and considered abdicating his peerage. Out of parliament he became a freeman of London and concentrated on writing on finance and the economy. His anonymously published pamphlet 'Thoughts on Finance' was followed in 1798 by 'A Letter on the Present Measures of Finance', which was critical of Pitt's budgetary expedients. His 'Plan for Altering the Manner of Collecting a Large Part of the Public Revenue' (1799) proposed substituting inheritance tax for income tax and reducing indirect duties. In 1804, the year when Glasgow University made him an LLD, he published 'An inquiry into the nature and origin of public wealth, and into the means and causes of its increase', a thesis which was enlarged in 1819. He questioned Adam Smith's theory of the relationship between labour and value, maintaining that wealth was a compound of labour, land, and capital, and value was a compound of utility and scarcity. He argued that capital was capable of harnessing productive labour to make profits by meeting market demand, and that such profits resulted only when there were no legislative restraints on commerce and no burdens, such as Pitt's sinking fund to redeem the national debt. His thesis was critically reviewed by Henry Brougham in the 'Edinburgh Review' (July 1804). His retaliatory 'Observations' provoked further 'Thoughts' from Brougham in 1805. Lauderdale published two more pamphlets that addressed problems of the Irish currency and the effects of absentee Irish landlords' remission of income. 
The duke of Bedford's death in 1802 raised the possibility of Lauderdale succeeding as opposition leader in the Lords if he obtained a British peerage, but Lauderdale only returned to Westminster four years later when Fox and Lord Grenville formed a coalition ministry. He was created first Baron Lauderdale of Thirlestane in the British peerage on 22 February 1806 but was denied a cabinet seat by Grenville. Fox encouraged his ambition to govern India but Lauderdale was deterred by the hostility of the court of directors and instead became lord keeper of the great seal of Scotland, with an income of $4000 a year. He wished to purge Scotland of Lord Melville's influence but his tenure of the post was short-lived. On 2 August he was sent to Paris to join Lord Yarmouth in peace negotiations with Napoleon Bonaparte; he had been sworn of the privy council on 21 July. After reporting Yarmouth's improper speculations Lauderdale replaced him as chief negotiator, though his mission proved impossible. He left France on 8 October and justified his conduct in the Lords on 2 January 1807. In March he defended the 'Scottish Judicature Bill' and continued to do so from the opposition benches after the change of ministry in April, which deprived him of office. In opposition he joined with Grey, Grenville, and Holland in defending other uncompleted measures of their ministry. He moved resolutions against orders in council regulating licensed trade on 22 March 1808 and remained critical of the conduct of the war. 
A deist in religion, Lauderdale questioned the validity of increasing stipends of Scottish clergy, in a speech, later published, of 20 May 1808, and in June opposed the curates' residence bill. Among his other regular targets in debate were the East India Company, which he criticized in print in 1809, and the judicial system. He gave warm support to the reduction of criminal penalties championed by Sir Samuel Romilly and later welcomed the introduction of trial by jury in Scotland in February 1815. Ambitious to return to ministerial office, Lauderdale had long cultivated the prince of Wales and his brother, the duke of York, and wished for the abdication of the incapacitated George III. He sought to reverse the duke's public disgrace over the army contracts affair and in December 1810 took the prince's part in opposing restrictions on his regency. When the prince objected to Grenville's and Grey's principled refusal to take office in his first regency ministry, Lauderdale rebuked him at Carlton House on 22 February 1812 but he failed to overcome the regent's dislike of Grey. 
Lauderdale thus remained in opposition and continued to voice his opinions on financial and economic issues. In March 1811 he had deplored excessive issue of paper currency, which had caused coin to disappear and paper money to depreciate. He opposed the gold coin and bank note bill introduced in July by Lord Stanhope in an attempt to stabilize paper currency, arguing that only a resumption of cash payments by the Bank of England could reverse the trend. In February 1812 he spoke out against the 'Framework Bill', provoked by the actions of distressed Luddites, and advocated retrenchment of public finances. However, his attempt to probe East India Company assets and Bank of England profits failed, as did his motion of 1 May for a committee on the circulating currency; he countered by opposing the 'Local Tokens Bill'. His pamphlets, 'The Depreciation of the Paper-Currency of Great Britain Proved' (1812) and 'Further Considerations' (1813) provided the basis of his speeches in the 1812 parliament. On 18 May 1813 he again deplored the sinking fund scheme and on 21 June he opposed renewal of the East India Company charter. His motion against over-issue of paper currency failed on 9 July but he persisted by objecting to the renewed restriction of cash repayments on 26 April 1814. He took a protectionist line in his 'Letter on the Corn Laws' (1814) which he reiterated in his protests against repeal of corn export bounties and against massive imports of foreign corn. Retrenchment was his main theme in March 1816 and he tried to hasten the resumption of cash payments by the bank in May. His own preference for a silver standard was overruled by Lord Liverpool in June in favour of the gold standard. 
The social policies of Liverpool's administration also kept Lauderdale in active opposition. He opposed the suspension of habeas corpus in March 1817 and appealed for universities to be excluded from the penalties under the 'Seditious Meetings Bill'. In debates in June he characterized a bill to combat unemployment as a chimerical attempt to provide general parochial relief, and attacked the game laws. Soon afterwards, in opposing the 'Aliens Bill', he attempted to preserve the non-alien status of the Bank of Scotland foreign shareholders. He was critical of the cotton factory regulation bill, particularly its measures regarding child labour, and advocated its extension to factories in other industries, yet he ridiculed a bid to ban boy chimney sweeps. Royal affairs continued to attract his interest and he objected to the duke of Cumberland's exclusion from the 'Royal Marriages Bill' in May 1818, having mediated in Cumberland's quarrel with his mother the queen over his marriage. He also questioned the queen's control over the Windsor establishment. 
Throughout Lauderdale kept up pressure for a resumption of cash payments. When the parliamentary committee examining the issue, chaired by Robert Peel, published its report in favour of resumption, he agreed with it that an abrupt recourse to a depreciated metallic currency would cripple commerce. On 15 June 1819 he sought judicial views on the legality of the flawed coinage. He believed that lower taxation would best relieve economic problems, as stated in debates on 21 June, and on 17 December he blamed economic distress on excessive public expenditure. In May 1820 he insisted that the peacetime depression had hit agriculture as well as commerce and manufacture. 
On 19 July 1820 Lauderdale defended the conduct of his brother Thomas as a colonial governor, but his exertions were far greater on behalf of George IV, whose queen faced a trial for adultery. A member of the Lords' secret committee investigating the charges, he delivered a keynote speech on 2 November stating the case against Caroline, which, when it was published, became the talk of the town. The king rewarded him by appointing him a knight of the Thistle, on 17 July 1821. By now a courtier, he had abandoned most of his whig credentials and objected to the disfranchisement of rotten boroughs unless all voters were corrupt. In 1824 and 1825 he attempted to restrain the proliferation of joint-stock companies that lacked sound finances. In 1826 he clashed with Liverpool over the bank charter agreement, contrasting the confidence placed by the Scottish public in their banks with English distrust of theirs. That year, as in 1822, he advocated protection against imports of foreign grain, and on 8 March 1827 he secured a select committee on the sliding scale of duties on imported grain. This remained his favourite subject until 1828 when he supported Wellington's ministry and was reported to have influence over its counsels. On 17 June 1828 he approved a bill enabling Scottish peers to sit in the Commons. He remained critical of parliamentary reform and in 1829 published 'Three Letters to the Duke of Wellington', which set out the false economies of adopting a sinking fund. 
Lauderdale's final speech was made against the 'Scottish Court of Session Bill' on 12 July 1830. He took his seat in the Lords the following year but absented himself for health reasons, though a suspected underlying reason was his embarrassment at opposing Lord Grey's administration. The passage of the 'Reform Bill', which he opposed by proxy while engineering the election of twelve anti-reformers as representative peers, induced him to retire to his Scottish estate. He died at Thirlestane Castle, near Lauder, Berwickshire, on 15 September 1839 and was buried in the family vault at Haddington Abbey on 20 September. Long dismissed as eccentric, his contribution to economic theory has more recently been acknowledged. 
Lauderdale's second son, 


@@@@@


doc= 17826


Maitland, John, first Lord Maitland of Thirlestane (1543-1595), lord chancellor of Scotland, was the second son of Sir Richard Maitland of Lethington (1496-1586) and Mary or Mariota Cranstoun (died 1586); his older brother was William Maitland of Lethington (1525x30-1573), one of the most powerful politicians in Scotland while he held the office of secretary between 1558 and 1571. Mary Maitland was his sister. Like his father and brother, Maitland was trained in the law. He probably attended Haddington grammar school; he is listed on the rolls of St Salvator's College of the University of St Andrews for the year 1555. Thereafter he completed his education in France; it is not known when he went or for how long he stayed. In 1563 Queen Mary made him joint factor, with his father, of the lands of the Cistercian nunnery of Haddington. In 1567 he became, quite suddenly, a person of importance. In February of that year he became commendator of the priory of Coldingham through a collusive arrangement by which Francis Stewart, the nephew of Mary's all-powerful favourite, James Hepburn, fourth earl of Bothwell, became commendator of the much richer abbey of Kelso. Two months later he became lord privy seal when his father resigned that office in his favour. 
The keeper of the privy seal was not a powerful official, nor was there much to do: Sir Richard Maitland had held the office for almost five years although he was blind. Secretary Maitland undoubtedly arranged the transfer: he needed an active political supporter, and John Maitland was exactly that, following his brother loyally until the end came for William in 1573. Like William, John Maitland joined the ranks of the queen's opponents in 1567, and was confirmed in his office by the Regent Moray on 26 August, four days after Moray's assumption of the regency. A year later, in June 1568, he became a member of the court of session. Like William, John broke with Moray over Mary's request for a divorce from Bothwell; they were among the few who voted for the divorce at the convention of estates of August 1569. When the fighting between the supporters of the queen and those of the young James VI began in 1570, an English army seized Coldingham. In May 1571 the Regent Lennox's parliament forfeited the Maitland brothers; the privy seal was bestowed on the king's tutor, the famous humanist George Buchanan. The brothers took refuge in Edinburgh Castle, which surrendered to a combined Anglo-Scottish force on 28 May 1573. Sir William Drury, the English commander, took charge of the important prisoners, including the Maitlands. William died within two weeks, possibly a suicide. John was turned over to the Regent Morton, who kept him for a time in his grim fortress at Tantallon. Fortunately for John, Morton did not regard him as worth hanging. In February 1574 the regent permitted him to live with his cousin Lord Somerville at Cowthally, at the western end of the Pentland Hills, under what amounted to house arrest. He did not regain his liberty until 15 September 1578, several months after a 'coup d'etat' put an end to Morton's regency. 
John Maitland's policies and behaviour during his years of power indicate that he had absorbed the lessons of his brother's spectacular and tragic career. Like William he was a 'politique', but he came to understand that William had seriously underestimated the extent to which religious passion determined people's political conduct and, in consequence, the political influence of the spokesmen of the kirk. Making good the Stewart claim to the English succession became William's primary political purpose from the time of Queen Mary's return to Scotland in 1561. He failed to see that in a religious age Anglo-Scottish union could come about only on the basis of a common religion, and so he backed Mary to the end in spite of her Catholicism, which made her unacceptable to the English establishment and, as time went on, to more and more Scots as well. The succession question did not obsess John Maitland, though of course he supported the claims of his master, King James, whom it did obsess. Good relations with England were very important to him, but for domestic political reasons, rather than on account of the succession. Finally, Maitland did not share his brother's, and their father's, view that the upper aristocracy was the only class that counted for anything in Scotland. For him the upper aristocracy was part of the political problem, not the indispensable element in the solution. 
John Maitland's rise to power began with the arrival in Scotland of Esme Stuart in September 1579. Esme quickly became a favourite of his cousin the king, who made him first duke of Lennox. In 1580 Lennox brought Maitland and other supporters of the fallen queen to court. James always valued such men for their loyalty to his mother, provided they transferred their loyalty to himself, and he came to like and trust Maitland, who, like James, was a poet of modest talents. On 17 February 1581 Maitland was formally rehabilitated; in April he resumed his seat on the court of session. He survived the fall of Lennox in 1582, though the ultra-protestant Ruthven raiders drove him from the king's presence. In January 1583, at the age of thirty-nine, he married Jane Fleming (1554-1609), daughter of James, fourth Lord Fleming, and the niece of his brother William's wife. Jane Fleming's mother was a sister of Lord John Hamilton, the effective head of that great family, an important political connection for Maitland. Two children were born of the marriage: John, born in 1594, who ultimately became first earl of Lauderdale, and Anne, born in 1590, whose husband, Robert Seton, second earl of Winton, whom she married at thirteen, went mad on their wedding night. Anne died six years later, still a virgin. 
With the fall of the Ruthven raiders and the rise to power of James Stewart, fourth earl of Arran, in the summer of 1583, Maitland returned to court. He became a privy councillor in August, and a regular attendant at the council's meetings. Arran had his suspicions about Maitland, who supported a proposal to allow Lord John Hamilton to return from exile: Arran held the Hamilton earldom. But shortly after the suppression of an attempted coup in April 1584 Maitland was knighted and provided with the opportunity to exercise real power, in the future if not now, by being made secretary. Parliament confirmed the grant in May, and at the same time annulled Maitland's forfeiture and restored him to all his honours and estates, save Coldingham. At this parliament Maitland helped to draft the Erastian church legislation known as the 'Black Acts', which explicitly approved episcopacy and the crown's jurisdiction over all persons and all cases; to deny that jurisdiction, as some ministers had done, was declared to be treasonable. Several ministers refused to accept the acts of 1584. Maitland helped to devise a formula that split the clerical opposition: the clergy would obey the laws in so far as they agreed with the word of God. Maitland also became a member of a commission to adjust ministers' stipends: the carrot for the clerical donkey. The clerical extremists bitterly denounced him in a libel 'wherein Justice is brought in lamenting, that one of Cameleon's clan, one of the disciples of Matchiavell, had so great place in the commonwealth, to the ruin of justice' (Calderwood, 4.349). Another commission on which Maitland served was charged with reforming the court of session, in other words, with replacing politically unreliable members. Maitland thereupon began the process of placing his political allies on the court, which was a matter of great importance for the future. 
Maitland also began to try to undermine the seemingly all-powerful Arran, whose violence and greed had never appealed to him. He was not sufficiently well connected and influential to accomplish this by himself, so he became a supporter of Patrick, master of Gray, an ambitious and attractive young man in whom King James was showing a marked interest. James sent Gray to London in the autumn of 1584 to discuss, among other things, a possible Anglo-Scottish league; while he was there Gray persuaded Elizabeth's officials, who disliked Arran, to provide underhand support for his schemes against the favourite. The ensuing intrigue was enormously complicated, one of the complications being the negotiations for the league, in which Maitland as secretary was deeply involved. In the end Gray achieved complete success. He undermined James's confidence in Arran, and leached away the latter's support among the people who counted, so that when the conspirators struck in November 1585 Arran could offer no resistance. He lost his title, his offices, and the property he had accumulated during his two years of power and faded into obscurity. 
The overthrow of Arran marked the beginning of the personal rule of James VI, now aged nineteen. It also marked the beginning of Maitland's years of power. His office gave him constant access to the king; he was diligent and capable; English officialdom thought well of him -- the English ambassador Sir Edward Wotton, with whom Maitland was negotiating over the proposed league, called him 'the wisest man in Scotland' ('CSP Scot.', '1584-5', 681-2). The grant of the keepership of the great seal for life, with the title of vice-chancellor, on 31 May 1586 was an indication of his growing influence and importance. He also received a pension of $1000 Scots. His one dangerous political rival, Gray, was ruined by his involvement in the negotiations preceding the execution of Queen Mary in 1587. From 1587 to 1592 Maitland was the king's chief minister and political tutor, the most powerful man in Scotland after the king. 
That Maitland had an agenda quickly became evident. As early as April 1586 Archibald Douglas, one of his enemies, wrote to Walsingham that the Scottish secretary's 'greatness with the king did consist in this, that he had set down certain platts unto the king, how he might preserve his state in obedience' ('CSP Scot.', '1585-6', 346-7). At first Maitland moved a little uncertainly. He realized, however, that a further clarification of relations between crown and kirk was necessary, and helped to work out an acceptable compromise which acknowledged the pre-eminence of the general assembly and the legality of the recently established system of presbyteries. In return the kirk accepted the existence of the office of bishop and the crown's view that the kirk's jurisdictional authority was limited to matters of doctrine, discipline, and religious offences such as blasphemy and sexual misbehaviour; it did not embrace politics. But it was clear throughout the negotiations, which lasted until May 1586, that Maitland was still very uneasy about the kirk's power and influence. The same uneasiness and uncertainty influenced his attitude during the negotiations for the league with England, which concluded in July 1586. Maitland supported the alliance in principle, but he believed that the English offer was inadequate, and saw no reason to hurry the negotiations to a conclusion. The young king overruled him, however, and agreed to the English terms, after Elizabeth wrote a letter agreeing to do nothing in derogation of James's claim to the succession without just cause. Maitland became even more acutely aware that the succession was uppermost in the king's mind from his reaction to the disclosure of the Babington plot in August 1586, followed, six months later, by the execution of his mother. Maitland prudently avoided involvement in this business. At one point, in November 1586, he did persuade James to threaten to break the league if Mary's life were taken. Elizabeth exploded with rage, and James reverted to his acquiescent stance, which Elizabeth helped him to maintain by ostentatiously denying responsibility for Mary's death and making Secretary William Davison her scapegoat. 
The execution of their former queen outraged large numbers of Scots, who put pressure on the king to retaliate in some way. The leadership of the kirk, which did not in the least regret Mary's death, was very helpful in enabling James to resist this pressure and preserve the English alliance. By the middle of 1587 Maitland saw how existing circumstances could be turned to the crown's advantage. The league had turned the English government into a supporter of royal authority instead of a threat to it. The large moderate party in the kirk was supportive also, provided that the king withdrew his favour from the detested Archbishop Patrick Adamson of St Andrews, which James was prepared to do. There remained the upper aristocracy. Although the nobles constituted a group that would follow a decisive royal leader who shared their outlook, Maitland believed that the authority of the crown should not depend upon the uncertain goodwill of this class. So he set out to lessen its power by creating a central government independent of these men, responsible to, and responsive to, the king and only the king. The institution through which Maitland worked was the privy council, which gradually filled with his administrative and judicial colleagues, upon whom he could usually rely for political support. 
The legislation of the parliament of 1587 embodied Maitland's and James's vision in a series of important enactments. The act of James I (1428) authorizing the lairds to elect representatives to parliament, hitherto a dead letter, was revived: Maitland, himself a laird, counted on this class for support. The annexation of the temporalities of benefices to the crown put a great deal of land at the crown's disposal. James used it to reward both the men who comprised the new class of government servants -- lairds, lawyers, cadets of aristocratic families, whom Maitland recruited -- and those members of the upper aristocracy who were prepared to support Maitland's regime. The revival of justice ayres and the appointment of local gentry to hold quarter sessions on the English model to handle minor crimes, though not very successful, and the expansion of the government's right to prosecute criminal cases, were efforts to eat into the near monopoly of criminal justice enjoyed by the lords of regality. The revival of the general band made landlords responsible for the production in court of any accused resident of their lands; their property was subject to seizure if they failed to meet their obligations. An effort was made, with some success, to meet some of the complaints of the burghs. All these measures were designed to strengthen the crown by creating a 'noblesse de robe' and chipping away at the independent power of the magnates -- in the phrase of the English ambassador William Ashby in October 1588, to 'bridle the earls' with the support of the lairds and burghs ('CSP Scot.', '1586-9', 623-4) -- and of the kirk. At the end of the parliament, on 29 July, James raised Maitland to the chancellorship. 
These measures met with varying degrees of success. The electoral machinery of the act reintroducing the lairds to parliament, which specified an annual election of representatives whether or not parliament met, was too complicated and did not function well. Its main purpose, however, was not to revivify parliament, which did not meet during the years of Maitland's greatest power, but rather to bring the lairds into contact with government and alliance with it. In this respect it resembled the acts reorganizing criminal justice, which also worked less than perfectly. The annexation of church lands, however, accomplished what Maitland had intended. The kirk, although it complained that it gained little financially, saw the act as a death knell for episcopacy as a system of church government, and became Maitland's ally -- 'he kept true and honest till the day of his death', wrote James Melville, one of King James's severest critics ('Autobiography and Diary', 271). James later denounced the act because it limited his ability to restore the authority of bishops, but during Maitland's years of power he used it effectively to reward political supporters and build a 'noblesse de robe'. Maitland himself received the lordship of Musselburgh, which belonged to the abbey of Dunfermline. The policy of the general band also worked effectively, especially on the borders, where it was combined with crackdowns on recalcitrant landlords like Lord Maxwell and co-operation with English officials to bring border reivers to justice. 
The thrust of James's and Maitland's policy was clear enough to the upper aristocracy, and Maitland was held responsible for it. 'All matters whatsoever, both domestic and foreign, rests ['sic'] only upon the chancellor's shoulders', wrote one observer in September 1587 ('Salisbury MSS', 1583-9, 282-3). Inevitably Maitland and his policy provoked resentment. Many aristocrats bitterly hated him, not only for what he planned to do but also for who he was, an upstart and a parvenu -- 'a puddock-stool of a night', in the phrase of his greatest enemy, Francis Stewart, earl of Bothwell (Calderwood, 5.156). His appointment as lord chancellor offended the most aristocratic of his administrative colleagues, Treasurer Thomas Lyon, the master of Glamis, whose brother had been chancellor and who wanted the office for himself -- Maitland was the first chancellor who was neither an aristocrat nor a bishop since the reign of James II. The Catholic earls, led by George Gordon, sixth earl of Huntly, one of James's favourites, also disliked Maitland because of his alliance with the kirk. In the autumn of 1588 they planned to assassinate him, or so Maitland was told. In 1589, following the revelation of Huntly's correspondence with Spain, Maitland, by threatening to resign, persuaded James to remove Huntly as captain of the guard. Huntly, together with the other Catholic earls and Bothwell, now planned to seize the king and compel him to dismiss Maitland, who, said Bothwell in a flamboyant speech, was in English pay and was arranging for an English army to enter Scotland, overthrow the nobility, and reduce Scotland to slavery. 
The coup misfired and led to a rebellion on Huntly's part which James easily put down. The king, who believed in showing a certain amount of favour to the Catholics so as to forestall Catholic opposition to his succession to the English throne, punished no one very severely. He was about to get married, and was determined that no domestic broils mar his bride's arrival. When he decided in October 1589 to go to Denmark to fetch Anne home himself, he took Maitland with him, partly to ensure Maitland's safety. He left behind a remarkable proclamation denying the truth of the general assumption that Maitland was 'leading me, by the nose as it were, to all his appetites, as if I were an unreasonable creature, or a bairn that could do nothing of myself' ('Reg. PCS', 4.428-9). 
The royal party landed in Norway in October, James was married in November, and went on to Denmark in December, where he remained until spring, enjoying his holiday, meeting with Tycho Brahe, to whom Maitland wrote two Latin epigrams, and holding political discussions with Maitland. Rumours abounded concerning these discussions: Maitland would have the nobility barred from the privy council and not permitted to come to court except on summons. These were canards; what was genuine was a quarrel between the Earl Marischal, James's ambassador to Denmark, and Maitland, which James settled in Maitland's favour. Furthermore, Maitland was unwilling to pay Marischal's (and others') expenses out of Queen Anne's dowry, though he accepted part of a cupboard of plate to cover his own. When the royal party returned to Scotland, and Anne was crowned on 19 May 1590, James raised him to the peerage as Lord Maitland of Thirlestane, the only person so honoured. His colleague the lord treasurer received no more than a knighthood, which further irritated him. Maitland was becoming dangerously isolated, and dangerously unpopular. 
As long as Maitland enjoyed James's wholehearted support, however, he was secure enough. He was now at the peak of his influence with the king. He used his position to create a special committee to enforce the policy of the general band in both the highlands and the borders, and to improve the procedure for filling vacancies on the court of session by requiring that the judges examine the qualifications of any nominee before the king formally made the appointment. He also undertook some financial retrenchment. His measures, which included husbanding the queen's dowry, raised a host of new enemies for Maitland among the courtiers. Queen Anne herself turned hostile: James had given her the temporalities of the abbey of Dunfermline, and she wanted them all, including Maitland's lordship of Musselburgh, which was not part of the gift. The allegation in April 1591 that Bothwell had been consorting with witches turned James permanently against the earl, who blamed Maitland, quite unjustly, for the king's implacability. Bothwell was imprisoned, escaped, evaded capture, and on 27 December 1591, with the aid of some disgruntled courtiers, entered Holyroodhouse itself in order to seize the king and kill Maitland. He failed, narrowly. Two months later Huntly, toward whom Maitland had been making friendly gestures, murdered James Stewart, second earl of Moray, who was his rival for local influence in north-eastern Scotland. Maitland was blamed for this by all those who wanted Huntly punished, notably the Stewart family, the kirk, and the English government. Huntly's enemies attributed James's inaction to Maitland rather than to its real cause, James's obsessive hatred of Bothwell, who was, in the king's view, a far more dangerous offender than Huntly. The political pressure became so great that on 30 March 1592 James ordered Maitland to leave the court. His great days were over. 
The last three and a half years of Maitland's life were anticlimactic. He was able to persuade the king to use the parliament of May 1592 to give legal recognition to the existing presbyterian structure of the kirk and repeal the act of 1584 that gave administrative jurisdiction to bishops. This legislation followed logically from Maitland's previous policy toward the kirk. Presbyterian commentators, while giving him credit, declared that his purpose was 'to win the hearts of the ministers and people, alienated from him for his hounding out of Huntly against the earl of Moray' (Calderwood, 5.162), which does Maitland less than justice. It was, in fact, his last act of constructive statesmanship. 
During his final years Maitland spent much time at Lethington, and then at his new house, Thirlestane Castle, in Lauder, which was finished in the year of his death. The king often rode out to consult him, and he returned frequently to court, where he manoeuvred among the various factions in order to recover his political footing. In September 1592 James appointed him ambassador to France, partly for his own safety: he was in real danger from Bothwell. He never went; he decided that, if he left, he was likely to lose his offices and property. As it was, he surrendered Musselburgh to the queen in July 1593 to recover her favour. The most significant development of these years was that the administrative machine Maitland and James had built withstood the attacks made on Maitland by Bothwell and the Catholic earls, whose dealings with Spain came to light with the discovery of the so-called Spanish blanks in December 1592. By 1595, after many vicissitudes, Huntly, Erroll, and Bothwell were all driven into exile; Bothwell would never return. This was a milestone: never again would a handful of disgruntled aristocrats threaten royal authority. And the crown had won through without outside aid, apart from a little English money. Thanks to Maitland's work Scotland now had an administration as distinct from a congeries of aristocratic office-holders. 
Maitland died on 3 October 1595 at Thirlestane Castle. 'He granted at his death', wrote Calderwood, 'that he had greatly offended that man of God, Mr. Knox; wished often that he had builded a hospital when he builded his castle at Lauder, and cried often for mercy.' Nevertheless he was 'in a very good estate, as appeared, for a life to come' (Calderwood, 5.382). King James wrote a stiff and conventional sonnet of regret; when asked about a successor, he 'said he will well ken who ['sic'] he chooses for that place, adding that he can have none but in short time they will presume to be equal with himself' ('CSP Scot.', '1595-7', 39-41). James in fact had no more such equals; Maitland had not only created an administration but also trained his own successor, in the person of the king himself. The chancellor's portrait, of unknown date, hangs in Thirlestane Castle. His splendid tomb, with a recumbent effigy, is in St Mary's Church, Haddington. 


@@@@@


doc= 17827


Maitland, John, duke of Lauderdale (1616-1682), politician, was born at the family seat of Lethington Hall, Haddingtonshire, on 24 May 1616, the eldest surviving son of John Maitland, second Lord Maitland of Thirlestane (died 1645), created earl of Lauderdale in 1624, and his wife, Lady Isabel (1594-1638), second daughter of the prominent Jacobean statesman Alexander Seton, first earl of Dunfermline. His mother bore fifteen children, of whom four survived her: Sophia, John, Robert, and Charles Maitland, later third earl of Lauderdale (c.1620-1691). Robert died in 1658, and it is the other two sons who feature in public life. 
The future duke was endowed with the barony of Haddington on 30 March 1622, matriculated at the University of St Andrews in 1631, and married Lady Anne Home (died 1671) in August or September 1632. She was the second daughter of a neighbouring magnate, Alexander Home, first earl of Home, and his second wife, Mary, daughter of Edward Sutton, ninth Baron Dudley. The union produced a daughter, Mary. This is all that is known of his early life, until the young Viscount Maitland (as he was styled) suddenly appears in national view in September 1641, accompanying the commissioners appointed by the Scottish covenanters to negotiate peace with the government of Charles I, first at Ripon and then at London, after their resounding military defeat of the king. From this it must be surmised that he had been a keen supporter of the covenant, but it seems unclear whether he went with the delegation in an official or a private capacity. 
Having returned to Scotland with the delegation in 1641, Maitland continued to push himself forward. He was refused leave to attend the parliament of that year in his capacity as a peer's heir, but did sit in the general assembly of the kirk in July, and was chosen to carry its request for uniformity of ecclesiastical government between England and Scotland to the king and the English parliament. This suggests that he had now established a reputation for intelligence and eloquence, and on 8 August 1643 he was made one of the commissioners to negotiate the solemn league and covenant, and on 17 August ordered to carry it to Westminster. He was also named to sit in the Westminster assembly of divines as a lay elder, and so by November 1643 had taken up residence in the English capital. In February 1644 he was made one of the Scottish members of the committee for both kingdoms which met there, and on 20 November he was appointed one of the Scottish contingent of the delegation instructed to carry an offer of peace terms to the king at Oxford. By the time of his father's death on 18 January 1645, therefore, the young noble had established himself as one of the main figures in the covenanter alliance with the English parliamentarians, and his fellow commissioners regularly praised him for the energy, dedication, and persuasive skill which he displayed in their work. 
The first duty of the new earl was to represent Scotland in the fruitless peace talks between the allies and the English royalists at Uxbridge, in February 1645. An invaluable insight into his attitudes at this time is provided by a remark which he made to the French ambassador Sabran, before setting out for Uxbridge. According to the Frenchman, Lauderdale admitted that the religious argument against episcopacy was actually unproven, and stated that the Scottish demand for its abolition in England was a sound practical move, to bring the two nations into harmony with each other. In his pragmatic and opportunist approach to the matter, devoid of any ideological commitment, he already differed from many of his fellow covenanters, and was establishing a pattern which was to remain consistent throughout his career. None the less, he worked as hard as any of his colleagues to persuade the royalists to concede the removal of bishops from the English church, and only after the talks collapsed did he return to Scotland, in May, to settle his inheritance. 
Lauderdale was deeply missed by his fellow commissioners in London, and was back there by February 1646, informing the city's common council of the determination of the Scots to uphold the alliance with parliament and its conditions. In the latter half of the year he was hard at work with his fellows negotiating the terms for the withdrawal of the Scottish forces from England after the defeat of the royalists, and arguing against a proposed resolution of parliament to dispose of the king's person without reference to the views of the Scots. He left England again at the conclusion of the treaty of Newcastle in December, only to return in April 1647 with a deputation briefed to urge parliament to come to terms with Charles on the basis of the terms agreed with the Scots in 1646. 
The occasion of Lauderdale's return was the growing crisis in England, as the New Model Army turned upon the dominant presbyterian party in parliament. As it deepened in May, Lauderdale and his fellow commissioners held secret talks with the presbyterians, who were their natural allies, concerning the return of a Scottish army to England to confront the New Model. After the latter seized the king, the earl was sent by the conspirators to obtain Charles's formal consent to this measure, visiting him at Newmarket on 19 June and at Latimer's Cross on 22 July. A third meeting, at Woburn, was prevented by English soldiers suspicious of the existence of such a plan, who burst into the earl's lodgings and expelled him from the town. He had done his utmost both to obtain Charles's consent to the invasion and to urge the Scottish kirk to support it; after his ejection from Woburn he made a formal protest to parliament and then behaved circumspectly for a time, seeing the king only at the formal presentation of parliament's propositions to him on 7 September. 
Access to the king's person was restored on 22 October, when Lauderdale visited him at Hampton Court with the earls of Lanark and Loudoun. They renewed the offer of Scottish aid if he would only make concessions regarding the English church. Further discussions with him followed, and the three Scottish nobles met the greatest Irish royalist, the marquess of Ormond, in a wood near Henley and agreed to raise armies in their respective nations to attack the New Model. All that was now lacking was the consent of Charles himself, which was obtained on 26 December, after the king's flight to the Isle of Wight, in the famous document called the engagement, by which Lauderdale and his fellows bound the Scots to assist Charles in return for a trial period of presbyterianism in England. The year 1648 was devoted to the consequences of this agreement. On 17 January, Lauderdale and the other commissioners protested against parliament's vote of no addresses, and so abrogated the alliance. On 24 January he departed for Scotland to advocate the engagement and devoted the next six months to writing and speaking of the danger posed to the Scots by the dominant Independent party in England and the acceptable nature of the deal with the king. On this last point he found himself unable to satisfy the majority of the kirk, which left him out of the commissioners appointed to discuss uniformity of worship with the English. It also estranged him from the more rigid covenanters and pushed him into co-operation with former opponents of the covenants such as the Hamilton faction, a natural consequence of that flexibility of principle which he had revealed to Sabran. 
Lauderdale's response to this situation was to seek further concessions from the king concerning the English church while making closer links with English royalists. He corresponded regularly with the latter between April and June, and on 1 May was a signatory of a formal invitation to the prince of Wales to command in Scotland. The prince's reply was that he would come only if no further terms were imposed on him than those in the engagement, whereupon Lauderdale volunteered to visit him in person and coax him into making the concessions that his father would not. The earl took ship at Elie, Fife, in July, and eventually located the younger Charles on board a royalist fleet in the Downs on 10 August. The meeting established a rapport between the two which was to endure through thirty years, and won Lauderdale his three main objectives. The prince agreed to join the Scottish army in England as its titular leader, to leave behind him royalists of whom the covenanters especially disapproved, and to adopt the Scottish form of worship while on campaign. This triumph marked the climax, and apogee, of the earl's career as an envoy for the cause of the covenants. 
Within a fortnight of the agreement, Lauderdale's whole political position began to collapse like a house of cards. First, news arrived that the Scottish invasion of England had been totally defeated, whereupon the prince withdrew his undertaking to join the Scots. Then the supporters of the engagement were overthrown in Scotland itself, by more extreme covenanters who had always opposed it and who now came to terms with the English parliament and army. Lauderdale found himself stranded in the Netherlands with the prince and his court, out of favour and employment with the new regime. Gilbert Burnet, who later recorded a number of doubtful tales about the earl's activities in the 1640s, asserted that Lauderdale crept back into Scotland at the end of January 1649, but departed again when he found himself in danger of arrest (G. Burnet, 'Memories of... James and William, Dukes of Hamilton', 1677, 377). This story may be correct. 
Lauderdale now established himself at The Hague, and set to work to restore his fortunes by persuading the younger Charles, whom regicide had now made king in exile, to come to terms with the hard-line covenanter government in Scotland. In March 1649 his efforts proved unavailing, but a year later he found both sides more willing to agree, and played a prominent part among those advisers who brought Charles II to sign the treaty of Breda with the covenanters in April 1650. This service secured his return to Scotland with the royal party in June, and the right to live there without molestation, but the Edinburgh regime ensured he was immediately separated from the king's presence and forbidden to engage in public life. Only the crushing defeat of the covenanters by Cromwell at Dunbar rescued him from this enforced retirement, as the government needed a broader basis of support to rebuild its war effort. On 26 December he was allowed to make a public repentance for his part in the engagement at Largo kirk, Fife, and by February 1651 he had rejoined Charles. He remained with and assisted the king in the campaign of that year, and took the risk of accompanying him in its last desperate act of the invasion of England which led to the destruction of the royal army at Worcester on 3 September. He was among those taken prisoner after the battle, in Cheshire after an attempt to flee homeward. 
Lauderdale was never brought to trial, but nor was he released. Instead his estates were confiscated, with the payment of an annuity of $600 to his wife, while he was kept in the Tower. He was excepted from the indemnity ordinance issued by the newly established protectorate on 5 May 1654, and the only difference made to his circumstances by Cromwell's rule was that he was moved to other prisons, in the castles of Windsor and Portland. His role in the attempts to destroy the New Model Army in 1647-8 was not deemed forgivable. He seems to have devoted his enforced idleness to study, for which he had a natural aptitude. In later life he was noted as reading Latin, Greek, and Hebrew with ease, having a special enthusiasm for theology and history, and possessing an extraordinary memory. His opinion that no form of church government was prescribed in scripture was clearly based on personal research. 
Lauderdale's freedom was automatically restored after the English republicans finally lost power in February 1660. By 23 March he was at liberty in London and immediately concerting plans with the presbyterians once more. He also wrote to the former engagers in Scotland and to Charles in the Netherlands, receiving a reply from the latter on 12 April subscribed 'your most affectionate friend' (Airy, 1.13). Having been sent money by his old acquaintance John Leslie, earl of Rothes, he was able to join the king in person at The Hague, renew their old intimacy, and apply himself to royal favourites such as Hyde 'with a marvellous importunity' ('Life of... Clarendon', 428). He therefore returned to England in the royal train as a gentleman of the bedchamber, poised to take full advantage of the restoration of monarchy. 
Lauderdale's windfall of rewards, slowly accumulated in the succeeding years, was immense. In the summer of 1660 he obtained the key office of secretary of state for Scotland, which carried with it the powerful position of constant attendance upon the king's person. He regained his family properties, with a grant of the lordships of Musselburgh, Cranschawis, and Thirlestane, with other land, on 15 May 1661, to which a valuable plot in Leith was added in May 1662 and the Forest of Lauder on 13 October 1664, acquisitions which cemented his status as one of the magnates of south-eastern Scotland. There was, however, a price to be paid for success. His appointment to the post of secretary was opposed by the set of Scots who had been Charles's companions in exile and fought for him in the 1650s, led by John, earl of Middleton, and allied with English royalists such as Hyde. It was the king's own rapport with Lauderdale which had brought him the job. The earl was left caught between Middleton and his friends, who dominated the new government of Scotland, and English ministers such as Hyde (now earl of Clarendon), who wanted their nation to retain a controlling interest in Scottish affairs. The very strength of his position, as the Scotsman with readiest access to the monarch, drew upon him the hostility of both groups. 
Lauderdale emerged as the chief champion of the moderate covenanter position once represented by the engagers. In August 1660 he got Charles to sign a letter promising to maintain the 'settled' kirk of Scotland, and in December he ensured that Middleton was instructed to obtain the restoration of former royal powers in the land, but not the restoration of episcopacy. He also persuaded the king, against Clarendon's advice, to withdraw the English garrisons. In early 1661 Middleton outflanked him by obtaining the repeal of the laws against episcopacy in a Scottish parliament. At a meeting of Scottish and English privy councillors in late July, Charles became persuaded that Middleton understood current feeling among Scots better than Lauderdale, and ordered the restoration of bishops on 14 August. Lauderdale struggled to protect himself by attending Anglican communion at the Chapel Royal to please the king while telling friends in Scotland to spread word there of his devotion to the covenanter cause. 
Middleton's hatred for his rival now intensified. He was said to have declared that Lauderdale would pimp for any prince in Europe, and in September 1662 he used the Scottish parliament in an attempt to destroy him. On 5 September he obtained an act which enjoined all office-holders to denounce the covenants. This got rid of Lauderdale's last friend in the government, the earl of Crawford-Lindsay, but the secretary himself made the declaration with the alleged sneer that he would take a cartload of others if needed. On 9 September the parliament passed an act of indemnity, with a clause disabling twelve men from office. Middleton's clique ensured both that the twelve would be named by secret ballot and that Lauderdale would be included. The device backfired, for the secretary's agent in Edinburgh sent his master the news at top speed, enabling Lauderdale to be the first to break it to the king, representing it as a means of controlling Charles's power to appoint or dismiss servants. This played directly on the monarch's personal fear of being misled or coerced, and enabled Lauderdale to draw his attention to other recent acts of Middleton which he held to usurp royal authority. The result was that Charles rejected the result of the ballot. 
In February 1663 the two earls confronted each other at Whitehall, and Lauderdale finally shattered his rival's reputation by convincing the king that Middleton had countermanded a royal order to suspend the collection of the fines due under the 'Act of Indemnity'. He implicated Clarendon in the action, and so at one blow destroyed one rival and damaged another. In May, Charles formally announced that Middleton would be replaced as his commissioner to the Scottish parliament by the young earl of Rothes, whose timely loan in 1660 had enabled Lauderdale to refound his career. Rothes was instructed to investigate Middleton's activities in power, and Lauderdale was allowed to visit Scotland to assist him. During the course of the summer the two men prepared a devastating report to prove that Middleton had played off monarch and parliament to his own advantage, which prevented any chance of his return to office. They then flattered and delighted Charles by persuading the parliament to increase royal power over legislation, and to provide for an armed force to be used wherever the king desired in Britain. 
Finding episcopacy now firmly established, Lauderdale accommodated himself openly to the new order by praising it in parliament while presenting a bill to fine people who worshipped outside the kirk and punish ministers who preached outside it. With this, he finally severed himself from the defeated cause of the covenants and established himself as one of the leaders of Restoration Scotland. For three years he had been penned in a political corner, under attack. Using every strategic advantage of that position, he had now broken out of it, and seized the initiative in his own affairs and that of his country. 
By 1664 Scotland was dominated by three men. The management of the kirk was left to its primate, James Sharp, who had as yet little influence on politics, dominated by the partnership between Rothes and Lauderdale, the former residing mostly in Scotland and the latter once more at court. Lauderdale tended to keep a low profile in Scottish affairs while quietly building up influence in the land. He attracted a clientage of lairds in his own south-eastern region, and gradually gained them posts, especially in the strategically important legal offices. He also courted popularity, by obtaining royal action against abuses in the collection of tax arrears. At the same time he sought to represent the new regime to the king as one which functioned solely as an agent of Charles's own will: in September 1663 he had informed his monarch that after Middleton's fall 'you govern this poor kingdom yourself' (Airy, 1.184). 
The Second Anglo-Dutch War, which broke out in 1665, created a new set of problems, highlighting the existence of religious and political dissent in Scotland, precipitating new taxes and the creation of a new army, and increasing the influence both of Sharp and his bishops and of military men in political life. The process brought Sharp and Rothes closer together, and further from Lauderdale, who began to feel himself tied to an increasingly unpopular administration while losing influence in it. The king was persuaded into supporting a policy of religious repression by visits from Alexander Burnet, archbishop of Glasgow, which threatened the secretary's own influence over Charles. The Pentland rising of November 1666 provoked a crisis, for Lauderdale feared that it would be used to vindicate that policy and that Rothes's repression of the rebellion would raise his stock still higher with the king. Instead he brilliantly turned the tables by using his proximity to Charles to convince him that Rothes had provoked the rising with the same policy, and that Sharp had once collaborated with Cromwell. In January 1667 the archbishop was confined to his see and between April and September, Rothes was gently stripped of his offices. Lauderdale had thus become the arbiter of Scottish affairs, and it was now for him to steer them into new courses. 
The earl had his new team of managers ready. Rothes was replaced as the leading man resident in Scotland by a neighbour of Lauderdale's in Haddingtonshire, John Hay, earl of Tweeddale. By 1666 the friendship between them was strong enough for Lauderdale to marry his only child, Mary, to Tweeddale's heir. Both men had been enemies of Middleton, who had reluctantly accepted episcopacy. They were linked by Sir Robert Moray, who carried messages between them, reinforced Tweeddale in Scotland at moments of critical negotiation and intrigue there, and replaced Lauderdale at the side of Charles when the secretary needed to go to his native land in person. These two were Lauderdale's chief allies in obtaining the fall of Rothes, and in devising and promulgating a new religious policy between 1667 and 1669, intended to neutralize religious dissent by dividing it. 
At first this consisted of conciliation, as the standing army was disbanded, an indemnity issued to rebels, and moderate presbyterian ministers were appointed to vacant livings in the kirk. When Archbishop Burnet organized a protest against the latter initiative, Moray convinced Charles that this represented disobedience, and Burnet was forced to resign. At that moment (in 1669) Lauderdale was in Scotland, at last equipped with the supreme office of royal commissioner to parliament and steering through an act which recognized the king's supreme power over the kirk; in this manner the whole policy could be sold to Charles as a demonstration of his control of the realm. After its passage, Lauderdale told him that 'Never was king so absolute as you in poor old Scotland' (Airy, 2.164). The second part of that policy was to crush obdurate dissenters, and in 1669-70 parliament and privy council passed a package of measures to harry and punish religious meetings outside the kirk, including the notorious act making death the penalty for field conventicles. 
Lauderdale has also customarily been treated by English historians as one of the five royal advisers who made up the body nicknamed the Cabal and who dominated politics between 1668 and 1673. It is certainly true that he sat in the committee for foreign affairs, the inner policy-making ring of England's privy council. Even there, however, he remained primarily an adviser on Scottish dimensions to initiatives, and his influence was further limited by the fact that he was most closely associated with the least important members of the group, Ashley and Buckingham, who had shared with him an old hostility to Clarendon. As such he was screened off with them from the crucial secret diplomacy of the period, although he did play a part in persuading the king to issue the declaration of indulgence of March 1672, as a parallel to his efforts to conciliate and divide dissent in Scotland. These continued in September with the placement of eighty more presbyterian ministers in vacant livings. 
Although functioning as a semi-detached member of the Cabal, Lauderdale still received his full share of the round of honours which Charles bestowed upon most of the group to reward and encourage them at the outbreak of his war with the Dutch in the summer of 1672. On 26 May his favourite Scotsman became marquess of March and duke of Lauderdale, and on 3 June the new duke was also made a knight of the Garter. He had reached the highest point of his career. 
The year 1672 represented a watershed as well as an apogee for Lauderdale. On 17 February he married his second wife at Petersham parish church, Surrey. She was Elizabeth Murray (bap. 1626, d. 1698), eldest daughter of William Murray, earl of Dysart, whose title she had been allowed to retain as countess in her own right. Her first husband had been Sir Lionel Tollemache, who had died in 1669, and from that moment she had become intimate with Lauderdale. The obvious closeness of the couple had ruined the earl's relations with his first wife, Anne, which had hitherto appeared happy. She abandoned him to live in Paris, where she died on 6 November 1671, clearing the way for the new marriage. It was easy for people to understand Lauderdale's infatuation with Elizabeth, for she was beautiful, charming, and learned. She was also about forty-six years of age at the time of their union, which meant that by marrying her he was effectively giving up his chances of having more children. Abandoning the home at Highgate, just north of London, where he had lived in the 1660s, he moved across the capital to the splendid mansion of Ham House in Surrey. 
In public as well as in domestic life Lauderdale was drawing a line underneath old habits, and the two were probably connected. During 1671 he turned upon his partners Tweeddale and Moray, and treated them so badly that they withdrew from the government's affairs. They themselves were bewildered by his change, and historians can supply no certain reason for it, but it is difficult to ignore the contemporary whispers that Elizabeth had disliked them and poisoned her lover's mind against them. She was certainly a proud and greedy woman, who loved to intervene in politics, and may have encouraged Lauderdale's unmistakable tendency to growing arrogance and ruthlessness at this time. His new favourite agents were Alexander Bruce, earl of Kincardine, and his own brother Charles, both lesser men than their predecessors and also much more clearly his servants rather than partners. The change reflected one in the Scottish privy council. Throughout the 1660s it had been a fairly heterogenous body representing different factions and friendships. Between 1669 and 1674 several deaths and enforced retirements enabled Lauderdale to turn it into something like a closed body of his own supporters. In his contributions to the debates of the English committee for foreign affairs, also, he now revealed a brutality and contempt for moral convention which had hitherto not been apparent in his nature. 
This trend towards ministerial despotism would probably in itself have produced a new coherence and determination of opposition, but the strains of the Third Anglo-Dutch War caused the latter to develop very swiftly. In 1673-4 Lauderdale faced opposition in parliament, and in 1674-5 in the Faculty of Advocates and the convention of royal burghs. The parliamentary attacks were led by Tweeddale and another noble with whom Lauderdale had now quarrelled, the duke of Hamilton. At the same time he lost his allies in England, Ashley (now earl of Shaftesbury) and Buckingham, by remaining loyal to the government even after they were dismissed during the winter of 1673-4. Shaftesbury in particular could not forgive him for supporting the royal duke of York after the latter's public conversion to Catholicism, and thereafter abetted the growing English suspicions of Lauderdale as an instrument of royal ambitions for more powerful and arbitrary monarchy. 
Lauderdale's response to all these pressures was to give up trying to work with the Scottish parliament at the opening of 1674 and to rely on his control of the flow of information to the king. He convinced both Charles and the grateful York that the attacks were motivated solely by jealousy and malice. The king ostentatiously favoured him on his return from Scotland in 1674, raising him to the English peerage on 25 June as Baron Petersham and earl of Guilford, and appointing him to the English privy council. These measures also strengthened his legal position against any attacks which his new enemies might foment against him in the English House of Commons. He made an immediate alliance with the new leading minister in England, the earl of Danby, and henceforth the two worked together. In April 1675 the English Commons indeed addressed the king for Lauderdale's removal, but Charles stood firm, driving around Hyde Park with Lauderdale in his coach and having the duke carry the sword before him at the prorogation of the parliament. 
There was a price to be paid for this support. In tying himself to Danby, Lauderdale was also tying himself to the English bishops who were allied with Danby and urging a drive against nonconformists in both kingdoms. It may be that the persistence of large-scale dissent in the wake of the policy of restoration of selected ministers to the kirk would have turned Lauderdale against conciliation in any case, but political circumstance now made this certain. In late 1674 he obtained a string of royal orders to the Scottish privy council to wipe out conventicles, and cultivated the support of the bishops, restoring Sharp to the king's favour and Burnet to his see. A new field army was raised, led by Lauderdale's clients, and quartered in areas especially noted for dissent. At the same time he changed his chief secular allies and agents, dropping Kincardine when the latter baulked all the new military measures, and with him Charles Maitland. In their place he elevated the earls of Atholl and Argyll. 
To Lauderdale's critics, this policy seemed to be part of a general inclination on the duke's part to crush opposition of any sort, and it caught him in a vicious circle of ever greater repression as the presbyterians of the south-west intensified their resistance. He tried to break out of it in 1677 by putting further plans for conciliation before the moderate presbyterians and English bishops alike. The latter, however, allied with both Danby and the Scottish bishops to force the abandonment of the plans and the adoption of yet more savage measures of persecution. Lauderdale had become the virtual dictator of Scotland, on behalf of an absent king. At the same time he had lost the initiative in the making of policy, and been forced into ever more desperate and counter-productive courses. 
The crisis which was to end Lauderdale's supremacy was precipitated by another of those measures, a decision to use highland levies to police and terrorize the most disaffected areas in early 1678. Local nobles who did not co-operate were to be declared traitors, a tactic which had the unexpected effect of making two of them desperate enough to bolt to England and appeal to the king. They were joined by old enemies of the duke, and by Atholl who had turned against him in disgust at these events. Lauderdale had to send a new set of agents to represent himself to Charles. The complainants found allies at court and in the House of Commons, where all Danby's efforts were needed to have a new address for the duke's removal defeated by a single vote on 9 May. In June, Charles compromised, declaring his approval of the Scottish government's measures, but ordering Lauderdale to treat the people and nobility of the south-west better. It was the first qualification of royal support for the duke, and the latter regarded it as the beginning of the end of his career. 
Lauderdale's position eroded further with the fall of Danby in December, and the new House of Commons of 1679 voted an address for his removal from office on 8 May. Once more this attack was co-ordinated with further complaints made at court by his Scottish enemies, led by Hamilton. Once again, too, the king ostensibly stood firm; the address evaporated with the sudden prorogation of the English parliament on 27 May, and in July Charles signed a succession of documents which upheld Lauderdale against his critics. At the same time it was plain that while the duke remained in power, his period of dominance was over. He had completely lost control of access to the king, so that his enemies could attend court, and the royal person, as they pleased. The Scottish army was put under one of his opponents. The Bothwell Bridge rising of June precipitated a formal condemnation by the king of the policies of repression, and a legalization of conventicles in private houses, made without consulting the Scottish government. It is possible that secret communications between the king and Lauderdale lay behind both initiatives, but by August 1679 it was no longer clear to commentators who, if anybody, was actually steering Scottish affairs. What all agreed was that the duke's replacement was only a matter of time. 
It was in September 1679 that Lauderdale himself proposed a way out of his predicament: that his old ally the duke of York be sent to govern Scotland, thereby giving the latter a bolt-hole from an England in the throes of the exclusion crisis while providing a powerful protector for himself. The king adopted this idea in October. Lauderdale was thus freed to return to Whitehall in the winter and bolster his royal master against the demands of the English whigs. Behind his back, however, York created a mixed Scottish government of his friends and enemies, and so effectively brought an end to his regime. It may be that this betrayal landed a final blow upon a constitution long undermined by hard work and political strain, for in March 1680 Lauderdale suffered a stroke which left him a semi-paralysed invalid with a failing memory, vainly seeking cures from the spa waters of Bath and Tunbridge Wells. He was now clearly but one royal adviser on Scottish affairs among many, and in September he finally resigned his post as secretary of state. 
Henceforth Lauderdale was a valetudinarian, living mostly at the health resort of Tunbridge Wells. He made what may have been the mistake of attending the English House of Lords in November 1680 for the trial of the Catholic Viscount Stafford. The king, for tactical reasons, was prepared to sacrifice Stafford by allowing him to be condemned and executed, while York was determined to save him. Caught between the two, and perhaps swayed by his old distaste for Catholics, Lauderdale chose to vote for guilt and so allegedly lost York's good opinion. It was also whispered that the royal duke had been scandalized by his discovery of how much money Lauderdale's duchess had been making out of corrupt exploitation of her husband's administration. Whatever the truth, the disabled old man himself was allowed to die in peace, which he did suddenly at Tunbridge Wells on either 20 or 24 August 1682, after taking a purge. He was buried with great ceremony and a huge attendance in the family vault at Haddington kirk on 5 April 1683, although York was ostentatiously absent. His Scottish estates and earldom passed to his brother Charles, but as the latter had never won the king's regard, he was not allowed to inherit the dukedom or English titles. Lauderdale's widow survived until 5 June 1698. 
Lauderdale suffered two of the worst misfortunes which can attend the posthumous reputation of a statesman: that his enemies left popular and much-admired memoirs while his friends did not, and that the policies with which he was associated were subsequently totally defeated and discredited. He had personally offended the most influential whig and the most influential tory historian of his age, Gilbert Burnet and Clarendon respectively, and their portraits of him are the more influential for being remarkably similar -- of a ruthless, selfish, and unprincipled politician whose sole aim was his own promotion and survival. This was enhanced by the fact that he moved from being one of the foremost representatives of the covenanters to one of their foremost persecutors. As their cause triumphed in 1690, and the kirk of Scotland was finally remade in their image, with Robert Wodrow providing its heroic history and martyrology, it was inevitable that Lauderdale should be implanted in national folk memory as a debauched tyrant, serving an unworthy and absentee monarch. That image was reinforced, like so much else in that folk memory, by Sir Walter Scott. 
There is a certain amount of truth in this hostile tradition. The contrast between Lauderdale's brilliant and erudite mind and his physical grossness, upon which Burnet made play, is amply borne out by the Lely portrait in the National Portrait Gallery, London. It shows a man with bushy, ruddy hair (which gave him his nickname of John Red), fat jowls, pursed lips, and cold, heavy-lidded eyes. His growing lack of scruple and aptitude for brutality have been remarked upon here and his supreme talent for political manoeuvre and manipulation should be equally obvious. It has hardly helped his reputation that the only one of his contemporary admirers to have left memoirs, Sir George Mackenzie, played up to the full Lauderdale's ability both to outwit his opponents and to vault over problems which vexed men of more tender conscience. The greatest cameo portraitist of the period, Pepys, has enhanced the impression of coarseness in the man, in his report that Lauderdale declared that 'he had rather hear a cat mew than the best music in the world' (Pepys, 7.225). 
On the other hand, Burnet himself paid tribute to the statesman's intellectual interests and prowess, and twentieth-century historiography has been kinder. Lauderdale's biographer W. C. Mackenzie, writing in 1923, pointed out the undoubted truth that he abandoned the cause of the covenants reluctantly, and only after it was apparently wholly lost. The persecution of those who adhered to it was well under way by the time that he acceded to power, and his repeated attempts to alter it failed largely because he was caught between the obduracy of the presbyterians and that of the bishops, ultimately abetted by the king himself. This picture, of a naturally tolerant and flexible politician gradually pushed into more and more savage measures, was endorsed by Julia Buckroyd in her study of Restoration Scotland published in 1980. It must be noted that Lauderdale's immediate successors were no more able to escape the impasse, until the revolution of 1688 made a different policy possible. Furthermore, the pattern which the duke established, of the government of Scotland by a viceroy ruling on behalf of a monarch resident in England, was to be repeated at various times during the following century as one solution to the problem of absentee royalty. The particular odium which Lauderdale incurred in this regard was due partly to the fact that he was the first fully to represent this pattern, partly to the historiographical factors noted earlier, and partly to the sheer size and flamboyance of his personality. 
When all this is said, the suspicion still lingers that the odium was in part earned. It is perfectly possible, and proper, for a more secular age than Lauderdale's own to contrast approvingly his doctrinal flexibility and pragmatism -- itself based on sound scholarship -- with the more rigid presbyterianism and intolerant episcopalianism of many of his contemporaries. Beside figures like Middleton, Sharp, Archbishop Burnet, and many of the nobles who served as his allies or tools, the duke unmistakably appears the greater man, more cunning, adroit, imaginative, open-minded, adaptable, and audacious. None of this, however, alters the simple fact that his sole abiding principle was to take power for himself and to retain it, and beside that all other considerations of honour, loyalty, and belief occupied an ever diminishing supportive role. Even in the rogues' gallery of Restoration politicians, he appears especially devious, ruthless, and brutal. His personal fidelity to Charles II was itself coupled with a willingness to manipulate and misinform the king to his own advantage, while his Scottish patriotism must be questioned by his later clear preference for English residences. When every extenuation is made, his career remains a classic illustration of the corrupting effects of power. 


@@@@@


doc= 17828


Maitland, John, fifth earl of Lauderdale (c.1655-1710), politician, was the second son of Charles Maitland, third earl of Lauderdale (c.1620-1691), and Elizabeth, younger daughter of Richard Lauder of Hatton. He graduated MA from Edinburgh on 12 August 1678 and was admitted as advocate on 30 July 1680. He was created a baronet on 18 November 1680. About this time he married Lady Margaret ('c'.1662-1742), only child of Alexander Cunningham, ninth earl of Glencairn. They had three sons and one daughter. 
In March 1685, as Sir John Maitland of Ravelrig, he was elected to parliament as a commissioner of the shires for Edinburgh, and he represented the same constituency in the 1686 parliament. On 4 June 1686 he was appointed a justice of the peace. 
Unlike his father and his elder brother Richard Maitland (1653-1695), Maitland played an active role in the revolution of 1688 in Scotland and supported the Williamite cause. He sat in the 1689 convention of estates as a shire representative for Edinburgh and on 16 March he subscribed the act declaring the meeting of the estates to be free and lawful. On 19 March he was appointed colonel of the foot militia for the shire of Edinburgh and his loyalty to the Williamite cause was further demonstrated on 23 March when he subscribed the letter of the estates thanking him for the administration of public affairs and promoting the cause of union between England and Scotland. Maitland's important political profile in the 1689 convention is further demonstrated by his membership of the convention's delegation appointed on 5 April to oversee the election of new magistrates in Edinburgh as well as his appointment (among others) as a commissioner to treat for a union between England and Scotland. He continued to represent the shire of Edinburgh in the parliamentary sessions of 1689-90. On 9 May 1690 he was one of the members of the parliamentary committee for granting supply to their majesties, and on 7 June he was appointed a commissioner of supply for Edinburgh. 
Meanwhile, in May 1689, Maitland had been appointed to the privy council. He was also appointed a lord of session on 28 October, with the title of Lord Ravelrig. On 7 June he was given the important task of distributing collections for Irish and French protestant refugees in parts of Scotland, alongside David Williamson, minister of the West Kirk in Edinburgh. On 15 June he was ordered by the privy council to secure cannon, arms, and ammunition being held by his father at their family home and at Hatton, and to secure them for the Williamite cause; they were subsequently taken to Edinburgh Castle. When Lauderdale agreed to live peacefully, Maitland was appointed one of his cautioners, a role ended by the earl's death in June 1691. In July 1691 Maitland received a charter of the barony of Hatton and took the name of Lauder. He sat for the shire of Edinburgh in the parliamentary sessions of 1693 and 1695 as Sir John Lauder of Hatton, but following the death of his elder brother Richard, succeeded in the latter year as fifth earl of Lauderdale. In remaining sessions of the Williamite parliament he was a member of the committee for trade (1696) and the committee for the security of the kingdom (1700 and 1702). He signed the Association on 10 September 1696 and he was appointed as a commissioner of supply for Haddingtonshire and Argyll in the 1698 parliament. On 16 January 1701 he voted for a parliamentary address, as opposed to an act, to King William concerning the Darien crisis. He was appointed a commissioner to the 1702 union negotiations between Scotland and England, but recorded sederunts of the meetings indicate his absence at all of the diets. 
During the union parliament (1703-7) Lauderdale was affiliated to the court, but he voted in half or fewer of the divisions in the union debate. On 19 October he was excused by parliament for his absence and he failed to turn up for the crucial vote on article 1 of the treaty. However, he did register support for ratification of the treaty on 16 January 1707. He died at Hatton on 13 August 1710. John Macky described him as a 'Gentleman that means well to his Country, but comes far short of his Predecessors, who, for three or four Generations, were Chancellors, and Secretaries of State for that Kingdom' ('Memoirs of the Secret Services', 230-31). His wife, who survived him, died on 12 May 1742. Their elder son James having died in 1709, their younger son Charles ('c'.1688-1744) succeeded as sixth earl. 


@@@@@


doc= 17829


Maitland, John Gorham (1818-1863), civil servant, was born on 27 October 1818 at Taunton, Somerset, the son of Samuel Roffey Maitland (1792-1866), historian and religious controversialist, and his wife, Selina Stephenson. He was educated privately before being admitted to Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1835, where he was elected a fellow after gaining the third place in the classical and the seventh in the mathematical tripos of 1839. In 1840 he was admitted at Lincoln's Inn and was called to the bar in 1843, but was not a successful practitioner. He was elected FRS in 1847. He was the author of two pamphlets, 'Church Leases' (1849) and 'Property and Income Tax' (1853), a critique of Disraeli's 1852 budget. On 12 August 1847 he married Emma (died 1851), second daughter of the physicist John Frederic Daniell. He was secretary to the civil service commission in succession to his friend, and fellow member of the Cambridge Apostles, James Spedding from 1855 until his death at his London home, 51 Rutland Gate, Knightsbridge, on 27 April 1863. He was survived by his only son, Frederic William Maitland, and two daughters. 


@@@@@


doc= 17830


Maitland, Sir Peregrine (1777-1854), army officer and colonial governor, was born at Longparish House, Hampshire, on 6 July 1777, the son of Thomas Maitland of Shrubs Hall, New Forest, and his wife, Jane, the daughter of General Edward Mathew of Felix Hall, Essex, and the granddaughter of Peregrine Bertie, second duke of Ancaster and Kesteven. 
On 25 June 1792 Maitland was appointed ensign in the 1st foot-guards (Grenadier Guards). In this elite regiment he served throughout the revolutionary and Napoleonic wars -- in Flanders in 1794, at Ostend in 1798, at Vigo and Corunna in 1809 (medal), at Walcheren, and at Cadiz. In 1803 he married for the first time. His bride, the Hon. Harriet Louisa Crofton, died in 1805. Maitland was second-in-command of the Grenadier Guards at Seville. After becoming their brevet colonel in 1812, he commanded them at the passage of the Bidassoa, at Nivelle, at the Nive in December 1813, and at Bayonne, Bidart, and the passage of the Adour. He was made a major-general in 1813. For his command of the 1st brigade of guards in 1815 at Quatre Bras and Waterloo and in the occupation of Paris he was created KCB. He crowned these achievements by his second marriage, at the duke of Wellington's headquarters in Paris, to Lady Sarah Lennox (died 1873), the second daughter of the fourth duke of Richmond. His life by birth, marriage, and army experience had thus set in a groove of European military convention, tory piety, and an aristocratic detachment and superiority which would ill suit the rough-edged colonial societies and irregular warfare he would henceforth encounter as governor and army general in various parts of the empire. 
When his father-in-law, Richmond, was appointed governor-in-chief of British North America, Maitland became lieutenant-governor of Upper Canada, on 3 June 1818. In appearance 'a tall, grave officer, always in military undress, his countenance ever wearing a mingled expression of sadness and benevolence' (Brode, 52), Maitland was content to retire frequently from the capital, York, to his beloved country residence of Stamford Park and leave much of the work of government to trusted subordinates such as the forceful attorney-general, J. B. Robinson. The latter headed a group of old loyalists who disapproved of the ultra-democratic tendencies represented by the 'reformer' opposition of William Mackenzie, John Rolph, and others. Somewhat inaccurately labelled the 'family compact', Robinson's following fairly mirrored Maitland's own views on such controversial matters as alien naturalization and exclusive Anglican clergy reserves. Consequently, his decade of government in Upper Canada (1818-28), while conservatively aligned, has been somewhat harshly seen as laying foundations for the subsequent uprising of 1837. 
Nevertheless, Maitland was happier to take over the oligarchic system of Nova Scotia in October 1828. He moved on from there in 1834, and commanded the Madras army after October 1836 until his piety caused him to resign in late 1838, because the East India Company would not enforce the exemptions from compulsory native religious festivals granted to Christian Sepoys. 
On 18 March 1844 Maitland became governor of the Cape of Good Hope. Here he made grave errors in severely modifying the treaty systems with frontier peoples and chiefdoms to the north-east and east of the colony. Both beyond the Orange and Great Fish rivers costly entanglements and hostilities followed. In particular, his new and arrogant version of Sir Andries Stockenstrom's original eastern frontier treaties with the Ngqika Xhosa chiefs was biased towards imperial and colonial interests in that it imposed the main onus of maintaining the treaties on the paramount chief Sandile, his co-chiefs, and their hard-pressed people, but allowed intrusions of colonial patrols and posts into previously declared neutral territory. Overreacting to minor violations, Maitland was soon involved in transfrontier hostilities. In the Cape Frontier War of 1846-7 the Xhosa enemy provided a major challenge in irregular bush-fighting, particularly in the form of attacks on wagon trains. On the whole this proved beyond the conventional military skills of the ageing governor -- who since 1846 had been a full general. Soon his critic, and the able architect of the original treaty system, Stockenstrom, could point derisively to Maitland's 'ruined cavalry, crippled infantry, and disgusted border force' (Milton, 166). Although by attrition Maitland did eventually achieve stalemate on the frontier by the beginning of 1847, his recall and replacement by more ruthless and energetic men such as Sir Henry Pottinger and Sir Harry Smith were inevitable. Maitland had therefore helped to provoke a major frontier conflagration and had then failed to extinguish it adequately. From this debacle his political and military reputation did not recover. On his retirement and return to England he did, however, become GCB in 1852. He died at his residence, Eaton Place West, London, on 30 May 1854. Lady Sarah Maitland died on 8 September 1873, and was survived by their three sons and three daughters. 


@@@@@


doc= 17831


Maitland, Sir Richard, of Lethington (1496-1586), courtier and writer, was probably born at Lethington Castle, the son and heir of Sir William Maitland of Lethington (died 1513) and Margaret Seton. The family was descended from Thomas de Matalan, who acquired lands in the eastern lowlands of Scotland in the time of William the Lion (1165-1214). The house and lands of Thirlestane remained the property of the dukes of Lauderdale to present times. Lethington or Ledington (Sir Richard himself used both spellings), from which Sir Richard and his more famous son William Maitland took their title, and by which they were often known, was a fortified house just south of Haddington (now subsumed into the house of Lennoxlove) which the family acquired by royal charter in 1345. Maitland's mother was a daughter of George, Lord Seton: he was thus connected directly with two of the most important lowland landowning and political families at the court of James IV and his successors. Sir William Maitland of Lethington was killed at the battle of Flodden in 1513, and Sir Richard was served heir to his father on 5 October 1513. He was educated at St Andrews ('c'.1510), and studied law at Paris ('c'.1514). 
Probably in 1521, Maitland married Mary or Mariota, daughter of Sir Thomas Cranstoun of Corsbie, who was to outlive him by only a day or two, dying, it was said, on the day of her husband's funeral (Maitland quarto MS, Magd. Cam., fol. 132a). According to an anonymous poem in the Maitland manuscripts they had seven sons, of whom three survived, and four daughters: William (1528?-1573), John Maitland (1543-1595), his father's heir, and Thomas ['see below'], Helen, Margaret, Mary Maitland, and Isobel. He became one of the courtiers of James V, but it is not known in what capacity. In 1537 he was given the lands of Blyth near Thirlestane, the estate whose harrying by the English in 1570 he made the subject of a rueful poem ('The Blind Baronis Comfort'). His most celebrated intervention in history is as alleged by John Knox, that he was bribed, along with his relative by marriage Lord Seton, to allow Cardinal Beaton to escape from Seton's custody in 1543. Maitland's instincts for reconciliation, practical tolerance, and moderation would not have endeared him to Knox, and there is no evidence to support Knox's assertion. 
In 1552 Maitland was one of the Regent Moray's councillors, and one of the commissioners appointed to settle the disputes in the English and Scottish borders; he was knighted shortly after the successful conclusion of his commission. When in 1559 he was commissioner to the queen of England in the same matter, his opposite number Sir Ralph Sadler described 'the old Lord of Lethington' (he was by then a venerable sixty-three years old) as 'the wisest man among them' ('State Papers and Letters', 1.448). He had trained as a lawyer, and was appointed an extraordinary lord of session (that is, in Scotland, a high court judge) in 1554, and an ordinary lord in 1561. In that year he became entirely blind, but, remarkably, he continued his judicial duties until 1584. In December 1562 Queen Mary made him her keeper of the great seal for life, and also appointed him, with his son John, as factor and chamberlain of the royal abbey of Haddington (in the town nearest to Lethington Castle, and the burial place of the Maitland family). In 1567, a year wholly catastrophic for the queen and for her supporters, he resigned the great seal to his son John, and appears to have retired from court and political life, his judicial duties excepted. As early as 1560, as his blindness increased, he recorded his disinclination to meddle with things of importance (preface to his 'Tabill or Cathalog of the Kings of Scotland'), and turned to history, genealogy, and literature. 
Despite Maitland's age and retirement, the involvement of his son William ('Mr Secretary Lethington') as a strong supporter of the queen in the turbulent conflicts of the queen's and regent's parties meant the seizure of Lethington Castle and its confiscation. His youngest son, Thomas, also working on the queen's behalf, died in Italy early in 1572. After the disgrace and death of William, following the surrender of Edinburgh Castle by the queen's party in 1573, Sir Richard appealed to Queen Elizabeth via Lord Burleigh to intercede for the return of his house and lands, but without result. Not until after the fall and death of the Regent Morton were the Maitland lands restored, in February 1584, when Sir Richard's surviving son, John, was released from prison and made a lord of session. Sir Richard then resigned from the bench, on 1 July 1584, and as a mark of favour to his infirmity and extreme age was allowed to keep the fees of the post. He died on 20 March 1586, and is presumed to have been buried at Haddington one or two days later. 
The Maitland Club, founded in 1828 to edit and preserve by publication early Scottish literary and historical texts, took its name from Sir Richard because he was, as the introduction to the club's edition of his poems says, both 'an amiable and accomplished poet, as well as the tasteful and industrious collector and pious preserver of Ancient Scottish Poetry' ('Poems', [xi]). While this suggests an activity more systematic than it was, nevertheless the Maitland manuscripts are one of the three most important collections of early Scottish poetry in existence (the other two being the Asloan manuscript of 1515 and the Bannatyne manuscript of 1568). Now in the library of Magdalene College, Cambridge, following their gift to Samuel Pepys by Sir Richard's great-grandson, John, first duke of Lauderdale, the Maitland folio manuscript and the Maitland quarto manuscript were edited by W. A. Craigie for the Scottish Text Society (1919-20). The folio contains 182 poems, of which 41 are by Sir Richard and 2 by John; the quarto, largely transcribed from the folio, contains the 41 and 3 more, and 51 other poems, of which only 10 also appear in the folio. The name of Sir Richard's daughter Mary, dated 1586, appears on the quarto, and she is said to have been her father's amanuensis. Prior to 1919 a selection of Sir Richard's poems had been printed by John Pinkerton ('Ancient Scottish Poems', 1786), by James Sibbald ('Chronicle of Scottish Poetry', 1807), and by J. Bain for the Maitland Club, already referred to, from a separate manuscript in the Drummond collection of Edinburgh University. The Maitland Club text includes four Scots poems by John Maitland with a number of Latin epigrams, and two Latin poems by his brother Thomas, which are a panegyric on Lethington House and a poem to the eldest brother, William, 'On Undertaking a Turkish War'. The Latin poems were taken from an anthology by Sir John Scot of Scotstarvet, 'Delitiae poetarum Scotorum' (1637). 
Sir Richard also wrote a 'Historie and Cronicle of the Hous and Surename of Seytoun' (1559), published along with his 'Tabill or Cathalog of the Kings of Scotland', edited by John Fullarton for the Maitland Club jointly with the Bannatyne Club (1829). A revised and more complete version, finished after 1561, remains in manuscript (NL Scot., Adv. MS 34.7.74). The National Library of Scotland manuscript used by the Maitland Club (NL Scot., Adv. MS 31.2.2(1)) also contains what appears to be Sir Richard's legal casebook, compiled between 1550 and 1565, 'Practiques of new [laws of Scotland] wharoff the caisses hes not been frequent'. 
Sir Richard's son 


@@@@@


doc= 17832


Maitland, Richard, fourth earl of Lauderdale (1653-1695), Jacobite nobleman, was born on 20 June 1653, the son of Charles Maitland, third earl of Lauderdale (c.1620-1691), and Elizabeth, younger daughter and heir of Richard Lauder of Hatton. He was known by the designation Maitland of Grogar until his father succeeded to the Lauderdale earldom in 1682, after which he assumed the title Viscount Maitland. On 1 July 1678 he married Lady Anne ('b'. 1657/8, died 1734), daughter of Archibald Campbell, ninth earl of Argyll. They had one son, baptized on 3 May 1679, who died in infancy. On 23 September 1678, he was appointed general of the mint, an office he held jointly with his father. In October of that year he was named as a privy councillor, and on 8 April 1680 attained further office when he was appointed lord justice clerk. He was, however, not to hold this position for any length of time. In February 1684 he was dismissed from office and replaced by Sir James Foulis of Colinton, on being suspected of complicity in the schemes of his exiled father-in-law, Argyll. It would appear Maitland was implicated by a ciphered letter from the countess of Argyll to her husband, intercepted on its way to the Netherlands. In August he was deprived of his position as one of the commissioners of the exchequer, further evidence of his fall from grace. 
Nevertheless, it seems that Maitland had little interest in the machinations of Argyll, and by April 1687 was evidently back in favour with James VII and II. On the 9th of that month he was appointed treasurer-depute, with a pension of $300 sterling, and in May was named in the new commission of the privy council. At the revolution he adhered to King James, and in July 1689 was ordered before the council charged with 'carieing on horid and unjust designes against the present government... befor his returne from the Viscount of Dundie and his being in armes with him'. Consequently a warrant was issued for his arrest at his 'dwalling hous in Edinburgh, at Hatton and Lauder', and in August he was denounced as a rebel and put to the horn ('Reg. PCS', 3rd ser., 13.541). Therefore, it was hardly surprising that he chose to join his king in France rather than accept the Williamite settlement. Subsequently, he was said to have joined James's expedition to Ireland, where he was present at the battle of the Boyne. 
Although a Catholic and stalwart Jacobite, Maitland disapproved of James's more extreme Catholic policies, and consequently lost favour at the court of St Germain. His wife shared the strong presbyterian sympathies of her father, Argyll, and was apparently ordered to return to Britain, while her husband was forbidden to appear at the Stuart court, and had his pension reduced to 100 pistoles a year. On 9 June 1691 Maitland succeeded his father as fourth earl of Lauderdale, but was outlawed by the court of justiciary on 23 July 1694. He produced a 'memoriall' on the state of Scotland dating from approximately 1690, and published with Nathaniel Hooke's correspondence in 1870-71, and a two-volume translation of the works of Virgil, perhaps first published in 1707. 
Lauderdale died in exile at Paris in 1695 and his wife, who survived her husband and subsequently married Charles Stewart, sixth earl of Moray, died on 18 September 1734, aged seventy-six years. He was succeeded as fifth earl by his younger brother Sir John Maitland (c.1655-1710) of Ravelrig, first baronet. 


@@@@@


doc= 17833


Maitland, Richard (c.1714-1763), army officer, is of unknown origin and parentage. He enlisted with the Royal Artillery as a matross on 1 November 1732, 'when about 18' (Kane, 250). In 1742 he was commissioned a lieutenant-fireworker. His subsequent commissions show the possibility of rapid promotion by merit in the more technical positions during time of war (in this case the War of the Austrian Succession): he was made second lieutenant on 1 May 1743; first lieutenant on 1 April 1744; and captain-lieutenant on 1 August 1747. He fought at Fontenoy in 1745 and probably at some of the less successful battles of the two following years. Following the peace Maitland's promotion was less rapid, but he was made full captain on 1 March 1755. 
Maitland was given command of one of the four companies of Royal Artillery formed for service in India in February 1755. One was lost on the way out; the other three arrived safely at Bombay in November 1755, where they joined the garrison. In February 1756 all three companies were engaged in the expedition against the pirates based at Gheria under the command of Lieutenant-Colonel Robert Clive. After returning to Bombay the Royal Artillery companies remained with the garrison and did not take part in the expedition to Bengal in 1757 for the recapture of Calcutta. 
On 9 February 1759 all three companies sailed from Bombay with the object of capturing Surat, a prosperous seaport on the River Tapti, 155 miles north of Bombay. The town was defended by a castle, a considerable fortress, which had been taken over by Sidi Masud, admiral to the Mughal emperor, who had installed his own forces and was interfering in the commercial affairs of the town, including trading posts of the Dutch and British East India companies. 
As the senior king's officer present Maitland was placed in command of the land force. In addition to the three Royal Artillery companies the expedition included 800 troops from the Bombay European regiment and 1500 sepoys, a total of 2718. Maitland thus has the distinction of being the first Royal Artillery officer to command an overseas expedition comprising a mixed force. The troops took with them six months' supplies and were to receive 200,000 rupees from the merchants of Surat as compensation for not looting the city. Maitland's force landed at Damas (later known as Dentiloury) on 18 February 1759, 9 miles from Surat, where the first camp was formed. On 20 February a new camp was established at Umra, a village on the river bank, close to the city. Maitland assembled his forces to besiege the castle; work began on the breaching of the town's defensive walls on 24 February but on 26 February, Maitland lost about twenty of his men when they drove Sidi Masud's men from Surat's French gardens. However, this action allowed him to bring a battery into close action and bombardment continued for several days, resulting in a small breach in the outer wall. When the frontal assault was repulsed Maitland, fearing heavy casualties, decided on a new plan: to make the main attack from the river, between the outer and inner walls, under covering fire from the accompanying naval force. After a heavy bombardment during the night of 1 March, Maitland sent an assault party comprising 200 European troops and 800 sepoys, which threw the defenders back and took command of the main gate of the outer wall. On 3 March heavy mortars were landed on the river bank to assist the reduction of the inner wall. In the meantime the East India Company agent had been negotiating with the governor of the castle and terms for capitulation were finally agreed at 10 p.m. on 4 March, when British troops marched into Surat. The losses to the besiegers amounted to some 130 killed and 74 wounded. Maitland had proved the capability of the Royal Artillery as well as his own leadership. His skilful deployment of the artillery had been crucial in the defeat of Sidi Masud's forces, who were worn down by the well-judged bombardment. 
Maitland spent the next month putting the castle in good order for the remaining garrison, before moving his troops down the river -- the last of which arrived back in Bombay on 21 April 1759. Upon his arrival Maitland received a 13-gun salute as well as the thanks of the East India Company, to whom the acquisition of Surat brought an additional revenue of $50,000 a year. 
On 3 April 1760 a payment of 120,000 rupees was distributed among the troops as gratuity money for taking the castle of Surat. Maitland's share as officer commanding was 3560 rupees in addition to 1004 rupees as captain of one of the Royal Artillery companies. On 4 May 1760 Maitland led all three Royal Artillery companies into the campaign against the French forts of the Pondicherry coast, which culminated in the capture of Pondicherry after a long siege on 15 January 1761. Maitland's company returned to Bombay shortly after. He remained in India and in November 1762 learned of his promotion to the rank of major, with effect from the previous March -- recognition for having commanded the Royal Artillery in India since 1759. 
Maitland died in Bombay on 21 February 1763. The whole council of the Bombay presidency attended his burial, later the same day, and the castle battery fired 60 half-minute guns. 


@@@@@


doc= 17834


Maitland, Samuel Roffey (1792-1866), Church of England clergyman and religious controversialist, was born on 7 January 1792 at King's Road, Bedford Row, London, the son of Alexander Maitland, a merchant, and his wife, Caroline Busby, who was descended from the seventeenth-century headmaster of Westminster School, Dr Richard Busby. She provided her husband, Alexander, a nonconformist of Scottish descent, with a Gloucestershire estate. 
Maitland was brought up early as a nonconformist, and received his early education in a number of private institutions, where he studied Latin and Greek, and also acquired some rudimentary knowledge of French and chemistry. He later remarked on his deficiency in the field of history when he left school in 1807; fortunately, he was subsequently tutored by the Revd Launcelot Sharpe, a master at the Merchant Taylors' School, whose zest for learning seems to have rubbed off on his pupil: Maitland developed a voracious appetite for reading. He was admitted to St John's College, Cambridge, on 7 October 1809, and at about the same time to the Inner Temple. He seems to have done little to distinguish himself at St John's, and switched over the following year to Trinity College, where he could be in closer proximity to his friend W. H. Mill, who instilled in him an interest in Arabic and Hebrew literature. 
In 1811 Maitland left Cambridge altogether, finding that he could not, in good conscience, sign the 'Thirty-Nine Articles', a requisite for obtaining a degree. He later explained that his problem lay not with the articles themselves, but in his own continuing fellowship within the dissenting tradition, which hardly qualified him as a fully committed Anglican. Shortly after, he accepted the task of cataloguing the library holdings of the late Dr Maxwell Garthshorne, on the understanding that he would retain any duplicate volumes for himself. Around 1815 he found his hopes for being called to the bar stymied by his university deficiencies. This situation he endeavoured to rectify by returning to St John's on 10 October 1815, for an additional three terms. During the Easter term of 1816, his application to study paid dividends in a call to the bar. And then, on 19 November of this very busy year, he was married to Selina Stephenson, whose father, Christopher, was vicar at Olney; they had only one child, John Gorham Maitland. 
Meanwhile, Maitland's commitment to law was evidently not strong enough to keep him fully occupied; in fact, his penchant for studying and writing on various subjects seems eventually to have absorbed him almost completely. His first publication, 'A Dissertation on the Primary Objects of Idolatrous Worship', which came out in 1817, was brief and obscure. The publisher was Josiah Conder, and although no one in their right mind could have expected it to become a best-seller, it did serve to introduce Maitland's rather eccentric interests and style to those members of the learned circles who took the trouble to examine his work. By the time his next publication came out, almost a decade later, Maitland's world had been altered considerably. 
In addition to a move from London to Taunton, Maitland's spiritual perspectives seem to have undergone a gradual change; accordingly, on 27 June 1821 at Norwich, Maitland was ordained deacon by Bishop Bathurst, becoming curate of St Edmund's there. His stay in Norwich was brief, however, and before long Bishop Ryder of Gloucester ordained him as a priest. Apparently Maitland's father had just moved to Gloucester himself, and so father and son became next-door neighbours. 
The next stage in Maitland's career was an appointment on 22 May 1823 as perpetual curate of Christ Church, Gloucester. The church was relatively new, but it could not hold Maitland's attention for long either. After less than five years in his parish he decided to embark on an extended continental trip. His primary motivation appears to have been his keen interest in the status of the Jews, and his desire to observe their culture for himself in Poland and Germany. 
After reaching France in April 1828, Maitland travelled on throughout Germany and Prussia as far as Warsaw. A collection of letters written during this time, together with numerous delightful sketches and illustrations, may still be seen at Lambeth Palace Library (MSS 1943-1945). His facility with languages served him well on his expedition, which lasted until the autumn of 1828. While abroad, Maitland published 'A letter to the Rev. Charles Simeon... on the propriety of adopting some means beside those which are now used for promoting Christianity among the Jews' (1828). Here he advocated institutional support for Jews who had converted to Christianity and had thereby been cut off from the means of earning their living. Maitland's suggestions appear to have been well received in Britain, and measures were taken to make his vision a reality; no doubt his decision personally to bear the costs associated with the project for the space of two years was a welcome incentive to many concerned supporters. 
Since interest in the fate of the Jews and biblical prophecy had long been linked in the history of the Christian church, it is unsurprising that Maitland had now become deeply engrossed in eschatological issues. As early as 1826 he had published his second work, 'An enquiry into the grounds on which the prophetic period of Daniel and St. John, has been supposed to consist of 1260 years'. This piece turned out to be a significant contribution to the discussion regarding the interpretation of Daniel's Seventy Weeks, and especially, the so-called 'Year-day Theory', which had attracted many adherents. Maitland aimed to demonstrate the folly of equating the crucial 1260 days in prophecy with calendar years, so that speculation abounded in many prophetic circles as to when the period in question would end and usher in the consummation. In an era of almost unparalleled fascination with apocalyptic questions of this sort, Maitland's work won much attention. Further interest was fuelled by the appearance of the Catholic Apostolic church and the Plymouth Brethren, movements which foreshadowed the increasing popularity of the 'futurist' method of prophetic interpretation, as opposed to what would be termed the 'historicist' at that time. Clearly, Maitland's stance lent further credibility to the futurist hermeneutic, which would eventually become very popular, especially among evangelicals, though he was careful not to align himself with any particular faction. 
Maitland threw himself wholeheartedly into a number of controversies during his lifetime, and any party or individual so unfortunate as to incur his wrath rarely forgot it. His next target was Joseph Milner, who, with assistance from his brother Isaac, had written 'The History of the Church of Christ' (1794-1809), which cast an approving eye upon such controversial sects as the Waldensians and Albigensians. Irked by the favourable review given to these movements, Maitland published the lengthy 'Facts and documents illustrative of the history, doctrine, and rites, of the ancient Albigenses & Waldenses' (1832). His views were also aired in his regular contributions to the 'British Magazine', then edited by its founder, Hugh James Rose. In Rose, Maitland appeared to have found a soul-mate, as both men flitted for a time on the outskirts of the Oxford Movement, without ever actually throwing in their lot with, or being completely trusted by, its leaders. A number of Maitland's articles were reprinted in 1844 under the title 'The Dark Ages', while a second collection, 'Essays on Subjects Connected with the Reformation in England', was forthcoming in 1849. 
Rose's untimely death in 1838 led to Maitland's assuming control of the 'British Magazine'. Previously, he had served briefly (in fact, for one issue only) as editor of the 'British Critic' under the watchful eye of John Henry Newman and his associates. In 1839 Maitland was elected a fellow of the Royal Society, but a greater honour had been bestowed upon him during the previous year. Acting upon the recommendation of Rose, Archbishop Howley had requested his services as Lambeth librarian and manuscript keeper. At the time when the invitation was issued, Maitland was still residing in Gloucester. It is obvious that he accepted the post for reasons other than financial ones: it carried with it an annual salary of only $40, yet Maitland left Gloucester and rented a house in London for $200 per annum. In addition, he brought his books with him, and even hired a clerk to assist him, at his own expense. Later, Maitland's friend William J. Thoms went to great lengths in 'Notes and Queries' to establish that 'Dr. Maitland was 'not' stall-fed' (Thoms, 50). Moreover, he never enjoyed 'one bit of Church preferment' (ibid.), although he was the recipient of a DD degree from the hands of Howley on 1 February 1848. 
Maitland is undoubtedly best remembered as the fiercest critic of a new edition of Foxe's 'Acts and Monuments', published in stages, beginning with the second, third, and fourth volumes in 1837. There had not been a complete edition of the 'Acts and Monuments' since the late seventeenth century, although numerous edited forms of Foxe, often under the title of the 'Book of Martyrs', had been published. Maitland's attack appears to have been two-pronged: while condemning Foxe for producing an extremely unreliable and slanted work devised to advance the fortunes of the 'puritan' faction, and particularly the Marian exiles whom Maitland so abhorred, he also criticized the Seeley and Burnside project itself, which had been announced in rather extravagant terms by the publisher and a group of prominent clergymen. In the pages of the 'British Magazine' Maitland took exception to the editorial 'labours' (for which read 'blunders') of Stephen Reed Cattley, and the introductory material contributed by Canon George Townsend. When Townsend attempted to justify his role in the project, more grist was added to the mill: Maitland dealt with many of the issues involved in the dispute in his 'Notes on the contributions of the Rev. George Townsend... to the new edition of Fox's martyrology' (3 parts, 1841-2). 
Undoubtedly, Maitland's harsh criticisms embarrassed those involved with the Foxe project, although they did not deter additional editions of Foxe (there were three more issued by 1877). Eventually, Maitland seemed to have tired of the issue and moved on to other publications, which reflect both his eclecticism and his eccentricities, including his 'Illustrations and Enquiries Relating to Mesmerism: Part 1' (1849) and his 'Superstition and Science: an Essay' (1855). Another unusual book written much earlier, 'Eruvin, or, Miscellaneous essays on subjects connected with the nature, history, and destiny of man' (1831), contained essays ranging from such subjects as 'The consequences of the fall' (Essay V) to 'The millennium' (Essay VII). 
Maitland's fortunes suffered a considerable reversal about 1848, when the new archbishop of Canterbury, John Bird Sumner, appointed his son-in-law, the Revd John Thomas, in Maitland's place as librarian; in addition in the year following, the 'British Magazine' ceased publication. 
Maitland's expulsion from Lambeth was largely undeserved: despite his acrid pen, it appears that he had gone well out of his way to help those engaged in research while at Lambeth. And, despite inferences to the contrary, he never entered fully into the spirit of the Oxford Movement, but like Rose, represented the old high church rather than the newer, more controversial phenomenon. S. C. Orchard pointed to his progressive disenchantment with evangelicalism fairly early in his career. Perhaps Newman's increasing distance from the old high-church position, which became a source of concern for Hugh James Rose (Nockles, 117), was of equal alarm to Maitland. 
Following his experience at Lambeth, this one-time 'Evangelical of the Evangelicals' (Orchard, 165) returned to Gloucester, and though living in retirement, continued to publish on a variety of subjects. He also supported W. J. Thoms at the launching of 'Notes and Queries'. At some point in his life Maitland began to write an autobiography, but he did not succeed in getting his manuscript past 1817. While Cambridge University Library possesses numerous printed works including a copy of 'Strype' with notations by Maitland, together with two manuscript essays, the autobiography does not appear to be among the resources held there. 
Though obviously a man of letters, Maitland evidently acquired some degree of expertise in a wide range of pursuits, such as music (he played several instruments), draughtsmanship, printing, and bookbinding. Having survived both his wife, Selina, and his son, he died on 19 January 1866 at his home, Spa Road, South Hamlet, Gloucester. 


@@@@@


doc= 17835


Maitland, Sir Thomas (1760-1824), army officer and colonial official, was born on 10 March 1760, probably at the family seat, Hatton House, Ratho, Edinburghshire, the second surviving son of James Maitland, seventh earl of Lauderdale (1718-1789), and his wife, Mary Turner (1733/4-1789), daughter and coheir of Alderman Sir Thomas Lombe (1685-1739) of Old Jewry, London. He was the brother of James Maitland, the eighth earl. He was educated at Lincoln's Inn (1774) and Edinburgh (1775-7). He retained his Scottish accent all his life. Shortly after his birth, he was appointed lieutenant in the old Scots 17th light dragoons or Edinburgh light horse, and after it was disbanded in 1763, drew half pay of his rank until 1778. 
In 1778 Maitland took up his commission (captain, 14 January 1778) and raised a company for the Seaforth regiment or 78th (from 1786 72nd) Highlanders. With the regiment, in which his younger brother William also held a commission, Maitland served some years in India, ashore against Haidar Ali and Tipu Sultan of Mysore, and afloat under Admiral Sir Edward Hughes against the French under Pierre Andre de Suffren. In June 1783 he was wounded in Hughes's action with Suffren off Cuddalore on the Coromandel coast. He distinguished himself at the capture of the Mysorean fortress of Palicatchery in November 1784. Later he was brigade major of the king's troops at Calcutta, and was transferred by Lord Cornwallis to a similar post at Madras, at his own request, when war was imminent in 1790. 
Maitland's brother, the eighth earl, a relatively radical whig with strong electoral interest in the Haddington burghs, decided to return Maitland for them. Following a contested election in 1790 with blatant corruption by both sides, Maitland was elected. He was MP from July 1790 to 1796, from March 1802 to February 1805, and from October 1812 to July 1813. An opposition whig, he supported Charles Grey. In his maiden speech (28 February 1791) he criticized the war with Tipu Sultan, and in April he supported Grey's motion against the Russian armament. His late Victorian biographer, Walter Frewen Lord, wrote that he was 'what we now call a Little Englander' (Lord, 9). In May 1791 he was admitted to the Whig Club and in June to Brooks's. In February and March 1792 he brought in motions against the war with Tipu. One of the Society of the Friends of the People, in 1792 he supported parliamentary reform. On 21 February 1793 he seconded Grey's motion against war with revolutionary France. In 1794 and 1795 he criticized the government's conduct of the war, opposed barrack-building as conducive to military despotism, opposed commissions to French emigres -- Lord wrote of his xenophobic 'ravings' -- and criticized the Toulon expedition and the occupation of Corsica. He continued to vote against the government until June 1795, after which he was sent to St Domingue. 
After the Belle Ile expedition of 1800 Maitland, disappointed at failing to gain further military employment, resumed his seat, vacated for him by the sitting member Robert Baird, in March 1802. W. F. Lord wrote that he 'never appeared again as an obstructionist, or a Little Englander... he rarely spoke, and always as an imperialist' (Lord, 18). He supported the Addington ministry and its defence policy against critics including Pitt. Pitt's return to power in May 1804 left Maitland in the political wilderness, but apparently there were ministerialist hopes of detaching him from the opposition. That winter he accepted the governorship of Ceylon and persuaded his brother to agree to his seat being occupied by a friend of the ministry. Following the 1812 general election he resumed his seat. He advocated suppression of sedition in Yorkshire, and in May 1813 voted for Roman Catholic relief. Soon after, disillusioned with politics and 'not liking to quarrel with Lauderdale and yet neither liking his friends Grey or Grenville' (HoP, 'Commons, 1790-1820', 529), he accepted the governorship of Malta. 
In the 1780s St Domingue (later Haiti), exporting sugar and over half the world's coffee, was the most lucrative French colony, producing more than the entire British West Indies and with more trade than the United States. In 1791 slaves revolted, and some of the colonists requested British intervention. Following the outbreak of war between Britain and revolutionary France (February 1793), Pitt and Dundas's strategy was to destroy France's naval and commercial power by capturing its West Indian colonies. In September 1793 Sir Charles Grey's expeditionary force landed at St Domingue, in co-operation with royalist colonists. They captured Mole St Nicholas, 'the Gibraltar of the West Indies' (Fortescue, 'Brit. army', 330), a key naval base, and the capital, Port au Prince, and occupied about a third of the colony. Opposing them were French republican, ex-slave, and mulatto forces, commanded by Toussaint l'Ouverture and others. Although reinforced by the 1796 'great expedition', the British, weakened by disease, were unable to decisively defeat their enemies and capture the interior and north. They suffered catastrophic losses from yellow fever, malaria, dysentery, and other diseases, exacerbated by lead-contaminated rum. The majority, at least three-fifths, of British troops there died: it was 'among the greatest disasters in British military history' (Geggus, 'British government', 285). 
Maitland was appointed major in the 62nd foot in 1790, and promoted lieutenant-colonel in the army in March 1794 and in the regiment in August 1794. From 1795 he commanded a half-battalion of it in St Domingue. A well-connected Scottish aristocrat, he was able to communicate his views to Dundas. Pessimistic and critical of the British intervention and doubting it could succeed, he wrote in July 1796 emphasizing British mortality, alleging that 'St. Domingo will end in being a Brigand Republick' (Geggus, 'Slavery, War, and Revolution', 205), and arguing that if the occupation had to be continued it should be minimal and defensive. He served under General John Graves Simcoe (1752-1806) but reported separately to Whitehall, continuing pessimistic and critical of the French colonists. Appointed brigadier-general at St Domingue (18 April), in August 1797 he returned to England. 
The British government, lacking resources, in January 1798 ordered the new commander for St Domingue, Major-General Nesbitt, to implement a partial evacuation, but he died at Madeira. Maitland, appointed brigadier-general in the West Indies (1 January 1798), designated Nesbitt's chief of staff, and informed of the government's intentions, had travelled ahead, leaving England in January and arriving in St Domingue in March. The senior officer there, Major-General John Whyte, 'tacitly abdicated' (Fortescue, 'Brit. army', 555) to Maitland and eventually returned home. Maitland, whose still effective troops and naval blockade enabled him to bargain, negotiated with Toussaint l'Ouverture -- whom he considered cunning but not very able or determined -- the British surrender of the western province, including the capital, and in May implemented a successful evacuation of it. Reporting to Dundas he emphasized British mortality -- 'the British force may now be truly said to be in a galloping consumption' (Lord, 43) -- and advocated total evacuation. After the government's instructions to Nesbitt arrived in late July, permitting total evacuation, Maitland seized his opportunity. Despite opposition from Major-General Alexander Lindsay, sixth earl of Balcarres (1752-1825), the governor of Jamaica, and Vice-Admiral Sir Hyde Parker (1739-1807), the naval commander, who both favoured retention of the Mole to defend Jamaica, Maitland, though ill probably with dysentery -- he wrote 'I shall never recover the shock to my health' (Lord, 47) -- in August negotiated separately with Toussaint and Andre Rigaud. He secured an agreement with Toussaint for an unmolested evacuation, a guarantee for French colonists remaining, and future non-aggression and trade. He wrote, 'Thank God I have at length got Great Britain rid of the whole of the incumbrance in this Island' (Duffy, 309). Hostilities ceased on 20 August 1798 and he carried out a successful evacuation, taking artillery, stores, and almost everything of military value. He sailed on 31 August, and the evacuation of the Mole was completed by Colonel Spencer on 3 October. Meanwhile in London the government had changed policy, deciding to hold the last strongpoints on St Domingue to defend Jamaica: but, with seaborne communications, they were too late. On his own initiative Maitland had extricated Britain from the St Domingue imbroglio. Later historians criticized Sir John Fortescue's scathing account in his 'History of the British Army' of the British involvement in St Domingue. Nevertheless his praise of Maitland arguably remains valid: 'by the supreme strength and courage of a single subordinate officer, England was plucked from the awful morass of confusion, extravagance, death and disaster' (Fortescue, 'Brit. army', 565). 
In 1799 Maitland went on an unsuccessful mission to the United States, arriving in April to negotiate an agreement on trade with St Domingue. In August he returned to England. He went to Cheltenham, then Berkeley Square, London. He was subsequently employed in supporting French royalist military attempts, and in September 1799 was promoted major-general (local rank). He was appointed to command an expedition to capture Belle Ile, off the coast of Brittany. As Maitland wished, the naval command was given to Sir Edward Pellew (1757-1833), later Viscount Exmouth. Great difficulty was experienced in finding the required 4000 troops. The expedition, inadequately prepared and equipped -- W. F. Lord called it 'this burlesque army' (Lord, 63) -- sailed from Cork in May 1800, and destroyed the forts on the south end of Quiberon on 4 June, and on 6 June captured some vessels and prisoners. Maitland's royalist force camped on Ile Houat. Reports of the strength of the garrison of Belle Ile, reinforced apparently because of British lack of pre-operational secrecy, caused Maitland to delay his attack until his entire force had arrived. On 21 June he received orders from Dundas to send his troops to Minorca as reinforcements for the Mediterranean. On 4 July Dundas ordered him home. Fortescue later condemned the expedition as 'eminently foolish... a wanton and wicked waste' (Fortescue, 'Brit. army', 779-80). 
In 1803 Maitland was appointed colonel of a battalion of the army of reserve. From November 1803, resigning his parliamentary seat, to May 1804, he was a member (at a salary of $1500 p.a.) of the Board of Control for India, under Addington's ministry, and was sworn of the privy council in November 1803. He was promoted major-general in August 1804, appointed colonel in the third garrison battalion in February 1805, and for a short time had a brigade command in Sussex. 
In 1805 Maitland was appointed governor and officer commanding the troops in the crown colony of Ceylon, his exceptional dual appointment presumably resulting from the Colonial Office perception of the problems there. Ceylon government had been troubled under the previous and first British governor, Frederick North (1766-1827), from 1817 fifth earl of Guilford, a well-meaning reformer 'of the most pestilent type' (Lord, 73), under whose lax control finances were disordered and abuses flourished. The previous commander, Major-General David Wemyss, formerly Douglas (1760-1839), was incompetent and extravagant and quarrelled with North and the judges of the supreme court. Moreover, from 1803 a disastrous and expensive war was fought against the inland kingdom of Kandy. 
On 18 July 1805 Maitland arrived at Colombo and assumed office. A hard-working, shrewd, and capable administrator, he was a masterful, overbearing, bad-tempered, sometimes unscrupulous autocrat who decided policy, dominated his council, and was disliked by subordinates. In his first six months he investigated the situation, writing a long report. He criticized North's administration as 'in many points totally inefficient' (de Silva, 240), and especially attacked the laxity of his control over the civil service and his tenurial changes. He condemned Wemyss's conduct as 'utterly reprehensible' (de Silva, 239) and his military expenditure as extravagant and often unnecessary, and alleged that the army had 'grown far too independent' (Mills, 47). Realizing the government then lacked the resources to defeat Kandy, and wanting to reduce expenditure, he attempted to make peace. He ended the North-Wemyss policy of economic blockade and military reprisals, remained on the defensive, offered peace terms, and tried to secure them by bribery. The Kandyans refused terms, demanding cession of a sea port, but by tacit agreement hostilities ceased from 1805 to 1815, and Maitland acted largely as if the two states were at peace. He vigorously subordinated the military to the civil authority, suppressed the military board, and reduced military expenditure. He advocated the adequate fortification of Trincomalee, which he claimed was the 'real key' to the 'naval superiority of India' (Lord, 96). Following the July 1806 Vellore Sepoy mutiny in Madras, in August he sent troops thither, and subsequently wrote to Gilbert Elliot, Baron Minto (1751-1814), the new governor-general of India, scathingly criticizing the Madras government. Following the 1809 Seringapatam mutiny of company European officers he again sent troops, and he proposed a scheme for the reorganization of the East India Company's army. 
Maitland declared, 'the sole object of Government is... to ensure the prosperity of the island solely through the medium of generally increasing the prosperity and happiness of the natives' (Mills, 57). He paid off debt, introduced rigorous control of expenditure, stopping large leakages, and attempted to balance the budget. He reorganized the civil service and purged it of corruption, increased salaries, and in 1805 forbade civil servants to trade. He offered rewards for proficiency in Sinhalese. He reorganized the central administration -- in 1806 abolishing the board of revenue and commerce and substituting a commissioner of revenue under direct orders of the governor -- and the provincial administration, replacing the agents of revenue and commerce by collectors under control of the commissioner of revenue. He retained and tightened the profitable government salt monopoly and introduced stamped paper duties. He tried to prevent native officials oppressing the people, and improved policing. He increased the number and powers of magistrates' courts, extended supreme court jurisdiction, and appointed minor courts of appeal. He also instigated juries in criminal cases, introduced by the 1810 charter. The chief justice, Edmund Henry Lushington, interfered with courts martial and executive decisions and quarrelled with Maitland. In 1808 Maitland suspended him from the council, and early in 1809 threatened to suspend him from judicial office. Lushington resigned in February 1809. 
Maitland encouraged agriculture, ending North's restrictions on cinnamon production, and increased the area under cultivation. Hoping to increase coffee production, he persuaded the secretary of state in 1810 to permit Europeans to acquire land anywhere in Ceylon. In 1806 he removed the Dutch-imposed disabilities of Roman Catholics, and he conciliated the Buddhists. He did not favour missionaries. His critics in England called him a pagan, and in 1808 Wilberforce criticized his education policy. In the autumn of 1810 Maitland suffered an attack of fever and his health, seriously affected by the climate, suddenly deteriorated. He returned to England in March 1811. His governorship favourably impressed the British government, and according to the Ceylon historian Colvin de Silva was 'an outstanding success... five years of sound and efficient government' (de Silva, 254). 
Maitland was promoted lieutenant-general in June 1811 and appointed colonel of the 10th foot in July. He recuperated in England, taking the waters at Cheltenham. On his recall he was 'perhaps worth $25,000 clear' (HoP, 'Commons, 1790-1820', 529) but lost by the discount on Ceylon paper currency when paying his debts. He wanted employment on the staff, according to the duke of York's secretary, James Willoughby Gordon (1773-1851), who described him as 'a very clever man, but he inclines to be prosy' (ibid.). In 1813 he was proposed as governor of Java. 
In July 1813 Maitland was appointed the first governor of Malta, and landed at Valletta on 3 October. Reportedly when offered the post it was proposed that a council be established, but he declared, 'Aweel, ye'll just send somebody else, for I'll na be bottle holder for ony mon' (Hedderwick, 80). He insisted on the 'free and unfettered power of the Governor' (Dixon, 137). A benevolent despot, nicknamed 'King Tom', he imposed reforms, including practices he had tried in Ceylon. On arrival he acted rigorously and apparently effectively against the plague, imposing isolation, quarantine, and disinfection of buildings. He centralized finances under his control, reformed local administration, and reduced corruption. He abolished the Universita, an ancient guild which controlled imports of some foodstuffs and, he wrote, 'the most troublesome dunghill of corruption I ever met with' (Lord, 155). He arranged grain purchase from the Black Sea region, and in 1818 established commissioners of the board of supply, directly responsible to the governor. He found 'pure judicial tyranny' (Dixon, 146) and reformed the judicial system. He introduced trial by jury and forbade judges to interfere with the executive or legislation. He tactfully limited the powers of the Roman Catholic church and, concerned for Maltese susceptibilities, prevented the Board of Ordnance moving Maltese armour from Valletta to England. 
From 1815 until 1864 when ceded to Greece, the Ionian islands were a British protectorate. In December 1815 Maitland was appointed, in addition to his Malta post, lord high commissioner of the Ionian islands and commander-in-chief in the Mediterranean, excluding Gibraltar. Also in 1815 British consulates on the Barbary coast, excluding Morocco, were placed under him, and he was made a GCB (2 January). The British then dominated the Mediterranean, and W. F. Lord wrote of Maitland, 'He bestrode the Mediterranean like a Colossus' (Lord, 241). He was paid $5000 as governor of Malta, $3500 as commander-in-chief in the Mediterranean, $1000 as high commissioner, and $1000 as former governor of Ceylon. He went to Ionia in February 1816, and thenceforth spent much more time there than at Malta, for which he was criticized. 
Maitland was no philhellene, criticizing their 'classic imaginings' (Lord, 217), and dismissing 'fools looking for old stones' (Young, 106). He formed a low opinion of the Ionians, and wrote of their 'duplicity, chicanery and want of principle' (Dixon, 181). He believed that a representative assembly would fail, as it had in Sicily. He wrote that 'if we gave such a people a real constitution, they would simply violate it' (Lord, 186) and that 'a free Government is incompatible with the existence of a strong one' (Dixon, 185). Required by the British government to establish a constitution, he consulted Ionians and drafted a bicameral one, introduced in 1817, which reserved extensive powers to the high commissioner. According to W. F. Lord its only function was 'to throw a decent veil over the despotism of Thomas Maitland' (Lord, 193). Sir Charles James Napier (1782-1853), who served under Maitland at Cephalonia, described him as 'a rough old despot' (Lord, 114). He ruled despotically and vigorously, preventing liberty of the press, and imposing reforms. He disarmed the islanders, improved administration, increased official salaries, attempted to end bribery and corruption, abolished tax-farming, systematized customs duties, and improved the judicial system and the treatment of Jews. He forbade usurious landlord advances to tenants, and established government banks. He built roads and lighthouses. He resisted expansion of papal prerogatives. However, himself reportedly minimally educated, he took little interest in education and resisted the philhellene project of a university. Made a GCH in 1817, he established in 1818 the Order of St Michael and St George for services in Malta and Ionia. In April 1818 he was appointed its first grand master and GCMG, and he accepted the cross in diamonds. However, he wrote privately of the order with a Swiftian cynicism which later shocked his biographer, and used it to gain influence 'as a mere means of corruption' (Lord, 230). He built the neo-classical palace of St Michael and St George in Corfu town, as headquarters for the order and a residence for the high commissioner. 
Despite reforms and prosperity, many Ionians were discontented, and Maitland had to counter the intrigues of local nobles and others, including the Russophile Corfiot Count Ioannis Kapodistrias (later first president of Greece, assassinated 1831). Maitland was required by earlier treaty to cede the formerly Venetian Greek town of Parga, on the Albanian coast, to the Ottoman empire. Privately he opposed cession, and he negotiated relatively favourable terms with the Turks. The cession in March 1819 caused much criticism of him in Britain and elsewhere. During the Greek war of independence he privately sympathized with the Porte as standing for established government, whereas he saw little prospect of the Greeks achieving a successful state. His policy of enforcing the British government's policy of Ionian neutrality and preventing Ionian support for the Greek war was most unpopular. Controversial, he had political enemies also in Britain. Joseph Hume (1777-1855) repeatedly attacked him in the House of Commons. In 1821 he denounced him as a tyrant, and his rule as 'a disgrace to England... a system of misrule' (Lord, 263), and alleged jobbery and financial abuses. The government defended Maitland. 
Maitland was capable and hard-working, but also arrogant, imperious, querulous, bad-tempered, and ill-mannered. Napier wrote of him, 'Narrow-minded, he saw many things under false lights, was constantly drunk, and surrounded by sycophants' (Napier, 285). His coarse behaviour and slovenly appearance offended officers and others. According to Napier he was 'insufferably rude' and 'particularly dirty in his person' (Young, 157). Thomas Collings wrote of his 'contempt of all propriety in regard to dress... he looked nothing better than a well to do shopkeeper, and even then not of the superior class' (Hedderwick, 80). He once received the senate in his night attire and told them to 'go to hell!' (Bruce, 83). When visiting a papal official his clothes were shabby, his shirt and waistcoat stained with snuff, and his cap greasy. Though economical in public finance, in private he lived lavishly. W. F. Lord wrote that 'his diversion, his solace, was gross indulgence' (Lord, xiv). He enjoyed 'the pleasures of the table', reportedly 'indulging to excess' (Hedderwick, 80). He indulged in drinking bouts, 'being frequently invisible for several days altogether' (ibid.). Apparently his health was poor, presumably from his tropical service, exacerbated by his lifestyle. He frequently visited the baths at Lucca, Tuscany, for his health, and his enemies scoffed at his valetudinarianism. He never married. 
A sick man, Maitland late in 1823 returned to Malta. On 17 January 1824 he visited the forces chaplain's house at Floriana, suffered an apoplectic stroke at half past one, and had died by half past ten that evening. He was buried on 21 January in the Upper Barracca, Valletta, and a simple monument marked his grave. Commemorative services were held in Ionian churches and at one the eulogy by Count Spiridian Bulgaris praised him as like 'a guardian angel', just, humane, and generous, causing 'the progressive improvement of all useful institutions' and entitled to 'the lasting veneration of the Ionian people' ('GM', 371-2). He was commemorated by a small Ionic rotunda at the Esplanade, Corfu town. The biography by Walter Frewen Lord, 'Sir Thomas Maitland: the Mastery of the Mediterranean', was published in 1897. Lord wrote that although some considered Maitland a 'gross bully' and 'brutal tyrant', 'his labours were Herculean... his life was illuminated and dignified by his unbending devotion to duty' (Lord, 87, xiv-xv). 


@@@@@


doc= 17836


Maitland, Thomas, Lord Dundrennan (1792-1851), judge, eldest son of Adam Maitland (died 1843) and his wife, Stewart McWhann, was born at Dundrennan Abbey, Kirkcudbrightshire, on 9 October 1792. Edward Francis Maitland, later Lord Barcaple, was his younger brother. Maitland studied at Edinburgh University, and was called to the Scottish bar in 1813. On 3 July 1815 he married Isabella Graham, fourth daughter of James McDowall of Garthland, Renfrewshire. They had four sons and two daughters. The author and judge Henry, Lord Cockburn, was married to a sister of his wife. 
After practising successfully for a quarter of a century Maitland was on 9 May 1840 appointed solicitor-general in Lord Melbourne's administration. He vacated the office in September 1841 on the accession to power of the tories under Peel. On the death of his father in July 1843 he succeeded to the family estates, and sat in parliament for Kirkcudbrightshire from 1845 to 1850. Lord John Russell reappointed him solicitor-general in 1846, and he remained in office until 1850. Maitland was a sound lawyer; he became, on 6 February 1850, a judge of the court of session, and took the title of Lord Dundrennan. 
Dundrennan was devoted to antiquarian literature, and possessed a magnificent library -- 'a monument' according to Lord Cockburn, 'honourable to his taste and judgment'. The collection was dispersed by sale over nine days in November 1851. He also edited a collection of his friend Francis Jeffrey's contributions to the 'Edinburgh Review', published in November 1843, and superintended the reissue of works by Marlowe and the poets Thomas Carew, Robert Herrick, and William Drummond, among others. Maitland died on 10 June 1851 at 31 Melville Street, Edinburgh, the home of his brother Edward. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 17837


Maitland, Thomas, eleventh earl of Lauderdale (1803-1878), naval officer, born on 3 February 1803 at Frankfort, co. Cork, was the only son of the Hon. William Mordaunt Maitland (died 1841), general in the army, third son of James, seventh earl of Lauderdale, and his first wife, Mary, widow of John Travers of Fir Grove, co. Cork, and daughter of the Revd Richard Orpen, of Killowen, co. Kerry. He entered the navy in 1816, and was promoted lieutenant of the 'Euryalus' on 16 May 1823. In December 1825 he was appointed to the 'Superb', guardship at Portsmouth, and in March 1826 to the 'Ganges', flagship of Sir Robert Waller Otway, on the South American station. On 30 April 1827 he was promoted commander. He married, on 7 February 1828 at Rio de Janeiro, Amelia (died 18 February 1890), daughter of William Young of Rio de Janeiro; they had at least one child. In 1832-3 he commanded the 'Sparrowhawk' (18 guns), on the West Indian station, and brought home a treasure freight of 589,405 Mexican dollars and forty-two bales of cochineal. In 1835-7 he commanded the 'Tweed' (20 guns), on the north coast of Spain during the civil war, and received the cross of Charles III, which he was permitted to wear. He was advanced to post rank on 10 January 1837, and in June was appointed to command the 'Wellesley' (72 guns), flagship, on the East India station, of Sir Frederick Lewis Maitland, and after Sir Frederick's death of Sir J. J. Gordon Bremer. He thus had an active share in the operations in the Persian Gulf in 1839, and during the First Opium War in 1840-41, including commanding the 1st naval battalion at the storming of the heights near Canton (Guangzhou). He was made a CB on 29 June 1841, knighted in 1843, and promoted rear-admiral on 18 June 1857. 
In 1859 Maitland was questioned by the royal commission on the defences of the United Kingdom, when he spoke strongly against the proposed fortifications at an expenditure which 'might be more profitably laid out in building ships; because', he said, 'if you can ensure being masters of the Channel, I do not see any absolute necessity, as far as security goes, for fortifying Spithead' ('Parl. papers', 1860, 23.520). From 1860 to 1863 Maitland was commander-in-chief in the Pacific. 
On 22 March 1863, on the death of his cousin, the tenth earl of Lauderdale, Maitland succeeded to the title, and to the hereditary offices of standard-bearer of Scotland and marshal of the royal household. On 30 November 1863 he was promoted vice-admiral. He was made a KCB, on 28 March 1865, and GCB on 24 May 1873. He was a Scottish representative peer (Conservative) from 1867 to 1878. He became an admiral on 8 April 1868, and, by special promotion, admiral of the fleet on the retired list on 27 December 1877. He died at his seat, Thirlestane Castle, Lauder, Berwickshire, on 1 September 1878; as he left no male issue, the title passed to a distant cousin. Mary Jane Maitland ['see 'Brabazon, Mary Jane, 'under' Brabazon, Reginald, twelfth earl of Meath], his only surviving daughter, married Reginald Brabazon, twelfth earl of Meath. 


@@@@@


doc= 17838


Maitland, William, of Lethington (1525x30-1573), courtier and diplomat, was the eldest son of Sir Richard Maitland of Lethington (1496-1586), courtier, judge, and writer, and Mary or Mariota Cranstoun (died 1586), daughter of Sir Thomas Cranstoun of Corsbie. His younger brothers were John Maitland, later chancellor and first Lord Maitland of Thirlestane (1543-1595), and Thomas Maitland (c.1548-1572) ['see under 'Maitland, Sir Richard, of Lethington]; his sister Mary Maitland (d. 1596) was also involved with the worlds of letters and the court. Much has been made of the notion of Maitland as representative of the rise of the 'middling sort' in Scottish society, and the lairds and the legal profession in particular, and there is certainly much in this, but he was not low born. The Maitlands enjoyed a place in Gavin Douglas's 'The Palice of Honour', and numerous marriages into noble families. Maitland's father proudly described himself as a daughter's son of the house of Seton. It is true though that in the mid-sixteenth century the Maitland family were a rising force and were yet to achieve their greatest days. 
Maitland was probably educated at Haddington grammar school before entering St Leonard's College at St Andrews University in 1540. He moved on to the University of Paris in 1542. Over fifty Scots entered the university along with Maitland on 16 December 1542, including Quintin Kennedy, the Catholic apologist, William Kirkcaldy of Grange's younger brother Thomas, Maitland's cousin George Seton, the future fifth Lord Seton, Robert Pitcairn, and William Roberton, the future Edinburgh schoolmaster who would cause the reformers so much trouble. Maitland was no doubt helped by the fact that his kinsman William Cranstoun, a staunch Catholic and future principal of St Salvator's College, was elected Scotus rector of Paris in 1542. Given the acknowledged strength of the 'auld Parisiane kyndnes' (A. Ross, 'Reformation and repression', 'Essays on the Scottish Reformation, 1513-1625', ed. D. McRoberts, 1962, 409) between the students which later often transcended sectarian differences, the importance of Maitland's years in Paris from a personal as well as an academic point of view should not be underestimated. Maitland may very well have drunk from the protestant well of St Leonard's along with so many others but his protestantism was of a very different brew from that of John Knox. Maitland had absorbed an Erasmian view of human nature at St Andrews and Paris, and seems to have shared his father's tolerant approach to religion. He may not have been present in his father's house in 1546 when George Wishart preached but he certainly shared his father's civility towards those of different religious views. Knox apparently persuaded Maitland of the sinfulness of the mass at a meeting of the Edinburgh privy kirk in 1555, but that was not an accurate portent for the future of their relationship, which would witness some very acrimonious confrontations. 
For a layman, Maitland was remarkably well equipped theologically. Not many were brave enough to threaten Knox with the discipline of his own kirk session for the latter's denunciation of Maitland as an atheist and the allegation that he had dismissed heaven and hell as 'thingis devised to fray bairnis' (Bannatyne, 281-2). Maitland traded scriptural chapter and verse with Knox and was conversant with the teachings of Calvin, Luther, Bucer, Musculus, and Melanchthon. Philosophically, he rejected the 'untractable discipline of the stoickes', preferring instead to be 'a student in that schole where it is taught that wyse men myndes must be ledde by probable reasons which the disciples of Plato and Aristotle have embraced' (TNA: PRO, SP 52/19/5). The same preference for flexible reasoning was evident in Maitland's regard for the practicality of the Roman jurisconsults and their awareness that 'the causes, tymes, places, persons, occasions and other circymstances wolde vary the whole decision' (ibid.). As well as being well acquainted with the classics, Maitland was comfortable with the new learning, as his friendship with the Italian protestant and humanist Pietro Bizzarri shows. Regrettably no record of Maitland's library survives. 
Maitland's movements during 1542-50 are unknown. Before 10 November 1553 he married Janet (died before 1560), daughter of William Menteith of Kerse; they had at least one daughter, Marion. The crucial development in his career was his appointment in 1554 as assistant secretary to David Panter. Maitland certainly had powerful friends at court for he was apparently sponsored by Gilbert Kennedy, third earl of Cassillis, and, more significantly as far as Maitland's future career was concerned, Lord James Stewart. This was the first example of the two men working together in close harmony and provides the origin of the partnership that was to be such a feature of the next decade in Scotland's history. 
Maitland did not waste his opportunity to establish himself in credit with the queen dowager, Mary of Guise, regent for her daughter Queen Mary, whom he impressed as a partner at cards as well as in his secretarial role. He gained much valuable experience of the royal administration and international diplomacy. In 1557 he was involved with Mary of Guise's attempt to support the French war against Spain through an abortive siege of Wark Castle in Northumberland. Equally illustrative of his high profile in the regent's administration at this time was his proposed embassy to England and France in February 1558 to mediate a peace. While the anger of Mary I of England at the recent loss of Calais ensured that the mission got no further than London, Maitland no doubt made many useful contacts at this time which he was able to exploit to the full after the death of the English queen that November transformed the political landscape completely. He did not attend the marriage of Queen Mary and the dauphin, Francois, in April 1558, but was probably grateful to keep the most conspicuous absentee from the wedding, the mother of the bride, company, particularly in view of the fact that four of the commissioners failed to return alive. 
It can have been no major surprise when Maitland was appointed Panter's successor as royal secretary on 4 December 1558, but he was conspicuous as the only Scottish member of an executive increasingly dominated by the French. By virtue of his access to the highest political circles of the Scottish, English, and French courts, Maitland was in the perfect position to act as a double agent at the expense of Mary of Guise and to the benefit of the newly formed congregation. 
Maitland did not openly defect to the congregation until October 1559, almost two years after the first bond of the congregation, but he had begun to serve their interests as well as those of Mary of Guise long before. In March 1559 he was sent as envoy to London and Paris on behalf of Mary of Guise. He completed his ostensible mission successfully, and returned to Scotland in May with the ratifications of the concluded peace between Francois and Mary and Elizabeth and his reputation with the regent enhanced. However, his covert agenda was far more significant, as this mission laid the basis for eventual English intervention in Scotland. He played the role of double agent superbly, even winning praise from George Buchanan for managing to deceive the cardinal of Lorraine, 'then esteemed the first diplomatist in Europe' ('Vernacular Writings', 44). Philip II of Spain was similarly duped, receiving news that Maitland ruled Mary of Guise 'body and soul' ('CSP Spain', '1558-67', 38). In England, Maitland built on the relationship developed at the border conference of January 1559 between James Hamilton, duke of Chatelherault, and Sir Henry Percy, and established a working relationship with the two most influential people in England, Sir William Cecil and the new queen, Elizabeth. His relationship with Cecil developed in such a way that he described it in filial terms, and the diplomatic community came to regard him 'as a sort of Scotch Cecil' ('CSP Spain', '1558-67', 492). Maitland's presence at the signing of the treaty of Cateau Cambresis between France and the Habsburgs in April 1559 enhanced his European perspective of the Scottish crisis, aware that their struggle mirrored that between the French crown and its Huguenot inclined provinces. He could also pose as being in possession of the darkest French secrets and intent towards England. 
Maitland defected to the congregation when their fortunes were at an all time low, but he was immediately used to good effect. From December 1559 to February 1560 he led an embassy to London which led directly to the treaty of Berwick. Knox was for once guilty of understatement when he referred to Maitland as his replacement as manager of the civil affairs of the congregation as 'a man of better judgement and greater experience' ('CSP for.', '1558-9', 69). The congregation were certainly in need of an improved public profile in England, having already been judged 'cold, slow and negligent' ('CSP Scot.', 1.226-8) while the unfortunate timing of Knox's 'First Blast of the Trumpet' rendered his name 'of all others most odious here' ('CSP for.', '1558-9', 73). During this embassy Maitland provided Cecil with the cogent arguments needed to convince an uncertain English privy council and a parsimonious Elizabeth of the necessity of intervention in Scotland. He countered the perception of the congregation as rebels, and appealed to English self-interest by reminding them of the danger they faced from France. He played on the desirability of a godly and political union between the two realms and also dangled the interesting carrot of the congregation's help in Ireland through the good offices of Archibald Campbell, fourth earl of Argyll, an offer that was actually written into the eventual treaty in February 1560. 
The treaty of Berwick, despite securing English military intervention, did not guarantee victory for the congregation and indeed the months between it and the treaty of Edinburgh in July 1560 were among the most precarious in Maitland's career. England's military intervention was disastrously incompetent, as the farcical siege of Leith demonstrated all too embarrassingly, and the congregation achieved victory largely through a series of fortuitous events beyond their or England's control. Most significant of these was the death of Mary of Guise and the all-consuming French domestic strife triggered by the tumult of Amboise. Even the successful treaty of Edinburgh which secured the withdrawal of French and English troops from Scotland would not have been signed if Elizabeth's letter to Cecil ordering him to break off negotiations had arrived sooner. Nevertheless the victory of the congregation was a triumph for Maitland and his ally Lord James Stewart, and won him great credit in England, 'for sustaining the whole burden of foresight' ('CSP Scot.', 1.364). Not only had he been instrumental in securing English aid but he had also, in the panic-stricken four months between Berwick and Edinburgh, kept a broadly based coalition together, attracting to it the Catholic leader of the north-east, George Gordon, fourth earl of Huntly, and the staunchly protestant but recently politically neutral James Douglas, fourth earl of Morton. 
Maitland was chosen as harangue maker, or speaker, at the Reformation parliament of August 1560, a role he was to perform in parliament on three other occasions. He was probably responsible for the disappointment of Knox by preventing what would later emerge as the first 'Book of Discipline' being discussed by the parliament, apparently later dismissing it as a 'devout imagination' ('Works of John Knox', 2.26-7). The Scottish confession of faith was adopted but it was not, as Knox lamented, a 'perfect reformation' ('Works of John Knox', 1.338), an accurate portent for the difficult infancy endured by the new kirk. As well as abolishing papal authority and the mass, the parliament supported the proposal of cementing the English alliance by the marriage of Chatelherault's son James Hamilton, third earl of Arran, to Elizabeth. This had the twin benefits of securing the alignment with England and preserving the fragile coalition of the congregation. It was Maitland's misfortune to have to handle the proposal which, while he was in sympathy with it, he knew was unlikely to succeed. Predictably, the reception from Elizabeth was negative, but the international situation was once again transformed by the death of Francois II of France in December, which Maitland and the other envoys heard about while in England. 
From January 1561 Maitland and Stewart were preparing the ground for Mary's return to Scotland. They rejected out of hand the solution to the crisis favoured by Elizabeth, the Hamiltons, and Knox of Mary's marriage to the recently rejected Arran, and put forward their own strategy. Maitland admitted that the prospect of Mary's return created a very difficult personal dilemma for him: 'always in France I am taken for a better Englishman than most' ('CSP Scot.', 1.506-7), which, given his recent record, was understandable. After Stewart's successful embassy to France, Mary admonished Maitland sharply and re-employed him on her own terms. It was a measure of Mary's political acumen that Maitland and Stewart (earl of Moray from 1562) were at the helm of her new regime when Mary began her personal rule in August 1561. Maitland and Stewart had promised Mary that they would win for her recognition of her claim to succeed Elizabeth on the English throne, in return for the maintenance of the religious 'status quo' in Scotland. It was a policy which fitted in perfectly with Maitland's ambition for a union of the Scottish and English crowns. 
Maitland played a key role in the successful early years of Mary's personal reign. Certainly from 1561 to 1565 he was at the centre not only of her government but of her court too. Apart from his necessary absence on high profile embassies to England and France, he was always present in the privy council and was a constant companion on her progresses throughout the realm. He was indefatigable in restraining the demands of the kirk, and an earnest advocate of Mary's right to hear mass and of the controversial thirds of benefices financial settlement. Astutely, he ensured that substance was not given to protestant discontent by ensuring that Mary rejected the invitation to send Scottish representatives to the Council of Trent in 1562. He played a military as well as his more customary political role in the defeat of the earl of Huntly at Corrichie that year, and was very much to the fore in the glittering atmosphere of the court, whether employing his intellectual gifts, displaying his skill at hawking, hunting, and running at the ring, or participating in court masques. 'Maitland serves me right well', Mary reported to the duke of Guise in January 1562, and he and his family's fortunes rose accordingly ('Letter from Mary', 28). In 1561 Maitland was appointed an extraordinary lord of session, and in 1562 his father was appointed keeper of the privy Seal. 
Most significant were Maitland's diplomatic endeavours on behalf of Mary's claim to the English succession. Within two weeks of Mary's arrival in Scotland he was dispatched to England in pursuit of this objective in exchange for the ratification of a modified treaty of Edinburgh. It was this embassy that saw the first mooting of the proposed interview between the two queens which was to provide the basis for Maitland's next embassy to England in May 1562 -- his sixth embassy to the Elizabethan court in just three years. An indication of the level of the mutual confidence felt by the queen and the secretary at this point was seen in Maitland's four-month embassy to France and London in 1563. In England he once again demanded parliamentary recognition of Mary's claims to the English throne, but more significant at this time were his intensive negotiations in the highest international political circles for Mary's marriage. The prospect of Don Carlos of Spain, the Archduke Charles of Austria, Charles IX of France, Lord Robert Dudley, and intriguingly her kinsman Henry Stewart, Lord Darnley, were all raised. 
This mission arguably represents the peak of Maitland's credit with Mary. She rewarded him with the abbey of Haddington, making him, according to Thomas Randolph, worth '3000 marks sterling in Lothian only' ('CSP Scot.', 2.28). Maitland applied pressure on the English by displaying his easy access to the French court and his excellent relationship with the Spanish ambassador, La Quadra. Worryingly for the English, he was also seen as a man who could deliver, securing the release from French prison of Sir Henry Killigrew which English diplomatic efforts had failed to achieve. Despite the collapse of meaningful attempts to obtain a Catholic prince as Mary's husband, by mid-1563 Maitland was able to convince the English that it was still an option, encouraging Elizabeth to propose first Lord Robert Dudley as an English spouse for Mary, and then request that Mary rescind the exile of Matthew Stewart, fourth earl of Lennox, whose son Henry Stewart, Lord Darnley, was another strong candidate for Mary's hand, possessing the next best claim to the English throne. The option kept the goal of a union of the crowns alive. Despite Maitland's performance as speaker in the parliament of 1564 and his boastful introduction of the Lennox restitution: 'Justlie it may be affirmed, Scotland in na manis age that presentlie levis wes in greater tranquilitie' (Cameron, 1.41-4), Mary's subsequent marriage to Darnley and the rupture it caused in the amity was a disaster for Maitland and the policy he had advocated since Mary's return. Unlike Moray, Maitland had remained cool-headed after the collapse of the Dudley marriage project in March 1565. He happily accepted his mission to Elizabeth that same month to seek her consent for Mary's marriage to Darnley and to continue the prosecution of her claim to the succession. His belief that Mary was still only applying pressure on Elizabeth is shown by his reaction, on 8 May, when, 'en route' for Scotland, he received a new commission. Maitland was instructed to return to London and announce Mary's decision to marry Darnley, regardless of Elizabeth's objections, and then to pass into France and announce the news there. Maitland was completely dumbfounded by Mary's new tactics and could not conceal his anger. He ignored his instructions and returned to court. 
Despite his defiance of Mary's commands, wisely, Maitland distanced himself from the chaseabout rebellion of Moray and Chatelherault in August and September 1565, but certainly sympathized with their anger. According to Randolph, Maitland and other ostensible supporters of the queen 'did only espy thayr moment and mayke fair wether untyll it come to the pinch' ('CSP Scot.', 2.162). Mary's brilliant handling of the rebellion ensured that Maitland sided with his queen, but his credit with her would never be the same again. An accurate measure of this was his temporary realignment with Knox and the desperate general assembly of winter 1565 which sent mournful letters to their European brethren lamenting the parlous state of the realm. It was this alienation and despair that led to Maitland's involvement in the murder of David Riccio in March 1566. Maitland's advice to Cecil, just weeks before the murder, of the need to 'chop at the veray root' ('CSP Scot.', 2.255) has unsurprisingly been interpreted as suggesting that he was prominent in the conspiracy. Maitland had lost much personal prestige by Riccio's rise to favour. His involvement in the murder signalled his willingness to rebel against Mary and her increasingly pro-Roman Catholic policy, of which Maitland and his fellow conspirators had lost control. 
Maitland was not officially dismissed from his position as secretary for his part in the Riccio murder, but he was heavily forfeited, losing Haddington Abbey back to James Hepburn, fourth earl of Bothwell. In the most obscure period of his career he was absent from court for the next six months. He was given permission to travel into Flanders but not France or England, but he remained in Scotland. He was warded in Caithness, received the hospitality of John Stewart, fourth earl of Atholl, in Dunkeld and Callendar, and resided in Colin Campbell of Glenorchy's stronghold of the Balloch before his eventual rehabilitation. 
The conciliatory policies Mary followed after the Riccio murder facilitated the return of the chaseabout rebels and these were continued after the safe delivery of her son in June 1566. Moray, Argyll, and Atholl lobbied against Bothwell and Darnley for Maitland's return to court and in September 1566 Mary gave way. Her personal reconciliation of Bothwell and Maitland was sealed by Maitland's restoration to the abbey of Haddington. The clear policy of reconciliation was also apparent in what was feared to be Mary's death-bed speech at Jedburgh in October 1566 which Maitland reported. Maitland was also a main figure at the so-called Craigmillar conference, where the Darnley problem was discussed and Darnley's murder allegedly plotted, and which certainly paved the way for the royal baptism. He was present at the spectacular baptismal celebrations of Mary's son Charles James in December 1566 at the Chapel Royal, Stirling. His own return to the inner sanctum of Mary's court was confirmed by his marriage at the same venue just days later, on 6 January 1567, to Mary Fleming (1542-c.1600) ['see under 'Queen's Maries], daughter of Malcolm Fleming, third Lord Fleming ('c'.1494-1547), and Janet Stewart ('c'.1510-1560x63), illegitimate daughter of James IV; her brother John Fleming, fifth Lord Fleming, was one of Mary's most loyal courtiers. Mary Fleming, raised a Catholic in France, was memorably described by Kirkcaldy of Grange to be as fit a wife for Maitland as Kirkcaldy himself was to be pope. None the less, the marriage was based on affection, and they had a son, James, and daughter, Margaret, who married Robert Ker, later first earl of Roxburghe, in 1587. 
It is hugely unlikely that Maitland was unaware of the plot to murder Darnley. He penned within hours of the deed, on 10 February 1567, the official explanation of the murder sent to Catherine de' Medici, signed by the privy council, including Bothwell, Huntly, Argyll, and Archbishop Hamilton. Even by his own chameleon-like standards, 1567 proved the most tortuous year of Maitland's life. The sheer complexity of his allegiance is revealed by the fact that he fulfils Gordon Donaldson's criteria (as set forth in 'All the Queen's Men') for committed membership of both the king's and queen's parties in the civil war. He was present at the court of session on 12 May where Mary declared that in marrying Bothwell she was a free agent, was a witness to the marriage contract of 14 May, and was one of the privy councillors present from 17 to 22 May. His king's party credentials are equally impressive; he witnessed the coronation of James VI in Stirling and supported Moray on 22 August when Moray accepted the regency. Only Maitland appears on all these lists. 
Maitland's hand was seen very much at work in the creation of the Moray regency. In August 1567, when Mary was imprisoned but before Moray had accepted the regency, Vincenzo Laureo, papal nuncio to Scotland in 1566, argued that what had helped Moray most was 'the crafty counsel of the Secretary Lethington, a man believed to be so astute and unprincipled that in all the late treasons he is thought to have thrown the stone without seeming to move his hand' (Pollen, 402). Such an interpretation is certainly tenable. After he had assumed leadership of the queen's party in 1570, Maitland issued an apology for his role in Mary's downfall. He even boasted that the king's party could not have done it without him: 'ye and farther without me they had nather the knowledge, wisdome, nor moyen to performe the same' (Calderwood, 3.85-6). 
Maitland's customary performance on Moray's behalf as speaker of the parliament in December 1567 was not an accurate portent for the future of the Moray-Maitland relationship, which was soon to collapse, nor of his relations with the kirk. In an ironic tribute to the tolerance of Mary's regime Maitland offered the parliament a timely history lesson, once again stressing the wider European dimension in which Scotland's affairs were cast. Maitland argued that the bloodless triumph of protestantism within the space of eight or nine years was: 'a peculiar benefit only to the realm of Scotland that the true religion has obtained a free course universally through the whole realm and yet not a Scotchman's blood shed. With what nation had God dealt so mercifully?... Germany, France, Flanders, Denmark, you will find the lives of thousands spent before they could purchase the least part of that liberty whereunto we have attained, as it were sleeping upon down coddes. (TNA: PRO, SP 52/14/51)' This was doubly ironic because it paved the way for the radical, Calvinist flavoured legislation Maitland had done much to resist in 1560 and heralded the high point of the kirk's relationship with the state. 
Maitland's continued affection for Mary had been suspected during her captivity in Lochleven. A source not well disposed to Maitland strengthens this view. It was alleged that Mary received from Maitland at this time a gold token enamelled with Aesop's fable of the lion enclosed in a net being freed by a mouse, with the Italian legend engraved upon it: 'A chi basta l'animo non mancan le forze' ('he who has spirit enough will not want force'; Nau, 58-9). Mary's escape from Lochleven in May 1568 caught Maitland unawares and the mistaken strategy of the Hamiltons prevented a proper realignment of the queen's party. Mary apparently tried to contact Maitland but failed, and Maitland was found in Moray's camp before Langside. However, even Maitland at this point was struggling to hide his true colours and immediately after the battle of Langside (13 May 1568) was openly referred to by Moray as the 'necessary evil' (ibid., 100). It was on these grounds that he was included by Moray in the party that travelled to York, Westminster, and finally Hampton Court for the Anglo-Scottish conference that became the shambles of a trial of Mary. Moray believed that Maitland would cause less trouble under the watchful eye of the English than he would unattended in Scotland. The trouble he was to cause in England showed the suspicions of the regent to be well founded. The months in England exposed the divergent policies of Maitland and Moray and this was most clearly revealed by the proposal that Mary marry Thomas Howard, fourth duke of Norfolk. If Maitland was not the project's actual architect, then he was a principal supporter. It fulfilled all his conditions for Mary's restitution and the ultimate union of the realms, Maitland's long-term goal. 
The inconclusive trial, and Moray's return to Scotland, buoyed by a $5000 English subsidy, brought the rift between Maitland and Moray completely out in the open. Maitland's continued support of the Norfolk marriage project was shown in July 1569 at a convention in Perth. He defied the regent and voted in favour of the motion allowing Mary to divorce Bothwell. This was lost by forty votes to nine, conclusive proof of the changed agenda from Carberry when the professed intention of the confederates was the separation of Mary from Bothwell. Maitland facetiously congratulated the assembly on their concern for Mary's domestic happiness. 
Maitland could now be numbered among the ranks of the queen's men and was arrested by Moray on 2 September on the charge of Darnley's murder. Maitland's future looked bleak given the intense enmity he faced from Moray and his allies at this time, but he foiled his enemies in spectacular style, escaping from custody through the good offices of Kirkcaldy of Grange to the sanctuary of Edinburgh Castle. Maitland wrote to his 'friends, actual and potential' (Lee, 269) urging them to attend his trial. Such was the extent of the support he was able to mobilize in Edinburgh that Moray was angrily forced to prorogue Maitland's day of law on 21 November 1569. Moray had been publicly undermined by a popular show of support for Maitland and his pro-Marian policies and matters were to decline further for the beleaguered regent. Moray's arrest of Thomas Percy, seventh earl of Northumberland, following the failed northern rebellion in England fuelled popular discontent which Maitland could exploit. Moray's assassination on 23 January 1570 represented the nadir for the fortunes of the king's party in the civil war against the growing momentum of the queen's party with Maitland increasingly at the helm: 'The son's party daily decays, the mother's daily increases' ('CSP Scot.', 3.126). 
Maitland took the day of Moray's funeral to complete in perfectly stage-managed style his political rehabilitation, insisting on a fully public trial on the charge of the Darnley murder. Public trial and acquittal was followed by a successful return to the privy council. It was from this point that the king's party depicted Maitland as their chief enemy and directed most of their propaganda against him. He was despised as 'the saule and without whom they can do no more than the wheliis can do without the extrie' (Bannatyne, 15). While the propaganda efforts of both sides differed little in the conservative emphasis on the commonweal and the defence of the realm which had been such a feature of Reformation crisis propaganda, it contrasted sharply in its intensity, volume, and bitterness. One piece of civil war propaganda that is of especial significance to Maitland is Buchanan's 'Chameleon'. This has had a great impact on Maitland's historical reputation, with its central accusation that Maitland was capable of any type of conduct apart from bravery and loyalty. These virtues are symbolized by red and white, the only colours the chameleon is incapable of disguising itself in. The other is the less well known, anonymously written 'Dialog of the twa wyfies' (TNA: PRO, SP 52/17/77) which was received by Sir William Cecil in April 1570. This depicted Maitland as an atheist who dismissed religion as 'bot ane bogill to bairnis' (ibid.) and also gives the earliest known and most detailed contemporary exposition of the popular Scottish interpretation of the political principles of Machiavelli. Maitland was depicted as the Machiavellian 'scole master' imbuing the 'glaikit cumpane' of the queen's party 'as they herd every day and convene as bairns to the scole up in ye secreataris house' with the principles of Machiavelli (ibid.). 
Maitland's pre-eminent position at the helm of the queen's party is usually attributed to his political and diplomatic abilities. He was certainly able, as his rivals feared, 'to lay a plaster over the wound of variance' that lay at the heart of the queen's party (Bannatyne, 38). Those same contemporary rivals were also more aware than subsequent historians have been of Maitland's vast personal influence over so many influential figures over the civil war. Maitland had built up an extensive network of support based upon a combination of kindred and personal ties during his career and from which many of the leading figures of the queen's party were drawn. His marriage to Mary Fleming had added Atholl and Fleming to his list of influential brothers-in-law, and opened up an important Hamilton connection to add to the useful connections his own Maitland family could claim. He was described as 'Athol's head of wit' (TNA: PRO, SP 52/17/77) and was decisive in winning Atholl over to the queen's side and in helping to mend the complex Atholl-Argyll feud through his friendship with Colin Campbell of Glenorchy. This helped to create a united Campbell-Stewart front. Maitland's brothers John and Thomas were active in support of the queen, while George, fifth Lord Seton, was his cousin. His friendship with Kirkcaldy of Grange dated back to the congregation and, with his two brothers, to Paris in 1542. To this can be added the loyal Melvilles. Alexander, fifth Lord Home, was described by Maitland as 'one of the dearest friends I have' (TNA: PRO, SP 52/18/59), while George Hackett, conservator of the staple at Veere, a fellow student of Maitland's at St Andrews in 1540, provided a vital focus for efforts to obtain Spanish help. 
However bullish Maitland was about the prospects of success for the queen's party, he was always aware that success was ultimately dependent on outside aid, be it from Elizabeth or France or Spain. Despite strenuous efforts, he was unable to convince Elizabeth of the righteousness of Mary's plight and endured the enmity of England during the successive regencies of the earls of Lennox, Mar, and Morton. Nor was he able to secure the substantial foreign aid necessary to offset Elizabeth's preference and ultimately crucial military and financial support for the king's party. 
While the civil war was never a sectarian conflict, as the allegiance of the participants shows, the queen's party's continuous but unsuccessful attempts to gain overseas aid -- necessarily from Catholic powers -- were to reap a most destructive harvest. Following the Ridolfi plot in 1571, English parliamentarians called for Mary's head in 1572. Her restoration was from that point more unlikely than ever. Similarly, the fall-out from the St Bartholomew's day massacre in Paris in August 1572 did the cause of the queen's party no good at all. Yet the reason the queen's party and Maitland's fate was not resolved sooner was Elizabeth's irresolution. The magnificent show of strength the queen's party boasted in April 1570 was swept aside by England's decisive and devastating military intervention in the same month under Thomas Radcliffe, third earl of Sussex. After scattering the Marian triumvirate of Huntly, Argyll, and Chatelherault, despite their territorial strength across northern, central, and western Scotland and the support of 'xxxii erles and lordes in parlement' ('CSP Scot.', 3.216), and the expulsion of the queen's party from Edinburgh in May 1570, Sussex could not believe Elizabeth's refusal to let him finish the job. There is no doubt Elizabeth's hesitancy kept the queen's party alive at this time. 
In August 1571 Maitland described Sussex's military intervention as the turning point in the retrogressive fortunes of the queen's party, lamenting 'in what terms we then stood, since which time for no labours could be made that number could never be assembled again' (Duncan, 56-67). During his year-long absence from the capital Maitland lobbied hard on Mary's behalf to no avail. Despite, on his return to the capital in May 1571, being able to inflict the indignity of the creeping parliament on to the king's party, it was an empty triumph as Maitland knew. He and his brothers felt the pain of the heavy forfeitures of the rival parliament more keenly despite the latter's ceremonial indignity. Hope, however, remained while Elizabeth prevaricated. The last chance the queen's party had to seize the domestic initiative was the botched raid on Stirling in September 1571. Instead of resulting in the capture of the leading lights of the king's party, this led only to the death of Lennox, which, as Maitland laconically admitted, aided the king's party as much as the queen's. Worse was to follow with the subsequent English reaction to the discovery of the Ridolfi plot. Maitland tried to bolster Mary's spirits by reminding her of the advantage their hold of Edinburgh Castle was, being 'aye able to cast the balance' ('CSP Scot.', 4.376) but Maitland, in declining health, was clutching at straws. The ruthlessness of Morton, following the undynamic Mar regency, coupled with the arrival of English military force, sealed the fate of Maitland and his supporters in the castle. Following the pacification of Perth in February 1573, Maitland and the castle stood alone in support of Mary. The bombardment began on 21 May 1573 and on 29 May, Maitland and Kirkcaldy surrendered. 
Maitland, crippled by ill health, died in mysterious circumstances in prison in Leith on 9 June 1573. It was alleged that he 'imitated the auld Romanes' (Melville, 256) and committed suicide to avoid the humiliation of the gallows alongside Kirkcaldy. What is certain is that the realistic hopes of Mary's restitution died with him. Morton's vindictiveness towards Maitland continued after his death, ignoring pleas for a decent burial from Maitland's family so 'that the vermin from it came creeping out under the door of the house' (Calderwood, 3.285). 
There is an irony in the fact that the name Maitland, in its earlier twelfth-century form Maltalent, translates as evil genius, because many of Maitland's contemporaries vituperatively held him to be just that. He was Bannatyne's Michael Wylie, Buchanan's Chameleon, and Knox's atheist. Yet the amount of time his enemies spent defaming his character is testament to his impressive contemporary reputation. He was regarded by Elizabeth I as 'the flower of the wits of Scotland' (TNA: PRO, SP 52/19/8). Even his enemies testified to his academic brilliance, and Robert Sempill, who denounced him as a 'scurvy scholar of Machiavelli's lair', grudgingly respected his ability to: '
both quhissill and cloik, 

And his mouth full of meil. 
('Satirical Poems of the... Reformation', 1.131)' John Spottiswoode refers to him as 'a man of deep wit, great experience and one whose counsels were held at that time for oracles' (Spottiswoode, 2.193). 
Maitland cuts a brilliant, colourful, controversial and even romantic figure. In the midst of his romance with Mary Fleming he declared love to be the 'most singular remedy for all diseases in all persons' (TNA: PRO, SP 52/10/21). He was certainly Machiavellian in the sense that, to him, the end justified the means, and he consistently manipulated religion for political ends, but despite the charges of Buchanan he was capable of both bravery and loyalty. During his doomed defence of Edinburgh Castle he rejected generous offers to abandon Mary and secure his own safety. While it is going too far to agree with the view that he alone in Scotland thought in terms that were neither religious nor personal, it is undeniable that he stayed true to his vision of the ultimate union of the realms. 


@@@@@


doc= 17839


Maitland, William (c.1693-1757), historian and topographer, was born at Brechin, Forfarshire. Nothing is known of his parentage or of his education. He is known first as a hair merchant, an occupation that took him to Sweden, Denmark, and Germany, and which seems to have enabled him to devote himself to historical study. By 1733 he was in London, working on a history of the city; writing to Richard Richardson on 7 August 1733, Sir Hans Sloane refers to the work in progress. He was elected fellow of the Royal Society on 12 April 1733 and on 13 March 1735 he became a member of the Society of Antiquaries. In April 1737 he appears to have started publishing his history of London in shilling numbers, but only one was announced. About 1738 he contributed to the 'Philosophical Transactions' a response to an essay by W. Kersseboom about the population of London. In 1739 he published by subscription his 'History of London, from its Foundation by the Romans to the Present Time', in a folio edition printed by Samuel Richardson. A strongly whiggish history, it was dedicated to the king; the prince of Wales's copy is in the British Library. The work, which owed much to predecessors such as John Stow and John Strype, was not universally well received. In a letter to Joseph Ames dated 1 July 1740 Maitland responds cantankerously to the suggestion that the work was 'not worth keeping', and abuses Ames for his failure to win subscribers. He goes on to declare that since the work has 'met with the approbation of the most judicious and best judges, I despise what others say of it, considering it is not in their power to do me an injury in the sale thereof, seeing I have not one copy left' (Nichols, 'Lit. anecdotes', 5.383). 
In the same year Maitland resigned from the Society of Antiquaries and returned to Scotland, where he remained, apart from a six-week stay at Bath for the recovery of his health in the autumn of 1750. He began studying the history of Scotland and proposed to write a general topographical description of it. To this end he prepared a 'large set of queries, with a general letter, and transmitted both to every clergyman in Scotland', but 'the return fell so very far short of his expectation, that he laid aside his design in disgust' (Nichols, 'Lit. anecdotes', 5.383). Some returns from this anticipation of Sir John Sinclair's 'Statistical Account' are mentioned in Gough's 'British Topography'. Meanwhile Maitland prepared a folio 'History of Edinburgh, from its Foundation to the Present Time' (1753), dedicated to the prince of Wales, and based on a fairly thorough examination of the city's archives. This was a work of 'very great labour' which contained much valuable information, though 'the style is mean, and the whole tone of the work is that of a plain, dull old man' (Chambers, Scots., 3.563). A second edition of the 'History of London', extended into two folio volumes, with help from others and by the addition of many more plates, followed in 1756. (Further editions appeared in 1760, 1769, 1772, and 1775, the last continued and expanded by the Revd John Entick.) Maitland resumed his work on Scottish topography by making a tour of the country himself. The results appeared in volume 1 of his 'History and Antiquities of Scotland', published in two folio volumes after his death at Montrose on 16 July 1757. This last work, though it 'did credit to his industry, seems to have been judged deficient in the erudition and critical sagacity requisite for such a design' (Aikin, 6.489). Later it was said to be 'absolutely destitute of reputation' (Chambers, Scots., 3.563). His general reputation within a few years of his death was low. Richard Gough says he was 'self-conceited, credulous, knew little, and wrote worse' (Gough, 2.572). According to Aikin, 'this author has no pretensions to rank among literary characters of the superior class, either in point of style or depth of reflection' (Aikin, 6.489). The 'History of London' is, however, still referred to by historians. Early newspaper accounts indicate that he died 'at advanced age' but sixty-four seems to be a reliable consensus (Chalmers, 21.169). He did not marry, and was said to have died worth $10,000. 


@@@@@


doc= 17840


Maitland, William Fuller (1813-1876), art collector, was born on 10 March 1813, the second, but eldest surviving, son and heir of Ebenezer Fuller Maitland of Stansted, Essex, and Park Place, Henley-on-Thames. He was educated by private tutors until he went to Trinity College, Cambridge, where he graduated BA in 1835, and MA in 1839. Although he never trained as an artist, Maitland quickly developed a remarkable love for, and insight into, paintings. During several journeys to Italy he became acquainted with the works of the early Italian masters -- yet to acquire their later popularity -- and was one of their earliest admirers and collectors. His taste for the Netherlandish and German schools of the fifteenth century was unusual in England, and his collection also included many remarkable works of English landscape. Unlike other collectors of the period, his interest was focused mainly on paintings to the exclusion of 'objets d'art'. 
Maitland's first marriage, to Lydia, only daughter of Lieutenant-Colonel Serjentson Prescott, took place in Florence in 1842; they had four children. A widower, he married again, in London, on 1 June 1852; his second wife was Charlotte Elizabeth Dick, daughter of James Munro Macnabb; they had one daughter. Maitland lived at Stansted in Essex. His interests were by no means confined to art and connoisseurship, but included literature and a love of sport, dogs, and everything connected with the outdoor life. 
For many years Maitland lent paintings to the Royal Academy old masters exhibitions, and most unusually, soon after his death, the Royal Academy passed a vote of condolence to his widow and acknowledged his substantial contribution to the loan exhibitions' success. He died suddenly at Stansted House on 15 February 1876, and was buried at Stansted on 19 February. After Maitland's death the bulk of his collection was exhibited at the South Kensington Museum, and subsequently nine of the most important pictures were sold to the National Gallery, including Fraucicbigro's 'Portrait of a Knight of Rhodes', an 'Agony in the Garden' ascribed to Le Spaque, and a tondo entitled 'Virgin and Child with Saint John' from the studio of Botticelli. Other works are in York, Berlin, and New York. 


@@@@@


doc= 17841


Maittaire, Michael (1668-1747), classical scholar and typographer, was born in Rouen on 29 November 1668, the son of French protestant parents of whom nothing further is known. He took refuge in England a few years before the revocation of the edict of Nantes in October 1685, and was educated at Westminster School, 'where Dr. Busby well grounded him in the Greek and Latin languages, keeping him some years longer than usual' (Nichols, 'Lit. anecdotes', 4.556). He was a king's scholar there in 1682 and matriculated from Oxford University on 16 October 1688, aged nearly twenty; having been made a canoneer student of Christ Church in 1693 he graduated BA in 1694, MA on 23 March 1697, and was incorporated at Cambridge University in 1708. From 1695 to 1699 he was under-master of Westminster School, but left to keep a private boarding-school at Mile End. According to Thomas Hearne 'he was turned out of the Schools purely out of Malice, to make way for Mr. Rob. Friend, now D. Div. & Head Master' ('Remarks', 5.232), although others represent his leaving Westminster as a voluntary retirement 'consecrated to Learning' (Nichols, 'Lit. anecdotes', 4.557). Certainly from the early 1700s he devoted himself to scholarship and began to publish extensively, nearly seventy individual works being attributed to him, mostly in the fields of classics and typography. He lived for much of his life at various residences in London -- in the late 1720s in Orange Street, Holborn, and at the time of his death at King Street, near Bloomsbury Square. 
Contemporary opinion, both of Maittaire the man and of his scholarly achievement, was somewhat divided. On the one hand he was respected for his probity and strength of conscience, particularly in religious matters. He was a nonjuror and, according to Hearne, a man whom George Hickes had tried unsuccessfully to persuade to take orders. He was also recognized as modest and unassuming, yet convivial, generous, and 'fond of friendly intercourse' (Nichols, 'Lit. anecdotes', 4.564-5). He had a good many friends and acquaintances among the aristocracy, and a number of his extant letters reveal him as a man expert in gaining the favour of patrons both for himself and for others. The earl of Oxford held him in sufficiently high regard to pursue the suppression of several lines in Alexander Pope's 'Dunciad' representing Maittaire as an inhabitant of the kingdom of Dullness. The duke of Rutland and Sir Richard Ellis are named in his will as two of his three best friends, to whom he directed his widow for advice and support, and Nichols reports that they each owned a portrait of him. By the standards of the time he was considered a very capable scholar of Latin and more particularly Greek, although his published works were not always highly regarded; while some were considered slapdash others were rated pedestrian and pedantic. Yet his 'Graecae linguae dialecti' (1706) was still being reissued in 1742 and an abridged version appeared in 1831, while a number of his editions of classical authors were being reprinted in the late eighteenth century, and in a few cases into the nineteenth. Dr Johnson's opinion of Maittaire's work, as reported by James Boswell, was the harshest eighteenth-century view: 'he seems to have been a puzzle-headed man, with a large share of scholarship, but with little geometry or logick in his head, without method, and possessed of little genius' (Boswell, 4.2). 
Among his many publications Maittaire's principal contributions to scholarship were in the fields of classical studies and typography. Between 1713 and 1719 he produced several volumes of Latin classics in a series published by Jacob Tonson and John Watts, and various other editions of Greek and Latin authors, in addition to his work on Greek dialects already mentioned. 'Annales typographici' (5 vols., 1719-41), his history of typography from its beginnings until the year 1664, is a major work of great industry. The first three volumes were published at The Hague, the fourth and fifth at Amsterdam and London respectively. Two supplementary volumes by Michael Denis were added in 1789 and a modern reprint was published at Graz in 1965-7. Maittaire wrote a useful grammar of the English language (1712; repr., 1967), edited the Greek 'New Testament' (1714), and published a new edition of the 'Marmora Oxoniensia' in 1732, a work that Thomas Hearne, who had wanted to do it himself, considered beyond Maittaire's capabilities: 'A Grammarian he may be, but he is far from being an Antiquary, and hath not (I fear) those qualifications that are necessary for an Editor of Greek & Roman Inscriptions' ('Remarks', 10.13). Other publications included his 'Stephanorum historia' (1709) and (with others) a catalogue of the Harleian library (1743-5), several religious essays, and some Latin poetry. His final publication was his 'Senilia' (1742), a collection of verses on various topics and persons in which, Dr Johnson opined (according to Boswell), 'he shows so little learning or taste in his writing, as to make Carteret a dactyl' (Boswell, 4.2). 
In keeping with his classical, bibliographical, and typographical interests Maittaire was a great collector of books. Over about fifty years he had built up a very large library, which included rare early editions of classical authors printed by the major early printing houses of Europe. After his death, on 7 September 1747, his library was sold at auction by Cock and Langford, the sale beginning on 21 November 1748 and lasting forty-four evenings. The sale catalogue was printed from Maittaire's own manuscript catalogue, and a copy with the prices inscribed is in the British Library. He was survived by his wife, Mary. 


@@@@@


doc= 17842


Majendie, Henry William (1754-1830), bishop of Bangor, was born in London on 7 October 1754, the elder son of John James Majendie (1709-1782) and his wife, Elizabeth Prevost ('c'.1738-1818). Majendie's grandfather Andre left France in 1688 and settled in England in 1700. He ministered to the French congregation in Exeter and married Susanna Mauzy, the daughter of the French pastor at Barnstaple, Devon. John James Majendie, after serving as pastor of the French church of the Savoy, was ordained in the Church of England. Soon after her arrival in England in 1761, he became preceptor to Queen Charlotte, living at court until 1769. He taught her English and she remained a patron and friend. Appointed a canon of Windsor in 1774, he became the queen's domestic chaplain and a tutor to her two sons, the prince of Wales and the duke of York. 
Majendie was educated at Charterhouse School, under Dr Samuel Berdmore, and from 1771 at Christ's College, Cambridge. He secured a scholarship there in 1772, and graduated BA in 1776, proceeding MA in 1785 and DD in 1791. In 1776 he was elected to the fellowship at Christ's just vacated by William Paley. He was ordained priest in 1783 at Worcester, and served as vicar of Bromsgrove, Worcestershire, from 1783 to 1785. In January 1780 he was appointed preceptor to Prince William (the future William IV) at a salary of $200 a year, but had acted as one of his instructors since June 1776. In a letter to the king of 1 November 1782 Prince William noted that Majendie 'has been between 7 and 8 years with me' ('Later Correspondence of George III', 5.694, no. 4294). As the king told Pitt in a letter of 13 September 1797, Majendie 'attended him with unremitting attention for four years on board the Fleet' (ibid., 2.622, no. 1617) during the American War of Independence. On the 'Prince George' they travelled much of the world, including a visit to New York in November 1782. It was as a direct reward for this service that Majendie was appointed a canon of Windsor in 1785 and he deferred marriage until he received that appointment. On 11 April 1785 he married Anne Routledge (died 1836) of Stapleton, Cumberland; they had thirteen children. He was vicar of Nether Stowey in Somerset, where he earned the friendship of Thomas Poole (the correspondent of Coleridge), from 1790 to 1793, and vicar of Hungerford from 1793 to 1798. In that year he resigned his Windsor canonry for a residential prebend at St Paul's, and the vicarage of Hungerford for that of New Windsor. He retained both prebend and living when he became bishop of Chester in 1800, but resigned both in 1809 when he was translated to the bishopric of Bangor. He remained in this see for twenty-one years, until his death on 9 July 1830 at the house of his son the Revd Stuart Majendie, at Longdon, near Lichfield. 
A strong supporter of the established order at the time of the French Revolution, Majendie regarded Pitt the younger as 'the ablest Man who ever guided the Councils of this Nation' (H. W. Majendie, 'A Charge Delivered to the Clergy of the Diocese of Bangor... 1814', 15). He understood the need to educate the poor as a means of achieving social control and founded a Sunday school at Nether Stowey. Later he was a vigorous supporter of the National Society, advocating the establishment of parochial and daily schools. He strongly supported legislation relating to the residence of clergy and the appointment of stipendary curates. He was aware of the growth of industrial occupations in the diocese of Chester, appreciated the problems of clergy 'in populous and commercial districts', stressed the need for them to co-operate with the schoolmaster and the civil magistrate, and encouraged them to serve as magistrates themselves (H. W. Majendie, 'A Charge Delivered... Chester', 19). As well as appearing regularly in the House of Lords, he took his pastoral responsibilities seriously and gave his clergy practical advice. He showed a pragmatic awareness of the necessary attitude of clergy to rich and poor; in 1804 he warned his clergy not to attempt 'private religious discourse in an obtrusive, laboured, or authoritative manner [with] the higher orders of society, whose fastidious refinement' might make it counter-productive, but to save it for 'the poor and unlearned [who] will more readily listen to instruction from their Minister, because they think it very natural and becoming his office whether in the church, the house or the field' (ibid., 30). As a bishop he used his influence to appoint his sons and other relations to lucrative livings, and contemporaries commented on 'the corpulence of the bishop's person and the imperturbable gravity of his countenance' ('Cheshire Sheaf', 86). 


@@@@@


doc= 17843


Mair, John (c.1467-1550), historian, philosopher, and theologian, was born into a farming family in the village of Gleghornie near Haddington, south-east of Edinburgh. He attended the grammar school at Haddington and went on, though not perhaps immediately, to university. Although it has been supposed that Mair was a student at St Andrews University, a passage in his commentary on the 'Sentences' of Peter Lombard ('In primum sententiarum', fol. 34'r') makes it clear that as late as 1510 he had not been in that city. So far as is known his first university, exceptionally for a Scot, was Cambridge, where he spent a year, about 1491-2, at Godshouse, a college in the parish of St Andrew -- perhaps the reason, a sentimental one, why he chose it. 
Mair next moved to Paris, to the College de Ste Barbe. He received his master's degree in 1494 and the following year incepted as regent in arts, at the same time beginning his studies in theology under Jan Standonck at the College de Montaigu. With his colleague Noel Beda he took charge of the college in 1499, on Standonck's banishment from Paris, though about that time Mair also became attached to the College de Navarre. 
In 1506, while still at Navarre, Mair took his doctorate in theology; he then began to teach theology at the College de Sorbonne, the pre-eminent college for theology in Paris and one of the great centres in Europe in that field. The membership, which consisted solely of doctors of theology of Paris, was a highly conservative body: as late as August 1523, after discussing the translations of sacred texts, it passed judgment that such translations from Greek into Latin, or from Latin into French, should be entirely suppressed and not tolerated. Throughout his life Mair remained a conservative on doctrinal matters, despite his periodic severe criticism of the behaviour of the church and of churchmen. 
Mair was not wholly opposed to the encroachment of Renaissance humanism. When, against a background of official criticism, the Italian scholar Girolamo Aleandro introduced the teaching of Greek to Paris, Mair was one of his pupils. Aleandro wrote: 'There are many Scottish scholars to be found in France who are earnest students in various of the sciences and some were my most faithful hearers -- John Mair, the Scot, doctor of theology and David Cranston, my illustrious friends' (Renaudet, 614 n.). 
Few writers of his day were more prolific than Mair. He began in 1499 with a work on exponible terms such as 'only', 'except', and 'in so far as', expressions which contribute in interesting logical ways to the validity or otherwise of syllogisms. Thereafter he contributed to a wide range of fields: ethics, metaphysics, theology, biblical commentary, history, and above all logic, at which he was pre-eminent. As regards ethics, for instance, Mair was the first writer to see the need to place discussions of the appropriate treatment of the American Indians within a moral theological framework, and he went on to provide such a framework in his own 'In secundum sententiarum' (1510). His great intellectual drive is demonstrated by the fact that, despite recurrent bouts of illness, he had within twenty years of the start of the series already completed at least forty-six books. 
Mair left Paris in 1518 at the height of his reputation -- a reputation based on three things. The first was the quality of his writings, many of which ran to several editions and became textbooks for a large number of students in Paris and across Europe. The second reason was the quality of his teaching. There are numerous indications of the respect which his teaching inspired. Juan Gomez, writing to Jerome de Canbanyelle, the Spanish king's envoy in France, said: 'I am following the theology course of John Mair with great interest as he is a deeply knowledgeable man whose virtue is as great as his faith... May the eternal king deign to grant him long life that he may for long years be useful to our alma mater, the University of Paris. (Lax, dedication)' The third reason for his reputation was his high-profile leadership of a team of scholars, in most cases former pupils of his, the majority from Scotland or Spain, including, among the Scots, David Cranston (died 1512), George Lokert ('c'.1485-1547), Robert Galbraith ('c'.1483-1544), William Manderston ('c'.1485-1552), and Gilbert Crab ('c'.1482-1522); and, among the Spaniards, Juan de Celaya ('c'.1490-1558), Antonio Coronel (died 'c'.1521), Fernando de Enzinas (died 1523), and Gaspar Lax (1487-1560). 
Mair returned to Scotland to become principal of the University of Glasgow, a post he occupied for five years. He was also appointed vicar of Dunlop, in Ayrshire, and a canon of the Chapel Royal in Stirling. During this period he wrote not only his 'History', but also a set of questions on metaphysics, and about this time he also began work on his commentary on the 'Nicomachean Ethics' of Aristotle. His commentary on the four gospels must also have been in incubation at that time. 
Mair is perhaps best-known today for his 'History of Greater Britain, England and Scotland' ('Historia majoris Britanniae tam Angliae quam Scotiae' -- which may also be translated 'A History of Mair's Britain'), published in 1521. It is possible that he wrote the book with the intention (among others) of promoting the idea of a union of the two countries; and the dedicatee, James V, son of James IV and grandson of Henry VII, was an appropriate symbol of the close relations between the two countries. But the reason Mair gave for writing the book was that 'you may learn not only the thing that was done but also how it ought to have been done'. He adds that the first law of the historian is to tell the truth and that it is 'of more moment to understand aright, and clearly to lay down the truth on any matter, than to use elegant and highly coloured language' (Mair, 'History', cxxxiii). Having told the truth, he had a good deal to say about what ought to have been done or ought not. For example, he criticized David I of Scotland for endowing religious foundations with great wealth in the early twelfth century, arguing that such endowments eventually caused great damage to the church. Similarly, in a discussion of the excommunication in 1217 of the Scottish king Alexander II, Mair writes: 'If it [an excommunication] is unjust to the degree of being null, it is in no way to be dreaded... unjust excommunication is no more excommunication than a corpse is a man... Whence it comes that we reckon a vast number of excommunicated persons who are in a state of grace. (Mair, 'History', 172-3)' In June 1523 Mair left Glasgow for the University of St Andrews, where he was incorporated on the same day as Patrick Hamilton, who had studied under Mair's colleague Manderston at Paris, and who was, five years later, burned before St Salvator's College, St Andrews, so becoming the first martyr of the Scottish Reformation. Mair made it clear that he was utterly opposed to Hamilton's heretical views. His attitude emerges in the dedicatory epistle of his commentary on the gospel of 'St Matthew', published in 1529 shortly after Hamilton's martyrdom. The dedication is to Mair's friend Archbishop James Beaton of St Andrews, and congratulates Beaton for 'removing, not without the ill-will of many, a noble but unhappy follower of the Lutheran heresy'. 
Apart from Hamilton, a strong reminder for Mair of his Paris days was the presence in St Andrews of his own former pupil George Lokert, who a year earlier had been elected rector of St Andrews University. During the years 1523-5 Mair was assessor to the dean of the arts faculty and in this capacity served on a committee, on which Lokert also sat, which revised extensively, and along Parisian lines, the St Andrews forms of examination. As well as carrying out administrative duties during this period, Mair also gave courses of lectures in both arts and theology. 
By 1526 Mair had returned to Paris, where he resumed his teaching career. During this period students working in his field, who may therefore be assumed to have heard him lecture, included John Calvin, Ignatius of Loyola, Francois Rabelais, and George Buchanan. Mair continued to write, and in 1529 published his commentary on the four gospels, 'In quatuor evangelia expositiones', in which, as in his 'History', he is frequently judgemental about matters of current concern. For instance, he attacks plural holdings, commendations, absenteeism, the extensive neglect of ordinary pastoral duties, and the personal laxness of many clergymen. In reference to such cases of ecclesiastical corruption, he says: 'Those deceive themselves who think that the approval of even the supreme pontiff can reconcile such things to the dictates of conscience' (Mair, 'Commentary on Matthew', fol. 80). But this criticism, as also his criticism of 'the grasping abbots who make things hard for the husbandmen' ('Commentary on Matthew', fol. 74'v'), went hand in hand with Mair's unwavering support on doctrinal matters. 
After the commentary on the gospels Mair produced one more book, his commentary on Aristotle's 'Nicomachean Ethics' (1530). It was dedicated to another friend, Cardinal Thomas Wolsey. Mair gives three reasons for the dedication. The first, harking back to a theme of his 'History', was a shared love of 'our common country', for Scotland and England are 'enclosed in one Britain'. The second reason was their common religion and field of study, and the third was his desire to express his gratitude for the frequent hospitality he had enjoyed in England. It is in this dedicatory note that we learn of the year Mair spent at Godshouse in Cambridge, and we also learn here of Wolsey's offer to Mair of a teaching post in Christ Church, Oxford, the college that Wolsey had just founded. Indication of the genuineness of Mair's feelings for Wolsey is found in the fact that the dedication was written after Wolsey had fallen from grace and had been stripped of his honours. 
A year after the publication of the commentary on the 'Ethics', Mair returned to Scotland, to St Andrews, where he remained until his death. A major source of information, the lengthy, chatty, often gossipy, introductory letters to his books dry up following that last publication, and his motives for returning to Scotland are unknown. Perhaps he was simply homesick. Years earlier in the dedication in his commentary on the fourth book of the 'Sentences' he had written: 'Our native soil attracts us with a secret and inexpressible sweetness and does not permit us to forget it'. 
Mair held two major appointments after his return to St Andrews. From 1534 he was provost of St Salvator's College, and he was also dean of the faculty of theology. Among the friends with whom he was reunited on his return was William Manderston, who had been elected rector of the university in 1530. During this lengthy final period of his life he tutored John Knox, who probably matriculated in St Andrews in 1529. In a famous phrase Knox refers to Mair as a man 'whose word was then held as an oracle on matters of religion' ('History of the Reformation', 1.15). Knox was a leading instigator of the new order, whereas his teacher Mair was to the end a schoolman of the middle ages. Mair's scholasticism is nowhere revealed more clearly than in his summation of Aristotle at the start of his commentary on the 'Ethics': 'In almost all opinions he agrees with the catholic and truest Christian faith in all its integrity... in so great and manifold a work [the 'Ethics'] if it be read as we explain it, you meet scarcely a single opinion unworthy of a Christian gentleman'. By the time Mair died, in 1550, just ten years before the Reformation in Scotland, he must have known that the world to which he had dedicated his life was gone for ever. 


@@@@@


doc= 17844


Major, John (1782-1849), bookseller and publisher, was probably born at Duke Street, West Smithfield, London, the son of Samuel Major. His first business was a shop located in the gateway of St Bartholomew's Hospital, but he moved successively to Skinner Street, Great Russell Street, and Fleet Street. In 1813 he privately printed his own verse, 'Rational Madness, a Song for the Lovers of Curious and Rare Books', which was adapted to the tune of 'Liberty Hall'. Having an extensive knowledge of bibliography, Major was heavily involved with the famous bibliophile and author Thomas Frognall Dibdin. When Dibdin in 1815 threatened to burn the remaining copies of the fourth volume of the 'Bibliotheca Spenceriana' because it was selling badly, Major took them on generous terms. 
Major's contemporary the publisher Charles Knight noted that he was also a reprinter of 'beautiful and cheap' standard works (Knight, 1.277). His most famous publication, which he edited himself, was an illustrated edition of Izaak Walton's and Charles Cotton's 'Complete Angler' in 1823; there were new editions in 1824, 1835, 1844, and 1847, with many reprints. His other publications included Walton's 'Lives' (1825), Walpole's 'Anecdotes of Painting' (1826), Bunyan's 'Pilgrim's Progress', and Defoe's 'Robinson Crusoe' (1830). Between 1825 and 1836 Major, a minor poet, frequently contributed rhyming commentaries on the politics of the day to the weekly newspaper 'John Bull'. He published his own 'A Poetical Description of Bartholomew Fair', by 'One under a Hood', in 1837. 
Major continued to support Dibdin's publications, subscribing for fifty copies of Dibdin's edition of Thomas a Kempis (1828), and publishing his 'Reminiscences' (1836). However, according to Thomas Rees, in the mid-1830s Major began to accept bills for Dibdin's speculations which Dibdin failed to honour. This eventually caused his financial ruin and a period of mental illness. He struggled on for a few years, first at 29 St Martin's Court, Leicester Square (1838), and then at 6 Museum Street, Bloomsbury (1839). His own rhymed version of Dean Swift's 'Advice to Servants' was published in 1843, and in conjunction with his son John Stenson Major, a composer and music teacher, he issued 'The Pastoral Week', in the style of Walton. On the recommendation of the Rt Hon. Thomas Grenville, Major obtained an asylum in the Charterhouse, where he prepared the last and finest edition of 'The Complete Angler' (1847), and died on 9 January 1849. 


@@@@@


doc= 17845


Major, Joshua (1786-1866), landscape gardener and designer, was born on 28 August 1786 at the estate village of Owston, near Doncaster, Yorkshire, the third of the three children of Richard Major (1736-1809), a general estate labourer, and his wife, Mary, 'nee' Bramma (1742-1830). It is probable that Major attended the village school founded by Frances Davies-Cooke, the estate owner's wife. In 1793 the landscape gardener Humphry Repton prepared a red book for Owston, laying out proposed physical developments for the estate. It is possible that Joshua's father was involved in their implementation and that the work inspired his boyhood interest in landscape design. 
It is not known when Major married his wife, Isabella. They had a son, Henry, who became a partner in the nursery garden Major founded at Knowsthorpe, Leeds, about 1810. Initially the firm practised commercial horticulture, and the gardening magazines of the day recorded their successes at flower shows. Later it became involved in landscape design, and in 1845 Major was awarded the first premium for the design of the first public parks in Manchester. The initial concept was unique: the development of a number of neighbourhood parks within easy walking distance for the majority of the city's population. Financial restraints plus the lack of suitable sites resulted in only Peel, Philips, and Queens parks being made of the four initially planned. Among other landscape works were Hanover Square, Leeds (1824); Derwent Hall, Derbyshire (1833); Oakes Park, Sheffield (1834); Wells House, Ilkley, Yorkshire; and the People's Pleasure Ground, Meltham, Yorkshire ('c'.1860). All these works showed Major to be pragmatic in his approach to landscape design, creating areas for walking and recreation, including open spaces where cricket or football could be played. But, inevitably, his designs became more picturesque. Joseph Paxton's Birkenhead Park (1843) was similar to Major's Manchester parks, but Major never succumbed to the formal Italianate style of gardening as did Paxton in the People's Park, Halifax, and at Sydenham, London. 
Major wrote a number of books: 'A Treatise on the Insects most Prevalent on Fruit Trees and Garden Produce' (1829), 'The Theory and Practice of Landscape Gardening' (1852), and 'The Ladies' Assistant in the Formation of their Flower Gardens' (1861), in which he was assisted by his son. He was a frequent contributor to the 'Gardeners' Magazine' and corresponded with the editor, J. C. Loudon, especially on the matter of the 'ideal' garden for the Victorian villa, and a scheme for such a garden (of 100 acres) by Major was extensively illustrated in Loudon's 'Encyclopaedia of Gardening' (1871 edn, 1185-91). 
In addition to his business interests, Major assisted in the formation of the first Sunday school in Leeds, of which he was the superintendent for many years, and he took an active interest in other religious and charitable institutions of the town. When he died, in Leeds on 26 January 1866, at the age of seventy-nine, his son continued the business, but as a horticultural nursery. 


@@@@@


doc= 17846


Major, Richard Henry (1818-1891), geographer, was born on 3 October 1818 at 38 Old Street (Road), Shoreditch, London, son of Richard Henry Major, surgeon, of an old Jersey family, and Elizabeth Edge, who married in 1816. After her husband's death on 7 January 1822 Elizabeth remarried, leaving Richard and his elder brother to the care of their paternal grandfather. After attending Merchant Taylors' School, London, from 1832 to 1836, Richard was destined for the church, but instead spent the next six years as clerk to a German and then a Spanish merchant's firm in London. He did not regret his decision not to enter the church, although he forwent a considerable legacy thereby and remained interested in religion throughout his life. He became supernumerary assistant at the British Museum in 1844 under the patronage of Sir Henry Ellis. He was also introduced by Ellis to the recently formed Hakluyt Society, where he was honorary secretary, officially between 1849 and 1858 and unofficially for considerable periods after this. His linguistic and historical skills led to his editing eight volumes of travellers' accounts for the society and he also materially helped editors of other volumes. 
On 3 June 1847 Major married Sarah Elizabeth Thorn ('c'.1814-1890), artist, and for twelve years lived with her at 4 Albion Place, Canonbury Square, Islington, London, the house of her parents, Henry (hosier and merino manufacturer) and Elizabeth Thorn. They had two daughters. Sarah -- who worked professionally as both Thorn and Major -- skilfully illustrated some of her husband's publications. Major continued to work at the British Museum, although, with money inherited from his grandfather and father-in-law, he had a comfortable private income. In 1854 he was elected fellow of the Society of Antiquaries and was active in it for the next twenty years. Elected fellow of the Royal Geographical Society in 1845, he was honorary secretary from 1866 to 1881 and vice-president between 1881 and 1884. In 1861 he was made knight of the Tower and the Sword by Pedro V of Portugal for his claim that the Portuguese discovered Australia in the sixteenth century. Luiz I made him officer of the same order after the publication of 'The Life of Prince Henry of Portugal, Surnamed the Navigator' (1868) and later made him knight commander of the order of Santiago. In 1873 Dom Pedro II of Brazil made him knight commander of the Rose of Brazil. In 1874 Victor Emmanuel II made him knight commander of the Crown of Italy for his 'Voyages of the Venetian Brothers N. and A. Zeno' (1873). He was appointed keeper of the newly created department of maps and charts in the British Museum in 1867. Respiratory illness forced him to retire from the museum in 1880 and from active involvement in professional societies shortly afterwards. He died on 25 June 1891 at his home, 51 Holland Road, Kensington, London, and was buried two days later in Highgate cemetery. 
Major was the leading figure of his day in Britain in the history of cartography and discoveries, particularly of America and Australia, and, although subsequent scholarship has forced revision of many of his opinions, he is still recognized as having been a pioneer in his field, with his unique access to the British Museum collections and a considerable say in influential publications. 


@@@@@


doc= 17847


Major, Thomas (1720-1799), engraver, may have been the infant baptized on 30 May 1720 at Preston Bisset, Buckinghamshire, the son of Samuel and Elizabeth Major, as Thomas later had property interests in that county. Claims that he was descended from Richard Major of Hursley, Hampshire, father-in-law of Richard Cromwell, are unsubstantiated. Major was taught to draw and etch by Hubert Gravelot, and his first prints are dated 1744. In October 1745 he accompanied the renowned landscape engraver Jacques-Philippe le Bas to Paris, assisted him there, and was befriended by the English-born engraver Andre Laurent. He published several prints in Paris from his apartment in the rue St Jacques. In October 1746 Major was arrested and spent three months incarcerated in the Bastille as a reprisal for the temporary imprisonment of the Frenchmen of Fitz-James's horse and the Irish regiments after the battle of Culloden. He was freed after strenuous intercession with the marquis d'Argenson by le Bas, Gravelot, and the English banker Selwin. Major dedicated three prints to d'Argenson in grateful recognition of his help. When Laurent died in 1747 Major accompanied his body to its grave in Paris, but he had returned to England by December 1748 when he sold the dealer Arthur Pond a number of prints he had brought back to London. He continued to import prints, acting as an agent for le Bas, and in 1750 auctioned a collection of paintings that he had bought in Paris. Despite his activity as a dealer he published a number of prints in quick succession, including two after Teniers from the collection of the prince of Wales, which earned him an appointment as engraver to the prince. At about this time he married his wife, Dorothy; their first child, Elizabeth, was born in January 1752. In that year the family moved from the Golden Head in West Street to more spacious accommodation in Chandos Street, off lower St Martin's Lane, where a further fifteen children were born between 1752 and 1771. 
Major was energetic in providing for his growing family. The patronage of the duke of Cumberland made it possible in 1753 to import Andre Laurent's plates that Major had bought in Paris. Major completed and in 1753 published Laurent's unfinished 'Death of the Stag', after Wouverman. He engraved the views for two important architectural collections, the 'Ruins of Palmyra' (1753) and the 'Ruins of Baalbec' (1757). He issued a first broadsheet catalogue of his works in 1754, and in 1756 engraved a title-page for collections of his prints, claiming with some justification that they were 'A collection of prints engraved from the finest paintings of the greatest masters chosen out of the most celebrated collections in England and France'. By then he was able to add to his other qualifications the title of engraver to the king, having been appointed chief seal engraver to the king with an annual income of $50. He was ejected in 1760 but reinstated in 1768 after appealing on behalf of his many children, then reduced by infant mortality to eight. From 1756 until 1797 he was also engraver to the stamp office. His second printed catalogue of his publications listed sixty-four plates, supplemented in that year by 'The Ruins of Paestum', of which he was probably author as well as engraver and publisher. The text was translated into French in 1769 and into German in 1781. 
Major joined the Society for the Encouragement of Arts, Manufactures, and Commerce in 1760, but showed prints with them only once, in 1762. He had nothing to do with the Society of Artists but was induced to become an original associate engraver of the Royal Academy in 1770. His most eminent colleagues had declined this honour as a slight to the profession (since they were denied full membership), and according to Robert Strange, Major was blackmailed with the loss of his pension. He exhibited there only once, in 1776, when he showed what may have been his last print, the 'Good Shepherd', after Murillo. 
He did not altogether relinquish his craft, however. When in 1784 thieves stole the great seal from the house of Edward Thurlow, the lord chancellor, Major provided within twenty hours a perfect substitute, and afterwards one executed in silver, which was used until the union with Ireland. Specializing in the interpretation of Flemish paintings, Major was the first great English landscape engraver. He was overshadowed by younger rivals after the 1760s, but by then he had already compiled the basis of a comfortable fortune. He died at his house, 5 Tavistock Row, Westminster, on 30 December 1799 and was buried on 6 January 1800 at St Giles's, Camberwell, Surrey. He left his wife an estate valued at nearly $5000, which included properties in Buckinghamshire. 


@@@@@


doc= 17848


Makemie, Francis (c.1658-1708), Presbyterian minister, was born near Ramelton, co. Donegal, Ireland. His parents, of Scottish ancestry, are unknown; he had at least two brothers and one sister. Described as blue-eyed and brown-haired, with a fair complexion, he was educated by a local schoolmaster and in February 1676 enrolled in the University of Glasgow. He appeared before Ulster's Presbytery of Laggan on 28 January 1680, was licensed to preach in late 1681 or early 1682, and was ordained in 1682. Restrictions on Presbyterians in Ulster, and an appeal from Maryland's council to his presbytery for ministers, attracted him to the Chesapeake region. 
Makemie itinerated along the coasts of Maryland, Virginia, and North Carolina and in Barbados. For a time he ministered in Virginia and by 1687 had a residence there in Accomack county where he began to acquire land and engage in trade. About 1689 he travelled to London, largely to recruit additional ministerial manpower. In Virginia, in 1692, he was visited by George Keith, a Quaker apologist eager to dispute a catechism for children that Makemie had published (no copy of which is known to have survived). Makemie published a verbose theological riposte, 'An Answer to George Keith's Libel' (1694). In 1692 he visited Pennsylvania and preached one of the first Presbyterian sermons heard in Philadelphia. By this time he had established trading interests in Barbados and divided his time between the island and Virginia. As early as 1690 he had received from the governor of Barbados a dissenter's licence to preach and by 1693 or 1694 was living there. From Barbados he wrote 'Truths in a True Light' (1699), an attempt to build ecumenical bridges to Anglicans on the island and in the Chesapeake. This pamphlet called for protestants to sink their differences in the face of Roman Catholic activity. 
Makemie was probably financed during these years by William Anderson, a wealthy Virginia merchant and Accomack county landowner, and some time between 1687 and 1698 he married Anderson's daughter Naomi, about ten years his junior. They had two children, Elizabeth and Anne. Upon Anderson's death in 1698 Makemie and his wife inherited the bulk of his wealth and returned to Virginia from Barbados. The following year Makemie was granted a dissenter's licence on the basis of the one received in Barbados, and registered his home for preaching. 
Makemie proved adept at managing both plantation and commercial affairs and added to his inherited wealth by purchase and trade; over the next eight years Virginia records regarding his activities almost exclusively reflected such interests. By 1704 he had become the second largest landholder in Accomack county. In that year he visited England, where the Presbyterian Fund of London promised financial support for two further ministers. Makemie was reacting against the increasing Anglican activity in the American colonies nurtured by the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel. He was also deeply concerned about the lack of civic growth in Virginia and Maryland. Wishing to warn fellow colonists of the pitfalls of scattered settlements, while in London he published 'A plain and friendly perswasive to the inhabitants of Virginia and Maryland, for promoting towns and cohabitation' (1705). By uniting in important towns the Chesapeake inhabitants could encourage economic and cultural development, thereby causing self-interest to 'truckle to the Common Good' (Schlenther, 'Life', 139). 
Upon his 1705 return to the Chesapeake with two ministerial recruits Makemie experienced the new Anglican aggressiveness, initiated by the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel, first-hand. He quickly moved to organize the first American presbytery, which met in Philadelphia in the spring of 1706, comprising the seven Presbyterian ministers then labouring in Virginia, Maryland, Delaware, and Pennsylvania. Its formation marked the formal foundation of the Presbyterian Church in America, and Makemie was elected its first moderator. Early in 1707 he and another minister visited New York to attempt to broaden the presbytery's scope. There they were confronted by the royal governor, Edward Hyde, Lord Cornbury, who had been actively undermining the rights of the colony's non-Anglicans. Makemie preached in a private home, for which Cornbury ordered his arrest. If various contemporary reports of Cornbury's regular practice of parading in women's clothes were true, Makemie's distaste for the governor was probably flavoured by considerations more than ecclesiastical. 
In June Makemie appeared in court. Ever relishing the taste of debate, he participated extensively in his own defence, at first basing it on his two licences to preach -- thereby claiming protection under parliament's 1689 'Act of Toleration'. However, he shifted his stance to denying the need for toleration in colonies where the Church of England had not been legally established. Such was the case, he claimed, in New York. The union of the English and Scottish parliaments just a month before the trial facilitated this alteration in his argument: Presbyterians, he said, 'have now since the Union, a National Establishment in Great Britain, as nighly related and annexed unto the Crown of England, as the Church of England themselves' (Schlenther, 'Life', 225). The presiding judge noted that this was the first such trial in the American colonies, and the jury found Makemie innocent. However, the court affixed upon him the trial's entire costs, which so roused popular opinion that the following year the colony's assembly made such a procedure illegal. A beleaguered Cornbury called Makemie a 'Jack of all Trades he is a Preacher, a Doctor of Physick, a Merchant, an Attorney... and, which is worse of all, a Disturber of Governments' (Schlenther, 'Life', 259). 
In Boston following his trial, Makemie arranged for the publication of what is probably the earliest extant American Presbyterian sermon, 'A Good Conversation' (1707) -- the preaching of which had led to his imprisonment -- and of his anonymous 'A Narrative of a New and Unusual American Imprisonment of Two Presbyterian Ministers' (1707). This last and most important of his publications brought to public view the trial that served as a milestone in religious toleration in the American colonies. Cotton Mather wrote: 'That brave man, Mr. Makemie, has after a famous Trial at N. York... triumphed over the 'Act of Uniformity', and the other Poenal Lawes for the Ch. of England. Without permitting the Matter to come so far as to Pleading the 'Act of Toleration', he has compelled an Acknowledgement that those Lawes aforesd... have nothing to do with the Plantations. (Schlenther, 'Life', 17)' Makemie died at some time between 10 June and 4 August 1708, probably at his Accomack home, and it is likely that he was buried on the bank of Holden's Creek. His estate comprised over 5000 acres of land, thirty-three slaves, and a library of 1000 volumes. Called the father of American Presbyterianism, he was its chief early exponent, its leading literary apologist, the main defender of its liberties, the foremost overseer of its congregations, and the moving force in its formal organization. Perhaps of necessity a polemical man, his theology was strictly orthodox, in the style of seventeenth-century Calvinism. 


@@@@@


doc= 17849


Makin, Bathsua (b. 1600, d. in or after 1675), scholar and teacher, was the elder of two daughters of Henry Reginald (died 1635), a schoolmaster, and his wife, whose name is unknown; her younger sister Ithamaria was baptized at St Dunstan and All Saints, Stepney, in 1601. In 1752, George Ballard apologized for having 'been able to learn very little' about 'Mrs. Makin (who corresponded in the learned languages with Mrs. Anna Maria a Schurman)', not realizing that he had misidentified her as John Pell's sister, rather than sister-in-law. That error confused accounts of her life until the 1960s when Vivian Salmon explained the mistake. 
Bathsua Reginald's early years were spent at her father's school in St Mary Axe Street, London. Here she soon acquired a reputation for learning, having, according to Sir Simonds D'Ewes, a fellow pupil, 'exact knowledge in the Greek, Latin, and French tongues, with some insight also into the Hebrew and Syriack'. Indeed, claimed D'Ewes, 'much more learning she had doubtless than her father, who was a mere pretender to it; and by the fame of her abilities, which she had acquired from others, he got many scholars, which else would neither have repaired to him, nor have long staid with him. ('Autobiography', 63)' Bathsua was still only sixteen years old when father and daughter collaborated on two publications. In the first, 'Ad Annam... reginam' (1616?), Bathsua demonstrated an original shorthand system, radiography, used in recording sermons, in illustrative plates; the surviving sheet from this pamphlet shows her name and the Lord's prayer written out in radiography. A second and far more ambitious project was Henry Reginald's publication of 'Musa virginea' (1616), a collection of Bathsua's poems and epigraphs praising King James and members of his family in six languages (Latin, Greek, Hebrew, Spanish, French, and German). This evidently elicited an ungenerous joke: 'When a learned maid was presented to King James for an English rarity, because she could speake and rite pure Latine, Greeke, and Hebrew, the King ask'd 'But can she spin?'' (J. Collett, 'Commonplace book', 'Anecdotes and Traditions', ed. W. Thoms, 1839, 129). 
While the king showed little regard for the girl's learning, his physician George Eglisham published in 1619 'Duellum poeticum', a Latin poem that praised 'Bathsua Reginalda' as 'eruditiones eximiae virgini' ('an exceptionally learned maiden'). Eglisham may have initiated Bathsua's interest in medicine. Certainly she did practise healing: Samuel Hartlib noted in his 'Ephemerides' (1650) that the London physician Aaron Gourdain had told him that she 'cured Mr Holsworth [probably Richard Holdsworth, one of Charles I's chaplains] of the Palpitation of the heart' (Hartlib, 27/1/48B). According to Hartlib's notes, she was 'very well acquainted' with Carew Ralegh, son of Sir Walter, and had obtained from his mother 'all Sir W. Ralegh's receipts' -- knowledge that Bathsua would have used in her work as a healer. 
On 5 March 1622 Bathsua married Richard Makin (1599-1659), who was in the king's service, at St Andrew Undershaft, London. One of the guests was D'Ewes, who described being at 'my ould schoolemasters daughters wedding, being the greatest scholler, I thinke, of a woman in England... [T]here was much companye, whence arose that which is the life of a scholler, good discourse' ('Diary', 68-9). During the late 1620s and the 1630s, Makin cared for her rapidly growing family. She gave birth to eight children: Anna (1623, died 1627), Richard (1626, died in infancy), Anna (1628), Bathsua (1629), Mary (1629), Richard (1630), John (1633), and Henry (1642). Before the birth of her last child, however, she returned to the teaching profession that she had learned from her father. 
In the autumn of 1640 the continental scholar Anna Maria van Schurman wrote two letters in Greek to Makin, and a letter in English to D'Ewes that mentions 'the most Learned Matron, Madam Bathsua Mekins' (Schurman, 126-7) as their mutual friend. In her letters to Makin, van Schurman discusses Makin's appointment as tutor to Charles I's daughter the Princess Elizabeth, whom she instructed in Greek, Latin, Hebrew, French, Italian, Spanish, and mathematics. It is not clear when her duties as royal tutor ended, although it must have been after 1644 when the princess was nine years old, since Makin subsequently wrote about the Princess Elizabeth's skills at that age. Makin would later ask the council of state 'for payment of the arrears of 40 $ a year granted her for life, for her attendance on the late King's children', but her petition was dismissed on 16 August 1655 ('CSP dom.'). 
As an educator Makin was a firm advocate of the methods espoused by Johan Amos Comenius, whom she probably met in 1641 or 1642, when John Pell (who had married her sister Ithamaria in 1632), Samuel Hartlib, and other English intellectuals brought him to London. In addition to the Princess Elizabeth, she also taught Lucy Davies, later Lucy Hastings, countess of Huntingdon, and her children, including Lady Elizabeth Hastings (later Lady Elizabeth Langham) and (for instance, in 1662) Theophilus Hastings, seventh earl of Huntingdon, and later wrote elegies on Lady Elizabeth, who died in 1664, and on Lord Henry Hastings, who died in 1649. Her other pupils may have included the daughters of Nicholas Love, and the Hebraist Elizabeth Fisher (later Elizabeth Bland). 
Beyond her tutorial activities, little is known about Bathsua Makin's life during the 1650s and 1660s. In 1652 she wrote a friendly letter to John Pell asking for information about a comet. Two years later he advised her about renting a house while Richard Makin was away. By 1655, however, John Pell complained that his wife Ithamaria was spending too much time with her sister Bathsua, 'a woman of great acquaintance and no small impatience. She will not sticke to raile at me and you, where ever she comes' (BL, Add. MS 4280.238). None the less, Pell's letters a year later make it clear that Ithamaria and Bathsua continued to see one another. In 1659 Richard Makin was buried in St Andrew's, Holborn, while Ithamaria Pell died two years later. 
By the 1670s Makin had embarked on two new projects. She joined Mark Lewis, author of a number of textbooks, who ran a private school for boys in Tottenham. With his help, she opened 'a school for gentlewomen at Tottenham, High Cross, within four miles of London in the road to Ware', described in 'An Essay to Revive the Antient Education of Gentlewomen' (1673). Designed to recruit students and set down her philosophy of education, this essay comprises a lively and amusing defence of women, a catalogue of learned women throughout history, an acerbic attack on the traditional humanist text Lily's 'Grammar', and an enthusiastic endorsement of texts by Comenius. It is likely to have influenced Mary Astell and is certainly the first essay by an Englishwoman defending women and their abilities in the classroom. 
The last extant letter that Makin wrote was to the physician Baldwin Hamey in November 1675, thanking him for some unspecified favour. The letter shows that her intellect was unimpaired, for she expresses herself in English, Latin, Greek, and a bit of Hebrew. At this date she was living in Long Acre, London; there is no known record of her subsequent life, death, or burial. 


@@@@@


doc= 17850


Mackarell, Matthew (d. 1537), abbot of Barlings, was probably of Scottish descent, and born to parents in the service of the first duke of Norfolk. He had entered the Premonstratensian abbey of Cockersand in Lancashire as a novice by 1497, and was professed as a canon, ordained priest, and appointed sacristan there by 1500. He clearly asked for a licence to study at Cambridge, to which he went early in the sixteenth century, and had obtained his BTh degree by 1510. From Cambridge he probably proceeded to Freiburg im Breisgau, where he gained his doctorate in theology before returning to England about 1516. By 1519 he was abbot of Alnwick, Northumberland, and by 1529 of Barlings, Lincolnshire. By 1524, he was a bishop-suffragan first in the diocese of York, then of Lincoln, with the title of bishop of Chalcedon. 
Mackarrell's was not the quiet life that his bare biographical details suggest. He was the chosen preacher (perhaps because of a family affiliation) at the funeral of the second duke of Norfolk in May 1524, and such was his sermon on death that the congregation was said to have fled the church, leaving it to the preacher and the corpse. As abbot of Barlings he played a somewhat ambiguous role in the Lincolnshire rebellion of 1536, itself the precursor to the Pilgrimage of Grace. He would later claim that the common people intimidated him, but in view of his previous record that is unlikely, and clearly he regarded the dissolution of the lesser monasteries in 1536 as daylight robbery. Accordingly, he seems to have taken precautions to dispose of some of the wealth of his house, sensing that it would not be too long before the greater monasteries went the way of the lesser. There is much evidence to suggest that he provided the rebels with food and hospitality. He was accused by Edward Dymock and other gentlemen that on 'dyvers tymes' he had urged the rebels 'to goo forwarde' (TNA: PRO, E 36/118, p. 1). It seems unlikely that he was uninvolved, but some of the accusations against him by interested parties, notably that he had plundered the house of John Freeman, are improbable. The anticlericalism of the courts he faced at Lincoln and London, and the suggestion of Scottish ancestry possibly conveyed by his name and early residence near the border, may have made Mackerell a man of few friends. In any event, he was executed as a traitor at Tyburn on 29 March 1537 and buried the same day at Pardon churchyard, London. Judged by the letter of the law he appears to have been guilty; had he not been a canon, probably a Scot, and a theologian, he might have fared better. 


@@@@@


doc= 17851


Malachy (fl. 1279), Franciscan friar, is first mentioned as a member of the convent of the order of Friars Minor in Limerick in 1279 and as the candidate for the archbishopric of Tuam whom Archbishop Nicholas Mac Maol Tosa of Armagh recommended to Edward I as young, provident, and discreet. Following a disputed election, in which the dean and a minority of the canons favoured Malachy, the case went before the papal court. Malachy was personally present in Rome during part of the hearing but failed to secure papal provision. A 'Libellus septem peccatorum venen[orum] eorumque remedia describens, qui dicitur venenum Malachiae' (a treatise on the seven deadly sins and on the pastoral theology of penance), or 'Tractatus de veneno', was printed under his name, and with the title 'doctor theologiae', in Paris in 1518. At least thirty-six manuscripts of the work survive, in fifteen of which the tract is anonymous, whereas eighteen attribute it to Robert Grosseteste, and only three name Malachy as author. However, references to St Francis and especially to Irish affairs, including the papal denunciation of the six wives of the last high-king of Ireland as recorded in the annals of Loch Ce, indicate the authorship of an Irish Franciscan, as does the pastoral intention of the writer: 'for the instruction of simple men who have to teach people' ('Tractatus de veneno', fol. 25'v'). It is further notable for the denunciation of the government in Ireland during the author's own lifetime. 
There is no contemporary evidence for Luke Wadding's statement that Malachy graduated as a bachelor of theology in Oxford 'c'.1310, but the range of sources cited in 'De veneno' is commensurate with an academic training in philosophy and theology, and the predominantly English manuscript circulation of the work under the name of Grosseteste further indicates an Oxford connection. 


@@@@@


doc= 17852


Mac Aedh, Malachy (d. 1348), archbishop of Tuam, was a canon of Elphin and in 1307 was elected bishop of that see by one party of the canons. The remaining canons chose Cathal O Conchobhair, abbot of Loch Ce, who obtained possession of the bishopric and was consecrated by the archbishop of Armagh. Malachy was supported by the metropolitan, William Bermingham, archbishop of Tuam; he therefore went to Rome, where, after three years, the pope decided in his favour, annulling the election of Cathal. On 22 June 1310 Malachy received consecration from Nicholas, bishop of Ostia and Velletri, and the papal decision was confirmed by the king, Edward II, on 7 December 1310. In 1312 Malachy was elected archbishop of Tuam; the king issued a commendatory letter to the pope on 24 August and on 19 December the archbishop received consecration. The temporalities were restored on 1 April 1313. As archbishop, Malachy pursued his predecessors' aim of assimilating the diocese of Annaghdown within the diocese of Tuam. In 1325 Gilbert, bishop of Annaghdown, complained that he had been deprived of his see by Malachy. On 31 July 1327 Pope John XXII, on the petition of the archbishop, sanctioned the union of the three dioceses of Annaghdown, Killala, and Achonry with Tuam. Edward III opposed the proposal claiming that the rule of an Irish bishop was being substituted for that of an English one, but on a vacancy to Annaghdown in 1330 the bull took effect so far as that see was concerned. Malachy died in Tuam on 10 August 1348, and was buried in Tuam Cathedral. According to Thomas Tanner, he wrote, 'inter alia', an Irish list of the kings of Ireland from Niall Noigiallach to Ruaidri o Conchobair. 


@@@@@


doc= 17853


Malachy (1094/5-1148), archbishop of Armagh, was born into an established ecclesiastical family in either 1094 or 1095, the son of Mugron (died 1102), 'fer leiginn' (lector) of Armagh. 
Malachy (as he is usually known, rather than by his Irish name, Mael Maedoc Ua Morgair) trained as a cleric at Armagh, where he came under the influence of an ascetic teacher, Imar Ua hAedachain, who was attached to the 'recles', the church of the monastic community of St Peter and St Paul, Armagh, and who died in Rome in 1134. Notwithstanding the canonical requirements for ordination, he was ordained deacon before the age of twenty-five and priest before the age of thirty by Cellach (Celsus), archbishop of Armagh. According to Malachy's biographer, Bernard of Clairvaux, Cellach made him his 'vices', or deputy, in which role he showed himself zealous in the cause of reform, instituting the customs of the holy Roman church, especially canonical hours, and the sacraments of confession, confirmation, and marriage at Armagh. So as to ensure that what he taught conformed with the practice of the universal church, Malachy went to Lismore to place himself under the ecclesiastical discipline of Mael Isu (Malchus) Ua hAinmire, bishop of Waterford, who had been trained as a monk at Winchester. 
In 1123 Oengus Ua Gormain, 'comarba Comgaill' (that is, head of the church of Bangor) and bishop of Ulaid, died at Lismore. This appears to have occasioned Malachy's recall by those who had sent him there; at the command of Imar, he took ten brethren with him to inaugurate his independent career as a church reformer by reviving conventual life at the secularized monastic site of Bangor, although he faced opposition from locally entrenched interests. Indeed, he failed to gain possession of the landed estates, contenting himself with the monastic site alone, where he erected a new wooden church, subsequently to be rebuilt in stone, despite local opponents voicing the argument 'Scoti sumus, non Galli' -- 'We are Irishmen, not French' ('Sancti Bernardi opera', 3.365). Bernard of Clairvaux indicates that Malachy had a familial connection with Bangor via his 'avunculus', described as a rich and powerful man, who was prepared to cede Bangor to him. It is not certain whether 'avunculus' should be interpreted in the late Latin sense of maternal rather than paternal uncle. Bernard's allusions to events at Bangor are in fact so generalized that it is difficult to reconstruct the circumstances of Malachy's accession. In 1131 the death was recorded of Muirchertach Ua hInnrechtaig, head of the church of Bangor. It is not possible to prove that Muirchertach was related to Malachy; it is equally possible that Malachy was related to Oengus Ua Gormain. Malachy appears to have taken possession of no more than the old conventual site, and Muirchertach may have remained as lay controller of the Bangor estates until his death. 
In addition to his role as head of a reformed monastic community at Bangor, in 1124 Malachy was consecrated by Cellach as bishop for the see of Connor, though he may have remained resident at Bangor. In 1127, according to Bernard of Clairvaux, an attack by an unnamed northern king forced him into exile. The attack may be related to the killings in that year of Aed (Niall) Mac Duinnsleibe and Eochaid Ua Mathgamna, kings of Ulaid, and the subsequent raiding in Ulaid by a son of Mac Lochlainn, king of Cenel nEogain. Malachy sought refuge in Munster, and probably once again at Lismore, where he encountered Cormac Mac Carthaig, temporarily exiled king of Munster, whom he persuaded to return to the kingship, and with whom he was to collaborate in promoting church reform. Cormac's beneficence enabled Malachy to construct within his kingdom the monastery of 'Ibracense' (unidentified). 
In 1129 Archbishop Cellach, while staying at Ardpatrick, Limerick, and realizing that he was close to death, made what was effectively a testament ('quasi testamentum') designating Malachy as his successor, enjoining especially on the kings of Munster that his wish be respected. Cellach was buried at Lismore on 4 April 1129; and the very next day Muirchertach Mac Domnaill, like Cellach a member of the hereditary secularized ecclesiastical dynasty of Ui Sinaig which had maintained an almost two-hundred-year monopoly of ecclesiastical offices at Armagh, was installed in the latter city. Three years after Cellach's death, in 1132, on the urgings of Mael Isu, bishop of Waterford, and Gilbert, bishop of Limerick and native papal legate, who had convened the bishops and rulers of the land, Malachy was consecrated for Armagh on the understanding, according to Bernard of Clairvaux, that he would be allowed to resign the see when the Ui Sinaig monopoly had been broken. In 1133 a circuit of Cenel nEogain and collection of tribute by Muirchertach as head of the church of Armagh is recorded, indicating whence Muirchertach derived his main support. 
For two years Malachy exercised his episcopal functions without gaining entry to Armagh city, and it was not until 1134, following Muirchertach's death, that he attempted to take possession of the insignia and temporalities of the church of Armagh, which, as Bernard of Clairvaux remarked, was vital to securing recognition as archbishop of Armagh from a 'foolish and unwise people' ('Sancti Bernardi opera', 3.334). His installation at Armagh was opposed by the Cenel nEogain, but he had the support of Donnchad Ua Cerbaill, king of Airgialla. Another Ui Sinaig candidate, Maile Niall mac Aeda meic Isu (died 1139), a brother of Cellach, immediately replaced Muirchertach, attempted to oppose Malachy's installation, and, according to the annals of the four masters, succeeded in temporarily displacing him in 1135. A visitation of Munster by Malachy is recorded in 1134, and he may have been present at the consecration in that year of the Romanesque chapel endowed by Cormac Mac Carthaig on the Rock of Cashel. On 7 July 1135, following the death of Flann Ua Sinaig, its hereditary keeper, Malachy was obliged to pay to gain possession of the 'Bachall Isu', believed to be the crozier of St Patrick, the principal relic of the church of Armagh. 
In 1136, having asserted the case for canonical consecration and broken the Ui Sinaig monopoly at Armagh, Malachy resigned that see to Gilla Meic Liac (Gelasius), abbot of Derry since 1121, in the interests of conciliation and the expectation that the latter would enjoy the protection of Muirchertach Mac Lochlainn, newly succeeded to the kingship of Cenel nEogain, who had close associations with Derry. Having in the meantime consecrated a bishop of Connor, Malachy now assumed the title bishop of Down, though it is possible that he never actually resided at Down and chose instead to locate himself at Bangor. In early 1139 he undertook a mission to Pope Innocent II to request formal papal approval and palls for the archbishoprics of Armagh and Cashel, travelling via Scotland and the court of King David, which at this time, when much of northern England had recently come under Scottish rule, was as likely to be at Carlisle as at Roxburgh or Edinburgh. On the way he visited York, where Waldef, the saintly prior of Kirkham, came to meet him, and later Clairvaux, where he formed a warm friendship with his future biographer, Abbot Bernard. He went on to Rome where Pope Innocent II did not accede to his request, but instructed Malachy (whom he commissioned as a native papal legate for Ireland) to return to Ireland and summon a general church council, so that a more formal and demonstrably unanimous request for palls could be made. On his homeward journey, Malachy again visited Clairvaux and left four of his associates to be trained as monks in the Cistercian observance; these were subsequently augmented by others sent from Ireland on his return. He travelled back via northern England and Scotland, and again stopped at the court of King David, who was himself a noted patron of monasticism and of ecclesiastical reform. The first Cistercian monastery in Ireland was to be founded at Mellifont, Louth, in 1142. 
In 1139 Malachy had also visited the monastery of Arrouaise near Arras and had its rule and liturgical practices copied, as was recorded in 1179 by its abbot, Gautier. Malachy introduced the austere Arrouaisian observances into Ireland, persuading clergy in cathedral churches in particular to adopt them, the first Arrouasian community in Ireland being established at the cathedral church and priory of St Mary's Abbey, Louth, in 1142. Mellifont and Louth Abbey were situated in the kingdom of Airgialla, the protection and patronage of whose king, Donnchad Ua Cerbaill, enabled Malachy to use Airgialla as a trial ground for his reform strategies. Malachy's brother, Gilla Crist (Christianus), was bishop of Airgialla (or Clogher) between 1135 and 1138; and Malachy also benefited from a close working relationship with Gilla Crist's successor, Aed (Edanus) Ua Caellaide, whom he chose and consecrated. Bernard of Clairvaux depicts Malachy as travelling extensively in the period 1139-48 in the north of Ireland, in Munster, and in Leinster, preaching reform practices. In Cork he resolved a disputed episcopal election by installing an outsider; in Lismore he confuted a scholar who denied the doctrine of the real presence in the eucharist. His position as papal legate gave him the authority to intervene in such cases, though his legateship may have lapsed temporarily following the death of Innocent II in 1143. In 1148 he consecrated the church of the Augustinian community at Knock, near Louth, which had been built under the auspices of Aed Ua Caellaide and Donnchad Ua Cerbaill. 
In the same year, availing himself of the circumstance that Pope Eugenius III, a former Cistercian monk of Clairvaux, was visiting France, Malachy undertook a second journey to the continent, for the purpose of making a formal request for palls, having first convened a synod on the island of Inis Padraig, Dublin. He travelled via Scotland and the court of King David, making arrangements on the way for the foundation of a Cistercian house at what may have been Soulseat in Wigtownshire, and avoided travelling through England because King Stephen denied him passage, possibly because of his status as a papal legate. However, he made a detour to visit the canons of Guisborough, in Yorkshire, near the then Anglo-Scottish border. He arrived at Clairvaux about 13 or 14 October, where he met the English monastic reformer Gilbert of Sempringham, to whom he gave a staff. He fell ill and died, in his fifty-fourth year, in the presence of Abbot Bernard on the night of 1-2 November 1148 and was buried at Clairvaux. 
Malachy's aspiration for palls and formal papal approval of the Irish diocesan constitution was to be realized at the Synod of Kells in 1152, presided over by the papal legate, Cardinal Giovanni Paparo. The monks of Clairvaux initiated proceedings for his canonization, which Pope Clement III confirmed on 6 July 1190. His feast day subsequently was celebrated on 3 November, so as to avoid All Souls' day (2 November). Malachy shares with Lorcan Ua Tuathail (Laurence O'Toole), archbishop of Dublin, who also died on the continent, the distinction of having been the only Irish saints to be formally canonized before Oliver Plunket in 1975. The most important sources for Malachy's career are Bernard of Clairvaux's biography, written in 1149, two commemorative sermons preached on the day of his death and on the first anniversary of his death, and a hymn and epitaph, as well as three letters written by Bernard to him during his lifetime. Bernard stated that he wrote his life at the request of Abbot Congan, 'my reverend brother and sweet friend' ('Sancti Bernardi opera', 3.309), undoubtedly one of the Irish trained at Clairvaux, and that a record of the deeds of Malachy had been provided from Ireland. Malachy (along with his brother, Bishop Gilla Crist) is also mentioned in the 'Visio Tnugdali', written by Marcus, monk of the 'Schottenkloster' (Irish monastery) of Regensburg, in 1149, as among the denizens of heaven whom Tnugdal encountered in his vision in the company of St Patrick. He was still remembered late in the following century. About 1272 Robert (V) de Brus, lord of Annandale in south-west Scotland, endowed Clairvaux with land in either Annandale or Cumberland, to pay for lights at Malachy's tomb. His object was to lift the curse which the saint had reputedly laid on a distant ancestor, for hanging a robber after promising Malachy that he would spare him. 
Malachy's career has to be set in the context of the church reform movement which sought to bring the Irish church more into conformity with the organizational structures of the contemporary European church. He played a crucial role in securing a canonically consecrated succession at Armagh, in attaining papal recognition for the diocesan constitution of the Irish church as it was first outlined at the Synod of Raith Bressail in 1111 and later refined at Kells in 1152, and in introducing the Cistercian and Augustinian rules, the latter especially, though not exclusively, according to the Arrouaisian observance. Opposition to his reform policies which he experienced during his lifetime outlived him: Augustinian canons whom he had installed at Saul, Down, were attacked and ejected by local unreformed clerics in 1170. 


@@@@@


doc= 17854


Malan, Solomon Caesar (1812-1894), orientalist and biblical scholar, was born on 22 April 1812 in the rue Verdaine, Geneva, the eldest of the twelve children of Cesar Henri Abraham Malan (1787-1864), a Reformed minister of Huguenot descent, and his wife, Salome Georgette Jeanne, daughter of Salomon Schonberger, a merchant established in Geneva. His early education was given by his father, under whom he not only gained a conversational knowledge of German, Spanish, Italian, and Latin, but also began English, Hebrew, Arabic, and Sanskrit. He was also instructed in natural science, drawing, and various handicrafts. 
In 1830 Malan met an Englishwoman, Mary Marsh, only child of John Mortlock, who was visiting Geneva, and the two fell in love. Mortlock initially opposed the match, but eventually consented on condition that Malan passed through an English university. Malan came to Britain in 1831 as tutor to the family of the marquess of Tweeddale (which was when he changed his name to its later form), and in 1833 he matriculated at St Edmund Hall, Oxford. The marriage took place on 1 April 1834. In the same year he gained the Boden Sanskrit scholarship, and in 1837 he won the Pusey and Ellerton Hebrew scholarship, and second-class honours in 'literae humaniores', despite becoming blind in the left eye. After graduating, Malan accepted the post of senior classical professor at Bishop's College, Calcutta, which he reached in May 1838. He took Anglican deacon's orders in the same year. In 1839 he became secretary to the Asiatic Society of Bengal, and gained the friendship of the remarkable scholar Csoma Korosi, from whom he learned Tibetan. Besides learning several Indian vernaculars, he also advanced in Chinese. Leaving India on account of failing health in January 1840, he travelled through the Sudan and Egypt to recuperate, until he learned that his wife, who had returned to England, had died of consumption on 5 April. He returned to England in September to make provision for their three sons, but then resumed his convalescent journeys via Scandinavia and Germany to the Middle East. 
After returning to England late in 1842, Malan accepted the curacy of Alverstoke, near Gosport. In 1843 he proceeded MA and moved to Balliol College; he was also ordained priest, and on 24 October that year married his second wife, Caroline Selina, second daughter of Charles Milman Mount, a prebendary of Wells. They had three sons and two daughters; his wife survived him. After a year (1844-5) as perpetual curate of Crowcombe, Somerset, Malan accepted the living of Broadwindsor, Dorset, in September 1845. On 4 November 1845 he was naturalized as a British subject by letters patent. While at Broadwindsor, he served as rural dean and diocesan inspector of schools (1846-53). He held the prebend of Ruscombe-Southbury at Salisbury from 1870 to 1875. He was a frequent traveller, most notably to the Middle East again (1849-50), where he visited the excavation of Nineveh, and to Georgia and the Caucasus (1872). 
Malan was regarded as the greatest British orientalist of his day; he was conversant with about eighty languages and published over fifty books. His main concern, however, was not the languages as such but the support of Christianity, for which he was made a DD by Edinburgh University (1880). Most of his orientalist works are accounts of eastern churches or translations of their devotional literatures, notably 'History of the Georgian Church' (1866), 'The Life and Times of St Gregory the Illuminator' (1868), and 'Original Documents of the Coptic Church' (5 vols., 1872-5). Some deal with problems of the mission field, particularly 'Who is God in China?' (1855), or with other topical controversies. In 1881 Malan joined in the attack made by John William Burgon on the Revised Version of the 'New Testament', contributing to his articles, and himself publishing a new version of 'Matthew' 1-4, with an appendix giving the Lord's prayer in seventy-one languages. His 'magnum opus' was 'Notes on the Proverbs' (3 vols., 1889-93), illustrating the Biblical text with nearly 16,000 passages from some forty eastern languages. 
Besides his academic work, and his pastoral duties, which he performed conscientiously, Malan managed to pursue many other interests. He was a keen natural historian, and his collection of birds' eggs, presented to Exeter Museum, was judged one of the finest in the country. He was admired for his skill at calligraphy and drawing, both of which are illustrated in the biography by his son. He drew the portrait of E. B. Pusey in 'Tract 90' (1841), and the sketches of the excavation of Nineveh in 1850 which illustrate Sir Austen Henry Layard's 'Nineveh and Babylon' (1853). His pictures of Palestine were exhibited at Burlington House in 1855 and the Crystal Palace in 1856. His other skills included bookbinding, carpentry, and repairing musical instruments. 
Malan's health forced him to retire in May 1855. Before leaving Broadwindsor, he presented forty valuable Tibetan books and manuscripts, given him in India by Csoma Korosi, to the Hungarian Academy of Sciences. His main collection of 4017 volumes became the nucleus of the library of the Indian Institute, Oxford. He spent his retirement at Bournemouth, dying there at West Cliff Hall, Priory Road, on 25 November 1894; he was buried in Bournemouth cemetery. 
Despite the remarkable range of his talents, Malan never attained real eminence in any one field. One reason may have been that his energies were too widely dispersed, but another was his strongly conservative temperament and distrust of many developments taken for granted by later generations, including the admission of women to university and transcription of oriental languages into the Roman alphabet. This is shown most clearly in his condemnation of the Revised Version, and of the new Greek text of the 'New Testament' published by Westcott and Hort (both 1881). 


@@@@@


doc= 17855


Malard, Michael (b. 1676), religious controversialist and tutor in French, was born at Vaurenard, near Macon, France, the son of Francois Malard, a doctor of Vaurenard; his mother later married a M. Patissier de la Fayette of Beaugeu. His parents were Roman Catholics and he was prepared for the priesthood but after serving for some years as pasteur at Belleville, Beaujolais, he came to England about 1700 and was converted to the protestant religion at the French church of the Savoy, London, on 15 April 1705. Shortly after his conversion differences with the French protestants, whom he offended by becoming an episcopalian, drove him abroad. 
On his return to England, Malard earned a living by teaching but he also produced a series of bitter attacks on the French committee for the distribution of the $15,000 that, since the beginning of William III's reign, had been annually allocated to the French protestants. His first extraordinary pamphlet, 'The Case, and Humble Petition, of Michael Malard' (1717), not only accuses Claude Grostete de la Mothe of stealing Malard's certificates of ordination and references but also of inveigling him into a bigamous marriage. In 1718 Malard published further accusations of malpractice within the French committee in 'The French Plot Found out Against the English Church'. Jean Armand Dubourdieu, one of the ministers in the French church of the Savoy, responded with 'An Appeal to the English Nation' (1718), in which he accused Malard of repeated adultery and attributed the withdrawal of his allowance to his scandalous life. Malard nevertheless continued his attacks in further publications. 
Malard also wrote several manuals on accidence in French grammar, and in 'The French and Protestant Companion, or, A Journey into Europe, Asia, and Africa' (1718), which is dedicated to George I, Malard is described as French tutor to the daughters of the prince of Wales, afterwards George II. The 'Companion', a curious mixture of grammar, travel book, and anti-Catholic satire, is offered by Malard to British parents as a safely protestant means of learning the French language. It was reprinted in 1719 and 1722. It is not known when or where Malard died. 


@@@@@


doc= 17856


Malby, Sir Nicholas (c.1530-1584), soldier and president of Connacht, was probably born in the West Riding of Yorkshire. His father died when Nicholas was four years old, and the boy was evidently reared, along with his brother John, in the family of a London merchant named John Malby, probably their father's brother, who had been admitted to fellowship at the Middle Temple in 1516-17. It is not known whether Nicholas or his brother were themselves educated at Middle Temple. Nicholas Malby married Thomasine Lamb, whose father, Robert, was from Leeds and whose mother was a Castell from East Hatley in Cambridgeshire. Thomasine's maternal uncle, Thomas Castell, had studied law at the Middle Temple with the elder John Malby. They had a son, Henry, who matriculated at New College, Oxford, in June 1585, aged thirteen, and a daughter, Ursula. Henry married Elizabeth Jobson, granddaughter of Sir Francis Jobson, lieutenant of the Tower. Ursula married Anthony Brabazon, lieutenant-governor of Connacht. Thomasine Malby survived her first husband and subsequently married George Rawe. 
It is likely that Nicholas Malby's involvement in Ireland originated in the activities of his relative and guardian, John Malby, who was employed in supplying provisions for the army at Berwick, a point of departure for soldiers bound for Ireland. Nicholas Malby's presence in Ireland is first recorded in 1556, when he was among those Englishmen who were willing to take part in the proposed plantation of Queen's county. Six years later he was back in England when, on 6 August 1562, he and six others were found guilty of coining. The goldsmith involved was executed, but Malby was among those whose death sentence was commuted, probably through the intervention of Sir William Cecil. He was reprieved in September 1562 on condition that he serve under Ambrose Dudley, earl of Warwick, in France. Both Warwick and Cecil were involved in procuring his pardon. By April 1563 he was acting as Warwick's secretary. He served in the army abroad for some years, being sent to Spain in 1565 where his conduct was commended by the English minister at Madrid. 
On his return to England Malby was sent to Ireland to serve as a captain under the lord deputy, Sir Henry Sidney. Having gained extensive military experience abroad he was appointed a sergeant-major of the army in Ireland in 1567. After the death of Shane O'Neill at the hands of the MacDonalds in June 1567, Malby was stationed at Carrickfergus, co. Antrim, sharing the power of martial law with Captain William Piers and charged with keeping in check the Scots who threatened east Ulster. His successful handling of the threat posed by Sorley Boy MacDonald earned him praise from Sir Henry Sidney. In July 1569 he was sent to the assistance of Sir Peter Carew against the Butlers in Leinster. During a skirmish near Carlow he was severely injured in a fall from his horse. 
Conscious of his responsibility to provide for his wife and young family, Malby went to London in spring 1571 to pursue his personal suits. He had equipped himself with letters of recommendation from Adam Loftus who considered him 'a right worthy and valiant captain' who could not easily be spared from service in Ireland (TNA: PRO, SP 63/31, no. 42), and Sir Edward Fitton who praised his long service and discreet diligence, but judged that Malby would make a 'coarse courtier and a worse suitor' (TNA: PRO, SP 63/31, no. 13). On 22 March 1571 he obtained a grant of the office of collector of the customs of the three east Ulster ports of Strangford, Ardglass, and Dundrum. On 5 October 1571 he received a further grant of MacCartan's country, the modern barony of Kinelarty in co. Down, on condition that he planted it with civil and loyal subjects before 22 March 1579. On his way back to Ireland in February 1572 the ship he commanded captured a Spanish ship in the channel. 
On 10 April 1572 Malby received a commission to execute martial law in MacCartan's country but his involvement with the proposed plantation of the Ards, led first by Thomas Smith and subsequently by Walter Devereux, earl of Essex, was ultimately unsuccessful. Nevertheless his work in the Ards earned him the respect of the earl of Essex and of Edward Waterhouse, the latter describing him as a man of few words and an ill courtier, but of great reputation among soldiers. A plot by Brian mac Phelim O'Neill to kill Malby while at supper was foiled in November 1574. Malby was sent to London in December of that year to report to the privy council on the state of Ulster. He returned to Ireland on 5 May 1575 with special instructions for the earl of Essex, and with an order for his own admission to the Irish privy council. In the summer of 1575 he took part in Essex's expedition against Sorley Boy MacDonald. 
Recognizing that the Ards plantation was not going to succeed, Malby was again in London early in 1576 pursuing his claim to have land to the value of $100 in fee farm in Ireland in exchange for surrendering his patent to MacCartan's country. From this point onward his attention shifted to Connacht and his subsequent land acquisitions were located in counties Roscommon and Longford. He pursued his interest in establishing an English colony in Roscommon in tandem with his role as provincial governor. In July 1576 Malby was chosen to replace Sir Edward Fitton as chief commissioner and military commander of Connacht. The office was perhaps higher than what someone of Malby's background could reasonably aspire to, but the privy council judged that 'his honesty and discretion will breed better government than would title or dignity' (TNA: PRO, SP 63/56, no. 15). His appointment was welcomed by Sir Henry Sidney as 'an apt instrument to frame the rude barbarous people of the province' ('CSP Ire.', '1574-85', 99). He accompanied the lord deputy, Sir Henry Sidney, to Connacht in September 1576, and was knighted by him on 7 October. During his first winter in the province he succeeded in suppressing the rebellion of John and Ulick Burke, sons of the second earl of Clanricarde. 
By the end of 1577, Malby considered that he had concluded his military tasks and was ready to attend to the civil government of Connacht. In particular he sought to implement a plan for taxation that would fund the provincial presidency. The first scheme for a composition of Connacht, devised by Sir Henry Sidney and implemented by Malby in 1577, laid the basis for the success of the English provincial administration in Connacht by making it self-financing. Malby's competence as an administrator and negotiator was clearly demonstrated by his successful implementation of this taxation scheme which did much to ensure the survival of the provincial presidency as an institution and Malby's own continuance in office. 
Malby's military endeavours in Connacht were limited in scale. He intervened on behalf of O'Connor Sligo in a dispute with O'Donnell over Bundrowes Castle in October 1577, but was not successful. When his negotiations with Brian O'Rourke proved ineffective Malby used force against him in April 1578. In autumn 1578 he went to England, returning to Ireland in May 1579 with the title of president rather than chief commissioner of Connacht. The province of Connacht being largely peaceful, Malby was free to travel south with 600 troops to assist the lord justice, Sir William Drury, in suppressing James Fitzmaurice's uprising in Munster in the summer and autumn of 1579. After brief military expeditions to Burrishoole in co. Mayo and to O'Rourke's territory in Leitrim early in 1580, Malby was again free to play an active military role outside the province. He travelled to Dublin in summer 1580 to assist Lord Grey in suppressing the Baltinglass rising, and witnessed the defeat of the English forces at Glenmalure. O'Rourke took advantage of his absence from Connacht, and Malby, despite ill health, returned west to deal with the situation. Dissension among the Mayo Burkes threatened to escalate in February 1581 with the arrival of Scots mercenaries, but Malby had advance notice of their coming and prevented them reaching Mayo. He then negotiated a settlement between the rival contenders for the MacWilliam lordship in Mayo. Further unrest was caused in Connacht by the ongoing rivalry over succession to the Clanricarde lordship which was not resolved until after the deaths of the second earl and one of the rival contenders, John Burke, baron of Leitrim, in 1582. 
Malby was rewarded for his early successes in Connacht, receiving a twenty-one-year lease of the castle and lands of Roscommon along with extensive monastic lands in the same county, on 1 November 1577, at an annual rent of $31 5's'. 10died Following Malby's offer to build a walled town at Roscommon and at Athlone, he received a more generous grant from the queen. Athlone was reserved for the official use of the Connacht presidency, but in June 1579 Malby's lease of the lordship of Roscommon and its monastic land was changed to an outright grant of the lands to him and his male heirs. Parts of the castle at Roscommon were remodelled soon afterwards. Malby's son, Henry, was still a minor, and the grant stipulated that where the holder was a minor the chief governor of Connacht would place a guard in the castle of Roscommon at the owner's expense. In July 1579 Malby also received a grant of the annual composition rent of $200 sterling payable by the O'Ferralls in the adjoining county of Longford, and was given power of distraint. He also obtained title to some monastic land in co. Longford. These arrangements allowed him a degree of control over the O'Ferralls, as well as providing an income, but Malby concentrated on his landed interests in co. Roscommon. The lands involved were extensive. He had effectively acquired title to the second largest estate in Connacht after the earl of Clanricarde. The monastic lands in particular were ripe for colonization, and Malby's strong presence in Roscommon attracted English settlers to the area. Some of the soldiers who had previously served with him in Ulster were among those who became his tenants there. His own brother John was also involved. Having learned valuable lessons from the failed Ards colony, Malby calculated that by using monastic lands as a base, and by treating the Irish courteously, an English colony could prosper under the protection of the presidency. Many of Malby's more significant tenants also served as officials of the Connacht presidency. The colony prospered in the 1580s and even after Malby's sudden death at Athlone on 4 March 1584, the English presence in Roscommon continued to expand. His successor as president, Sir Richard Bingham, was forced to pay rent for Roscommon Castle to his son, Henry Malby, when he wished to live there in the mid-1580s. The Malby colony suffered considerable setbacks during the nine years' war, and the death of Sir Nicholas's only son, Henry, in 1602 marked the end of the direct involvement of the Malby family in Roscommon. The descendants of other Elizabethan families who had established themselves in the area under the auspices of Sir Nicholas Malby lived on in the area for many generations. 
Malby was a self-made man who rose to prominence in Ireland by virtue of his considerable personal talent as a soldier and administrator. His success aroused jealousies, however, with the influential Thomas Butler, earl of Ormond, numbered among his antagonists. His strength lay in his ability to look after the interests of his soldiers while simultaneously dealing diplomatically with the Irish. He was a shrewd politician and diplomat whose strategic decisions were intelligent and well-informed. In his dealings with O'Rourke and O'Neill he 'had intelligence of all their doings, but dissembled his knowledge', as he explained to the earl of Leicester in 1583 ('Calendar of Carew Manuscripts, 1575-88', 362-3). Malby understood the political concerns of the Irish and probably understood their language also. His obituary in the annals of the four masters recorded that: 'He was a man learned in the languages and tongues of the islands of the west of Europe, a brave and victorious man in battles fought through Ireland, Scotland, and France, in the service of his sovereign; and this was a lucrative service to him, for he received a suitable remuneration from the Queen, namely the constableship of the town of Athlone, and the governorship of the province of Connacht for seven years before his death, and a grant in perpetuity of the towns of Roscommon and Ballinasloe for himself and his heirs. (AFM, vol. 5, s.a. 1584)' There was more ambivalence in the comment of the Irish obituarists in the annals of Loch Ce who noted of him that: 'there came not to Ireland in his own time, nor often before, a better gentleman of the foreigners than he, and he placed all Connacht under bondage. And it is not possible to count or reckon all that this man destroyed throughout Ireland, and he executed many works, especially on the courts of the towns of Athlone and Roscommon. ('Annals of Loch Ce', vol. 2, s.a. 1584)' 



@@@@@


doc= 17857


Malcolm I (d. 954), king in Scotland, was the son of Donald II (d. 900) ['see under 'Constantine II], and assumed the kingship of Scotland some time between 940 and 945. The confusion of the sources (if not simply the result of multiple copying errors) may indicate that this was a period of political uncertainty in which he gradually asserted his position against the aged Constantine II (died 952), who retired (perhaps under duress) and became a monk at St Andrews. Throughout his reign Malcolm was on the offensive to both north and south. In 945 he benefited from Edmund of Wessex's devastation of the kingdom of Strathclyde, which Edmund formally acknowledged to belong to Malcolm's sphere of influence. He attacked the north of England as far as the Tees 'c'.949 (perhaps in support of the attempt of Olaf Cuaran, king of Dublin, to take York) and in the same period or maybe earlier led an army into Moray and killed Cellach, possibly its king. In 952 he formed part of an alliance of Scots, Britons (from Strathclyde), and Saxons which was defeated by a Scandinavian force, probably led by Erik Bloodaxe, former king of Norway (died 954), who took control of York at this time. Malcolm I was not untroubled by matters at home, however, and in 954 was killed by the men of the Mearns at Fetteresso (Kincardineshire). His body is said to have been taken to Iona for burial. He had two sons, Dubh (d. 966) and Kenneth II (d. 995), both of whom became king in Scotland; he was succeeded by Indulf, son of Constantine II. 


@@@@@


doc= 17858


Malcolm II (d. 1034), king of Scots, was the son of Kenneth II (d. 995); his mother was possibly a daughter of a Ui Dunlainge king of Leinster. Having challenged his cousin Kenneth III for the kingship, and killed him at the battle of Monzievaird in Strathearn (now Perthshire) in 1005, he reigned for nearly thirty years and at his death he was described by a contemporary annalist as 'the honour of all the west of Europe' (Anderson, 'Early Sources', 1.572). A fourteenth-century law tract bears the title 'Leges Malcolmi MacKenneth', but has no genuine connection with Malcolm II. 
Malcolm was known to medieval chroniclers as 'the most victorious' (Anderson, 'Early Sources', 1.573). His martial record was, however, patchy. He won a famous and decisive victory over Uhtred, earl of Northumbria, at Carham on the Tweed in 1018. As a result Earl Uhtred's brother, and successor as earl, formally recognized Malcolm's possession of all of Northumbria as far as the Tweed, which remained part of the Scottish kingdom's territories thereafter. At the beginning of his reign, however, Malcolm had invaded Northumbria and laid siege unsuccessfully to Durham in 1006. He was repulsed and suffered a crushing defeat at the hands of Earl Uhtred. There are unsubstantiated late accounts of Malcolm defeating Danes in battle, which associate his creation of a bishop's see at Mortlach in what later became Banffshire -- from where it was moved by David I to Aberdeen -- with one of these victories. An Anglo-Danish invasion which did not culminate in a famous victory for Malcolm was that of Cnut in 1031-2, after which Malcolm II was obliged to submit to Cnut, along with Macbeth, king of Moray, and another unidentified king (possibly of the Isles). By this time Malcolm may have become master of the kingdom of Strathclyde. The last recorded king of the Strathclyde royal dynasty was Owen the Bald, who fought with Malcolm at the battle of Carham and died soon afterwards in 1018. The history of Strathclyde is uncertain thereafter. It has been suggested that Duncan I was appointed king by his grandfather Malcolm II on Owen's death. This is unlikely, however, because Duncan (who does not appear in the submission to Cnut in 1031-2) was regarded by contemporaries as a young man at his death in 1040. Perhaps Malcolm seized the kingship of Strathclyde for himself while at the zenith of his power following the battle of Carham. 
Little is known of Scotland's internal affairs during Malcolm's reign. Although it has been argued that he was responsible for developing a network of thanages throughout his kingdom and even into Moray, these may have been much more ancient in origin, and in any case it is far from certain that Malcolm was in a position to dominate Moray. Findlaech mac Ruaidri (died 1020) and Mael Coluim mac Mail Brigte (died 1029), successive rulers of Moray, are both described in their obits in a (probably) contemporary source as 'king of Scotland', which may suggest that Malcolm's own position in his kingdom was under threat from the north, perhaps after the debacle of the campaign against Durham in 1006, and again in the 1020s. 
Malcolm's successful bid for the throne in 1005 may have ushered in a period of dynastic stability. At the end of his reign, however, strife within the royal kindred was certainly renewed, resulting in Malcolm II having the grandson of Boite mac Cinaeda (probably Malcolm's brother) killed in 1033. Malcolm was doubtless already an old man, and he died at Glamis on 25 November the following year. A late source claims that he was assassinated. It is also alleged that his body was taken to Iona for burial. With his death the male lineage of Kenneth I relinquished the kingship it had held continuously since 889 and had fashioned into the kingdom of 'Scotland', Alba. It is said, on the strength of the killing of the grandson of Boite, that Malcolm II in his final years was paving the way for the succession of his grandson Duncan I. It is possible, however, that in killing Boite's grandson he was simply beating off a challenge to his own position. 
It is not known whether Malcolm had any sons, but he may have had as many as three daughters. The only one whose name in known is Bethoc, who married Crinan, abbot of Dunkeld (died 1045). Their son was Duncan I, who succeeded Malcolm as king. Another daughter of Malcolm married Sigurd (II) Hlodvisson, earl of Orkney (d. 1014), whose son was Thorfinn the Mighty, earl of Orkney. The evidence for Malcolm's third daughter is late and uncertain. She is alleged to have married Findlaech mac Ruaidri king of Moray, whose son Macbeth (d. 1057) succeeded Duncan I as king of Scots in 1040. 


@@@@@


doc= 17859


Malcolm III (d. 1093), king of Scots, was the eldest son of Duncan I, king of Scots from 1034 to 1040, and his wife, who is said to have been a cousin of Siward, earl of Northumbria (died 1055). During the reign of Macbeth ('r'. 1040-57), who had killed Duncan I in order to take the throne, Malcolm was an exile at the court of Edward the Confessor, king of England, and was given a small estate in Northamptonshire. In 1054 Malcolm was present with an army led into Scotland by Siward, probably by command of King Edward, who supplied some of Siward's forces. On 27 July the earl's army defeated Macbeth, traditionally on Dunsinnan Hill in the Sidlaws, with heavy losses on both sides. The victory evidently put Malcolm in possession of Scotland south of the Tay. Three years later (on 15 August 1057) he slew Macbeth at Lumphanan, in what is now Aberdeenshire. Although Macbeth's stepson, Lulach ['see under 'Macbeth], was accepted as king by some of the Scots (he can hardly have been made king at Scone, the traditional place for royal inaugurations), Malcolm ambushed and killed him near Rhynie in Strathbogie, in March 1058, and (on 25 April, according to the fourteenth-century historian John Fordoun) succeeded to the throne. 
In spite of a peaceful visit to Edward the Confessor in 1059, the first of Malcolm's five raids into English Northumbria took place in 1061, when Holy Island was plundered. Since 1018 at the latest, Scottish Northumbria (that is, Lothian and the merse of Berwickshire) had been part of the northern kingdom. Malcolm seems to have been determined to annex Northumbria between Tweed and Tees, his ambition forming the mirror image of that of the West Saxon kings of England, who regarded the territory from Tees to Forth as part of their lordship. In contrast to the experience of his predecessor Macbeth, Malcolm's relations with the Scandinavian rulers of the northern isles were friendly. About 1060 he married, as his first wife, Ingibjorg (died 'c'.1067), who was either the widow or the daughter of the earl of Orkney, Thorfinn, son of Sigurd. She is more likely to have been the earl's daughter: Thorfinn's death is usually put at 1064 or 1065, and with his first wife Malcolm had three sons, Duncan II, Donald, and possibly Malcolm, for whose births there would scarcely have been time between the mid-1060s and the king's second marriage, in either 1069 or 1070. 
This second, and famous, marriage, to Margaret (d. 1093), daughter of Edward AEtheling (d. 1057) and great-niece of Edward the Confessor, was a consequence, however remote, of the Norman conquest of England. In 1066, following the Confessor's death and Harold Godwineson's assumption of the English throne, Tostig, Harold's brother and until 1065 earl of Northumbria in succession to Siward, plotted with the count of Flanders, Harald Hardrada, king of Norway, and Malcolm, king of Scots, to overthrow Harold Godwineson and, probably, to partition England between them. Although during the summer of 1066 Tostig had been sheltered by King Malcolm, and was said to have been his 'sworn brother', the Scots played no part in the sea-borne invasion of northern England carried out by Tostig and the king of Norway, which ended disastrously for both leaders on 25 September at the battle of Stamford Bridge. Malcolm seems to have viewed the confusion which followed William of Normandy's victory at Hastings as an opportunity to fulfil his ambitions in Northumbria south of Tweed. Although the chronology of events from 1068 to 1071 is hard to establish with precision, it is clear that English resistance to the Normans looked to Scotland for refuge and military support. In the summer of 1068 Edgar AEtheling, upon whom the aspirations of English nationalists were focused, fled to the Scottish court with his mother and his two sisters, Margaret and Christina. A northern English rising was thwarted by King William's occupation of York and an agreement made with Malcolm which staved off a Scottish invasion. By 1070, however, Malcolm was raiding south of Tweed with a large army. It is not likely that this incursion was intended to support the second Northumbrian rising, which had begun with the killing of Robert Comin (whom William I had appointed earl of Northumbria) in January 1069, for that rising had been effectively suppressed by the Conqueror by Easter 1070. Nevertheless, it was in the period 1069-70 that Malcolm married Edgar AEtheling's sister Margaret. The marriage cannot have been viewed by William I as a friendly act, and must have been meant to give any heirs of the Scottish king's second marriage a claim to English kingship. 
Malcolm's aggressive policy led to the Conqueror's only expedition to Scotland. In 1072 William led an army and fleet north as far as the Firth of Tay, and received the homage of the king of Scots at Abernethy. Probably as a result of this submission, Edgar AEtheling made his peace with William, who treated him honourably. The dynasty ruling in Moray still had leaders who could challenge Malcolm's kingship, for in 1078 Lulach's son Mael Snechta was in rebellion, and Malcolm captured his mother and chief adherents. A reconciliation may have followed, as Mael Snechta died peacefully in 1085. In the meantime, the king of Scots carried out his third major raid into Northumberland (1079), sparing the lands and church of Hexham out of reverence for the local saints. The Conqueror's response to this was to send north his eldest son, Robert Curthose, with an army (1080), but he got no further than Falkirk and achieved little beyond building the 'New Castle' on the north bank of the Tyne, near the site of the Roman bridge ('pons Aelius'). That Malcolm was sensitive in the matter of his authority over Scottish Northumbria is shown by a story told in Symeon of Durham's 'Historia ecclesiae Dunelmensis'. According to this account, Turgot (subsequently Queen Margaret's biographer and bishop of St Andrews), in association with Aldwin, formerly a monk of Winchcombe in Gloucestershire, attempted to revive monastic life at Old Melrose, perhaps in the late 1070s. The Scottish king demanded that the two English monks take an oath of fealty to him, and when this was refused persecuted them in various ways, until at last they were recalled to England by Bishop Walcher of Durham (died 1080). 
For the rest of William I's reign Malcolm's relations with England seem to have been peaceful, and at the accession of William Rufus, Malcolm's eldest son, Duncan, who had been for years a hostage in England, was knighted by the new king and allowed to go to Scotland in freedom. But by 1091 Malcolm was once again raiding Northumbria as far south as Durham. A sea and land expedition mounted by Rufus was severely hampered by bad weather which sank his fleet and played havoc with his cavalry force. Robert Curthose and Edgar AEtheling negotiated a peace which restored English estates to Malcolm which had been given by the Conqueror and, according to some sources, involved Malcolm's homage to Rufus. The latter seems to have been impressed by the fragility of the Scottish border, for in 1092 he went north again and forcibly annexed Carlisle and its district, building a strong castle and settling the area with English peasants. It has been suggested that there had been recent precedent for an English take-over of at least part of Cumbria, inasmuch as Earl Siward is shown exercising authority over a free tenant west of Carlisle, in a writ issued 'c'.1050 by an unidentified lord named Cospatric. The authenticity of this writ is uncertain, but even if it is genuine it deals only with a restricted area between Carlisle and Wigton, and can scarcely be regarded as evidence that Siward held territorial lordship even over Cumbria south of the Solway. A statement in the 'Historia regum' of Symeon of Durham, that in 1070 Cumberland was under Malcolm's control, 'not possessed by right but subjugated by force' (Symeon of Durham, 'Opera', 2.191), shows both that the region was then being ruled by the Scottish king, and that there were Englishmen who resented this. The status of Cumberland had in fact long been disputed, so that Rufus's seizure of Carlisle and its district hardly needed any precedent, but such an act of aggression nevertheless gave Malcolm a clear grievance. 
It was agreed that Malcolm would meet the English king at Gloucester at the end of August 1093. On his journey south he took part in the ceremony of laying the foundation stones for the new (that is, the present) cathedral at Durham. But when the Scottish king reached the English court, William disdainfully refused to see him. An enraged Malcolm (having visited his elder daughter Edith at Wilton) returned to his own land and at once mustered a force with which to inflict maximum damage upon English territory. North of Alnwick he and Edward, the eldest son of his second marriage, were ambushed by the earl of Northumbria, Robert de Mowbray, and were both killed, the king falling victim to Archil Morel of Bamburgh, described as his 'comrade', on 13 November 1093. Malcolm was buried later the same month at Tynemouth Priory and a younger son, Edgar, carried the news of the death of his father and brother to Edinburgh where his mother, Queen Margaret, lay ill, exhausted by her too severe regime of self-denial. She died of grief on 16 November and was buried in the monastic church she had founded at Dunfermline, where in the reign of her son Alexander I ('r'. 1107-24) the body of her husband was brought for burial beside her. At the Reformation the remains of both Margaret and Malcolm were transferred by Philip II of Spain to the Escorial at Madrid. 
In spite of the brutality involved in his raids into English Northumbria, Malcolm III left a reputation for sagacity, and a story preserved by Ailred of Rievaulx, in which Malcolm placed himself in the power of a conspirator, and then disarmed him with the force of his reproaches, shows that the king was also credited with exceptional moral stature. His byname, Ceann Mor, meaning 'Big Head', from which comes Canmore, is probably to be understood literally. However, the same sobriquet is also recorded in a twelfth-century source as being applied to his great-grandson Malcolm IV, prompting speculation that he suffered from Paget's disease. Malcolm III is not certainly referred to as Canmore before the thirteenth century, though contemporary accounts refer to his florid complexion and long neck. Malcolm was succeeded as king by his brother Donald III. 
Although no significant innovator, Malcolm III, by his vigorous rule and his remarkable second marriage, left Scotland a very different kingdom from what it had been before 1050. It was more clearly defined territorially and more decisively within the orbit of an English kingdom conquered by the Normans, and was appreciably less oriented towards the Scandinavian north. Malcolm and Margaret may be said to have put Scotland on the European map. 


@@@@@


doc= 17860


Malcolm IV (1141-1165), king of Scots, was the eldest son of Henry, earl of Huntingdon and of Northumberland (c.1115-1152), and Ada de Warenne (c.1123-1178), and grandson of King David I. Born between 23 April and 24 May 1141, he became his grandfather's heir when his father died, on 12 or 13 June 1152. In the care of Duncan, earl of Fife (died 1154), he was then taken round Scotland north of the Forth, and thus, by Celtic custom, shown to be heir to the kingdom. When David I died, on 24 May 1153, Malcolm succeeded peaceably. Although he was only twelve years old there was no formal regency. But his early 'acta' suggest that real power lay with Walter, son of Alan, the steward (died 1177), Hugh de Morville, the constable (died 1162), and some eight other laymen, with Walter de Bidun, the chancellor, and several bishops. 
The long period of internal peace established by David I was broken in November 1154 when Somerled, lord of Argyll, and his nephews, sons of Malcolm MacHeth (claimant to the earldom of Ross, and a dangerous rebel in the previous reign), revolted. Seaborne raids were probably made on the mainland; in 1156 Donald MacHeth was captured at Whithorn and sent to join his father in prison at Roxburgh Castle. In 1157 the king and the MacHeths were reconciled. Deprived of some of his support, Somerled made peace, perhaps in 1159. 
Before this pacification the Scots had also faced pressure from England, where King Henry II began to assert himself after his coronation (19 December 1154); in 1157 he was ready to deal with Scotland. Malcolm met him at The Peak in Derbyshire; then, at Chester, in July 1157, he did homage 'in the manner in which his grandfather had been the man of old King Henry' says the Melrose chronicle (Anderson, 'Early Sources', 2.233), tactfully concealing that he was made to give up Cumberland, Westmorland, and Northumberland. Henry subsequently restored the honour of Huntingdon to Malcolm, and gave the lordship of Tynedale to the latter's younger brother William. The surrenders and regrants were made quickly. The kings met at Carlisle, now an English city, in January 1158 and parted at odds; Henry had publicly snubbed Malcolm's dignity, social expectations, and, in all likelihood, personal wishes by declining to make him a knight. Henry meanwhile recovered castles, revenues, and the silver mines in the northern Pennines. He had weakened Scottish prestige, security, and wealth. 
In April or May 1159 a very well-attended court at Roxburgh confirmed the possessions of Kelso Abbey, and probably also considered the need for a new bishop of St Andrews and preparations for a military expedition overseas. Robert, bishop of St Andrews, died early in 1159. A successor had to be found, and a means of denying the archbishop of York's customary claims to a profession of obedience from a new bishop. Malcolm's step-uncle Waldef, abbot of Melrose (died 1159), was selected but declined. William, bishop of Moray, and Nicholas, the king's chamberlain, were then sent overseas to the pope, probably with proposals to make St Andrews an archbishopric. The bishop returned with powers of a legate and a commendation from Pope Alexander III ('r'. 1159-81) that he become bishop of St Andrews. This was not acceptable; Arnold, abbot of Kelso, was elected bishop on 13 November 1160 and consecrated by the legate in the king's presence at St Andrews on the 20th. After Arnold's death on 13 September 1162, Richard (died 1178), a chaplain of the king, was elected as bishop, probably early in 1163. The claims of York were pressed and rebuffed; on 28 October 1164 Ingram (died 1174), the king's chancellor, was consecrated as bishop of Glasgow by Alexander III at Sens; then, provided with specific papal authority, he and other Scottish bishops consecrated Richard at St Andrews on 28 March 1165 in the presence of the king. In both cases direct links with the papacy had been established, York's claims had been deflected, and the king's candidates had been installed. Long-term effects of these events became clear in the next reign. 
The Roxburgh court of 1159 probably also considered Henry II's call-out (March 1159) of his forces from Normandy, England, Aquitaine, and 'other provinces which are subject to him' (Lawrie, 41-2) for an expedition to Toulouse. Malcolm's attendance was no doubt required, and a summons may have been welcome; it gave a chance to be knighted honourably in the field. The king, his brother William, and other Scots crossed the channel on 16 June 1159, and joined Henry's army at Poitiers on the 24th. At Perigueux, about 30 June, Henry knighted Malcolm. Until September the army overran the county of Toulouse; after intervention by King Louis VII of France ('r'. 1137-80) a siege of the city was abandoned, the army retired, and Malcolm and Henry were at Limoges about the end of September of that year. 
Malcolm, possibly after a visit to the earldom of Huntingdon, returned to Scotland early in 1160 to a hostile reception. Ferteth, earl of Strathearn, and five other earls, angered that he had been to Toulouse, besieged him at Perth. Mediation by the clergy ended the immediate dispute. But unrest then appeared in Galloway, and later in the year the king made three military forays there. Fergus, lord of Galloway (died 1161), submitted and by the end of the year there had been a general reconciliation. Malcolm's Christmas feast at Perth in 1160 was very well attended by prominent laymen (including probably Somerled of Argyll, earning by his presence the nickname 'Sit-by-the-King') and ecclesiastics. Royal authority had been vindicated and one lesson had been learned; for the rest of the reign and for that of William the Lion ('r'. 1165-1214) the earls of Scotland were never given cause for armed opposition to the king. 
The peace held for three years. The king was now a young adult; an aggressive edge appears in matters where he could use personal influence, such as the bestowal of his sisters Margaret and Ada, married respectively in 1160 to Conan (IV), duke of Brittany (c.1135-1171), and in 1161 to Florence, count of Holland (died 1190). The matches linked Scotland with ruling houses then outside the range of Angevin political control. But such gestures had little real effect; Malcolm was again called south in 1163 by Henry II. An illness, perhaps a grave one, at Doncaster on the outward journey did not enable him and his brothers to avoid attendance at Henry's court at Woodstock at the end of June, to find there a group of Welsh rulers; the gathering was evidently meant to demonstrate Henry's lordship within Britain. On 1 July Malcolm again did homage, and handed over as hostages his brother David (d. 1219), subsequently earl of Huntingdon, and other young noblemen. 
In 1163 'King Malcolm transported the men of Moray' ('Holyrood Chronicle', 142). This has never been satisfactorily explained; a later tradition of a large-scale removal of population is probably false. Another later view is that it caused the last revolt of Somerled of Argyll in 1164. Supported by a large fleet, and troops from outside Scotland, he attacked Renfrew, the chief residence of Walter the Steward. Rather than a reaction to events in Moray, this might have been a protest against Malcolm's second homage to Henry II, as well as a direct thrust at the steward. In June 1161, at an exceptionally well-attended court at Roxburgh, the king had formally confirmed Walter's extensive lands in Scotland. This sign of trust in an important 'Norman' incomer could scarcely have had a more public demonstration. The invasion failed. Local forces organized by Bishop Herbert of Glasgow (died 1164) surprised the enemy; Somerled was killed and his head was cut off and presented to the bishop, who attributed the victory to St Kentigern. There was peace for the rest of the reign. 
During that time the king completed his major monastic foundation, the Cistercian abbey of Coupar Angus, and secured a refoundation of the Augustinian priory of Scone as an abbey. The first grants for the former had been made in 1161 or 1162; it was fully established by 12 July 1164 when Fulk, the first abbot, was blessed by Bishop Gregory of Dunkeld. Scone had been devastated by a fire, and at Stirling, between May 1163 and May 1164, the king confirmed earlier gifts by kings Alexander I (died 1124) and David I, added some of his own, and provided an abbot. At various other times he made some gifts to the hospital of Soutra (but probably did not found it), and granted or confirmed gifts to all the major foundations of David I. 
After his illness in 1163 Malcolm may not have recovered entirely. He is said to have suffered severe pains in his head and feet, symptoms which, when taken with the contemporary notice of his death in the annals of Ulster, which calls him Cennmor, or 'Big Head', suggest that he was suffering from Paget's disease. An enlargement of the skull is a typical symptom of this affliction; another is pain in the legs. It would thus appear that the original Malcolm Canmore was Malcolm IV, rather than his great-grandfather Malcolm III, who seems to have acquired that nickname only in the thirteenth century. In the last two years of his reign Malcolm was still able to travel within eastern Scotland, but perhaps rarely. He hoped to make a pilgrimage to Santiago de Compostela, no doubt in search of healing, but was unable to do this. He was at Jedburgh in his final illness and died there on Thursday 9 December 1165, aged twenty-four, having reigned for some twelve years and six months. His last bequest was an annual payment of 100 shillings to Dunfermline Abbey, where he was buried, attended at the last by several bishops. On that day Walter the Steward honoured his memory by a gift of land to the abbey. 
For an Irish writer Malcolm was 'with regard to charity and hospitality and piety the best Christian of the Gaels to the east of the sea' (Anderson, 'Early Sources', 2.261). Godric of Finchale mentions him in the same breath as Thomas Becket. He was not interested in marriage. His nickname 'Malcolm the Maiden' is not known before the fifteenth century, but well before 1200 his reputation for chastity was fully accepted by several writers. There can be no doubt about his close interest in ecclesiastical matters: the foundation and enhancement of religious houses; appointments to the see of St Andrews; a wish, made too late in life to be fulfilled, to be a pilgrim to Compostela. But Malcolm was no cleric; he ruled as a layman, struggled with internal revolts, and re-established royal authority and peace, which after 1164 was not broken for ten years. After the loss of the northern counties of England, the integrity of the kingdom to which David I had succeeded was maintained; the claims of York over the church in Scotland were consistently and firmly opposed. Although he is also represented on coins and seals, the most striking likeness of Malcolm is that contained in the initial letter of his charter for Kelso Abbey. That he is there shown as a young and beardless figure, seated beside his venerable grandfather David I, may be taken as intended to symbolize dynastic continuity, and within the kingdom David I's innovations were undisturbed or strengthened: for example, more burghs appear, and upper Clydesdale was divided into knights' feus, several of them granted to Flemish settlers. Except, as always, for the loss of Northumberland, his brother William can have had little real cause for complaint when he succeeded. 


@@@@@


doc= 17861


Malcolm, Sir Charles (1782-1851), naval officer, tenth son of George Malcolm (1729-1803) of Burnfoot, Dumfriesshire, and his wife, Margaret (died 1811), daughter of James Pasley of Craig, Dumfreisshire, and sister of Admiral Sir Charles Pasley, bt, was born at Burnfoot in Dumfriesshire on 5 September 1782. Sir Pulteney Malcolm and Sir John Malcolm were his brothers. In 1791 his name was put on the books of the 'Vengeance', commanded by his uncle, Commodore Thomas Pasley, and in 1793 of the 'Penelope', of which his brother Pulteney was first lieutenant. He entered the navy in person in 1795 on the 'Fox', then commissioned by his brother, with whom he went out to the East Indies, and whom he followed to the 'Suffolk'. He was promoted by the admiral to be lieutenant of that ship, on 12 January 1799, and remained in her until 3 October 1801, when he was appointed acting commander of the sloop 'Albatross' (a promotion confirmed by the Admiralty to 28 May 1802). In 1803 he returned home acting captain of the 'Eurydice' (24 guns), and on his arrival in England found that he had been previously promoted captain by the Admiralty on 29 December 1802. In 1804 he commanded the 'Raisonnable' in the North Sea, and from 1806 to 1809 the frigate 'Narcissus' on the coast of France and Portugal; at Porto in 1807 he was able to save much British property from the French. In the beginning of 1809 he went out to the West Indies, and in April took part in the capture of the Saintes Islands. On his return to England he was moved into the 'Rhin' (38 guns), in which during 1812 and 1813 he co-operated with the patriots on the north coast of Spain. In 1813 he went out to the West Indies in convoy; in 1814 he was cruising on the coast of Brazil; and on 18 July 1815, having been joined by the frigates 'Menelaus' and 'Havannah' and the sloops 'Fly' and 'Ferret', he landed a party of seamen and marines at Corrijou on the coast of Brittany, stormed the battery, and brought out of the harbour three small armed vessels and a convoy under their protection. The action was of a type that had become customary, but was the last such during that war. 
In September 1817 Malcolm fitted out the 'Sibylle' (44 guns), as flag captain to Sir Home Popham in the West Indies, from where he was invalided in February 1819. From 1822 to 1827 he commanded one or other of the yachts 'William and Mary' and 'Royal Charlotte' in attendance on the Marquess Wellesley, lord lieutenant of Ireland, by whom he was knighted in 1827. 
In November 1827 he was appointed superintendent of the Bombay marine, then reorganized and placed under new regulations, which required it to have a captain of the Royal Navy at its head. Malcolm arrived at Bombay in June 1828, where he reformed the navy. On 1 May 1830 its name was officially changed to the Indian Navy, and in addition to the rigorous discharge of its police duties, it became distinguished as a school of surveyors. Malcolm held the post for ten years, and on his being relieved was officially thanked by the governor in council. The introduction and establishment of steam navigation in the Red Sea were also largely due to him. He was promoted rear-admiral on 10 January 1837, and vice-admiral on 28 April 1847, but had no further service. 
During his later years Malcolm gave much attention to professional institutions and charities. He also served continuously on the council of the Royal Geographical Society. He was twice married: first, on 4 June 1808, to his cousin Magdalene, daughter of Charles Pasley, his mother's brother; and second, on 11 April 1829, to Elmira Riddell, youngest daughter of Major-General Shaw. With his first wife he had one daughter, and with his second three sons, two of whom became naval officers. 
Malcolm died at Brighton on 4 June 1851, and was buried in the catacombs at the Brighton cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 17862


Malcolm, Sir George (1818-1897), army officer, born at Bombay on 10 September 1818, was the only son of David Malcolm (died 1826), a Bombay merchant (brother of Admiral Sir Pulteney Malcolm and General Sir John Malcolm), and his first wife, Maria Hughes (died 1818). He attended Addiscombe College from 1835 to 1836, and was commissioned ensign in the East India Company's service on 10 June 1836, being posted to the 1st Bombay native infantry (Bombay Grenadiers) on 18 July 1837. He served in the Anglo-Afghan War of 1839 as deputy assistant commissary-general and baggage master with the Bombay division, and was present at the capture of Ghazni and occupation of Kabul. In August 1840, at the head of a detachment of Sind horse, he joined the force sent under Major Clibborn to relieve Kahun in Baluchistan, took part in the attempt to force the Nafusk Pass, and was mentioned in dispatches for his gallantry. He was also engaged in the operations against Nasir Khan and the Brahoes and the capture of their camp near Kanda on 1 December. 
Malcolm became lieutenant on 31 August 1840. He served under Colonel John Jacob during the subjugation of Sind, and was at the battle of Shahdadpur and the capture of Shahpur. In the Second Anglo-Sikh War he commanded the 2nd Sind horse, and was present at the siege of Multan and the battle of Gujrat. He was mentioned in dispatches, and on becoming captain in his regiment was given a brevet majority on 22 June 1849. He became lieutenant-colonel on 28 November 1854. 
On 19 October 1852 Malcolm married Wilhelmina Charlotte (died 13 Dec 1911), youngest daughter of the Revd Henry Alright Hughes, and they had four sons. He served in the Anglo-Persian War of 1856-7, and commanded a small field force during the Indian mutiny. On 29 November 1857 he stormed the fortified village of Halgalli, took possession of Shorapur on 9 February 1858, and on 2 June captured the fort of Nargund, the strongest in the south Maratha country. He was mentioned in dispatches and was made CB on 21 March 1859. He became colonel in the army on 30 August 1860 and major-general on 15 December 1867. In the expedition to Abyssinia in 1868 he commanded the 2nd division, which guarded the line of communications. He was made KCB on 14 August 1868. In the same year he printed for private circulation at Karachi a short pamphlet, 'Remarks on the Indian Army', arguing the danger of relying on European troops and of discrediting the native army, as had been the tendency since the mutiny. He was promoted lieutenant-general on 29 May 1875 and general on 1 October 1877, and was placed on the unemployed supernumerary list on 1 July 1881. He received the GCB on 29 May 1886. Malcolm died at his home, Guy's Dale, Leamington, Warwickshire, on 6 April 1897. 


@@@@@


doc= 17863


Malcolm, James Peller (1767-1815), antiquary and topographical draughtsman, was born a British subject in August 1767 and baptized at St Peter's Church, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, the son of the merchant Moses Malcolm (died 1769) and his wife, Mary, 'nee' Peller ('b'. 1742). His father, whose parents had moved to America from Scotland, died when he was two years old. His mother was the granddaughter of James Peller, who had accompanied William Penn on his journey from Bristol to the banks of the Delaware, where he built a house and eventually settled in 1689. Despite being a member of the Church of England, Malcolm began his education at the Quaker school in Philadelphia; following the horrors of war his family fled to Potts-town, Pennsylvania, where his education continued 'at an enormous expence' ('GM', 1st ser., 85/1, 1815, 467). After the war ended in 1784 he returned to Philadelphia, where, under the guidance of a Mr Bembridge, he began to concentrate on the study of art and taught himself to engrave. His first published plate was the frontispiece for Colonel John Parke's 'Lyric Works of Horace' (1786), after a sketch by Peter Markoe. Towards the end of 1787 he travelled to England to continue his artistic training at the Royal Academy Schools in London. During his three years there he received encouragement from Benjamin West and Joseph Wright of Derby but, realizing that his interests were in history and landscape images, he turned to etching as a more appropriate medium. His potential was recognized at the end of his time at the Royal Academy Schools, when two of his landscape prints were included in their annual exhibition of 1791. Shortly afterwards he began regular work as an illustrator for the 'Gentleman's Magazine', for which he etched numerous, mostly topographical, plates between 1792 and 1814. He was also an active contributor to this periodical, writing numerous letters and articles on antiquarian subjects, including a detailed history of Somers Town, the London suburb where he lived throughout his time in England. It was also in the pages of the 'Gentleman's Magazine' that his marriage to 'Miss Chrysogon Vaughan, daughter of the Rev. Richard V[aughan] rector of Leominster Co. Hereford' was announced in January 1797 ('GM', 1st ser., 67, 1797, 79-80). 
In 1850 the antiquary John Britton recalled Malcolm's passion for antiquarianism, recording how he would religiously spend his days making sketches and notes either at his home or at the reading room of the British Museum (Britton, 1.112). Although he was not elected a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries until 27 March 1806, his work from 1797 onwards reflected his enthusiasm for research into English antiquities and topography. Of his eleven illustrated antiquarian publications, the most renowned are 'Londinium redivivum' (4 vols., 1802-7), 'Excursions in Kent' (1807), and 'Anecdotes of the Manners and Customs of London' (3 vols., 1808). In these he compiled an impressive array of unknown parochial and institutional documents and combined these with personal observations and his characteristic and skilful etchings of historical architecture, artefacts, customs, and costume. He also appealed to the more commercial market for antiquarian publications with his series of etchings entitled 'Views within Twelve Miles Round London' (1800), where the plates were designed to complement the topographical texts of popular authors such as Thomas Pennant and Daniel Lysons. 
Malcolm died on 5 April 1815, after a three-year-long debilitating illness which is said to have begun with an abscess on his knee. His inability to work during his final months rendered him totally indigent and at his death his wife and ageing mother were left destitute. As a mark of respect for Malcolm's industry and popularity, following his death his loyal friends set up a public subscription to provide for his mother and widow. This appeal was announced in the 'Gentleman's Magazine' (May 1815) and was supervised by Malcolm's most regular publishers, Longman & Co., and John Nichols. 


@@@@@


doc= 17864


Malcolm, Sir John (1769-1833), diplomatist and administrator in India, was born at Burnfoot, Westerkirk, Dumfriesshire, on 2 May 1769, the fourth son of George Malcolm (1729-1803) of Burnfoot, from a junior branch of the Malcolms of Lochore, Fife, and of Margaret (died 1811), daughter of James Pasley of Craig, Dumfriesshire. Sir Charles Malcolm (1782-1851) and Sir Pulteney Malcolm (1768-1838) were his brothers. Daring and venturesome ('the scapegrace and the scapegoat of the family'; Kaye, 1.5), he left parish school at twelve, was taken to London by his prosperous uncle, and applied for a position with the East India Company. When a director asked 'Why, my little man, what would 'you' do if you met Hyder Ali?', he replied that he would 'out with his sword, and cut off his heid!' and was accepted (Kaye, 1.8). 
Having reached Madras in April 1783, Malcolm was assigned to a regiment at Vellore. He had entered the service of what had become far more than a trading company. On the profits of the cotton textile trade and revenue from its growing territory, particularly Bengal, it was in competition with the many other regional kingdoms which were establishing themselves after the erosion of Mughal power. His first task as an ensign commanding sepoys was to escort to safety English prisoners surrendered by Tipu Sultan under the treaty of 11 May 1784. Boy Malcolm, as he long continued to be known, became a good horseman and marksman. Later, as adjutant in the 29th battalion of the Madras native infantry at Masulipatam, he paid off his debts and forsook gaming. When his regiment was ordered to Hyderabad in 1790, he determined to become a 'political' (diplomatic) officer. The 'once careless' youth became fluent in Persian. A chance opportunity came in 1792 when the military encampment of Lord Cornwallis at Seringapatam needed a Persian interpreter to serve as liaison between the company's and the nizam of Hyderabad's troops. After the war, in February 1794, he returned to England on medical leave. 
Not long after Malcolm landed in England he presented a paper listing grievances of the company's military officers over their scanty pay and slow promotion. This caught the attention of Henry Dundas (later Lord Melville), president of the Board of Control. Dundas persuaded Sir Alured Clarke, the new commander-in-chief of the Madras army, to add Malcolm to his staff. In May 1795, after visiting his parents and studying briefly at the University of Edinburgh, he returned to India. 
Early in 1796, following action against the Dutch on the Cape, Lieutenant Malcolm became private secretary to the commander-in-chief. This service continued under General George, Baron Harris, with extra income as town major of Fort St George. When Lord Mornington landed in April 1798 Malcolm submitted a paper on how to deal with the princes of India. In October, after being appointed assistant to the resident at Hyderabad, a crisis erupted. When, under company pressure, the nizam disbanded the 'French corps', the sepoys mutinied, seized their French officers, and threatened Malcolm's life. Only action by deserters from Malcolm's old infantry regiment, who were part of the mutinous corps, saved him. Hastening to the residency Malcolm took command of a body of the nizam's horse in support of the 'Hyderabad contingent'; the muntineers were soon overawed and persuaded to lay down their arms. Malcolm then hurried to Calcutta, captured colours in hand, and personally laid a report of these events before the governor-general. He was invited to join the expedition then sailing south to deal with Tipu Sultan. After rejoining the Hyderabad contingent (19 January 1799), Malcolm became the key liaison between the governor-general and various military units, especially Mornington's brother Colonel Arthur Wellesley and the King's 33rd foot, deploying forces then marching upon Seringapatam during the Mysore campaign. After victory was assured, he was made first secretary of the commission for the settlement of Mysore, and became instrumental in restoring the former Hindu (Woodiyar) maharaja's family to rule over the territories of Mysore. 
Meanwhile, Napoleon's presence in Egypt prompted British efforts to thwart French designs in India. Malcolm was chosen as envoy to Persia, the first person since Elizabeth's reign to undertake such a mission. He travelled overland from Madras, with stops in Hyderabad and Poona, and embarked from Bombay at the end of 1799. At Muscat the imam was induced to accept a company agent, but delays occurred at Bushehr, Shiraz, and Esfahan over stickling slights and protocols of etiquette and ceremonial, and almost a year passed before his audience with the shah took place. Lavish exchanging of presents ('nazrs') took place before any serious negotiations could begin. Treaties were agreed on 28 January 1801 (but, in the end, never ratified): unrestricted trade, commercial stations, cession of the islands of Qishm, Anjam, and Kharg, and curbs upon French influence and upon actions by the amir of Afghanistan, Zaman Shah, in exchange for military supplies, ships, and troops. But Persia refused to give up its gulf islands. Malcolm returned to India by way of Baghdad, letting its Turkish pasha know that the company was determined to oppose French designs. 
As acting private secretary to Marquess Wellesley, as Lord Mornington had now become, Malcolm soon accompanied the governor-general up the Ganges to settle the affairs of Oudh, another princely state. He then went to Madras to persuade the governor, Lord Clive, not to retire: Wellesley wished to preserve recently enacted revenue and judicial regulations and needed able and experienced officials to remain at their posts. By March 1802 Malcolm was becoming 'Lord Wellesley's factotum and the greatest man in Calcutta' (letter from Col. James Young, Kaye, 1.175). With war clouds again gathering, he went to Hyderabad and Poona to examine relations with their respective princes, the nizam and the peshwa. At Bhore Ghat, anticipating war, a Maratha chief seized and held him for a couple of days. In Bombay the Persian ambassador, Haji Khalil Khan, was killed during hostilities between company sepoys and Persian attendants; Malcolm sent Lieutenant Charles Pasley with the corpse and messages and gifts for the shah. 
The Second Anglo-Maratha War began when Maharaja Holkar attacked and defeated Maharaja Sindhia and the peshwa, Baji Rao. The peshwa turned to the company for help, and on 31 December 1802 signed the treaty of Bassein. In March 1803 Malcolm joined General Arthur Wellesley as the Marquess Wellesley's representative and chief political negotiator, but he fell ill in June and went on leave. Military actions against Sindhia began in August 1803. Mountstuart Elphinstone took Malcolm's place, and he missed the great battles at Assaye and Argaon. But he then helped to negotiate terms for peace. The settlement made with Sindhia and lesser chiefs, especially his allowing Sindhia to keep his great stronghold at Gwalior (in which he was supported by Arthur Wellesley) incurred the wrath of the Marquess Wellesley. This censure, communicated on 22 April 1804, left him 'perfectly heart-broken' ('DNB'). He again fell ill, and was forced to retreat to the coast. As a consequence, he did not take up his new appointmend as political resident of Mysore, made in 1803, until December 1804. Early in 1805, others having failed, Wellesley sent Malcolm to deal with Sindhia. From Lord Lake's camp he advocated ways to deal with both Sindhia and Holkar, devising formulas for guaranteeing peace. After the peace treaty, concluded on 7 January 1806, he was assigned to settling hosts of land grants, pensions, and rewards for services rendered to the company during the three campaigns. 
Not until late March 1807, after half a year in Calcutta, did Malcolm return to his post as resident of Mysore. He was never thrifty, and often engaged in costly diplomatic missions which, despite extra allowances, left him impoverished, as well as worn out from overwork and exposure to the climate. On 4 July 1807 he married (Isabella) Charlotte (1790-1867), younger daughter of Colonel Alexander Campbell. They had one son, George, who became a soldier, and four daughters, of whom Margaret eventually married her first cousin, also named Alexander Campbell. But despite marriage, Malcolm stayed restless. He hoped that, as a lieutenant-colonel, he might command a force going to Basrah and combine military with diplomatic functions. The governor-general, Lord Minto, however, was anxious about the impact of the treaty of Tilsit upon Indian affairs. Wishing to prevent a French-Russian advance towards India, he decided to send missions to Lahore, Kabul, and Tehran. Malcolm was chosen for Persia, but his mission ended ultimately in failure. Sent to the Persian Gulf with a somewhat vague commission, albeit backed by a force of three frigates and 500 sepoys, Malcolm's efforts to overcome French influence failed: his messengers were forbidden to advance beyond Shiraz. He abandoned his efforts, and had hardly returned to Calcutta when yet another expedition was launched. This too was hastily cancelled when Sir Harford Jones, who had arrived in Bombay 'en route' to Persia as the crown's envoy, set off for Bushehr, determined to carry out his assignment. Jones replaced Malcolm because the court of directors remembered Malcolm's expensive policies as Wellesley's envoy in 1800. 
In 1809 the Madras ('white') mutiny occurred: a European garrison at Masulipatam had revolted against its commander. Sir George Barlow, governor of Madras, sent Malcolm to investigate and make a settlement. When Malcolm arrived, the mutinous regiment was on the point of marching to Hyderabad, where the company's forces were also about to mutiny. Mutineers vaguely talked of a declaration of independence, emulating their erstwhile colonial cousins in America. Faced with this situation, Malcolm negotiated freedom for the commander (Colonel Innes), convened a meeting of company officers, and persuaded the mutineers to abandon plans for marching to Hyderabad. While he was successful, and thereby gained time, his conciliatory gestures were not approved. Sir George Barlow wanted nothing less than stern punishment for the mutineers. 
Malcolm returned to diplomatic service, and was again dispatched to Persia. Early in 1810, while at Bushehr, he completed his 'Sketch of the Political History of India' (1811), which was later issued in expanded form as 'The Political History of India' (1826; repr. 1970). In Tehran he was received with pomp and cordiality while Sir Harford Jones was snubbed. Jones, the crown's ambassador to the shah, was exasperated by lack of success and support from the East India Company, and reacted with fury. Tensions between the two delegations became extremely acute. Eventually the British government, wishing to keep all diplomatic relations strictly within its own control, took steps to nullify the actions of the governor-general. Sir Gore Ouseley was appointed as London's new ambassador to the shah; and on hearing the news Malcolm decided to leave Persia for India. (One of Malcolm's most durable legacies was his introduction to that country of the potato, one local name for which is translated as 'Malcolm's plum'.) In vain the shah offered him inducements to remain as a military adviser, even bestowing a newly created order of the Lion and Sun of Persia upon him. On reaching Bombay and before returning to Britain, while awaiting the auditing of his expense accounts (which brought him censure), Malcolm started to write his 'History of Persia'. At this time he also wrote his 'Observations on the Disturbances in the Madras Army in 1809', which came out shortly after his arrival in London in 1812. His 'Sketch of the Sikhs' was published in the same year. 
In England, Malcolm was knighted, allowed to keep the Persian order of the Lion and Sun, and made a KCB (April 1815). His views on the East India Company's army were sought by the Board of Control; and he gave testimony before the Commons on the renewal of the company's charter. He also became acquainted with literary figures, such as Sir Walter Scott; and his classic 'History of Persia', which appeared in 1815, brought him an honorary doctorate of laws from Oxford. Translated into French (1821), German (1830), and Persian (n.d.), the history was particularly valuable for contextualizing events surrounding his own time in Persia, and served as the standard western work for about a century. Claiming that he was bereft of funds, Malcolm eventually received $5000 from the company. Like any Indian officer, debarred from European service, he could look only to India and hope for a regimental command as colonel on full pay or for further political service. At forty-seven Malcolm again embarked for India, leaving his family behind him. While at sea, he wrote a review of William's 'History of the Bengal Army' ('Quarterly Review', 18, January 1818). 
Malcolm reached India in March 1817, on the eve of the Third Anglo-Maratha War. The governor-general, Lord Moira, gladly welcomed him; and he was soon sent to visit various major princely states. As a brigadier in the Deccan army, he then took part in actions against the Pindaris, and was in the process of pursuing them across the River Narbada at the head of a light field force when formal word about the outbreak of war reached him. Not long after, Holkar of Indore joined the peshwa and the bhonsle of Berar in opposition to the British. On 21 December 1817, Malcolm's force engaged Holkar's army in battle at Mahidipur, and won a decisive victory. Yet his headlong charge against the Maratha position was considered by some to be more a result of sepoy valour than of good generalship. Holkar sued for peace on 6 January 1818. But it soon became clear that no attempt to 'settle' central India could succeed without a 'voluntary' surrender by the peshwa: Maratha warlords would refuse to lay down their arms and would go on fighting. On 1 June 1818 company forces finally surrounded Baji Rao's encampment. Malcolm offered the peshwa an annual pension of eight lakhs of rupees for life and gave him a twenty-four-hour ultimatum. The peshwa, having little choice, capitulated, and his forces were gradually disbanded. The size of the pension displeased the governor-general and the court of directors, though both later acknowledged that Malcolm had been right in setting the original terms. However, the peshwa survived for thirty-three years and the ultimate cost was $2 million. Full order and peace could not come to the peshwa's dominions without much more work, and Malcolm spent many months completing this task. Only after suppressing mutinous Arab contingents, building military cantonments, destroying formidable fortresses, and ending the formation of dangerous 'bunds' by turbulent warriors did violence gradually subside. During this period Malcolm produced a vast report on Malwa (central India), which was published in Calcutta in 1821, and later expanded to become his 'Memoirs of Central India' (1823). 
At this point Malcolm's hopes and ambitions were thwarted and his pride offended. Mountstuart Elphinstone was picked to succeed Sir Evan Nepean as governor of Bombay. Malcolm was promoted major-general and GCB, but his wish to become lieutenant-governor of central India was refused by the court of directors; the newly won peshwa's territories were transferred to Bombay, and his hopes for the Madras governorship were dashed in 1820 when Sir Thomas Munro was chosen to succeed Hugh Elliot. Thus, despite the fact that his pay as brigadier and his stipends as a political officer left him better paid than the governor of Bombay, Malcolm was not mollified. His hopes for other military assignments, possibly expeditions against the amirs of Sind or against Ranjit Singh at Lahore, also came to nothing. While still popular among notables, officers, and princes in central India, he resigned his position and went to Bombay. The marquess of Hastings failed in his efforts to dissuade him from leaving. His homeward journey by way of Suez and the Mediterranean took until late April 1822. 
Malcolm spent the next five years in England. Living with his family, initially at Frant, Sussex, near Tonbridge, and then at Hyde Hall, near Sawbridgeworth, Hertfordshire, he cultivated contacts and wrote. His new acquaintances included Madame de Stael, Humboldt, Schlegel, Sedgwick, Julius Hare, and above all the Cambridge historian and philosopher of science William Whewell. After the appearance of his 'A Memoir of Central India' (1823), 'Political History of India' (1826), 'Sketches in Persia' (1827), and 'Letter to the Duke of Wellington on the State of India', he sought new assignments. But hopes for another mission to Tehran foundered on his insistence that both crown and company credentials be granted him. His wish to succeed Munro as governor of Madras failed when he was unable to see that Stephen Lushington was already chosen. In contests between the company and the crown that he could never really win, he wore out the patience of friends. Some, like Wellington, wearied of his restless ambition and by now exaggerated sense of self-importance. Finally, the Bombay governorship again became open; and Malcolm accepted it. He hoped for Central India to be added to the Bombay presidency, or that his new post might serve as a stepping stone to the governor-generalship. 
But what Malcolm encountered, as governor of Bombay, was more trouble than could have been anticipated. No sooner had he assumed office on 1 November 1827 than the 'Moru Raghanath v. Pandurang Ramachandra' case came up, and an acrimonious constitutional crisis erupted. Sir John Grant, one of the Bombay supreme court judges, issued a writ of habeas corpus against Pandurang Ramachandra, a 'privileged sirdar' who was protected by a company treaty ('sanad'). This action, extending the court's jurisdiction beyond Bombay Island and touching matters 'political', was regarded as going beyond the legitimate limits of judicial authority. On 3 October 1828 the governor-in-council ordered a stay of proceedings in the Raghanath case and in similar writs of habeas corpus. Sir John Grant, piqued, retorted that he was not obliged to heed orders of the company's government. While the matter was being referred to the government of India and the crown, Malcolm forbade officials to discuss such sensitive matters in the press. When the commander-in-chief, Sir Thomas Bradford, came to Grant's support and threatened to use military force, Malcolm decided that, should this occur, he would have Bradford arrested and deported. Grant then issued a writ of attachment against Pandurang Ramachandra and, when the governor failed to act on it, closed the court. This prompted Malcolm to issue a proclamation announcing that henceforth, since the court (Grant) was no longer protecting the persons and property of Bombay inhabitants, it was incumbent upon the government to act in its place. Such action was narrowly averted by the arrival of new judges. As they did not share Grant's views, this all but ended the matter -- except that a letter from Ellenborough (president of the Board of Control) to Malcolm, referring to Grant as 'like a wild elephant led away between two tame ones' (Kaye, 2.530) found its way into the 'Bengal Harkaru' -- due to some mysterious foe's calculated indiscretion. This caused considerable embarrassment to the sender when news of the leak reached London. 
This all-consuming 'scandal' was the last important event of Malcolm's career. While he tended other duties, such as country tours, visits to Baroda, Kathiawar, and Cutch, retrenchments, public works, road construction, and steam navigation (summarized in his 'Farewell minute' in his 'Government of India', 1833), his administration was not popular. Even though a statue (by Chantrey) was erected after he left Bombay, his day was clearly over. Following his return to England in 1831, his efforts to fulfil further public roles also ended in disappointment. Friends helped to secure his election for Launceston at the general election held that year, but at the election of 1832, held after the passage of the 'Reform Bill' (which he opposed as Wellington's spokesman in the Commons), he was unsuccessful in a contest at Carlisle. Early in 1833 he was still working on his 'Government of India' (1833) and 'Life of Clive' (posthumously published in 1836) when he came down with flu. He continued to work, collecting documents on the company's charter renewal, and was addressing a meeting of the court of proprietors in this connection when he collapsed. After another partial recovery, he died on 30 May 1833, at his lodgings in Princes Street, Hanover Square, London. He was buried on 6 June at St James's, Piccadilly. A marble bust by Chantrey, paid for by subscription, was erected in Westminster Abbey, and an obelisk raised on Whita Hill, above Langholm, Dumfriesshire. 
What distinguished Malcolm throughout most of his career was an ability to work with people and to inspire trust. Ambition, sensitivity, and self-confidence, sometimes excessive, accounted for many diplomatic successes. Influence in moulding policies undergirding imperial structures in India cast him as one the most able officers ever to have served the East India Company and the rising Indian empire. In the words of Malcolm Yapp, 'he was the ideologue 'par excellence' of British India... His insight, his imagination, his willingness to think outside accepted patterns, and, above all, his capacity to bring in a range of considerations far beyond that of which others were capable, all mark him out as a man of real intellectual genius' (Yapp, 53). 


@@@@@


doc= 17865


Malcolm, Sir Pulteney (1768-1838), naval officer, third son of George Malcolm of Burnfoot, Langholm, in Dumfriesshire, and his wife, Margaret, daughter of James Pasley and his wife, Magdalen, 'nee' Elliot, and sister of Admiral Sir Thomas Pasley, was born at Douglan, near Langholm, on 20 February 1768. Sir John Malcolm and Sir Charles Malcolm were his brothers. He entered the navy in 1778 on the books of the 'Sybil', commanded by his uncle, Captain Pasley. With Pasley he afterwards served in the 'Jupiter', in the squadron under Commodore George Johnstone, and was present at the action in Porto Praya and at the capture of the Dutch Indiamen in Saldanha Bay. In 1782 the 'Jupiter' carried Admiral Pigot to the West Indies. Malcolm was thus brought to the admiral's notice, was taken by him into the flagship, and some months later, on 3 March 1783, was promoted lieutenant of the 'Jupiter'. He continued serving during the peace, and in 1793 was first lieutenant of the frigate 'Penelope' on the Jamaica station under the command of Captain Bartholomew Rowley. The 'Penelope''s service was peculiarly active. In company with the 'Iphigenia' she captured the French frigate 'Inconstante', off the coast of San Domingo, on 25 November 1793; she captured or cut out many privateers and merchant vessels; and Malcolm, as first lieutenant, commanded her boats in several sharp conflicts. Early in 1794 Commodore Ford took him into his flagship the 'Europa', and on 3 April promoted him to the command of the 'Jack Tar', which he took to England. 
On 22 October Malcolm was made a post captain and a few days later appointed to the frigate 'Fox' (32 guns). In February 1795 he convoyed a fleet of merchant ships to the Mediterranean; from there he went to Quebec, and afterwards was employed for some time in the North Sea. He was later sent out to the East Indies, and towards the end of 1797 into the China seas under the command of Captain Edward Cooke, in whose company he entered Manila Bay under false colours, on 14 January 1798, and carried off three Spanish gunboats. After some further cruising among the islands the 'Fox' returned to India, where, on 18 June, he was appointed by Rear-Admiral Rainier to be his flag captain in the 'Suffolk' (74 guns) and afterwards in the 'Victorious' (74 guns). He continued to serve in this capacity during the war. On her homeward passage in 1803 the 'Victorious' proved very unseaworthy and, meeting with heavy weather in the north Atlantic, was with difficulty kept afloat until she reached the River Tagus, where she was run ashore and broken up. Malcolm, with the officers and crew, returned to England in two vessels which he chartered at Lisbon. 
In February 1804 Malcolm went out to the Mediterranean in the 'Royal Sovereign' (100 guns) in which, on her arrival, Sir Richard Bickerton hoisted his flag, and he was appointed to the 'Kent' (74 guns), then with Horatio Nelson at Toulon. He was, however, almost immediately sent to Naples, where, or in the neighbourhood, he remained during the year. His removal to the 'Renown' (74 guns) in July did not change his station. It was not until the beginning of 1805 that he was permitted to rejoin the flagship and to exchange into the 'Donegal' (74 guns) in time to take part in the celebrated pursuit of the French fleet to the West Indies. On the return of the fleet to the channel, the 'Donegal', with others, was sent to reinforce Collingwood off Cadiz and was still there when Nelson resumed command on 28 September. On 17 October she was sent to Gibraltar for water and a hurried refit. On the 20th Malcolm learned that the combined fleet was coming out of Cadiz. His ship was then in the Mole, nearly dismantled; but he made a supreme effort and got her out that night, and on the 22nd she sailed from Gibraltar with her foreyard towing alongside. It was blowing a gale from the westward, but she succeeded in getting through the Strait of Gibraltar and on the morning of the 24th rejoined the fleet, too late for the battle of Trafalgar but in time to render valuable assistance to the disabled ships and more disabled prizes. She captured the 'Rayo', which had sallied from Cadiz on the 23rd; and on the night of the 24th, when some of the prisoners on the French ship 'Berwick' cut the cable and let her go on shore, on which she almost immediately broke up, the 'Donegal''s boats succeeded in saving a considerable number of her men. She afterwards took charge of the Spanish prize 'Bahama' and brought her to Gibraltar. Writing to Sir Thomas Pasley on 16 December Collingwood said: 'Everybody was sorry Malcolm was not there [at Trafalgar], because everybody knows his spirit, and his skill would have acquired him honour. He got out of the Gut when nobody else could, and was of infinite service to us after the action. (Nicolas, 7.242)' The 'Donegal' continued off Cadiz until the end of 1805, when she sailed for the West Indies with Sir John Duckworth and played an important part in the battle of San Domingo on 6 February 1806. Malcolm was afterwards sent home in charge of the prizes, and in a very heavy gale rescued the crew of the 'Brave' as she was on the point of foundering. He received the gold medal for San Domingo and was presented by the patriotic fund with a vase valued at 100 guineas. In 1808 he convoyed troops to the Peninsula, and in 1809, still in the 'Donegal', was attached to the Channel Fleet, then commanded by Lord Gambier. In January 1809 he married Clementina, eldest daughter of the Hon. William Fullarton Elphinstone, a director of the East India Company and elder brother of Lord Keith. 
The 'Donegal' was paid off in 1811, and Malcolm was appointed to the 'Royal Oak', which he commanded off Cherbourg until March 1812, when he accepted the post of captain of the fleet to Lord Keith, his uncle by marriage. He was promoted rear-admiral on 4 December 1813 but remained with Keith until June 1814, when, with his flag in the 'Royal Oak', he convoyed a detachment of the army from Bordeaux to North America and served during the Anglo-American War (1812-14) as third in command under Sir Alexander Cochrane and Rear-Admiral (afterwards Sir George) Cockburn. On 2 January 1815 he was made a KCB and during the 'hundred days' of Napoleon's bid for power commanded a squadron in the North Sea in co-operation with the army under Wellington. In 1816-17 he commanded the St Helena station, specially appointed to enforce a rigid blockade of the island and to keep a close guard on Napoleon, who was imprisoned there. He was promoted vice-admiral on 19 July 1821 and was commander-in-chief in the Mediterranean from 1828 to 1831. In 1832 he commanded on the coast of the Netherlands, with the fleets of France and Spain under his orders; and from May 1833 to April 1834 was again commander-in-chief in the Mediterranean. He was made a GCMG on 21 January 1829 and a GCB on 26 April 1833. He died on 20 July 1838. 


@@@@@


doc= 17866


Malcolm, Sarah (c.1710-1733), murderer, was born in Durham but the family moved to Dublin. On the death of her mother, Malcolm migrated to London, becoming a domestic servant at the Temple. One of her employers was an elderly widow, Lydia Duncomb, who lived with another old woman and their maid. On 5 February 1733 the papers reported a grisly murder of the three women, found in their beds with their throats cut from ear to ear. Four servants were arrested and Sarah Malcolm was later named as the prime suspect. Examined by the magistrate, Sir Richard Brocas, she confessed that 'she, Mary Tracy, together with James and Thomas Alexander, both Brothers, had for some time contrived to rob the Chambers of Mrs Duncomb', saying that they had sneaked into the apartment, accidentally waking the servant and having to murder the women. The evidence produced was 'A Silver Tankard, a bloody Apron and Shift found in a Close-Stool, and Bundles of Cloaths, in her Master's Chambers, where she hid them, and 45 Guineas, concealed in her Hair' (Paulson, 'Hogarth', 2.7). 
She was remanded to Newgate and the inquest subsequently brought in a verdict of wilful murder against Malcolm only, refusing to accept her story about the accomplices. She probably expected either to turn king's evidence and get herself off or at worst admit theft while denying murder. Both were capital offences, but the former frequently resulted in transportation rather than the death sentence. At her trial on 23 February she pleaded not guilty and put up a spirited defence, arguing that the blood found on her garments was her own menstrual blood and not that of the murdered women. After her sentence she continued to deny the murder, simultaneously declaring that she was a Roman Catholic and behaving 'very penitent and devout'. Her case was unusual given the scandal of her defence, her alleged Catholicism, and above all her refusal to confess, since confession and penance in the face of death were usual at the time. 
As Ronald Paulson suggests, it may well have been the mix of Malcolm's bloody crime and youth, gender, and cool behaviour after the murders that attracted William Hogarth to paint her portrait. Accompanied by his father-in-law, Sir James Thornhill, Hogarth visited her cell and 'took down a very exact Likeness' of Malcolm, which was subsequently published as an engraving. Hogarth is said to have remarked, 'I see by this woman's features that she is capable of any wickedness', but on what grounds he based this conclusion is open to speculation. Her execution two days later on 7 March was almost as melodramatic as her performance in court and prison. She went to the gibbet dressed in a black gown and black gloves, appearing 'very serious and devout, crying and wringing her Hands in an extraordinary manner' (Paulson, 'Hogarth', 2.9-10). Several platforms constructed for the crowds collapsed and a number of spectators were injured. Malcolm's trial and execution reveal the continuing fascination with the idea of women and evil, though it is unlikely that she would have been remembered if Hogarth had not used her as a subject for one of his 'low life' works. 


@@@@@


doc= 17867


Malcolm, David (d. 1748), philologist, was licensed as a preacher by the presbytery of Haddington on 11 January 1700 and was ordained on 28 March 1705 to the ministry of Duddingston, at the foot of Arthur's Seat, near Edinburgh. Nothing is known of his life before 1700. He married Susanna Anderson and at least four children of theirs were baptized at Duddingston between 1712 and 1721. Malcolm's celebration of the marriage of George Drummond to Catherine, daughter of Sir James Campbell of Aberuchill, caused him to be summoned before the presbytery on 10 November 1721 and rebuked at the bar for his conduct. 
Though not a highlander, Malcolm devoted himself to the study of Gaelic and, according to the Scots antiquary Walter MacFarlan, acquired an amazing knowledge of the etymology of Scottish place names (Gough, 487n.). In 1732 Malcolm proposed to augment, revise, and reprint the Irish-English dictionary from Edward Lhuyd's 'Archaeologia Britannica' (1707), adding writings of his own, intended to illustrate Latin, Greek, Hebrew, and Chaldean from Gaelic, and 'inter alia' to demonstrate an affinity between Gaelic and the language spoken by natives of the Darien isthmus in Central America. He had the backing of learned societies in Edinburgh and a publication grant of $20 from the general assembly of the Church of Scotland in 1737, but his only traced publication is a hotchpotch of testimonials, correspondence with scholars and possible patrons, and translations and extracts from Lhuyd and others, under the collective title of 'An Essay on the Antiquities of Great Britain and Ireland' (1738). With the addition of more testimonials and correspondence and letter A of the proposed dictionary this collection was reissued under different self-advertising cancel-titles in Edinburgh (1739) and London (1744). 
On 12 August 1736 Malcolm was elected FSA, but he evidently spent too much time in London on publication projects because he was deposed from his Duddingston ministry on 24 March 1742 for having deserted his charge for two years without leave. The sentence of deposition was recalled only when he demitted (that is, abdicated) his ministry on 27 April 1743. In the following year he unsuccessfully attempted to ensure that his wife and children could benefit from a newly established ministers' widows' fund. His eldest son, John, an army surgeon and physician in Ayr, was acting for him in financial affairs by 1743, suggesting that he was ill or otherwise incapacitated (Baird, 218). David Malcolm died on 7 February 1748. 


@@@@@


doc= 17868


Malcom, Andrew George (1782-1823), minister of the Presbyterian General Synod of Ulster and hymn writer, was born at Hill Hall House, co. Down, on 15 September 1782. He was the second son of James Malcolm (died 3 Oct 1805), who was ordained minister of Drumbo, co. Down, on 24 December 1764, in succession to his uncle, Andrew Malcom (died 2 March 1763). His mother was Fanny, third daughter of Andrew Kennedy, Presbyterian minister of Mourne, co. Down. He was educated at Glasgow University, where he graduated MA. On 11 March 1807 he was ordained by Bangor presbytery as minister of Dunmurry, co. Antrim. He was not related to his predecessor at Dunmurry, John Malcome. He resigned from Dunmurry on 11 September 1808, and was installed on 14 March 1809 as minister of the First Newry Presbyterian Congregation in co. Down. Through his mother he was the great-grandson of George Lang (died 25 Jan 1702), the first Presbyterian minister of Newry. Malcom's ministry at Newry was one of marked success, and he was an influential leader of educational and charitable movements in the town. He was one of the founders in 1813 of the 'Newry Magazine' and he frequently contributed to it. He married Eleanor Hunter (died 22 March 1854); they had five sons and two daughters. His children reverted to what they believed to be the original spelling of his surname -- Malcolm. His eldest son, James Malcolm (1811-1855), was a Unitarian minister in Ireland and England. His fourth son, Andrew George Malcolm MD (1818-1857), was physician to the Royal Hospital, Belfast. 
Although his theology was Arian, Malcom never became involved in controversies with orthodox colleagues. Early in 1820 he received the degree of DD from Glasgow. On 27 June 1820 he was elected moderator of the General Synod of Ulster. On 28 June 1821 the general synod approved an exposition of the principles of Presbyterianism from his pen, and ordered it to be prefixed as an introduction to their forthcoming code of discipline. This order was not carried out, the introduction being set aside in committee as it was considered by the orthodox members of the synod to be somewhat unsound. Malcom died of fever at Newry on 12 January 1823, and was buried in the First Newry Presbyterian graveyard; his wife survived him. 
Malcom was best known during the nineteenth century as a hymn writer. He published 'A Collection of Psalms, Hymns, and Spiritual Songs' (1811) which contained 405 hymns, twenty-three of them being by Malcom himself, and was for a long time the most considerable collection published in connection with Irish Presbyterianism. Many of Malcom's own hymns are of real merit; six were retained in 'Hymns for Christian Worship' (1886), the authorized hymnal of non-subscribing Presbyterians. 


@@@@@


doc= 17869


Malcome, John (c.1656-1729), minister of the Presbyterian General Synod of Ulster, matriculated from Glasgow University in 1672 as 'Joannes Malcolmus, Hybernus' and so was probably born in Ireland; he graduated MA in 1674. In December 1686 the Presbyterian congregation of Killead, co. Antrim, was divided into upper and lower; Malcome was called to Lower Killead in June 1687 and ordained there on 5 December. In 1699 he was transferred to Dunmurry, in the same county, where an old malt kiln was used as a meeting-house. 
In 1703 the Presbyterian clergy was divided on the question of the oath of abjuration. Malcome strongly favoured taking the oath and attacked a neighbouring minister, Alexander McCracken (died 1730), who, though a staunch Hanoverian, had preached against the oath as sinful and had retreated to Scotland to avoid it. The affair came before the General Synod of Ulster in June 1704, when Malcome was rebuked and McCracken admonished. 
In 1720 the nonsubscription controversy broke out in Belfast in connection with the installation of Samuel Haliday. Malcome was a staunch subscriber and was the first to launch into print with an attack on the nonsubscribers. His 'Personal Persuasion No Foundation for Religious Obedience' (1720) was an answer to John Abernethy's published sermon 'Religious Obedience' (1720). Although Malcome was not the originator of the phrase he was the first to use in print the term 'new light' about the nonsubscribers. His opposition to them was based on a belief that they were undermining the authority of the church courts rather than on any theological grounds. His argument was that 'a set of men, by preaching and printing, pretend to give new light to the world, by putting personal persuasion in the room of church government and discipline' (Witherow, 218-19). 
An anonymous pamphlet, 'More Light, being some Remarks on the Late Vindication' (1722), an answer to a work by James Kirkpatrick published in 1721, is often ascribed to Malcome. His final published pamphlet was 'The dangerous principles of the sectarians of the last age, revived again by our modern new lights' (1726), which brought forth a response from Abernethy in the same year. Malcome died at Dunmurry on 17 May 1729 and was buried there, in the graveyard of the meeting-house, on 20 May. The location of his grave is now lost. 


@@@@@


doc= 17870


Malden, Daniel (d. 1736), prison-breaker, was probably born in Canterbury; details of his parents are unknown. He trained as a postilion, and served for a time in the navy. After his discharge he became involved in petty crime in London. He was found guilty and received sentence of death at the Old Bailey on 10 May 1736 for stealing a large parcel of linen at Islington. His wife, Mary, John Holbert, and Holbert's wife, Ann, were also indicted but were acquitted ('Old Bailey Sessions Papers', May 1736, 103-4). He was ordered for execution on 24 May but on 14 May he escaped from Newgate. This was the first of two escape attempts and there is some confusion about the order of events. According to the 'Weekly Miscellany', acting on a hint from the previous occupant of his cell, he raised one of the floor planks, using the leg of a stool as a lever, and dropped into the cell beneath, which was on the ground floor. He got through the bars into the press-yard and then, by way of the chapel and the ordinary's house, onto the roof of the prison. After traversing the roofs of several adjoining houses he finally gained entry through a garret window to an empty house, 'late a pastrycook's in Newgate Street' ('Weekly Miscellany', 29 May 1736). Wrapping his irons close to his legs 'with rags and pieces of my jacket, as if I had been gouty or lame', he went 'out at a kitchen window, up one pair of stairs into Phoenix Court, and so through the streets to my home in Nightingale Lane' ('Ordinary's Account', Nov 1736). According to other sources, however, Malden escaped with six others; they made their way down to the common sewer, from which 'four of them got up a vault in Fleet-lane' (Caulfield, 4.67-9; 'GM', 1736, 230). 
Early in June Malden was retaken in Rosemary Lane, London. He was now placed in the 'old condemned hold' in Newgate and doubly loaded with irons (Griffiths, 304). A keeper named Austen left him his rations on the night of Sunday 13 June, when he seemed to be well secured. A few hours later he managed his second escape. Having got hold of a knife, which, according to different sources, had either been secreted about his person, or been given to him by a fellow prisoner, he sawed through the chain that held him, near the staple. He then managed to work a passageway under the seat in the corner of the condemned hold. This led into a funnel which connected with the main sewer. Though still encumbered by chains weighing nearly 100 lb he made his way along the sewer. Newgate runners were at once let into the sewer to look for him and found the bodies of two persons who had been smothered while trying to escape. But Malden, after remaining forty-eight hours in the sewer, eventually got out in a yard 'against the pump in Town Ditch, behind Christ's Hospital' (ibid., 306). He made his way to his wife's room in White's Yard, Rosemary Lane, where he was seen dining. A woman called Elizabeth Shelton, who was later accused of harbouring Malden but acquitted, reported seeing him in a lodging in White's Yard on the night of 14 June with fetters upon his legs 'and the Rivets of a prodigious Bigness, and the great Links of the Chain, and the great Rivets' ('Old Bailey Sessions Papers', July 1736, 161-3). According to Shelton she approached a smith named Germane to take Malden's irons off but he refused to help. 
Malden again lingered about London and on 26 June was reported (apparently in error) to have been taken at Reading ('The Craftsman', 26 June 1736). He subsequently made for Harwich, by way of Enfield, and journeyed to Flushing in the Netherlands where he was nearly persuaded to take foreign service, but returned to England 'in search of his wife' (Griffiths, 306). He seems to have returned with her to Canterbury, where he may have found employment as a groom or jockey. He was retaken in September by Akerman, a noted constable, and brought to London on 26 September. He reached the capital handcuffed and with his legs chained under the horse's belly yet guarded by thirty or forty horsemen. The roads and streets were lined with spectators anxious to see a criminal so notorious: 'he was as much talked of as the famous Jack Sheppard' (Caulfield, 4.67-9). He was henceforth chained to the floor of his cell in Newgate and constantly and closely watched. Brought into court at the Old Bailey to be sentenced on Friday 15 October, he begged hard that he might be transported, having 'worked honestly at Canterbury, and done no robbery since last June'. But he was hanged at Tyburn with two other convicts on 2 or 3 November 1736; his body 'was carried to Surgeons' Hall' ('Weekly Miscellany', 6 Nov 1736; 'Old Whig', 4 Nov 1736). His escapes are the more remarkable because Newgate had been 'strengthened' after the notorious exploits of Jack Sheppard. 


@@@@@


doc= 17871


Malden, Henry (1800-1876), classical scholar, was the fourth son of Jonas Malden, surgeon, of Putney. He was educated privately, first at the school of the Revd William Carmalt at Putney, and afterwards by the Revd M. Preston at Aspenden Hall, near Buntingford, Hertfordshire, where Macaulay was a fellow pupil. In October 1818 he entered Trinity College, Cambridge. He won the Craven scholarship in 1821, being bracketed with Macaulay and George Long (1800-1879), and was chancellor's classical medallist in 1822. He graduated BA in 1822 and MA in 1825, and was elected fellow of Trinity in 1824. While at Cambridge he wrote for 'Knight's Quarterly Magazine' on Longus (no. 2) and on the later Greek philosophy (no. 3). He was also the author of a poem, 'Evening', published in a volume edited by Joanna Baillie. In 1824 he was strongly recommended for the post of rector of the Edinburgh Academy, but failed to obtain it. On 19 March the following year he married Elizabeth Frances (died 23 Nov 1835), eldest daughter of John Taylor MP. 
In 1831 Malden succeeded George Long as professor of Greek at University College (then the University of London), and filled this chair until his resignation in 1876. He took an active part 'in promoting the compromise that led to the erection, in 1836, of the University of London as an examining body, and the incorporation of the Gower Street institution as University College'. He published in 1835 an essay entitled 'On the origin of universities and academical degrees', which was written as an introduction to the report of the argument before the privy council in support of the application of the University of London for a charter empowering it to grant degrees. 
In 1831, when it faced closure after a difficult first year, Malden was appointed headmaster of University College School jointly with Thomas Hewitt Key, the two men agreeing to take on the school at their own risk. Malden resigned in 1842, though he continued to teach the sixth form Greek until 1868. Malden remarried in 1843; his second wife was Georgina Augusta, daughter of Colonel Drinkwater Bethune of Thorncroft. He died on 4 July 1876 at his residence, 39 Belsize Square, South Hampstead. A Malden medal and scholarship (of the value of about $20), open to men and women, were established in 1878 by the subscribers to the Malden memorial fund. The medal, by M. Macphail, bears a portrait of Malden. 
Malden was a man of a gentle and retiring disposition. His scholarship was 'singularly elaborate and minute'. A tribute by a former pupil, probably R. H. Hutton, recalled his 'fastidious method', deliberately cultivated to counter contemporary critics of the new university in London who alleged that it would dispense superficial instruction (Bellot, 93-4). He was a contributor to the 'Philological Museum', edited by Connop Thirlwall in 1830; to the 'Classical Museum', edited by Dr Leonard Schmitz between 1843 and 1850; and to the 'Transactions of the Philological Society'. He reviewed Niebuhr's 'Roman History' in the 'Edinburgh Review' (56, 1833) and also published for the Society for the Diffusion of Useful Knowledge a 'History of Rome to BC' 390 (1830). 


@@@@@


doc= 17872


Maldon, Thomas (d. 1404), prior of Maldon, theologian, and preacher, was born in Maldon, Essex, and joined the Carmelite order there. He studied in London, where he was ordained acolyte on 17 February 1353 and priest on 4 March 1357, before moving to Cambridge. He was prior there from 1369 to 1372 and incepted as a doctor of theology shortly after. It is likely that he accompanied the provincial, Thomas Brome (died 1380), to the general chapter at Le Puy-en-Velay in June 1375, as they were at the papal court in Avignon on 10 October petitioning for a notarized copy of a papal bull. At the following general chapter, held in Verona in 1381, Maldon was appointed procurator-general, but was probably removed from office later in the same year. Some time after his return to England, he was appointed prior of the Carmelite house in Maldon, where in 1394 he received papal permissions to choose his own confessor and possess a portable altar, and in 1397 a further indult to receive plenary absolutions from a confessor of his choice. He died in 1404 and was buried in the chapel there. Bale records an address on the 'Sentences', four sets of 'quaestiones', and works on the 'Bible', 'Genesis', the 'Psalms', and the letters of St James, as well as three books of sermons, made up of twenty-four on the Blessed Virgin, thirty-four on the saints, the seasons, funerals, and dedications, and a collection delivered on academic occasions. The only surviving work is part of one of his forty-eight lectures on the 'Psalms' given at Cambridge, on 'Psalm 118' (Oxford, Balliol College, MS 80, fols. 190-232). 


@@@@@


doc= 17873


Malebisse, Richard (c.1155-1209/10), justice, was the eldest son of William of Acaster Malbisse, whom he succeeded in 1176, and Emma, the illegitimate daughter of William de Percy. His only tenancy-in-chief was a single fee of the honour of Eye, but he was nevertheless a considerable landholder in Yorkshire and Lincolnshire, who in 1198 founded the Premonstratensian abbey of Newbo, Lincolnshire, and was a benefactor of other religious houses, notably Fountains Abbey. He acted as a royal justice at Northampton in 1183, and seems to have kept the forest at Galtres in Yorkshire under Henry II. The keepership was confirmed (in return for a large sum) by Richard I. However, indebtedness to the king, arising in part from participation in royal administration and in part from litigiousness, forced him to borrow, and by 1182 at the latest he was heavily indebted to Aaron of Lincoln. Malebisse's leading role in the massacre of the Jews in York in 1190 made him infamous, even in his own lifetime. The chronicler William of Newburgh thought his name 'Mala-Bestia' peculiarly apposite. He makes it clear that the massacre was instigated not by the citizens of York, but by a 'conjuratio' of indebted local landholders, who capitalized on popular antisemitic fervour, whipped up by the preaching of the third crusade, as a means of extinguishing their debts. At the climax of the pogrom the 'conjurati' marched on York Minster and burned the Jewish bonds -- lodged there for safekeeping -- in the middle of the church. Thereby they sought to achieve 'liberation for themselves and many others' (William of Newburgh, 'Historia rerum Anglicarum', ed. R. Howlett, Rolls Series, 1884, 321-2). 
Malebisse might have liberated himself from debts to the Jewish moneylenders of York, but in doing so he had fettered himself anew. He forfeited his lands for his part in the pogrom, and was allowed to resume them, pending the return of the king, only in return for a fine of 20 marks. He compounded his difficulties by supporting Count John, the king's brother, first against the chancellor, William de Longchamp, for which he was excommunicated in December 1191, and then in open revolt against the king in 1193-4. On Richard I's return to England in 1194 Malebisse had to proffer 300 marks to recover the king's goodwill, and Richard seems to have kept him on a short leash of debt for the rest of his reign. On John's accession Malebisse sought to call in the new king's debt to him: he proffered a substantial fine to recover full seisin of what he had lost through his participation in what the chancery clerk delicately termed 'our service' ('Pipe rolls', 2 John, 110). He had managed to retain his keepership of the forest during Richard's reign, but he now began to play a fuller part in royal government, as an assessor of tallage, a justice itinerant in several midland shires during the 1201-3 visitation, and a member of John's embassy to William the Lion in 1201. But when he secured permission to fortify his residence at Wheldrake, near York, the citizens of York persuaded the sheriff to intervene with the king and stop the work. 
At the same time Malebisse was again finding that fuller participation in royal government could be just as expensive as exclusion. By 1204 he was proffering $100 to recover seisin of lands and chattels taken into the king's hand because of reports that he had kept the forest at Galtres badly. An inquest found that, among other offences, he had taken 250 of the king's oaks to fortify his aborted castle at Wheldrake. He had been caught with his hand in the till, and his administrative career came to another halt. Even his keepership of the forest was not restored to him. By this time he was again in debt to Jewish financiers: so much so that in 1205 the king instructed the sheriff of Yorkshire to grant him respite from his Jewish debts 'for as long as he remains in debt to us' ('Rotuli litterarum clausarum', 1.58). Ever resourceful, he managed to extract himself from this debt within three years, perhaps by dint of arranging a second marriage for his daughter Emma, widow of Robert de Meisnil, to Robert de Stuteville of Great Ayton, probably a younger son of Robert (IV) de Stuteville (died 1205), lord of Knaresborough. Stuteville thereby secured Emma's valuable dower, and doubtless made an appropriate expression of his gratitude to Malebisse, who had to pay heavily for royal permission for the marriage. By 1210 Malebisse was dead, for his elder son, John, owed a relief of 300 marks. Little is known of his wife, Helewise, and his second son, Richard. 


@@@@@


doc= 17874


Sir Alexander Malet, second baronet (1800-1886), diplomatist, who was born on 23 July 1800 at Hartham Park, Wiltshire, and educated at Winchester College and Christ Church, Oxford, where he graduated BA in 1822. He entered the British diplomatic service in 1824 as an unpaid attache and went to St Petersburg. Here he was an eyewitness to the military insurrection that took place on the accession of Tsar Nicholas in 1825. Malet now began his rise through the lower grades of the service, serving next as secretary of legation at Lisbon, under Lord Howden, during the Miguelite War of 1832-4. 


@@@@@


doc= 17875


Arthur Malet (1806-1888), East India Company servant and writer, was educated at Winchester College, Addiscombe College, and the East India College at Haileybury. In 1824 he was appointed to the Bombay civil service and took up his duties in 1826. He began his career as assistant collector and then magistrate at Khandesh. He next became assistant to the resident at Baroda, political agent and resident at Cutch in 1842, and agent in Kathiawar in 1843. In 1846 he was appointed secretary to the Bombay government's political and secret department, and then chief secretary in 1847. 


@@@@@


doc= 17876


Malet, Sir Charles Warre, first baronet (1753-1815), East India Company servant, was the eldest son of Alexander Malet (1704-1775), rector of Combe Florey, Somerset, and Maiden Newton, Dorset, and his wife, Ann, daughter of the Revd Laurence St Lo of Pulham, Dorset. At an early age he entered the service of the East India Company. He filled various posts, including charge of a mission to the Mughal emperor and of the residency at Cambay from 1774 to 1785, where he formed views in favour of expanding British power in India. Malet also developed an unrivalled knowledge of Gujarat and western India more generally, and was dispatched by the government in Calcutta to persuade the Maratha leader Sindhia to accept the appointment of a company resident to the court of the peshwa at Poona, a post which he took up himself in November 1785. 
Malet was by now associated with those, such as David Scott, who argued strongly in favour of consolidating and expanding the East India Company's Bombay presidency. He was keen to use the influence and energy of private traders to bolster the company's position in western India, and in 1780 had noted that 'Surat Broach and Cambay form the shackles of Gujrat' (Malet's letter-book, 1780; Nightingale, 137). For Malet, trade and British power went hand in hand, and he saw clearly the potential value of India's west coast to the China trade. In 1782 he recorded how a forward policy there 'opens a new prospect inviting the exercise of our arms, our policy and that great line of liberal justice by which reducing to order a country plundered by a thousand predatory chieftains is as easy to execute, as worthy of attention of a great and generous people, and the more readily to be adopted when consistent with their interest, their honour and perhaps necessary to the reestablishment of their affairs.(22 Feb 1782; Nightingale, 139)' The company's constant preoccupation with retrenchment meant that Malet's ideas were not immediately accepted. Nevertheless, he has been credited by Pamela Nightingale with 'a new vision... which influenced [Charles] Cornwallis and his successors as Governor General in Calcutta and Henry Dundas and the Court of Directors in London' (Nightingale, 137). His work also helped to lay foundations for Richard Wellesley's forward policy after 1798, Malet's imperialism having a clarity of design and loftiness of vision 'which Wellesley could not add to' (ibid., 174). In 1790 his correspondence with Lord Cornwallis was also influential in persuading Dundas against the proposed abolition of the company's Bombay presidency. 
Changing circumstances in western India soon validated Malet's arguments for a more assertive policy. In 1789 Tipu Sultan of Mysore attacked Travancore, a company ally. Cornwallis decided to counter by concluding a triple alliance between the company, the nizam of Hyderabad, and the peshwa. Given the mutual antipathy between these two Indian powers, the alliance was something of a coup. Malet was instrumental in bringing it to fruition in June 1790 after difficult negotiations and despite the counter-efforts of Tipu's 'vakils' in Poona. In February 1791 Malet was created a baronet as a reward for achieving the treaty. The alliance removed the initiative from Tipu in the military campaigns of 1790-92, although Mysore was defeated but not destroyed. Malet had observed to Cornwallis in 1790 that, if Tipu was removed, the company would be drawn into 'an intricate and almost inextricable labyrinth of controversy and altercation' with the nizam and the Marathas over the settlement of Mysore (Forrest, 129-30, 193). 
Malet was also concerned to counter French intrigue in western and southern India, especially after the outbreak of the revolutionary war in 1793. By now he had a well-established reputation and style. In 1796 Walter Ewer told Dundas that Malet 'was fit for the highest station in India... and he has a good deal of the Asiatick State about him, is very fond of shew and I should imagine may be easily gained with Titles or gaudy honors' (Nightingale, 137). He remained resident at Poona until 1797, became a member of the council at Bombay, and served for a while as acting governor of the presidency. 
Malet retired to Britain in 1798 accompanied by Susanna (died 1868), daughter of the portrait painter James Wales, whom he had befriended while in India. The couple married on 17 September the following year and had eight sons. Malet retained his interest in India and was instrumental in helping, with the artist Thomas Daniell, in the publication of some of Wales's works, most notably those of the caves at Ellora. In 1801 Malet published an article in 'Asiatic Researches' on the architectural and historical features of the same caves. He was created a fellow of the Royal Society and fellow of the Society of Arts, and died at Bath on 24 January 1815, when he was described as living at Wilbury House, Wiltshire ('GM'). 
Malet was succeeded in the baronetcy by his eldest son, 
On 22 December 1834 Malet married Mary Anne (or Marianne) Dora (1810?-1891), daughter of John Spalding and stepdaughter of Henry, Baron Brougham; the couple had two sons, Henry Charles Eden and Edward Baldwin Malet. Known as 'Brougham's petticoat' at the Foreign Office, Mary was ambitious for Malet's advancement and immediately plotted to get her husband made precis writer to the foreign secretary, Lord Palmerston. This ploy failed, although Palmerston did make Malet secretary of legation at The Hague, where he remained for almost nine years. He was eventually promoted to secretary of the embassy at Vienna and then British minister at Wurttemberg. In 1849 he was appointed minister-plenipotentiary to the Germanic confederation at Frankfurt. Here he formed a close friendship with Bismarck during a crucial period in German history which ended with the eclipsing of Austrian influence within the confederation and the emergence of a pre-eminent Prussia. Malet's career failed to progress further and, after the collapse of the confederation, in 1866, he retired and was created KCB. He became a magistrate and deputy lieutenant for Wiltshire, where he lived at Wilbury House. In addition to his diplomatic career, he was author of 'Some Account of the System of Fagging at Winchester School' (1828), an English translation of Wace's 'Roman de Rou' (1860), and 'The Overthrow of the Germanic Confederation by Prussia' (1870). He died on 28 November 1886 at his London house at Queensberry Place, Cromwell Road. 
Sir Charles Warre Malet's third son was 


On 31 March 1851 Malet married Mary Fleming, daughter of Colonel John Taylor; they had one son and three daughters. A keen huntsman (particularly of hogs), Malet narrowly escaped death on 26 January 1837 when his head was trapped in a tiger's mouth at the moment the animal was killed by a fellow hunter. Malet wrote a 'History of Sind' and translated from the Persian of Muhammad M'a. In 1856 he was in command of the 3rd light cavalry in the war with Persia when he was killed at the capture of Bushehr on 9 December. 
Sir Charles Warre Malet's fifth son, 
Seven years later he became a member of the Indian legislative council and of the Bombay council, and chief judge of the 'sadr diwani adalat' and 'sadr faujdari adalat' in 1857. During the Indian mutiny Malet initiated the defensive works for Bombay (which won him high praise from the governor). In 1860, the year he retired, he devised a land reclamation scheme for Bombay harbour. 
Malet was twice married: first (on 3 September 1846) to Mary Sophia, daughter of Sir John Pollard Willoughby, and secondly (in December 1854) to Annie Louise, daughter of G. Powney Thompson of the East India Company service. These marriages produced two sons and seven daughters. 
Malet published several works, including 'A Metrical Version of the Psalms in English' (1863), 'The Marriage of Solomon: a Drama' (1876), and 'The Books of Job, Ecclesiastes and Revelation in English Verse' (1883). He was also a keen family historian and compiled, in 1885, 'Notices of an English Branch of the Malet Family'. He died on 13 September 1888. 


@@@@@


doc= 17877


George Grenville Malet (1804-1856), army officer, was the fourth son of Sir Charles Warre Malet. He entered the 3rd light cavalry in Bombay in 1822 as a cadet and subsequently rose through the ranks, becoming lieutenant-colonel in 1854. In 1824 he took part in the capture of Godhra, Champaner, and Powanghen in Gujarat; in 1832 he served with Lieutenant-Colonel Jervis in Kathiawar against Sirdar Champoaj, and in 1834 in Gujarat once more against rebels in the Mahi Kantha. In 1839 he became the political superintendent of Mellanee, in Rajputana; he took part in the Anglo-Afghan War in 1842, during which he was wounded, and received a silver medal for his services. The year 1843 saw him serving with Sir Charles Napier at Hyderabad in Sind, and in 1844 he was appointed resident at Khairpur, the court of Mir Ali Murad Khan. In 1845 he accompanied Napier and Meer Ali in an expedition against the Baluchi chiefs. Five years later he became superintendent of the Gwalior contingent of horse. 


@@@@@


doc= 17878


Malet, Robert (fl. 1066-1105), landowner, was the eldest son of the Anglo-Norman landowner William Malet (d. 1071?) and Esilia, daughter of Gilbert Crispin. He was an adult by 1066 and succeeded his father on the latter's death, probably in 1071. The Malet lands in Normandy lay in the Caennais and the Pays de Caux, where their chief castle was at Graville. In England by 1086 Robert Malet had land in eight counties from Surrey to Yorkshire and was among the dozen richest lay landowners. Four-fifths of his wealth lay in east Suffolk, where his father had made Eye the centre of the estate. 
In 1075 Malet took a leading part in suppressing the Bretons who rebelled against William I in East Anglia, and occupied Norwich Castle for the king in the aftermath of the revolt. He was sheriff of Suffolk in 1080. He may have supported Robert Curthose's attempt to win the English crown in 1088 and was certainly out of favour with William II, who took the honour of Eye away from him, no later than 1094, and gave it to Roger the Poitevin. Malet disappears entirely from the historical record during William Rufus's reign: probably he went to Normandy and supported Curthose until the latter went on crusade in 1096. Eventually he attached himself to the king's brother Henry and was with him when he was crowned in England in 1100. Shortly afterwards Malet recovered the honour of Eye. He became Henry I's chamberlain and occupied a central place at court for the next five years, witnessing many royal charters. In later years he was regarded as the first occupant of the new office of master chamberlain. His latest dated appearance on a witness list was in February 1105. Probably between 1100 and 1105 he completed the foundation of a priory at Eye, a project which he had begun before 1087 but which had been interrupted during Roger the Poitevin's ownership of the estate. 
Malet's marriages and offspring are uncertain. A much altered copy of a charter names his wife as Maud, but a Robert Malet and his wife, Emmeline, gave land to the abbey of St Taurin at Evreux for the support of their son Hugh, a monk there. Malet may have had other sons called William and Robert, though the William Malet who succeeded him in Normandy has generally been regarded as his brother. Eye and the rest of his English lands passed on his death to Henry I, who in 1113 gave them to Stephen of Blois (later King Stephen). 


@@@@@


doc= 17879


Malet, Sir Thomas (c.1582-1665), judge and politician, was the son and heir of Malachi Malet, of Luxulyan, Cornwall, and his wife, Elizabeth Trevanion. Despite his Norman lineage, and more immediate descent from a solicitor-general to Henry VIII, Malet's immediate family and early life remain obscure. His special admission to the Middle Temple on 29 November 1600 at the request of Chief Baron Sir William Peryam lists his father as 'gent.', a vague and formulaic description. Malet's call to the bar at the summer reading of Sir Henry Montagu in 1606 was confirmed the following November. 
In 1614 Malet made his parliamentary debut as member for Tregony, Cornwall, being named to five committees and speaking on at least thirteen occasions. Growing professional stature may also be indicated by his appointment in 1616 with two other barristers to organize the Middle Temple's contribution to the tournament staged at Charles's creation as prince of Wales. On 18 March 1620 Malet married Jane, the daughter of Francis Mills, at St Matthew's, Friday Street, London; as their family grew with the birth of successive sons and daughters, eventually eight in all, he leased the Somerset manor of Poyntington in 1624, acquiring the freehold jointly with his uncle Michael Malet in 1630. Malet sat again for Tregony in 1621, where he continued an active speaker and committee man, attacking monopolists, patentees, and judicial corruption. By now, however, Malet was himself beginning to accumulate court preferment, initially via Bishop George Montaigne in his capacities as dean of Westminster and lord almoner, then through his own kinsman Edward Conway, secretary of state, who helped secure not only his return for Newport, Isle of Wight, in 1625 and 1626, but also the office of solicitor-general to Queen Henrietta Maria (September 1626). Hence Malet's lower profile in the first two parliaments of the new reign, and his qualified defence of Conway's patron Buckingham in the 1626 debate on the favourite's impeachment, although the demands of a still expanding practice and his fortnight's Middle Temple reading on 32 Hen. VIII c. 30 (jeofails) in Lent 1626 doubtless also played some part. 
Conway's death in 1631 barely checked Malet's advancement; when he was created serjeant in 1636 the patrons who lent their names to the case pleaded at his call were the queen and his old Middle Temple mentor, now the earl of Manchester. As befitted a 'learned man of good report' (Baker, 'Serjeants', 375) he enjoyed a widely based practice in Westminster Hall, served as treasurer of Serjeants' Inn, Chancery Lane, and acquired a Westminster town house. But it may rather have been his connection with a country near-neighbour, John Digby, earl of Bristol, that led to Malet's knighthood and appointment as puisne justice of king's bench on 1 July 1641. Within a year his suspected conniving at the promotion of a royalist petition from the Lent assizes at Maidstone saw Malet imprisoned in the Tower. Released in May 1642, he again rode the home circuit that summer. But when some Kentish MPs were refused permission to read a parliamentary declaration in his court at Maidstone, black rod and a troop of horse brought him back to the Tower. There he remained until October 1644, when he was released in order to negotiate a prisoner exchange at Oxford. 
Malet stayed eighteen months with the king, during which time parliament formally disabled him from any future judicial service. After being admitted to compound in December 1646, he retired to Somerset. But on 2 May 1660 the House of Lords summoned 'Serjeant Mallet' (Woods, 128) to attend them, and within the month he was reappointed judge. Disappointed of the chief justiceship, for which he no longer possessed physical or mental capacity, Malet was permitted to retain his judicial place and perquisites, without any requirement to attend court sittings. He died, probably at Poyntington, on 19 December 1665, some two and a half years after being granted a pension of $1000, plus a baronetcy which for unknown reasons he did not take up. He was buried at Poyntington and was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 17880


Malet, William (d. 1071?), landowner, was lord of Graville-St Honorine in the Norman Pays de Caux; his much-debated byname has been explained as meaning 'one who conducts a mail-horse and its baggage'. Of unknown parentage, he was described by Gui of Amiens as part Norman and part English and as 'compater' 'Heraldi', which indicates either spiritual affinity to or close companionship with Harold Godwineson. His father was probably his predecessor as lord of Graville and tenant of the Giffards in numerous other fiefs in the same region. Legends associating his son-in-law Turold the Sheriff with Godgifu (Godiva) of Mercia, mother of Harold's wife, probably indicate a relationship between William's mother and the earls of Mercia or their wives. A strong association of William and his family with Lincolnshire suggests that his English roots lay there. 
Between 1060 and 'c'.1066 William Malet occurs with William I in a number of charters relating to the abbeys of Montivilliers and Jumieges. He was associated with the abbey of Preaux in the Lieuvin, of which he was given the fellowship by Abbot Ansfrid in 1060, and with the abbey of Bec, which later mistakenly identified him with his descendant, a monk of the same name. His interests in the region of Lisieux probably originated in his marriage to Esilia, daughter of Gilbert Crispin, castellan of Tillieres in the Vexin. William fought at Hastings and was soon credited with having been ordered to bury Harold's body on the seashore; whether he had anything to do with Harold's burial is uncertain, but it now seems clear that the body was buried at the church Harold founded at Waltham. In 1068 William became castellan of the first castle at York and sheriff of Yorkshire. In September 1069 the city was attacked by Danes. Briefly held captive, William, his wife, and their younger children were among the few to escape alive. He lost the shrievalty of York and the land associated with it soon afterwards, and was thereafter occupied in suppressing the fenland revolt led by Hereward the Wake. 'Domesday Book' makes it clear that he died in the campaign, probably in 1071. 
At his death, the bulk of William Malet's wealth lay in the vast lordship (the honour of Eye) granted to him in East Anglia, principally in Suffolk (where he had a castle and a market at Eye), but also in Norfolk, Essex, Surrey, Bedfordshire, and Nottinghamshire. His heir was his eldest son Robert Malet, who occurs with his father from shortly before 1066. Of William's numerous other children few can be identified. He had another son Gilbert, a daughter Beatrice, wife of Guillaume d'Arques, and a daughter who married Alfred of Lincoln. Another daughter married Turold the Sheriff; their daughter Lucy became the principal heir of the family's Lincolnshire estates. Close examination of 'Domesday Book' strongly indicates that Durand Malet was another of William's sons and not his brother, as is often stated. 


@@@@@


doc= 17881


Malet, William (c.1175-1215), baron, lord of Curry Mallet, Somerset, an honour of twenty-two and a half knights, was the descendant of Robert Malet (died before 1156), first holder of the barony, and the son of Gilbert Malet (died 1194). He married Alice, the daughter and coheir of Thomas Basset of Headington, Oxfordshire. He accompanied King Richard on crusade and landed at Acre in June 1191. In 1196 he paid a fine and relief of $150 for his inheritance. 
Malet was appointed sheriff of Dorset and Somerset at Christmas 1209, after the men of the two shires had offered King John a large fine to have someone resident in the shires other than William Brewer as their sheriff, and he served until Michaelmas 1212. By 1212 he was in financial difficulties with the king, and by 1214 owed 2000 marks, which remained unpaid in 1221, although he had made an agreement in 1214 to serve King John with ten knights and twenty soldiers in Poitou in exchange for cancellation of his debt. In 1215 Malet took a prominent part on the rebel side in the struggle between John and the barons. He joined the confederacy of the barons at Stamford in Easter week, and was one of the twenty-five barons subsequently elected to guarantee the observance of 'Magna Carta' ['see also 'Enforcers of Magna Carta]. For the part which he took in the events of that year he was personally excommunicated by the pope, together with thirty other barons. 
Malet appears to have died before 20 December 1215, for on that date his estates are known to have been in the possession of his son-in-law, Hugh de Vivonia, his estate having been divided between three daughters: Mabel, who married first Nicholas Avenel and second Hugh de Vivonia (died 1249) of Chewton, Somerset; Helewise, who married first Hugh de Poyntz (died 1220), a tenant of the honour of Gloucester (who joined Malet and his own father in the rebellion, and was a prisoner in Bristol Castle in July and August 1216), and second Robert de Mucegros (died 1253/4), a prominent servant of Henry III; and Bertha, who died unmarried before Easter 1221. 


@@@@@


doc= 17882


Malham, John (bap. 1747, d. 1821), schoolmaster and writer, was baptized on 14 June 1747 at Burnsall, near Skipton in Craven, in the West Riding of Yorkshire, the son of Robert Malham. He had at least one brother, Robert, who was baptized on 7 August 1749, and he was educated at Skipton grammar school. In 1768 he ran a school and corresponded on mathematical subjects in the 'Leeds Mercury'. He then took holy orders and served a curacy in Northamptonshire. In 1781 he returned to teaching, and in the following year published the first of many educational works: 'The Schoolmaster's Complete Companion and Scholar's Universal Guide to Arithmetic'. By September 1790 he was living in The Square, Plymouth Dock, as a 'teacher of navigation and the classics', as he described himself in his 'Navigation Made Easy and Familiar' (1790). In 1792 he vainly petitioned John Pitt, second earl of Chatham, then first lord of the Admiralty, for a naval chaplaincy. His publications at this period included revisions of textbooks by Daniel Fenning, a collection of sermons addressed to seamen, and a naval gazetteer. 
About 1798 Malham settled in Salisbury, where he served as chaplain to the county gaol and curate of St Edmund's, and worked as a corrector of the press. He joined in the local controversy about itinerant preaching -- between the dissenters and the bishop of Salisbury, John Douglas -- that had been sparked off by Douglas's charge to his clergy in summer 1798. After loyally defending his bishop in 'A Broom for the Conventicle, or, The Arguments for Village Preaching Examined' (1798) Malham was presented to the vicarage of Hilton, Dorset, on 30 April 1801. Almost immediately he published a pamphlet on clerical non-residence to demonstrate that country clergymen could not afford to reside on their livings, as their current stipends were too low. In an earlier pamphlet he had bemoaned the poverty of curates. His conscience clear, he moved to London, where he found work in the book trade. He continued to write, principally on religious and educational subjects, and grew more ambitious in his projects. He published a life of Christ and a revised edition of Foxe's 'Book of Martyrs', both of which were illustrated, and spent three years on his final work, an impressive folio published in 1816 as 'The grand national history of England, civil and ecclesiastical, from the earliest period of genuine record to the year 1816'. He died near London on 19 September 1821. 


@@@@@


doc= 17883


Malym, William (1533-1594), headmaster, was the son of Henry Malym of Staplehurst, Kent. He was educated at Eton College from about 1544, was accepted as a scholar of King's College, Cambridge, on 14 August 1548 and graduated BA in 1553. On 11 January 1555 Malym was discommuned from King's for an unknown offence, but was reinstated after two weeks and graduated MA the following year. 
In 1561 Malym was appointed headmaster of Eton College. His role in the provocative selection as the college's provost of the Roman Catholic sympathizer Richard Bruarne in 1561 is unclear, but -- unlike Bruarne -- he remained in office. Malym was the author of a 'Consuetudinarium', or account of the rules of the college, which bears his name on the fly leaf and which was probably intended as a guide for the commissioners who visited the school in 1561. The work is a vital source for the customs of the Eton calendar and the routines of school life. It reveals that the day began at 5 a.m., and that much of the instruction of younger pupils was in the hands of the senior boys of the seventh or highest form, styled 'praepositores'. It also shows that features of the old religion survived at Eton in 1561. Each of the boys had a confessor, on the basis that 'confession is a wholesome medicine for the sinner', as Malym explained approvingly, though this passage was later crossed through (Lyte, 148). Other features of school life did not change. The day remained extremely long, holidays were meagre, and Latin and Greek dominated the curriculum. 
On her visit to Eton in September 1563 Queen Elizabeth was presented with a collection of Latin verses by the scholars, who asked that she look favourably on 'our dearest master, by whose kindness and extreme watchfulness, by day and night, we have attained such proficiency in literature', hoping that he should not 'be ground down by ceaseless labours and studies' (Lyte, 169). It may be doubted whether the students' plea was inspired by spontaneous gratitude for the master's tender care. The tradition of flogging, established under its most celebrated practitioner Nicholas Udall, was continued enthusiastically by Malym, his former pupil. In a meeting at Windsor about this time, William Cecil reported that 'divers scholars of Eton be run away from that school for fear of beating', news which provoked a debate on the value of the birch, and stimulated Roger Ascham to write 'The Scholemaster' (Ascham, preface, sig. B2'r'- 'v'). 
Most historians of Eton have thought that Malym's headship finished in 1563, but Sterry lists his tenure as lasting until 1571. On his own account Malym travelled to Turkey in 1564, convincing himself of the 'cruelty and beastly behaviour' of the natives, 'having been among them more than 8 months together' (Daye, preface). He toured widely, visiting Antioch, Cyprus, the Aegean Islands, and Venice. There is also a second report of 'his great travayle by sea and land unto Hierusalem. Where he was made knight of the sepulchre as appeareth by his letters patent dated at Jerusaleme the 13th day of September... 1564' (BL, Harleian MS 1116, fol. 69'v'). Such protracted travels suggest that Malym had left Eton altogether. On 3 April 1569 he was installed in the prebend of Biggleswade in the diocese of Lincoln, an appointment most unusual for one who had not been ordained. When, a few days earlier, Malym had written to thank Cecil for using his influence with the earl of Leicester in his behalf, it was probably in regard to this benefice. 
On 19 and 20 January 1573 a meeting of the court of the Mercers' Company was held at St Paul's School, London, which discussed the appointment of a new high master in succession to John Cook. The bishop of London, Edwin Sandys, and the archdeacons of Essex and Middlesex were asked to choose between William Malym and Ralph Waddington. Malym was preferred, and took up his appointment on Lady day 1573. It seems possible that Christopher Holden, the 'surmaster' or usher, was resentful at being thus passed over. Whatever the reason, it is clear that the two men were at loggerheads, and in 1575 it proved necessary to appoint arbitrators to resolve contentions between them. But the trouble, which centred on rights of access to the Mercers' lodgings, continued. In 1576 the Mercers' court resolved the dispute. The school was now accommodating boarders, and it is possible that this had been inaugurated by Malym. 
It was on 13 April 1578, while master of St Paul's School, that Malym was married to Mary Strete, at the church of St Thomas the Apostle in London. Mary died before him, for in his will Malym named one Alice as his wife. Malym had two daughters and two sons, of whom one, Dudley, was completely disinherited and disowned by his father as 'undutiful, unthankful and unnatural'. Among Malym's pupils at St Paul's were the soldier Sir Francis Vere, and Sir Thomas Chaloner, later chamberlain to Prince Henry, whose book 'De republica Anglorum instauranda' was edited by Malym in 1579. Malym also translated from the Italian a pamphlet on the siege and capture of Famagusta in Cyprus by the Turks, published by John Daye as 'The True Report of All the Successe of Famagosta', with an epistle dedicated to the earl of Leicester dated 23 March 1572. Malym contributed commendatory letters or verses for 'Demosthenis Graecorum', by Nicholas Corr (1571), and for Edmund Grant's 'Spicilegium' (1575). In 1578 he delivered an oration in Latin to the Dutch military leader John Casimir on his visit to London. 
In February 1580 Malym wrote to Alexander Nowell, dean of St Paul's, asking for release from his duties at the school, but this was not granted. On 29 May 1581 he appeared before the wardens of the Mercers and requested to be discharged, asking them to find a successor within the next twelve months. Malym had constructed a polyglot lexicon for the students, in Latin, Greek, Hebrew, French, Spanish, and high Dutch, for which the college paid 19's'. on his departure in autumn 1581. Malym died shortly before 15 August 1594, when he was buried at the church of All Hallows-the-Less, Thames Street, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 17884


Malins, Sir Richard (1805-1882), judge, was born at Evesham, Worcestershire, on 9 March 1805, the third son of William Malins of Ailston, Warwickshire, and his wife, Mary, eldest daughter of Thomas Hunter of Pershore, Worcestershire. He was educated at a private school in Soho, London, before entering Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge, where he matriculated in Michaelmas 1823 and was sixth junior optime. He graduated BA in 1827. He had already joined the Inner Temple in 1825, and was called to the bar on 14 May 1830. On 10 May 1831 Malins married Susanna (died 1881), eldest daughter of the Revd Arthur Farwell, rector of St Martin's, Cornwall. 
Malins practised with success as an equity draftsman and conveyancer in Fig Tree Court, Temple, and later in New Square and in Stone Buildings, Lincoln's Inn. He had no family or other connections in the profession, but he was industrious and persevering, and eventually, through his special knowledge of real property law and of the interpretation of wills, he obtained a good court practice in equity. He trained in his chambers numerous pupils, of whom the most eminent, Hugh Cairns, was his responsible assistant for some time. In 1849 he transferred his membership from the Inner Temple to Lincoln's Inn, and was made a bencher, acting as treasurer in 1870. In 1849 also he was appointed a queen's counsel, and soon enjoyed a large leading business in the court of vice-chancellors Parker and Stuart. 
Malins was elected as a Conservative MP for Wallingford in July 1852, standing as a supporter of agricultural protection, and held the seat until July 1865, when he was defeated by Sir Charles Wentworth Dilke. He was a frequent parliamentary speaker, and was prominent in the determined opposition which was made to the 'Divorce Bill' of 1857. He carried two bills successfully through parliament, the 'Infants' Marriage Settlements Act', in 1855, and the 'Married Women's Reversionary Property Act' in 1857, known jointly as 'Malins's acts'. 
On 1 December 1866 Malins was appointed a vice-chancellor of the Chancery Division of the High Court in succession to Sir Richard Kindersley. He was knighted in February 1867. He had a considerable gift for marshalling facts, expressed himself with fluency and point, and was esteemed for his amiability and generosity of sentiment; but he was talkative and impulsive, and his judgments did not add much to the law of England. Early in 1879 he was lamed by a fall from his horse. He was seized with paralysis early in 1881, and in March 1881 he retired and was sworn of the privy council. The death of his wife at the end of 1881 hastened his own death, which took place at his London home, 57 Lowndes Square, on 15 January 1882. He was buried on 21 January at Bray, Berkshire. A niece, Henrietta Carey, married the judge Sir Charles James Watkin Williams. He left no family. 


@@@@@


doc= 17885


Malkin, Benjamin Heath (1769-1842), schoolmaster and antiquary, only son of Thomas Malkin of St Mary-le-Bow and his wife, whose maiden name was Heath, was born on 23 March 1769 in London. He was educated from 1779 to 1787 at Harrow School, where he was head of the school in 1787. He entered Trinity College, Cambridge, as a pensioner on 5 January 1788 and graduated BA in 1792. He was admitted to Lincoln's Inn on 3 February 1791. He married 'c'.1794 Charlotte, the daughter of the Revd Thomas Williams, curate of Cowbridge, Glamorgan, and master of Cowbridge grammar school. 
As a young lawyer in London, Malkin made the acquaintance of William Blake, with whom he shared an interest in radical politics, and in 1806 he commissioned Blake to design and engrave the frontispiece of his book 'A Father's Memoir of his Child', a personal record of his eldest son, Thomas, a gifted child who died in 1802 at the age of six. The published engraving, though designed by Blake, was eventually executed by R. H. Cromek (1770-1812). The introduction to the work, dedicated to Thomas Johnes of Hafod (1748-1816), is valuable as the first and fullest account of Blake's early life and it included a selection of Blake's poems, which it brought to the attention of the general public for the first time. Blake contributed an appreciation of the child's precocious artistic talents. Malkin did much to promote Blake's career and is thought to have been the author of the texts accompanying the latter's plates for Robert Blair's 'The Grave' (1808). An illuminated manuscript copy of the 'Songs of Innocence', presented by the author to Malkin and given by him to Johnes, is preserved in the Beinecke Library at Yale University. 
From 1809 to 1828 Malkin was headmaster of the grammar school at Bury St Edmunds, where his pupils included Edward Fitzgerald, John Mitchell Kemble, and James Spedding (1808-1881). The last mentioned was later to pay a warm tribute to Malkin as an inspiring and liberal, if idiosyncratic, teacher who encouraged independence of mind and character. The attention he gave in the curriculum to essay-writing and the study of English literature was unusual for the time. 
In March 1810 Malkin was awarded the degree of DCL by the University of Oxford, having previously been incorporated of St Mary Hall. In December 1829 he was appointed to be the first professor of history, ancient and modern, at the newly established University of London, and his inaugural lecture was published the following year, but he resigned before the end of the academic session. His wide interests are reflected in the range of his publications. His tragedy 'Almahide and Hamet' (1804), based on Dryden's 'Conquest of Granada' (1669), was never acted but was praised for its introductory 'Letter on dramatic composition'. In addition to historical work such as 'Classical Disquisitions and Curiosities' (1825) he published in translation 'The Adventures of Gil Blas' (4 vols., 1809), illustrated by Robert Smirke, which was frequently reprinted. Malkin's taste for the picturesque is to be seen in his topographical work 'The Scenery, Antiquities and Biography of South Wales', published in 1804 and reissued in a two-volume edition in 1807. Written after a tour of south Wales in 1803, it was one of the best travel books of its kind, displaying Malkin's acute observation and considerable knowledge of Welsh history. From about 1830 Malkin lived at the Old Hall, Cowbridge, and took a keen interest in the Glamorgan community. He founded the Society for the Improvement of the Working Population in Glamorgan, for which he edited pamphlets and acted as president and secretary. 
Malkin died at Cowbridge on 26 May 1842, and was buried there. A monument was erected to his memory in the church of St James, Bury St Edmunds, with an inscription attesting to the affectionate respect in which he was held by his former pupils. He and his wife had four sons besides Thomas. The eldest, Sir Benjamin Heath Malkin (1797-1837), a friend of Macaulay, was a fellow of Trinity College, Cambridge, and later a judge of the supreme court at Calcutta. Frederick (1802-1830), also a fellow of Trinity, was the author of a 'History of Greece' (1830), while Arthur (1803-1888), a contemporary and friend of Fitzgerald and Spedding, was a pioneer alpinist. Charles Johnes (1808-1825) died young. 


@@@@@


doc= 17886


Malleson, George Bruce (1825-1898), army officer and military historian, born in London on 8 May 1825, was the second son of John Malleson of Wimbledon and Lucy ('nee' Nesbitt), whose father was colonial secretary in the Bahamas. He was educated at Wimbledon and at Winchester College, where he became a keen cricketer. Through Colonel Oliphant, a director of the East India Company, he was given a direct commission as ensign on 11 June 1842, and was posted to the 65th Bengal native infantry on 26 September. He obtained a lieutenancy in the 33rd Bengal native infantry on 28 September 1847. He was appointed to the commissariat department on 30 November 1852 and served in the Second Anglo-Burmese War. On 28 March 1856 he was appointed an assistant military auditor-general and was engaged in administrative duties at Calcutta during the mutiny. He wrote 'The Mutiny of the Bengal Army', published anonymously in 1857 and known as the 'red pamphlet'. In this he identified Lord Dalhousie's administration, and especially the annexation of Oudh, as mainly responsible for the revolt. In 1856 Malleson married Marian Charlotte, only daughter of George Wynyard Battye of the Bengal civil service, and sister of three distinguished soldiers, Quintin, Wigram, and Frederick Battye, all of the Guides, and all killed in action. She survived her husband. 
Malleson was promoted captain on 11 June 1857, major in the Bengal staff corps on 11 June 1862, lieutenant-colonel on 11 June 1868, and colonel in the army on 11 June 1873. He was appointed a sanitary commissioner for Bengal in 1866, and controller of the military finance department in 1868. In 1869 he was chosen by Lord Mayo to be the guardian of the young maharaja of Mysore; he held this post until 1877, when he retired on full pay with the honorary rank of major-general. He had been made CSI on 31 May 1872. 
Malleson had been a frequent contributor to the 'Calcutta Review' since 1857, and was also a correspondent of 'The Times'. After he retired he devoted himself to writing, mainly military history, especially Indian. He had a broad grasp, great industry, and a vigorous and picturesque style, but was apt to be a strong partisan. He did much to draw attention to Russian expansion in central Asia and its potential threat to British rule in India. His many publications included 'History of the Indian Mutiny' (3 vols., 1878-80, in continuation of vols. 1 and 2 of J. W. Kaye's 'A History of the Sepoy War in India, 1857-1858', 3 vols., 1864-76), 'History of Afghanistan' (1879), 'The Decisive Battles of India' (1883), and 'The Russo-Afghan question and the Invasion of India' (1885). Malleson died at his home, 27 West Cromwell Road, Kensington, London, on 1 March 1898. 


@@@@@


doc= 17887


Malleson, John Philip (1796-1869), Unitarian minister and schoolmaster, was born in Battersea, Surrey, on 11 February 1796, the fourth and youngest son of Thomas Malleson (1752?-1820) and his wife, Mary (1759?-1823), third daughter of Frederick Gibson, merchant of Cheapside. Thomas Malleson was a silversmith in Sweeter's Rents, Cornhill, and later a jeweller in Princes Street (later Wardour Street), Leicester Square. The family soon moved to 4 Cheyne Walk, Chelsea, where Mary Malleson opened a boarding and day school for girls to supplement a family income declining with the prosperity of Thomas Malleson's business. 
Educated in his mother's school, Malleson was sent in 1810 to Hitchin to board with the Revd John Bailey (1754-1818), who that year became classical tutor at Wymondley House, an Independent academy supported by the Coward Trust, which Malleson entered in 1812; letters to his mother attest to the liberation he felt in his new surroundings. Beginning in June 1817, he supplied the Independent chapel at Wem, Shropshire, but in November, to the disappointment of his congregation, he matriculated at the University of Glasgow, aided by Dr Williams's Trust, taking the BA in 1819. 
In 1820, his views on the divinity of Christ having moved to the Arian position, Malleson became minister of a presbyterian congregation in Hanover Street, Long Acre, London; but he resigned two years later on turning Unitarian. He then opened a day school in Leeds and served as chaplain to Mrs Richard Slater Milnes (1760?-1835) at Fryston Hall near Wakefield. When Lant Carpenter (1780-1840) fell ill in 1827 and resigned -- temporarily, as it turned out -- from Lewin's Mead Chapel in Bristol, Malleson filled in for a time, but proved an unsuccessful candidate; while there he met James Martineau (1805-1900), just out of Manchester College, York, and conducting Carpenter's school. 
In 1829 Malleson succeeded the Revd John Morell (1775-1840) as minister of the New Road Chapel, Brighton, and as head of the school at Hove House; he retired from both posts in 1860 and settled in Croydon. He placed far higher value on the role of minister than on the onerous task of teaching, but, while some admired the restrained elegance and sober effect of his preaching, he had no popular gifts in the pulpit, and it is as a schoolmaster that he deserves primarily to be remembered. 
On 14 January 1823 Malleson married Anna Sophia (1793-1873), daughter of William Taylor (1755-1843) and his wife, Catherine Courtauld (1760-1826) of London, and granddaughter of the Revd Henry Taylor (1711-1785), rector of Crawley, vicar of Portsmouth, and author of the latitudinarian letters known as 'The Apology of Ben Mordecai' (1771-7). The second-generation Taylors were Unitarian, as were the Courtaulds with whom they were associated in the great silk manufacturing firm. The eldest daughter of John Philip and Anna Sophia Malleson died of a fever shortly after the move to Brighton, and within a few weeks their eldest son was killed in a street accident; three other children survived their father, who died of 'softening of the brain' at The Close, Croydon, on 16 March 1869 and was buried in Marylebone cemetery, Finchley. 


@@@@@


doc= 17888


Mallet, David (1701/2?-1765), poet, was the son of James Malloch (died 1723) and his wife, Beatrix Clerk, but it is not certain which of two couples of that name were his parents: one James was an innkeeper of Crieff, Perthshire; the other was a well-to-do tenant farmer at nearby Dunruchan. David was educated first at Crieff parish school then at Edinburgh high school, where he was a janitor. In both places his mentor was John Ker, writer of Latin poetry and later professor of humanity at Edinburgh. By 1720 Malloch was tutor to four sons of a Mr Home of Dreghorn, near Edinburgh, and had entered the university, where he made friends with James Thomson (1700-1748) and other budding writers whose earliest published work, including four poems by Malloch, appeared in the 'Edinburgh Miscellany' (1720). He was also befriended by the established poet Allan Ramsay (1686-1758). 
Malloch spent between three and four years at college but did not at this time proceed to a degree. He was recommended by his professors to James Graham, duke of Montrose (1682-1742), a whig peer in the union parliament, as tutor to the duke's younger sons William and George, aged eleven and eight; so in August 1723 he went south and for the next three and a half years lived in his employer's residences in Hanover Square, London, and at Shawford, near Winchester, enjoying a salary of $30 per annum plus keep. 
Malloch's first literary success was 'William and Margaret', which is so free an adaptation of the traditional ballad 'Fair Margaret and Sweet William' as to be an original work. First printed with Ramsay's 'Jenny and Meggy' (1723), it was reprinted many times in song and ballad collections, including Thomas Percy's 'Reliques' (1765), and occasionally as a broadside with music; it first appeared over Mallet's name in Savage's 'Miscellany' (1726). Malloch's English imitation of John Ker's 'Donaides' (1725), a Latin poem on Aberdeen University, achieved far less notice but earned him an Aberdeen AM degree on 11 January 1726. 

'William and Margaret' made an early appearance in Aaron Hill's 'Plain Dealer' (24 July 1724), after which Malloch entered Hill's literary circle and became acquainted with other English poets, including Richard Savage, John Dyer, and Alexander Pope. When Thomson and other Edinburgh friends migrated to London, Malloch, who soon Anglicized his pronunciation and changed his name to Mallet, gave them valuable introductions. Between March and September 1727 Mallet made a short tour of Europe with his pupils the Montrose boys. It was said that when he was in Italy he was challenged by a Tuscan soldier named Flobert over a girl they were both in love with, but there was no duel (Walpole, 'Corr.', 21.377, 386). 
After his return Mallet wrote 'The Excursion' (1728), a blank verse poem of deistic nature description similar to Thomson's 'Summer', and 'A Poem to the Memory of Mr Congreve' (1729), which has been wrongly attributed to Thomson. Pope and Mallet together wrote the prologue to Thomson's tragedy 'Sophonisba' (1730), after which Pope interested himself in the writing and staging of Mallet's tragedy 'Eurydice', which opened at Drury Lane on 22 February 1731 and ran for a respectable fourteen performances. (It is about Periander, tyrant of Corinth, not Orpheus or Creon.) Aaron Hill wrote the prologue and epilogue; the printed play was dedicated to the duke of Montrose. The anonymous 'Remarks on Eurydice' (1731) is a mock 'Key', absurdly arguing that Mallet's play is a Jacobite allegory about the 1715 rising. Also in 1731 Mallet wrote an epitaph on his friend William Aikman, the painter, and his son, who died within weeks of one another. Mallet's 'Of Verbal Criticism' (April 1733), an epistle in heroic couplets addressed to Pope, satirizes Bentley, Theobald, and other so-called pedants. 
Pope's friendship for Mallet, 'whom I love and esteem greatly' ('Correspondence', 3.511), grew in the 1730s. When Mallet left Montrose's service in 1731 it was on Pope's recommendation that he became tutor to James Newsham (1715-1769), stepson of John Knight of Gosfield, Essex. Tutor and pupil were admitted to St Mary Hall, Oxford, as gentlemen commoners and matriculated together on 2 November 1733: Mallet understating his own age as twenty-eight. His congratulatory verses to the prince of Orange on visiting Oxford were published in April 1734, coinciding with his receipt of three degrees: the Oxford BA on 15 March and MA on 6 April, and the Edinburgh MA on 16 April. Mallet and Newsham travelled abroad in 1735-6: their itinerary is unrecorded except for visits to Paris, Geneva, and Hanover. 
Mallet married a woman named Susanna (died 1742), probably in 1734, after Oxford. They and their two children, Charles ('b'. 1735) and Dorothea Celesia (bap. 1738, d. 1790), lived at Strand on the Green, across the river from Kew, where Thomson lived, and close to Pope in Twickenham. Mallet was often in their company; he associated with Chesterfield, Bolingbroke, and others who opposed Walpole, and readily lent himself to the politico-literary campaign orchestrated by Lyttelton on behalf of the prince of Wales in the later 1730s. Thus it was that Mallet became one of the earliest victims of Walpole's stage 'Licensing Act' when part of his prologue to Thomson's contentious opposition play 'Agamemnon' was censored in January 1738. Mallet's own 'Mustapha', which opened at Drury Lane on 13 February 1739 and, like 'Eurydice', ran for fourteen nights, was a typical opposition piece in its parade of high-minded patriotic sentiments and denunciation of evil ministers. Pope and Bolingbroke thought highly of it; Thomson wrote the prologue; the printed play was dedicated to the prince of Wales. 

'Alfred, a Masque' (1740), which glorifies the ideal of a patriot king, implicitly embodied in the prince of Wales, was written jointly with Thomson; the music was by Thomas Augustine Arne. A text revised and enlarged by Mallet, with additional music by Charles Burney and spectacular stage effects, was acted fifteen times at Drury Lane in 1751 and printed over Mallet's sole name; it was the only dramatic work of his to hold the stage after his death. Queen Elizabeth, another idealized patriot, is prominent in Mallet's 'Life of Francis Bacon' (1740), which Fielding commended for its judgement and 'nervous manly style' ('Joseph Andrews', book 3, chap. 6). Gibbon, too, admired the 'vigorous sense' of Mallet as a historian (Gibbon, 'Memoirs', 121). Vivid character sketches and spirited narrative make the 'Life' of Bacon the most readable of Mallet's writings and induce regret that he could not or would not complete his life of Marlborough. 
Mallet's wife, Susanna, died in January 1742. On 27 May Mallet was appointed under-secretary to the prince of Wales at $100 per annum. On 2 October he was married by licence at St Andrew's, Holborn, to Lucy Elstob (1715/16-1795), spinster, aged twenty-six. She was the youngest daughter of Lewis Elstob, steward to the earl of Carlisle, and brought a dowry of $10,000, of which $4000 was settled on herself. According to Gibbon, Lucy was a 'talkative, positive, passionate, conceited creature', though 'not destitute of wit and learning' (Gibbon, 'Letters', 2.155; 'Memoirs', 94). On the evidence of several affectionate poems, the most charming of which is 'Cupid and Hymen' (1750), describing how family and friends will celebrate his eighth wedding anniversary, Mallet loved her not only for her money. The children of this marriage were Lucy ('b'. 1743) and Arabella ('b'. July 1745). Mallet's wife took care to see that her husband, a man of diminutive stature, was always very well-dressed, usually in black velvet. These circumstances lend some support to the conjecture that Mallet is the small, black-suited, seated figure on the left in Hogarth's well-known painting of Lord George Graham in his ship's cabin (1745). Graham was Mallet's friend and former pupil. No certain portrait of Mallet has been traced. 
In October 1743 Mallet published a collected edition of his poems and plays. In 1744 he was at Pope's deathbed. In the same year Sarah, duchess of Marlborough, died and bequeathed $500 apiece to Richard Glover and Mallet to write a life of her late husband, desiring that 'no part of the said history be in verse' ('GM', 14, 1744, 590-91). Glover refused; Mallet, who had corresponded with the duchess about Marlborough's papers, accepted the commission, but made little or no progress in the remaining twenty years of his life. In the first half of 1745 he suffered from gout and visited the Netherlands for some unstated purpose, perhaps connected with the life of Marlborough. His 'Amyntor and Theodora, or, The Hermit' (April 1747) is a blank verse narrative set on St Kilda and much indebted to Martin Martin's well-known description of that island in 1698. Mallet's poem, which he had originally conceived as a stage play, is dedicated to the earl of Chesterfield and prefaced by an affectionate poem to Mrs Mallet. It was sold to the booksellers for $120 (compared with $25 for 'The Excursion', a poem of comparable length, in 1728). 
The prince dismissed Mallet from his under-secretaryship early in 1748 when Lyttelton (Mallet's patron) joined the government, whereupon both Chesterfield and Lyttelton sought a government post for him, but without success. Mallet wrote 'A Congratulatory Letter to Selim' (April 1748) to defend Lyttelton against the charge of political apostasy, but continued to associate with Bolingbroke, the unpopular doyen of opposition, who prompted him in 1749 to write an advertisement attacking Pope for having clandestinely printed a garbled edition of Bolingbroke's 'Patriot King'. Bolingbroke died in December 1751 and Mallet, as his literary executor, published his works between March 1752 and March 1754. Some had been first published by Richard Francklin and now became the subject of a copyright dispute; arbitrators judged that Mallet owed Francklin $200 but he never paid; Francklin's consolation was the poor sale of Mallet's expensive edition. More seriously, Mallet included certain hitherto unpublished writings of which Johnson memorably wrote that Bolingbroke was 'a scoundrel for charging a blunderbuss against religion and morality' and 'a coward, because he had not resolution to fire it off himself, but left half a crown to a beggarly Scotchman to draw the trigger after his death' (Boswell, 'Life', 6 March 1754). Mallet was charged with mercenary motives but he had at least the courage of his religiously sceptical convictions. 
Since 1748 the Mallets had lived in Putney, where their neighbour and friend was Edward Gibbon, father of the historian. They made a home for the elder Gibbon's niece and ward, Catherine Elliston, and advised on young Edward's tutor. When young Edward became a Roman Catholic in 1753 his father promptly took him to the freethinking Mallets, who plied him with philosophy, by which he was 'rather scandalized than reclaimed' (Gibbon, 'Memoirs', 68), but they remained friends: Gibbon accepted Mallet's advice on his reading and writings, and was a frequent guest in his house. Mallet had a more guarded association with David Hume, who asked him to point out Scotticisms in the manuscript of his 'History of England'. Hume lived, as he said, on 'good terms' with Mallet, while conceding that he could be an 'irascible little man', but he cordially disliked Mallet's freethinking and assertive wife, who reportedly spoke of herself and Hume as 'We Deists' ('New Letters of David Hume', 68; 'Letters of David Hume', 1.307n.). 
Mallet's patriotic 'Britannia, a Masque', with music by Arne, was performed as an afterpiece at Drury Lane on 9 May 1755 and achieved another dozen performances over the next three years. Its prologue, written and spoken by Garrick in the character of a drunken sailor reading a playbill, was very popular. At this time Mallet was eager to serve the government. In December 1753 he had indignantly rejected an invitation to write an opposition periodical for $400 per annum (BL, Add. MS 32733, fols. 614, 616). Visiting Paris in September 1755 and having highly placed French contacts, he offered to act as a spy (BL, Add. MS 43772, fols. 55-61). He was one of the authors hired to defame Admiral Byng: his pamphlet 'Observations on the 12th Article of War', by 'A Plain Man', was written in October 1756 and vetted by lords Hardwicke and Anson (BL, Add. MS 35594, fols. 103, 236-7, 254); its publication on 27 March 1757 was timed to justify the execution of Byng on 14 March; it earned him $300 from the duke of Newcastle's secret service fund. 
In 1758 Mallet moved to fashionable George Street, Hanover Square, and began to grow very corpulent. In 1759 his poems, plays, and 'Life' of Bacon were reprinted in a three-volume edition of 'Works'; also 'Eurydice' was revived at Drury Lane and acted four times. In 1760 appeared his 'Verses on the Death of Lady Anson' and 'Edwin and Emma', a ballad of unhappy love similar to but less successful than 'William and Margaret', and in 1761 'Truth in Rhyme', a compliment to Bute, the new prime minister. These three new works and others were collected in 'Poems on Several Occasions' (1763), dedicated to the fourth duke of Marlborough with the promise that Mallet's life of his great ancestor would soon be finished. On 19 January 1763 Mallet's tragedy 'Elvira', based on Houdar de la Motte's 'Inez de Castro', opened at Drury Lane and ran for fourteen performances; the printed edition carried a politically contentious dedication to Bute. Mallet's recent services to the government were now rewarded with the post of inspector of the exchequer book in the outports of London, worth $300 per annum. George Canning, the statesman's father, wrote 'Davy Malloch the Whig in his old age turn'd 'Tory'' ('On the Tragedy of Elvira' in G. Canning, 'Poems', 1767, 89). 
Mallet's private letters to Andrew Millar, Thomas Percy, Hume, and others in the 1760s disingenuously claim that his work on the life of Marlborough is nearly complete and would fill two quarto volumes, but no trace of such a work has been found. In 1764 the duchess of Douglas made Mallet one of her commissioners in the famous Douglas cause concerning the legitimacy of her nephew Archibald James Edward Douglas (1748-1827). The cause took Mallet to Paris, the boy's birthplace, in 1764. Leaving his wife in France, he returned to England in poor health early in 1765, died at home on 21 April, and was buried on 27 April in St George's burial-ground, South Audley Street. According to Chesterfield he died 'of a diarrhoea, which he had carried with him to France, and brought back again hither' ('Letters of... Chesterfield', 22 April 1765); he was said to have been aged sixty-three. 
By his will, proved in London on 8 May, Mallet bequeathed all his property to his wife. The contents of their house in Hanover Square, which were sold in July 1765, included a fine-toned French horn with a silver mouthpiece and a chamber organ. Mallet's large library, sold in March 1766, contained as many French books as English. Manuscripts he had inherited directly from Bolingbroke and from Pope via Bolingbroke, including Pope's Homer, were given by his widow to the British Library (Add. MSS 4807-4809 and 4948 A and B). Thereafter Mrs Mallet lived in France. She was imprisoned during the Revolution with her daughter Lucy (Mrs Macgregor), and died in Paris on 17 September 1795, aged seventy-nine. Mrs Macgregor died insane in Paris before her mother. The other daughter, Arabella, who married a Captain Williams RE, and parted from him after two months, was the chief beneficiary of Mrs Mallet's will. The fate of her stepson Charles is not known; his sister Dorothea died in 1790 in Italy, where she had lived since 1759, having married young to escape her stepmother's tyranny (Gibbon, 'Journey', 22 May 1764, 65). 
Mallet is best-known in Johnson's hostile 'Life', coloured as it is by an (unexpressed) detestation of freethinking. Johnson charges Mallet rightly with being vain and mercenary, though it is not true that he 'was the only Scot whom Scotchmen did not commend' (Johnson, 'Poets', 3.403), for he had good friends among Scots as well as English. Mallet's poems and plays were reprinted in standard collections into the nineteenth century; French, German, and Italian translations of his 'Life of Bacon' were still appearing after his death; his 'William and Margaret' played a significant part in the eighteenth-century ballad revival and has remained a frequent anthology piece; nevertheless these flickers of afterlife do not refute Johnson's judgement that Mallet's works were such as could be kept alive during the author's lifetime by the 'personal influence' of 'a writer, bustling in the world', but which, 'conveying little information and giving no great pleasure, must soon give way' to 'other modes of amusement' (ibid., 410). 


@@@@@


doc= 17889


Mallet, Sir Louis (1823-1890), civil servant and economist, was born on 16 March 1823 in Hampstead, Middlesex, the second son of John Lewis Mallet ('b'. 1775) and his second wife, Frances (died 1851), sister of John Herman Merivale of Barton Place, Exeter. Louis was descended from a Huguenot family which left France because of religious persecution and settled in Geneva. His grandfather Mallet du Pan ('b'. 1749), a celebrated publicist, fled from Paris to Britain in 1798, with John Lewis, to escape the French Revolution. Mallet's father was appointed through Pitt's influence to a clerkship in the Audit Office in 1800 and rose to be secretary to the board of audit. 
Mallet was privately educated because of an unspecified constitutional delicacy inherited from his father. In 1839 he was appointed junior clerk in the Audit Office, where monotonous regularity plagued him -- as it did throughout his life. He turned to reading poetry and Shakespeare, studying German, playing the guitar, and initiating a lifelong correspondence with 'a brilliantly gifted cousin of about his own age', Louisa Merivale (Mallet, 'Sir Louis Mallet', 12). In 1847 he moved to the more congenial and stimulating atmosphere of the statistical department of the Board of Trade, which expanded vigorously in responsibility and staff during the 1850s. A whig with radical sympathies, he studied political economy, embraced free trade before meeting Cobden personally, and rose through the ranks to assistant secretary and head of the commercial department on 2 January 1867. While doing so he became private secretary (1848-52) to the president of the board, Henry Labouchere, and then (1855-8) to Stanley of Alderley as vice-president and president. In 1858 he married Frances Helen, daughter of the Hon. and Revd Edward Pellew. They had four sons, of whom Bernard wrote a biography of his father. 
In 1860 Mallet was appointed assistant commissioner, under Richard Cobden, for negotiating the commercial treaty with France. Cobden was impressed by his exceptional competence. This was the turning point in Mallet's career. He became an enthusiastic proponent of Cobden's ideas and was launched into diplomatic work, resulting in some sixty commercial treaties in Europe. Cobden's death in 1865 left him the principal authority on commercial policy, and the chief official representative of free-trade opinion. He was joint plenipotentiary for negotiating treaties of commerce and navigation with Austria in 1866. This established his reputation as chief adviser to the British government in matters of commercial foreign policy. He was accorded the CB in 1866, and was knighted in 1868. 
Meanwhile, in 1864, a parliamentary select committee report recommended that the Foreign Office and its consular staff become the clearing house for Board of Trade commercial negotiations and treaties. By 1868 the commercial department withered to an assistant secretary and four under-employed clerks. Mallet pragmatically recommended that the consultative business of the commercial department be transferred to the Foreign Office, and resigned in January 1872. 
Largely because of his commercial experience, Mallet was appointed to the Council of India, on which he served from 8 August 1872 until 16 February 1874, when he succeeded his cousin Herman Merivale as permanent under-secretary in the India Office. A stickler for discipline, punctuality, and protocol, he was dismayed by the persistence of the easy-going ways of the East India House, and complained to the newly appointed secretary of state, Salisbury, of the 'laxity' which had been 'allowed to grow up in this office'. Certain heads of department were singled out for criticism of their 'superficial' and 'misguided' opinions, or for being 'literary men' with press connections. In his opinion 'the personality of an official should be vigorously and systematically suppressed'. As for the council, it was 'too young', given to holidays, and rushing off to the train at the end of meetings (Williams, 102-5). He did not discourage Markham, head of the geographical department, from resigning in 1877. Even the young, inexperienced parliamentary under-secretary Hamilton was loaded with work to test his durability (Hamilton, 69). 
Mallet's exorcism of the ghost of 'John Company', which included tidying up the secret department, made it easier for his successor, J. A. Godley, to consolidate office reform. Mallet exercised considerable influence on the finance committee. His financial and commercial expertise, underpinned by Salisbury, improved the standing of the office in economic matters. Both were anxious to curb expenditure, especially in public works, which Mallet regarded as 'a bottomless pit of expense and waste', not to be funded by government (Mallet, 'Northbrook', 70; Mallet, 'Sir Louis Mallet', 122). 
Mallet's relationship with Salisbury was cordial, with considerable agreement on policy. The viceroy from 1872 to 1876, Northbrook, was a personal friend. Notwithstanding, the 1875 'Indian Tariff Act', with its duty on raw cotton, was ill received in the India Office, where Sir Erskine Perry warned Northbrook that Mallet 'as a rigid Member of the Cobden Club would annihilate everything that in the least involves protection' (Moulton, 197-8) ['see also 'Cobden Club]. In an unprecedented move, Mallet was sent to India to negotiate suitable amendments. There he fell ill, but he benefited from this valuable, if short-lived, Indian experience. Meanwhile Salisbury disallowed parts of the act. Later Mallet contributed to its repeal, and the reform and reduction of the salt tax. Nevertheless, Indian policy generally was subject to vagaries in the relationship between the home and supreme governments. Ultimately, even Mallet, with his strong aversion to 'feeble and slipshod Government', was convinced that because of this weakness, and lack of knowledge on the part of transient ministers, it was impossible for the India Office to initiate effective measures for reform (Mallet, 'Sir Louis Mallet', 39, 147-9). 
Mallet believed in a secure India within the empire, governed according to British ideas, but he disapproved strongly of the title empress of India conferred on Queen Victoria, as encouraging disloyalty among Indians. In 1877, during the Russo-Turkish War, he agreed with Salisbury that restless Muslims did not constitute a threat either in India or to British policy in Europe. He supported the employment of Indians in the lower ranks of the civil service, believing that the material condition of the Indian masses should be improved to equip them for self-government. His strong sense of justice and equity thus laced his view of England's mission abroad, which owed much to Cobden's lifelong aim 'to lay the foundations of her empire in her moral greatness' (Mallet, 'Free Exchange', 71). He opposed the 'forward' policy in India, believing that further expansion of empire generally should not be at the cost of failure to alleviate suffering at home. The surge of imperialism after the Second Anglo-Afghan War (1878) troubled him, since he took no pride in assuming the 'white man's burden'. Increasingly, therefore, he no longer felt at home in government. 
Mallet represented the varied interests of India and Britain, as a royal commissioner at the Paris and London exhibitions (1878) and, with Lord Reay, at the international commission on gold and silver in Paris (1881), where he became a convinced bimetallist. In retirement he was a member of the royal commission on the relative value of precious metals (1887-8). Earlier he was a member of the royal commission on the copyright laws (1875). 
Mallet, like his father, did not publish extensively, and read widely in French and English literature (including 'Treasure Island') for relaxation. He preferred to live among those who divided their time between 'letters and affairs' ('DNB'). Morley's biography of Cobden owed much to his suggestion and help. His contributions to the publications of the Cobden Club, and various other writings, were collected in 'Free Exchange' (1891). Sympathetic to Frederic Bastiat and the French school, and unhappy with Ricardo and Mill, his view of Cobden's ideas identified a carefully conceived political scheme which embraced all aspects of national life, seeking a solution to the social problem. In its international aspect, it was a policy of concord and peace ('DNB'). As he put it: 'If, as an economist and Liberal, I did not believe that the free operation of natural economic laws tended to raise the condition of the masses and to bring about a less unequal distribution of wealth, I should take very little interest in political economy or in public affairs. (Mallet, 'Free Exchange', frontispiece)' Mallet belonged to an 'inner circle of influential political thinkers' who had personal access to all levels of government (Mallet, 'Sir Louis Mallet', 53). At congenial gatherings in the homes of Grant Duff and Lord Arthur Russell he enjoyed the company of friends who included Indian civilians and soldiers. The Athenaeum also was a meeting-place with, among others, Maine, Cobden, and Matthew Arnold. However, the new spirit in imperial government was at odds with his high principles of peace abroad and retrenchment at home, while living in London had become 'impossible' for health reasons. Accordingly, he resigned on 29 September 1883. A month earlier he had been sworn of the privy council. 
Mallet moved to Englefield Green, Surrey, in 1884. As a young man he delighted in natural beauty and country life, riding his horse to work. But chronic ill health, including a partial failure of eyesight during the 1850s and 1860s, resulted in frequent absences from the office. Persistent infirmity saddened him, but there was no self-pity or shirking of duty. His firm, austere looks denoted a magisterial presence, whose challenging eyes belied unusual sensitivity and compassion. He was essentially a family man, whose wife 'brought him the lifelong devotion and intelligent and cheerful companionship which was precisely what his own deeply affectionate nature needed' (Mallet, 'Sir Louis Mallet', 31). Endowed with many statesman-like attributes, including perspicacity, persuasiveness, and humour, Mallet carried authority graciously and with humility. His unassuming 'savoir-vivre' was derived from his forebears, parents, and family connections and friends in Britain and the continent, which he visited regularly from the age of ten. He died of influenza at 13 Royal Crescent, Bath, on 16 February 1890. 
There were those who believed that Mallet was too single-minded in his quest for universal free trade as a panacea, failing to appreciate fully the weaknesses of commercial treaties; that he was on the wrong side in the bimetallic controversy, and appeared to have underestimated the capacity of Britain to pay additional taxes. Yet he was admired, especially because he never lost sight of his life's main question: 'Why have I so much and others so little?' For him the solution lay in the teachings of the economists, reflected in his dictum that 'A man may be an economist without being a statesman; he most certainly cannot be a statesman without being an economist' ('Spectator', 95, 1905, 654). 


@@@@@


doc= 17890


Mallet, Robert (1810-1881), civil engineer and scientist, was born at Ryder's Row in Dublin on 3 June 1810, the son of John and Thomasina Mallet. His father came from Devon in 1780 to join his uncle's brass and copper founding business. Mallet received his early education at Bective House in Dublin and entered Trinity College, Dublin, in December 1826, where he studied mathematics and science, graduating BA in 1830. 
In 1831 Mallet became a partner in his father's works, the same year marrying Cordelia Watson (died 1854); the marriage produced three sons and three daughters. He took charge of the Victoria foundry, greatly expanding it and securing large contracts for much of the railway plant, permanent way materials, and ironwork required in the building of the main lines of railway in Ireland. An early undertaking was the raising and strengthening of the 133 ton roof of St George's Church in Dublin, for which he was in 1841 awarded a Walker premium by the Institution of Civil Engineers. In 1836 the firm of J. and R. Mallet erected a number of swivel bridges over the River Shannon. Contracts were also completed for Guinness & Co., the brewers, including boring a deep artesian well, the construction of steam barrel-washing machinery, and large sky coolers. Mallet was elected an associate of the Institution of Civil Engineers in 1839, being transferred to member in 1842. He surveyed the River Dodder in 1841 and devised a scheme to provide a supply of pure water to parts of Dublin city, and to secure a reliable summer water supply to the paper mills along the river. (A similar scheme was eventually built in the 1880s.) Between 1845 and 1848 he supplied and erected the ironwork at many of the railway termini, as well as engine sheds, workshops, and a 200 ft span timber viaduct over the Nore in co. Kilkenny. His foundry supplied the castings for the first Fastnet Rock lighthouse (1848-9); the structure was replaced in 1904. Mallet invented the buckled plate, which he patented in 1852 (No. 557). Such plates were used widely in structures, particularly for flooring, where they combined maximum strength with minimum depth and weight. In 1854, during the Crimean War, he designed and had built two large siege mortars capable of firing 36 inch shells to distances of over 1 mile, but no opportunity arose to use them before the conclusion of a peace treaty with Russia in 1856. 
In 1860, with the completion of the trunk railway lines in Ireland, engineering work became scarce, and Mallet closed the foundry and moved to London, where he had begun to establish himself as a consulting engineer. He lodged with a Mrs Daniel, and in 1861 married her daughter Mary, his first wife having died in 1854. He edited the 'Practical Mechanic's Journal', 1865-9, wrote extensively for 'The Engineer', and gave evidence as a scientific witness in patent cases. In 1863 he reported on the Hibernia and other Ruhr collieries in Germany, and in 1864 was involved in an abortive scheme to connect Dublin's main line railway termini. He investigated the use of the Thames Tunnel by the East London Railway, and the possibility of damage to the Royal Observatory at Greenwich. 
Mallet's investigations in physical geology were directed towards four main areas: glacial flowage (1837-45), geological dynamics (1835 onwards), seismology (1845 onwards), and vulcanology (1862 onwards). Between 1850 and 1858, he coined no less than eight terms with the prefix 'seism- ', including seismology. His classic paper to the Royal Irish Academy in 1846 on earthquake dynamics is regarded as one of the foundations of modern seismology. He investigated the great Neapolitan earthquake of December 1857 and established the first principles of observational seismology. With his eldest son, John W. Mallet, he compiled a 'Catalogue of the World's Earthquakes' (1852-4) and a 'Seismographic Map of the World' (1857), both published by the British Association. 
Mallet published at least eighty-five papers, on such diverse topics as the corrosion of iron, alloys of copper with tin and zinc, atmospheric railways, the application of water power, fouling of iron ships, earthquakes, and volcanoes. He was elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1854. He received a Telford medal and premium from the Institution of Civil Engineers in 1859, and the Cunningham medal from the Royal Irish Academy in 1862. In the same year, the University of Dublin bestowed on him an honorary master of engineering degree, followed two years later by an honorary LLD. He was awarded the Wollaston medal of the Geological Society in 1877. 
Mallet died at Enmore, The Grove, Clapham Road, London, on 5 November 1881. He was buried at Norwood cemetery, London, on 6 November. He was survived by his second wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 17891


Mallett, Francis (d. 1570), dean of Lincoln, was the son of William Mallett of Normanton, Yorkshire. He was a scholar of Queens' College, Cambridge (1519-22), graduating BA (1522), MA (1525), BTh (1534), and DTh (1535), and preached before the university in 1532-3. As a protege of Thomas Cromwell he became master of Michaelhouse in 1533, retaining this post until the college was subsumed into the larger foundation of Trinity in 1546, when he received a pension of $20. Also in 1533 he acquired the vicarage of Rothwell, Yorkshire (which he resigned in 1543); in 1535 he became rector of Swillington, Yorkshire, retaining it until 1569. In 1536 and 1540 he was elected vice-chancellor of Cambridge. But he was slow to produce the foundation deeds of his own college as required by the royal visitors of 1535. Archbishop Cranmer, whose chaplain he had become by January 1536, asked Cromwell to excuse Mallett's delay because of his preaching duties in the diocese of Canterbury and at Paul's Cross. By April 1539 Mallett was chaplain to Cromwell himself, and employed by him at Cranmer's palace of Ford, Kent, in writing up a liturgical scheme. This was almost certainly a part of the texts (now BL, Royal MS 7 B iv) in which Cranmer first followed Lutheran models in adapting the canonical hours to the twofold office of matins and evensong. Cranmer hoped Mallett's 'diligence and pains in this business' would earn him favour from Cromwell, to whom he commended his 'right judgment in learning, and discreet wisdom' (Cox, 367). 
Cromwell's fall in 1540 doubtless impeded Mallett's advancement, but on 13 December 1543 he was granted a canonry of Windsor, in which he was installed on 24 December and which he retained for life. In 1544 he acquired the prebend of Yatton in Wells Cathedral (resigned by 1559). Up to this point he had been a keen reformer -- by his own later admission he had been deceived by 'new fangled two-penny books' ('Acts and Monuments', 8.728). The turning point came when, by 1547, he completed the translation of Erasmus's paraphrase on 'St John' which Princess Mary had begun but then abandoned. As Mary's principal chaplain and almoner in Edward VI's reign (by 1550 at the latest), Mallett (by now a staunch Catholic) was at the centre of the controversy over the princess's mass, which for a time threatened to become a major diplomatic crisis. Mass had been permitted in Mary's houses, but only in her actual presence. In July 1550 Mallett broke this compact by celebrating at Beaulieu in Essex before Mary took up residence there. The sheriff, apparently without waiting for orders from London, indicted Mallett, who fled to the north of England. In December the sheriff, by now backed by the privy council, was still seeking him. Finally in April 1551 the earl of Shrewsbury secured an arrest. Mallett was examined before the privy council at Durham Place and condemned for reoffending after having been forgiven his original fault, and also for persuading others to 'embrase his naughtie oppinions' ('APC', 3.267). He was committed to the Tower on the 29th. In answer to Mary's complaint the council told her that Mallett had been imprisoned for his original offence, compounded by his flight, and at the king's 'express orders' ('CSP Spain', '1550-52', 288). 
Following Mary's accession in 1553 Mallett's career recovered dramatically. As precentor of St George's, Windsor, he supervised the restoration of Catholic ornament he had previously rejected. On 5 April 1554 he was appointed canon of Westminster, retaining his position until the chapter was dissolved in 1556. On 19 April the queen named him dean of Lincoln; he was installed by proxy on 29 May and in person on 7 September. He was also installed in the prebends of St Martin's (18 December 1556) and Corringham (28 January 1557) in Lincoln Cathedral, but rarely resided there. On 20 July 1554 he was appointed master of the hospital of St Katharine near the Tower of London, and on 23 May 1555 was exempted from first fruits of over $300. To this office he gave his chief attention, refurnishing the church and house, and restoring choral services; but subsequently he could not find adequate singing men for any money, nor 'obedient parishoners' (TNA: PRO, SP 12/7, no. 77). In secular affairs he was JP for Middlesex and Berkshire from 1555, and in 1556 helped to interrogate state prisoners. On or before 3 September 1556 he became lord high almoner. In this capacity he gave the queen a gold crucifix as a new year's gift, accompanied by a letter heavy with classical allusion. On 10 April 1558 he was presented to the prebend of Stratton in Salisbury Cathedral. 
On 14 October 1558 Mallett received the temporalities of the see of Salisbury as bishop elect, but his advancement was halted by the queen's death on 17 November. In her will he received $200 for masses for her soul. Following Elizabeth's accession Mallett accepted the return to protestantism and so kept his deanery. He resigned the mastership of St Katherine's on 6 November 1561, following a dispute with the executor of the previous master. He had been vicar of Lancaster from 1554 until his nomination to the episcopate. He was also incumbent of Ashbourne and Wirksworth, Derbyshire, in his patronage as dean of Lincoln, and the rectory of South Leverton, Nottinghamshire. As 'ex officio' member of the 1563 convocation he assented to the 'Thirty-Nine Articles' by proxy, and defended himself to Archbishop Parker against the accusation that he had preached against the Anglican classification of the sacraments. He died at Normanton, as owner of Malet's Hall there, on 16 December 1570. By his will of 14 December he made bequests to the poor women of Rothwell, Swillington, and Castleford (Yorkshire), to his sister, Jane Burtone, and to other kin. His brother Henry was canon of Lincoln. 


@@@@@


doc= 17892


Mallory, Thomas (d. 1689), clergyman and ejected minister, was a native of Northamptonshire, although his date of birth and parents are unknown; he is not to be confused with the royalist Cheshire clergyman of the same name. Having matriculated as a sizar from St Catharine's College, Cambridge, at Lent 1630, he graduated BA in 1634 and proceeded MA in 1637. He was ordained priest in the diocese of Peterborough on 9 June 1639. 
Little is known of Mallory's wife, other than her likely name, Frances, and the fact that she predeceased her husband, dying in or before January 1669. The couple had, at the least, a son and six daughters, of whom the eldest, Frances, was baptized at St Nicholas, Deptford, on 19 July 1644, not long after her father's nomination on 1 February as vicar of that parish. On 3 August 1645 Bulstrode Whitelocke 'tooke in short hand a Sermon of Mr Mallery att Deptford & repeated it to his family this Sabbath day' ('Diary of Bulstrode Whitelocke', 177). Mallory's church politics were not to the taste of John Evelyn, but the diarist recorded in 1653 that though the present incumbent was 'somewhat of the Independent, yet he ordinarily preached sound doctrine, and was a peacable man; which was an extraordinary felicity in this age' ('Diary of John Evelyn', 2.65). On 6 August 1657, he noted, Mallory 'declaimed against the folly of a sort of enthusiasts and desperate zealots, called the Fifth Monarchy Men, pretending to set up the kingdom of Christ with the sword' (ibid., 2.122). On 29 September 1657 Mallory was named an assistant to the Kent commission into the ministry. Evelyn attended his farewell sermon at Deptford on 17 January 1659. Soon afterwards, Mallory took up a lectureship at St Michael, Crooked Lane, London, where he preached, probably on Sunday afternoons, for a period of two years from 25 March 1659. 
In a 1660 list of London congregational ministers Mallory is given as also preaching at St James's, Duke's Place. His sermon, 'How may we have suitable conceptions of God in duty?', was published by Samuel Annesley in 'The Morning-Exercise at Cripple-Gate'. Mallory was one of twenty-five signatories of 'The renuntiation and declaration of the ministers of congregational churches and public preachers of the same judgment', a document issued in order to dissociate those churches from the Venner rising in January 1661. Ejected from his lectureship some time later, on 24 March 1662, Mallory accompanied Bulstrode Whitelocke and Dr John Goodwin to the house of the lord chancellor, where it was reported that Clarendon: 'discoursed very freely about liberty of Conscience & professed himselfe a great friend to it, & that he would bring the K[ing] to assure it to them... they thought their desires in this point to be accomplished... [but] after an hours discourse... he dismissed them, & proved afterwards the greatest ennemy that could be to them & their desires. ('Diary of Bulstrode Whitelocke', 645)' In 1669 Mallory was a signatory of a preface to 'Death and Life' by the Amsterdam preacher Samuel Malbon, whose 'name is sweet and precious amongst those saints and people to whom he preaches', together with William Greenhill, Joseph Caryl, and Richard Lawrence, a grouping which testifies to his continuing congregational outlook. He died, probably in London, in January 1689. 


@@@@@


doc= 17893


Mallory, Thomas (1604/5-1671), Church of England clergyman, was the son of Thomas Mallory of Davenham, Cheshire (died 1644), dean of Chester, and his wife Elizabeth, daughter of Richard Vaughan (c.1553-1607), bishop of London. He matriculated at New College, Oxford, on 15 October 1624 aged nineteen, graduated BA on 7 May 1628, and proceeded MA on 17 January 1632. In 1635, on the death of William Forster, he was presented by Richard Mallory of Mobberley and William Forster by reason of a grant from the dean (his father) and chapter of Chester, to the church of Northenden, Cheshire. However, doubts about the validity of the presentation seem to have given rise to his re-presentation by the king on 6 August 1635. It was perhaps about this time that Mallory married his first wife. Jane Mallory, however, died very young and was buried at Northenden on 12 February 1639; Thomas must have remarried shortly afterwards, for in 1644 his second wife, Mary, was reported to be looking after six of his children, for whom $6 19's'. 9died was provided by the committee for sequestrations. Mallory later claimed to have been ejected by Sir William Brereton in 1642. A Henry Root was in possession by 18 May 1643. 
Mallory was evidently a committed and active royalist. Early in the civil war, as his son John informed John Walker, Mallory was imprisoned for a year at Stafford, but was released in exchange for a notable parliamentarian. From here, reports Walker, he travelled to Oxford, where he often preached before Charles I, and from there he repaired to Lichfield as chaplain to Sir Harvey Bagot, governor of the garrison. When the town fell Mallory returned to Northenden, joining the band of royalists who sought to defend Wythenshaw Hall, and effecting a dramatic escape before besieging troops under the command of Colonel Robert Dukinfeld stormed the building on 25 February 1644. In August the house and glebe at Northenden were sequestered. 
Mallory was listed in May 1648 as a delinquent parson, still under sequestration, but in that month it was reported that the estate of his father the dean, who had died in April 1644, had been restored to the use of his mother, Elizabeth. It was at her house at Davenham, Cheshire, in July 1648, that the marriage of the Revd Henry Newcome took place, and Thomas probably officiated. Later Mallory served Norton in Moors, near Stoke upon Trent; his second wife, Mary, was buried at Astbury, just across the Cheshire border, on 26 June 1649. In 1651 Mallory gained a title to the rectory of Eccleston, Lancashire, when the incumbent, Edward Gee, signatory from Eccleston of the 'Harmonious Consent' of the Lancashire preachers in 1648, was in prison. It is unclear whether Mallory actually entered this living during the Commonwealth, for Gee was released and in occupation before 27 May 1653. Gee died, however, on 27 May 1660, and Mallory was instituted to the rectory on 6 September on the presentation of the king. The next year he was readmitted to the rectory of Northenden, and on 11 April 1662, a government dispensation was granted to Mallory to hold both rectories, despite the distance of more than 30 miles between them. 
Mallory evidently felt that his record warranted the gratitude of the restored house of Stuart. In his petition for the rectory of Houghton, Durham (endorsed on 9 July 1660), he claimed to have 'Served the late King in the war, and his Majesty in the late abortive attempt of the Cheshire gentlemen', that is, that he had been active under Sir George Booth in the summer of 1659 ('CSP dom.', '1660-61', 112). The bid for Houghton was rejected, and his petition of 13 July for the prebend of Stillington, York, also failed, for on 30 July Henry Bridgeman was presented to that dignity. However, in time Mallory received his reward. On 1 December 1660 he was made a DD by the University of Oxford. On 31 July 1661 he was collated to a canonry of Chester, and on 19 September he was admitted to the prebend of Wolvey, in Lichfield. 
Mallory's pastoral efforts did not please everyone. Newcome recalled his 'learned unprofitable sermon to the generality of people' on 9 November 1662, though it might have been worse: 'If the shepherd fed not as desired, yet the watchman smote not as was feared' ('Diary', 138). Such remarks may reflect the diarist's anxieties in the aftermath of the Bartholomew purge; Newcome later suggested that Mallory had influence with the bishop of Chester. Mallory was still rector when he died in 1671 at nearby Brindle. He was buried at Eccleston on 8 September. 


@@@@@


doc= 17894


Malone, Anthony (1700-1776), politician, was born in Ireland on 5 December 1700, the eldest son of Richard Malone (1674-1745) of Baronston, co. Westmeath, and his wife, Marcella, the daughter of Redmond Molady, the nephew and coheir of Sir Patrick Molady of Robertstown. His father was the only son of Anthony Malone and his wife, Mary, the daughter of John Reily of Lismore. Edmund Malone (1704-1774), barrister and politician, was his brother. While a student at the Temple he had attracted the favourable notice of William III through diplomatic work in the Netherlands. He was called to the Irish bar about 1700 and pursued a successful legal career before his death on 6 January 1745. 
Anthony Malone was educated at Mr Young's school in Abbey Street, Dublin, before proceeding to Trinity College, Dublin, on 7 November 1717; he was awarded the degree of LLD by Trinity in 1737. On 30 March 1720 he entered the Middle Temple, London; a week later, on 6 April 1720, he matriculated at Christ Church, Oxford. After spending two years at the university he returned to the Middle Temple. He was called to the Irish bar in May 1726, and in the following year he was elected MP for co. Westmeath, being returned at the same time for Blessington, which seat he declined. In July 1733 he married Rose (died 1773), the daughter of Sir Ralph Gore, bt, speaker of the Irish House of Commons; the couple had no children. At an early date in his career Malone was earning more than $3000 per annum, and by now he had established himself in Dublin as a successful barrister. In the Commons he became noted as an orator and attracted the attention of the Irish administration. In 1737 he voted with the minority against the devaluation of gold, on the grounds that it would harm Irish trade. He became prime serjeant-at-law in 1743, and served as a justice of assize on several occasions between 1744 and 1750, as well as in 1760 and 1763. In parliament he was associated with Gore's successor as speaker, Henry Boyle, who had the greatest influence in the Irish Commons, but he also earned the praise of George Stone, archbishop of Armagh, who described him as 'the most considerable Man here, and the most usefull to the Government; at the same time, He is of all those in the Service of the Government, the most independent and the least importunate for Favours' (Burns, 87). 
Relations between Stone and the Boyle party, and as a result between Boyle and the government, later became strained, partly through Stone's failure in 1751 to support the application for the post of solicitor-general of Malone's younger brother Richard (1706-1759), MP from 1741 for Fore. Stone suspected that Malone's Irish and Catholic ancestry made him naturally inclined against the British interest in Ireland. Malone was seen as the leader of anti-government opinion in the early 1750s, and he incurred the displeasure of the duke of Dorset's administration in 1753 for his insistence that the bill allowing the appropriation of surplus revenues should refer to royal recommendation of the measure rather than emphasizing royal consent. He was removed from office by order of the ministry in London. However, he was compensated by Dorset's successor, William Cavendish, marquess of Hartington, in 1756 with a patent of precedence at the bar -- one of a series of measures designed to conciliate the Boyle party and leading to accusations that they had surrendered their patriot principles by some colleagues and the mob. He was also offered the post of chancellor of the exchequer, which he at first refused because he feared a loss of income from the bar and was loath to alienate his allies. He was eventually appointed on 10 September 1757, with an additional pension to compensate for the reduction of his law practice, and he was sworn of the privy council on 26 October. 
Malone remained an influential member of the Commons, ensuring parliamentary majorities for the administration of John Russell, fourth duke of Bedford. His career was tarnished, though, in 1758, when he became a partner in an unsuccessful bank with Nathaniel Clements, vice-treasurer of Ireland, and Sir Arthur Gore. The collapse of Malone, Clements, and Gore (founded on 3 July 1758, but closed on 1 November 1758) led to the act prohibiting persons holding public funds from engaging in banking, and was considered by Pitt to have contributed to the discontent with Dublin politics manifested in the anti-union riot in December 1759. 
Malone was dismissed from the exchequer in 1761, when he resisted the transmission of a money bill to England as a cause for calling a new parliament. Pitt thought the punishment improper, but learned of it too late for his opinion to be counted. Malone and the ministry may have connived at his dismissal, in order for him to retire with honour and return to the bar. In the election of that year Malone was elected for Castlemartyr on the interest of his old ally Boyle, by then earl of Shannon. The Malones were of Catholic descent, and Malone's mother had been born a Roman Catholic, a heritage reflected in his sympathy for Catholic grievances. He supported Monck Mason's bill for enabling Catholics to invest money in mortgages upon land, and in 1762 he was appointed, with Sir Richard Aston, to try the whiteboys of Munster. The two concurred in ascribing their outrages to local and individual grievances. Malone's political enemies, including William Gerard Hamilton, suspected in 1763 and afterwards that Malone was preparing a return to opposition politics, but their fears were never realized. 
At the election of 1768 Malone was returned for both Granard and co. Westmeath; he chose to sit for the county. In his later years he occasionally advised the government. His wife, Rose, died on 22 April 1773, and he himself died on 8 May 1776 at his home in Sackville Street, Dublin. His nephew Edmond Malone remembered him as a man of large and even robust stature, in later years his abundant grey hair giving him a commanding and venerable appearance. By his will, made in July 1774, Malone left all his estates in the counties of Westmeath, Roscommon, Longford, Cavan, and Dublin to his nephew Richard Malone ['see under 'Malone, Edmund (1704-1774)], afterwards Lord Sunderlin, the eldest son and heir of his brother Edmund Malone, 'in the utmost confidence that they will be settled and continue in the male line of the family and branches of it, according to priority of birth and seniority of age'. But Lord Sunderlin, who had no children, did not obey this injunction, and on his death in 1816 the right of succession was disputed. 


@@@@@


doc= 17895


Malone, Edmund (1704-1774), barrister and politician, was born in Dublin on 16 April 1704, the second son of Richard Malone (1674-1745), who originally lived in Baronston, co. Westmeath, and his wife, Marcella, daughter of Redmond Molady. Anthony Malone (1700-1776), politician, was his brother. Educated in Dublin, Edmund Malone arrived in London in 1722 to study law at the Middle Temple. He was called to the English bar on 16 May 1729 and was student of the Inner Temple in 1734. Having established himself as a successful barrister, Malone married Catherine Collier (died 1765), daughter of Benjamin Collier of Essex, on 26 May 1736. When Malone returned to Dublin in 1740, having been called to the Irish bar, he was already the father of Richard (1738-1816) ['see below'], whose legal and political career followed a course similar to that of his father. In 1741 another son, Edmond (1741-1812) ['see 'Malone, Edmond], was born. Edmond entered the law before establishing himself as a noted Shakespearian critic. Malone fathered another four children, two of whom died in infancy. In Dublin, Malone was soon a respected and prosperous barrister, specializing in private litigation. He was sworn in as MP for Askeaton on 26 October 1753 and served until 1760. He was MP for Granard, co. Longford, from 1761 to 1766, but his political career came to an end soon after the death of his wife and he returned to London as a judge in the court of common pleas in 1767. His other appointments included bencher of the Honorable Society of King's Inns (1767-74), commissioner to hear and determine causes in chancery, in the absence of, or on the death of the lord chancellor (1768-74), and commissioner of bankruptcy appointed by the lord chancellor (1772). He was awarded an honorary LLD from Trinity College, Dublin, in 1756 and given the freedom of the city of Cork in 1760. 
Malone died on 22 April 1774, probably in London. Though overshadowed by his second son, Malone epitomizes the successful eighteenth-century professional gentleman. 
Malone's first son, 


@@@@@


doc= 17896


Malone, Edmond (1741-1812), literary scholar and biographer, was born at Shinglas, co. Westmeath, Ireland, on 4 October 1741, the second son of Edmund Malone (1704-1774), member of the Irish House of Commons and judge of the court of common pleas, and his wife, Catherine Collier (died 1765) of Essex. His uncle was Anthony Malone (1700-1776), distinguished parliamentary orator and chancellor of the exchequer from 1757 to 1761. His elder brother Richard Malone (1738-1816) ['see under 'Malone, Edmund] inherited the family's estates at Shinglas and Baronston in co. Westmeath and also sat in the Irish House of Commons; he was raised to the peerage as Baron Sunderlin in 1785. After moving to London to take up a literary career, Edmond was always careful to remain close to his brother and two sisters, Henrietta and Catherine, as well as to a number of Irish connections from his youth. 
Not much is known of Malone's youth, except that in 1747 he was sent to Dr Ford's Preparatory School in Molesworth Street, Dublin, and in 1757 he entered Trinity College, Dublin, where a year earlier his father had received an honorary LLD. At Trinity he was consistently at the top of his class, earning several 'premiums', books stamped with the college arms. While there he wrote some worthwhile poetry, a translation of 'Oedipus', and a surprisingly erudite history of tragedy. In 1759 he travelled to England for the first time, accompanying his ailing mother to Bath where he left her and then returned home. He took his BA degree in February 1762, one of only three to earn the top mark, 'valde bene'. In appearance, he was of less than average height, round-faced, and soft in countenance. 
After a year at home in Shinglas reading some law but mainly literature, his great love, in January 1763 Malone followed in the footsteps of his father, uncle, and grandfather by entering the Inner Temple in London on his way to becoming an Irish barrister, notwithstanding a distaste for the profession that he had gleaned from his father. He remained in London for three years, spending much of his time at his favourite haunt, the Grecian Coffee House in Devereux Court, where he picked up literary and social gossip; he also began to interest himself in English and Irish politics, about which he wrote a few fugitive satirical articles. The most important event of this period in London was meeting Samuel Johnson at his rooms in Inner Temple Lane some time in 1764. They met several times over the next two years, meetings which were crucial in turning Malone's mind increasingly toward the muses and away from the law. When he could he visited his mother in Bath. She eventually died there in 1765. 
On his return to Ireland after a few months in France, Malone was called to the Irish bar in 1767 and took up his duties as a barrister on the Munster circuit, working hard but taking little pleasure or profit from it. The first years of his practice were darkened by an unfortunate love affair with the enigmatic Susanna Spencer. His family disapproved of her and may have seen to it that she was removed to London, causing him to have a near nervous collapse. He plodded on as a lawyer until his father died in 1774, leaving him and his siblings modest incomes that gave him more time for literary pursuits and some involvement in politics that included friendships with the Irish patriots Henry Grattan and Henry Flood. Among his political writings during this period were contributions to 'Baratariana', a volume of 'Letters' by Flood, Grattan, and others attacking government policy on Ireland; he wrote for the newspapers as well. And in 1774 he also won Trinity College's nomination as its parliamentary candidate for the election in May 1776. He promptly gave up the nomination, however, when his uncle Anthony Malone died leaving him an annuity of about $1000. Without too much reflection, he also gave up the law and decided to dedicate himself to a life of literary scholarship. 
Malone promptly began work toward a new (publishers') edition of Oliver Goldsmith, working on it both in Dublin and (briefly in 1776) in London, where he renewed his literary friendships with Johnson and perhaps others of his circle. He returned briefly to Dublin to settle his affairs and with his independent income moved permanently to London in May 1777, arriving just as 'Poems and Plays by Oliver Goldsmith' was published with notes and an eight-page memoir of Goldsmith by him. Impressed, the Shakespearian George Steevens, whom he had met the previous year, invited him to contribute to his second edition of the 'Johnson-Steevens Shakespeare'. Malone took up the invitation with alacrity. His first major project was to try to determine the chronology of Shakespeare's plays; he also provided a stream of notes and corrections for Steevens's edition, implying that he did not think highly of Steevens's accuracy and in the process arousing the first signs of Steevens's envy and rivalry. The edition was published in January 1778 and the first volume contained Malone's pioneering 'An Attempt to Ascertain the Order in which the Plays Attributed to Shakespeare were Written'. It was an early indication of the emerging literary biographer. 
Steevens still encouraged Malone to push on with a supplement to the 'Johnson-Steevens' edition, though he irritated Malone by suggesting that the latter need not think he was doing the work for anything but 'mere amusement'. As he worked, Malone received help with notes and commentary from Thomas Percy, Samuel Henley, Edward Capell, Isaac Reed, William Blackstone, and a number of others, but he was firmly in charge. The supplement, containing Shakespeare's apocryphal plays as well as narrative poems and sonnets, appeared in April 1780 in two substantial volumes, generally to very positive reviews heralding Malone as a new Shakespearian prodigy, though a few reviewers cavilled at the particularity of his notes. He was praised especially for his close reading of early texts. In the spring of 1783 he published 'A Second Appendix to Mr. Malone's Supplement to the Last Edition of the Plays of Shakespeare', containing mostly textual emendations to his supplement. 
Malone by now had become well known in the luminous Johnsonian circle of literary, social, and political personalities and a close friend of many of them, not least Sir Joshua Reynolds with whom he enjoyed an uninterrupted intimacy until Reynolds's death in 1792. Reynolds painted his portrait in 1778, bringing it up to date a few years later, and Malone acted as his literary executor after his death. It was not until 1782, however, that deeper friendships with the likes of Edmund Burke, Edward Gibbon, Dr Charles Burney, James Boswell, Joseph Banks, William Windham, and Charles James Fox developed from his election to Johnson's famous Literary Club. He soon became the club's first treasurer, holding the office until his death and becoming its greatest promoter and historian. When Johnson died in 1784, Malone's long eulogistic obituary in the 'Gentleman's Magazine' was the most detailed and accurate to be published; in homage to Johnson, he and Reynolds also saw to it that a monument to Johnson was set up in St Paul's Cathedral. Later he would do the same for Reynolds. The pattern of his sedentary London-centred, bachelor existence with its endless round of dinners was now well established and continued for the rest of his life. He fell in love two or three times and twice proposed marriage and twice was rejected. Boswell attributed Malone's failure to marry to his 'Irish stare'. 
When Malone was not engaged in his scholarship or dining out, he was spending a large portion of his annuity on rare volumes of English literature, mainly Elizabethan poetry and plays, and collecting the 'Heads' (mostly engravings) of English poets which he prized as an important part of the biographer's and literary historian's evidence. He regularly attended book auctions, so that by the end of his life he owned one of the best collections of early English poetry and drama in England, the greatest portion of which was given to the Bodleian Library, Oxford, after his death. 
In the early 1780s Malone also became acquainted with Horace Walpole and the actors Sarah Siddons and Philip Kemble in his efforts to revise and get staged a couple of plays by his boyhood friend Robert Jephson. Malone's friendship with Walpole was strengthened when in comprehensively exposing Thomas Chatterton's forgeries of the so-called Rowley poems in his pamphlet 'Cursory Observations on the Poems Attributed to Thomas Rowley' (1782) he defended Walpole's treatment of Chatterton's forged poems several years earlier. The pamphlet was well received although it was also ridiculed by Burnaby Greene and others for its alleged pedantry and scholarly arrogance in censuring respected critics. It was not the last time Malone would attack literary forgers or alienate fellow critics. In 1783 he helped Jephson again by editing and seeing through the press the latter's 'Roman Portraits'. 
In August 1783 Malone asked his friend John Nichols, editor of the 'Gentleman's Magazine', to announce his intended edition of the complete plays and poems of Shakespeare 'with select notes from all the commentators'. He planned two separate editions, the first a 'portable' family edition in duodecimo, the second a complete edition with extensive apparatus. For the latter not only would he provide a history of the English stage and correct and expand the Shakespearian biographical record, drawing on documentary evidence painstakingly (and at great cost to his eyes) unearthed in archives in London, Stratford, and country houses, but he would also consult the early quartos (many of which he borrowed from David Garrick) and folios of the plays more thoroughly than any scholar before him in order to establish an authoritative text, going far beyond the 'Johnson-Steevens' edition. His research, especially on Shakespeare's life and the history of the English stage, was encouraged and helped by Johnson, Thomas Warton at Oxford, Richard Farmer at Cambridge, Percy, Reed, Burke, the Irish statesman the earl of Charlemont (with whom he carried on a lengthy correspondence about literature and politics), and a plethora of other scholars, with Steevens excepted, whose envy grew in proportion to Malone's influence. Malone more or less lived at the British Museum; he worked in chancery, at Dulwich College, the stamp office, the Tower of London, the diocese of Worcester, the remembrancer's office in the exchequer, the office of the lord chamberlain, and the Bodleian and Ashmolean libraries; and he spent weeks at Stratford combing through the corporation archives by dim candle-light that seriously damaged his eyesight. He took away with him from Stratford masses of the corporation archives that he kept for years in spite of strident requests to return them, knowing that he could well be using them for the rest of his life. 
During these years Malone also struck up correspondence with James Davenport, vicar of Stratford, who lent him the parish registers and did some research for him, and the local poet and amateur historian John Jordan who provided so much romantic legendary chaff about Stratford and Shakespeare that Malone came to distrust almost everything he said on the subject. Malone's correspondence with these two Stratford citizens was published in very limited editions by J. O. Halliwell in 1864. Malone ended up debunking much erroneous tradition about Shakespeare that Nicholas Rowe had perpetuated in his 1709 biography, discovering more about the poet's life than was known before or has been discovered since. Sadly, he never got around to writing a biographical narrative for this edition, delaying that instead (he hoped) for his variorum edition. He also came up with two startling and rich archival discoveries of English stage history in 1789, the office-book of Sir Henry Herbert (master of the revels in the reigns of James I and Charles I) and (at Dulwich) Philip Henslowe's theatre diary and account book. 
Malone delayed the 'portable' edition that would have got him into print earlier -- it was brought out by Nichols in seven volumes several years later -- but in 1786 he published his 'Conjectures concerning the date of... Macbeth' in the 'Hibernian Magazine' and in 1787 his bombshell, 'A Dissertation on the Three Parts of Henry VI', providing exciting new scholarly perspective on Shakespeare's earliest work as a dramatist and new insights into his life. 
Not everyone applauded Malone's efforts. Steevens grumbled, but caustic attacks surfaced from other quarters, chiefly from Joseph Ritson, a sound scholar whose bitter jealousies induced him to attack not only Malone, but also Warton, Percy, and other leading scholars within the Johnsonian circle. With Steevens's apparent encouragement, in 1783 Ritson published his 'Remarks' angrily and astutely attacking Malone for arrogantly trying to establish the 'genuine' Shakespeare text and setting himself up as the leading Shakespearian. In 1788 Ritson again ridiculed and angered Malone in 'The Quip Modest', attacking his textual preference for the first folio over the second, his notes in the supplement and 1778 'Johnson-Steevens', and his legion of 'mushroom assistants' in arrogating to himself the crown of Shakespearian studies. 
In 1790, after numerous delays caused by new discoveries, Malone published 'The Plays and Poems of William Shakespeare' in ten volumes, which included his original and expansive 'Account of the English stage', a revised essay on the order of the plays, and a commentary on Shakespeare's life containing new information exploding many of the legendary stories about the poet. Criticism in the 1980s and 1990s attempted to minimize this monumental achievement in Shakespearian studies by discounting the importance of Malone's unprecedented documentary and textual research, but his work heralded a new age of scholarship in which he helped define the scholar's code for generations to come. Except for some cavilling over the length of the notes, the reviews were enthusiastic. Edmund Burke even praised it as a brilliant scholarly piece of service to the country, repaying Malone's efforts with his own 'brass' offering of 'The reflections on the French Revolution'. Horace Walpole complained that the edition was too heavy with notes but that Malone had been 'indefatigable'. Ritson, however, weighed in again with a caustic attack, 'Cursory Criticisms' (1792), accusing Malone of 'profound ignorance' and a total want of 'ear' for poetry. More often than has generally been acknowledged, Ritson made legitimate points. Furious, Malone retaliated against the 'viper' Ritson a few weeks later with his important definition of editorial practice, 'A Letter to the Rev. Richard Farmer, D.D.' Steevens, enviously and against his better judgement taking Ritson's side, reissued his own edition in 1793 with frequent criticism of Malone. In recognition of his work on Shakespeare, on 5 July 1793, Oxford University awarded Malone the degree of DCL (Foster, 'Alum. Oxon.'). He was also granted the degree of LLD by Trinity College, Dublin, in 1801. 
In a little over a year the edition was almost sold out and Malone announced his intention of producing another in fifteen volumes, a plan he abandoned in 1796 for a new octavo edition in twenty volumes that would become known as the third variorum edition. His scheme was to include as centrepieces of the edition a complete and revolutionary biography of Shakespeare and an expanded history of the English stage. But the prevalent theme of Malone's Shakespearian work for the rest of his life was interruption. He plodded on amassing material and working on the text, but physical and emotional problems conspired to distract him, and in the 1790s especially when he still had the energy and strength, he found it easier and more palatable to turn to other literary projects. He also became the target of considerable ridicule when on a visit to Stratford in 1793 he had Shakespeare's coloured bust in Holy Trinity Church whitewashed, incorrectly assuming that was its original colour. And when in 1792-3 he immersed himself in the John Aubrey manuscripts at the Ashmolean Museum in Oxford, a rich source of biography for Shakespeare, he took the liberty of rearranging the papers with a view to publishing them (which he never did) and high-handedly kept other interested scholars like James Caulfield at bay. Citing Malone's 'big bloated pride', in 1797 Caulfield got his revenge by publishing an extravagant indictment of Malone's scholarly behaviour in his stinging pamphlet, 'An enquiry into the conduct of Edmond Malone esq. concerning the manuscript papers of John Aubrey'. 
One of Malone's major literary distractions from Shakespeare was James Boswell. They met in 1781 but their famous friendship did not develop until 1785 when Malone, dubbed by Boswell as 'Johnsonianissimus', decided to dedicate himself to encouraging and helping Boswell write and publish his 'Tour to the Hebrides with Samuel Johnson, LL.D.' It was one of the greatest literary collaborations in English literature, Malone spending hundreds of hours with Boswell, advising him, revising his manuscript, and helping to bring it to publication later that year. Then after helping Boswell bring out a third edition in 1786, Malone prodded him to proceed immediately with his monumental 'Life of Johnson', over the next five years serving as midwife to the biography, correcting the manuscript as Boswell wrote it, encouraging him against depression with endless advice, and generally keeping him to the task. It is not improbable that without Malone Boswell would never have written the 'Life'. The 'Life' was published in 1791, after which Malone helped Boswell revise it for a second edition in 1793 and, after Boswell's death in 1795, performed as editor for several more editions, the last (sixth) in 1811. As one of Boswell's executors, he saw to it that after his friend's death in 1795 his manuscripts and collections were organized and sent up to Scotland, where they awaited sensational rediscovery in the first half of the twentieth century. 
Other significant interruptions of his work on Shakespeare included a false start on a new edition of Pope to supersede Warburton's, whose scholarship he denigrated; a comprehensive and sensational exposure of the Shakespeare forgeries by William Henry Ireland, 'An Inquiry into the Authenticity of Certain Miscellaneous Papers... Attributed to Shakespeare' (1796); an edition of his dear friend Sir Joshua Reynolds's works, complete with an extensive biography of the artist (1797, 1798); and his edition, 'The Critical and Miscellaneous Prose Works of John Dryden' (1800), again with a thoroughly researched biography of the poet on which Sir Walter Scott later would lean heavily for his own edition of Dryden. The latter elicited one of those recurring literary reprisals Malone had to endure on account of his fame for copious scholarship, a hilarious and successful parody by George Hardinge, 'The Essence of Malone', which Hardinge followed up a few months later with 'Another Essence of Malone, or, The 'Beauties' of Shakspeare's Editor'. 
The upshot was that Malone's work on Shakespeare came virtually to a halt in the late 1790s and, though he fitfully continued with documentary research, he never recovered any momentum with the edition. In spite of encouragement from many friends, ennui set in, he dabbled, and his eyesight worsened. When the Shakespearian Isaac Reid died in 1807, Malone called himself 'the last of the Shakspearians', but by then he had little Shakespeare or any other kind of scholarship left in him. In 1805 he laid out plans and did some research for an essay on Shakespeare's metre that he never completed. After his death it fell to James Boswell jun. to edit it, as well as his incomplete biography of Shakespeare, into something like a coherent work. In 1808 Malone had privately printed his 'Account of the incidents, from which the title and part of the story of Shakespeare's Tempest were derived; and its true date ascertained'; and in 1809, 'Parliamentary Logick', an edition of his friend the statesman William Gerard Hamilton's (mostly unpublished) political writings, together with a biographical preface generous with praise. The latter effort won him only ridicule, however, mainly from Francis Jeffrey of the 'Edinburgh Review', for political triviality and extremism. In 1808 Malone also contemplated an expanded edition of Dr Johnson's 'Dictionary' that he never published but toward which he systematically annotated the work -- almost 3000 annotations in all, an astonishing expenditure (and perhaps misuse) of time and energy. In 1810 he came out with 'A Biographical Memoir of the Late Right Honourable William Windham', another panegyric in memory of the statesman and his dear friend and fellow club member. 
After an undetermined illness of several weeks in the spring of 1812 Malone died at Queen Anne Street East, London, on 25 May, survived by his brother Lord Sunderlin and two sisters in Ireland. His body was interred at the family seat of Baronston in co. Westmeath. Lord Sunderlin left most of his brother's library and papers to the Bodleian Library, Oxford, while the rest was dispersed by auction in London in May 1825. Malone left his portrait by Reynolds and his collection of the 'Heads' of English writers to the Revd Thomas Rooper; the collection (now lost) was last seen in the Hove Public Library, Sussex. A few of the papers and Malone's annotated copy of Dr Johnson's 'Dictionary' are in the British Library. For most of the time from Malone's death until 1825, Malone's library and papers were at the disposal of James Boswell jun., who in gratitude for Malone's untiring help to his father took his chaotically organized Shakespeare material and spent almost a decade preparing the twenty-one-volume third variorum edition, 'The Plays and Poems of William Shakspeare' (1821). Young Boswell also wrote a lengthy memoir of Malone for the 'Gentleman's Magazine' in May 1812, describing his mildness and steadiness as a friend, his sincerity and manly independence. More recently, critics and biographers have drawn attention also to Malone's impatience, temper, and indignation where literature and politics were concerned. He is still regarded as the greatest eighteenth-century Shakespearian editor and commentator and one of the earliest scholars to stake all on documentary evidence. 


@@@@@


doc= 17897


Richard Malone, Baron Sunderlin (1738-1816), was educated at Dr Ford's school, before entering Trinity College, Dublin, on 18 October 1755. He was student at the Inner Temple, London, in 1757 and graduated BA from Trinity College in 1759 before being incorporated of Christ Church, Oxford, in Michaelmas term that same year. He was called to the Irish bar in 1767. In 1776 he inherited the estates of his uncle Anthony Malone (1700-1776), including Baronston, co. Westmeath, and in 1778 he married Philippa Elizabeth Dorothy, 'nee' Rooper (1745-1831), eldest daughter of Godolphin Rooper (1709-1790) of Berkhamsted, Hertfordshire, and his wife, Mary Ann, 'nee' Harris (died 1793), daughter of Timothy Harris. Made sheriff of co. Westmeath in 1780, in 1783 Malone bought a seat in the Irish House of Commons and served as MP for Banagher until 30 June 1785, when he was raised to the Irish peerage as Lord Sunderlin. He was further created Baron Sunderlin of Baronstonin 1797. In the House of Lords, Malone sought appointment to the privy council without success. Little is known of his life after 1788, but as his brother Edmond's executor he bequeathed many of the Shakespearian scholar's books to the Bodleian Library. Richard Malone died on 14 April 1816, probably at Baronston. 


@@@@@


doc= 17898


Malone, William (1586-1656), Jesuit and religious controversialist, was born in Dublin on 6 December 1586, the son of Simon Malone, merchant, and his wife, Margaret Bexwick of Manchester. He studied at Douai before entering the Society of Jesus at Rome on 24 September 1606. At Antwerp in 1611 he published the first English translation of the autobiography of St Teresa of Avila. He continued his studies at Rome and in Portugal, at Evora (1611-14) and Coimbra (1614-15). He was ordained in Portugal in 1615 before returning to Ireland as part of the Irish Jesuit mission. 
Malone is remembered principally for his part in a theological disputation with James Ussher, later archbishop of Armagh, and other protestant controversialists. In 1621 he circulated, possibly in manuscript, a 'Challenge about the judgement of antiquity concerning the Romish religion', a short polemical work questioning the idea that the Church of Rome had deviated from the pure doctrines of Christianity, and challenging what he perceived as protestant disregard for many of the teachings of the fathers of the church on matters like the real presence, confession, and tradition. Ussher replied in manuscript and subsequently in print in 'An Answer to a Jesuit' (Dublin, 1624). Three years later Malone's reply to Ussher was printed at Douai under the title 'A reply to Mr James Ussher his answere, wherein... the uniform consent of antiquity is declared to stande for the Roman religion: and the answerer is convinced of vanity in challenging the patronage of the doctors of the primitive church for his protestancy'. His reply did not go into circulation in Dublin until 1629 or 1630. George Synge and Roger Puttocke prepared separate rejoinders which were printed in 1632. Christopher Sibthorpe also replied to Malone but his contribution circulated in manuscript only. Joshua Hoyle's rejoinder, the last published text in the Malone controversy, was published in Dublin in 1641. 
Malone's published work was not universally well received by Irish Catholic clergy on the continent with reservations expressed about Malone's dedication to Charles I, which to many appeared to award undue influence to the king in the resolution of religious controversy. However, his Catholic critics considered that the least damage would be done if his writings were ignored. 
Malone served for a time as superior of the Jesuits in Dublin until in 1635 he became rector of the secular Irish College at Rome, a position he retained until 1647. The college had been founded by Cardinal Ludovisi with the assistance of John Roche, later bishop of Ferns, and the Franciscan Luke Wadding, and following the premature death of the founder in 1632 the Ludovisian college had passed from Franciscan to Jesuit control in controversial circumstances. 
In December 1647 Malone was appointed superior of the Jesuit mission in Ireland. Differences with the papal nuncio, Cardinal Rinuccini, in 1648 soon gave rise to requests for his recall. He ceased to be superior in 1650, but was again temporarily in charge in 1653 before being deported from Ireland by the parliamentarians in 1654. In the following year he became rector of the Jesuit college at Seville in Spain; he died in Seville on 18 August 1656. 


@@@@@


doc= 17899


Malory, Sir Thomas (1415x18-1471), author, was son and heir of John Malory esquire ('c'.1385-1433/4), and Philippa (died 1441x5), daughter of Sir William Chetwynd of Ingestre in Staffordshire and Grendon in Warwickshire. 
John Malory held the manor of Newbold Revel in Warwickshire, that of Winwick in Northamptonshire, and lands nearby in Leicestershire. He was a person of importance in Warwickshire, where he was sheriff, escheator, justice of the peace, and five times MP, and his brother or cousin Sir Robert Malory was preceptor of the hospitallers of St John of Jerusalem in Warwickshire, and later prior of the hospitallers in England. Philippa Malory was probably a few years older than her husband. They had three daughters, but Thomas was their only known son, and may have been the youngest child. 
Thomas Malory must have been born between 25 April 1415 and 22 May 1418, because after John died in 1433 or 1434, it was Philippa who acted as head of the family, proving his will and arranging the marriage of their daughter Isobel. Thomas must have been born by mid-1418, because on 23 May 1439 he witnessed a settlement for his cousin Sir Philip Chetwynd. Prior Robert died a few months later, after which Malory's best hope of serious advancement may have lain with Chetwynd, who was making his mark in the service of the earl of Stafford and elsewhere. His own knighthood, by 8 October 1441, suggests ambition. On 28 December 1441 he acted as a parliamentary elector for Northamptonshire. He must then have been a Northamptonshire resident: most likely he had married, and Winwick had been settled on him and his wife. She may have been Elizabeth Walsh (died 1479) of Wanlip in Leicestershire, who bore him his son and heir, Robert, in (if his inquisition post mortem can be trusted) 1447 or 1448, who probably bore him one, perhaps two, other sons, and who survived him. There is no evidence of daughters. 
For Sir Thomas the routines of provincial life may have been interrupted in 1442 by serving under Philip Chetwynd in the war in Gascony: it is the most likely way for him to have acquired the detailed knowledge of south-west France he shows at the end of the 'Morte Darthur'. It was certainly interrupted in 1443 by an accusation of robbery with violence near Winwick, a charge that apparently fell through. Philip Chetwynd died soon afterwards, and in 1445 Malory was elected MP for Warwickshire, and became a commissioner to assess tax exemptions in the county. This would mean both that he had returned, presumably on his mother's death, to live at Newbold Revel, and that he was 'persona grata' to the two great Warwickshire magnates, Chetwynd's patron Stafford, now duke of Buckingham, and Henry Beauchamp, duke of Warwick. About this time Warwick was paying him an annuity, and Buckingham may have helped him in 1449 to be returned as MP for his borough of Bedwin in Wiltshire. 
With the new decade, however, Malory's life underwent a sudden, startling, and unexplained change. During the first recess of the new parliament, on 4 January 1450, he and twenty-six other armed men allegedly lay in ambush to murder Buckingham in the abbot's woods at Combe near Newbold Revel. This was followed by eighteen months of well-supported allegations of crime, including extortion, theft, rape, cattle rustling, robbery of the local abbey, and deer stealing and enormous damage to property at Caludon Park, a hunting lodge belonging to the duke of Norfolk, but of which Buckingham apparently had the use. Malory's attack was no doubt deliberate provocation of Buckingham, who at the time was hunting him with a large posse, but put him at odds with Norfolk too. His natural protector should have been Warwick, but Duke Henry was dead, and his newly installed successor, Richard Neville, earl of Warwick, was unable or unwilling to help. Malory seems to have turned to the duke of York, who was trying to bring political pressure to bear on the government, and for whose borough of Wareham a Thomas Malory was returned to the parliament that met in September 1450. 
It was a bad move. In May 1451 York's efforts collapsed, and in July Buckingham caught up with Malory and committed him to the sheriff, who detained him in his own house at Coleshill. Malory escaped by swimming the moat at night, but was recaptured. He was charged at Nuneaton, the centre of Buckingham's power in Warwickshire, before a court presided over by Buckingham, with a long list of offences including the attempted murder of Buckingham; and when the two juries returned true bills, a writ of 'certiorari' transferred the proceedings to the king's bench at Westminster. In January 1452 Malory was in prison in London, awaiting trial. All of this was clearly meant to keep the legal process away from the assize town of Warwick and the influence that Malory's friends might bring to bear there. Someone had also clearly encouraged potential complainants to bring forward every possible charge against him. That does not mean the charges were false. 
Malory was to have a long wait for his trial. During his first year in prison he made his peace with Norfolk, and later was bailed to a group of Warwickshire gentlemen. However, a neighbour's complaint that Malory had stolen her oxen probably dates from this period of freedom, and at the end of it he failed to surrender to his bail; Buckingham had to be called out again to recapture him. Bailed a second time, in 1454, to a group of Norfolk's men, he joined an old crony on a horse-stealing expedition across East Anglia that ended in Colchester gaol. From there he escaped again, 'using swords, daggers, and halberds', but was again recaptured and sent back to London. After that he was shifted frequently from prison to prison, and, as far as is known, the penalties imposed on his gaolers for his safe keeping reached a record for medieval England. In 1455, when Henry VI suffered a mental collapse, Malory was granted a pardon by the lord protector, York. However, if his imprisonment had begun as an incautious feud with a powerful and vindictive magnate, it had now become politicized: the Lancastrian chief justice dismissed his pardon. This was the lowest point in his fortunes. He was twice sued for small sums he could not repay, and a young Thomas Malory, presumably his son, died at Newbold Revel. Late in 1457 he was bailed again, this time for two months to Warwick's men, and he seems to have been free again briefly in 1459. When the Yorkists invaded England in 1460, he was moved to a more secure prison, but their victory brought him lasting freedom. He was never tried on any of the charges against him. 
The new decade looked more promising. A second pardon cleared the legal slate, and in 1462 (after settling an estate on his son Robert), he followed the new king, Edward IV, and his lords north to besiege the castles of Alnwick, Bamburgh, and Dunstanburgh, which had been seized in a Lancastrian coup. When the castles were retaken, he settled down to a more peaceful life. In 1464 he witnessed another family land settlement, and in 1466 or 1467 his grandson Nicholas was born. But soon after that his political sympathies appear to have shifted. The new king was beginning to be at odds with his chief supporters, Warwick's family, and Malory seems to have been drawn into a plot against him that was discovered in June 1468, and arrested and imprisoned without formal charge, probably in the Tower of London. He was certainly imprisoned in relative comfort and with access to one of the best libraries in the country. This is shown by the 'Morte Darthur', which he wrote in prison at this time, and completed by 3 March 1470; but the Yorkists now thought of him as a dangerous enemy, and he was excluded by name from general pardons offered in July 1468 and February 1470. 
Outside prison the balance of power shifted uncertainly. In October 1470 a sudden invasion brought the Lancastrians back, and among their first acts in London was the freeing of imprisoned members of their own faction. Six months later, on 14 March 1471, Sir Thomas Malory of Newbold Revel died in London. He was buried under a marble tombstone in St Francis's Chapel, Greyfriars, Newgate, which despite its proximity to one of the gaols in which he had been imprisoned, was one of the most fashionable churches in London. His epitaph called him 'valens miles de parochia de Monkenkyrkby' ('valiant knight, of the parish of Monks Kirby'). On the day of his death the Yorkists landed again in the north, and two months later were back in power. When they held an inquiry into Malory's estate, the jurors testified that he had died owning nothing. In a prudent moment, the rash Sir Thomas had made over all his lands to others. 
His permanent memorial was to be the 'Morte Darthur'. It may not have been his only work. A contemporary Arthurian verse romance called 'The Wedding of Sir Gawain and Dame Ragnell' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Rawl. C. 86) bears striking similarities to it in some aspects of treatment of the story and authorial comment. In particular, both end with prayers for the author's deliverance from prison, couched in similar terms. But although 'The Wedding' shows some gusto in reworking the old folk-tale theme of 'what women most desire', its 855 lines of near doggerel would not purchase anyone literary immortality. 

'Le Morte Darthur' is a very different matter. It survives in two important texts, the edition printed by William Caxton in 1485 and a manuscript rediscovered at Winchester in 1934 (now BL, Add. MS 59678). The two texts derive independently from a lost common original, and both have suffered from post-authorial tinkering. Modern editions have reversed some of the damage by careful comparison of the two texts with each other and with Malory's known sources, which he sometimes follows very closely. 
Malory called what he wrote 'The Whole Book of King Arthur and his Noble Knights of the Round Table'. Its usual name, now established too firmly to be altered, was accidentally given by its first printer, William Caxton, who mistook the name of its last section for the name of the whole. As Malory's title implies, he intended to retell in English the entire Arthurian story from authoritative accounts, which for him meant primarily the three major cycles of French Arthurian prose romance, although he knew many other Arthurian stories and drew on them for incidents, allusions, and minor characters that give his story additional solidity. 
Malory's book falls into eight tales. The first is based on the end of the second romance in the post-vulgate 'Roman du graal'. It relates Arthur's mysterious conception, his achievement of the throne, and the early wars and quests of his knights: it ends with Arthur as undisputed king of Britain. The second adapts a late medieval English alliterative poem, 'Morte Arthure', to tell how Arthur conquers the Roman empire. Malory replaces the poem's tragic ending with a triumphant return to Britain, so making Arthur the greatest monarch in the world, and increases Lancelot's part from a few passing references to that of the rising star of chivalry. 
The third tale sets incidents mostly from the third romance of the vulgate cycle in a frame of Malory's devising, to show Lancelot becoming the greatest knight in the world. He is also Guinevere's knight, but Malory's choice of episodes suppresses the adulterous love that is prominent in his source. The fourth tale is almost certainly based on a lost English poem about Gawain's youngest brother, Gareth, in which Malory has transferred much of Gawain's role to Lancelot. It gives Lancelot a follower with followers of his own, who might support him and Lancelot against Arthur. 
The long fifth tale is taken from the French prose 'Tristan'. Malory cut the extended account of Tristan's ancestry with which his source begins and the grail story with which it ends, leaving as the centrepiece of his book a profusion of adventures without obvious plot and theme. The result, however, is what later authors would imitate or satirize as the characteristic Arthurian world of chivalric quest and adventure. 
The sixth tale is based on the fourth romance of the vulgate cycle, and tells the story of the grail, the supreme quest, in which three of Arthur's knights succeed, Lancelot is caught between success and failure, and the rest fail. The seventh tale combines material from the last romance in the vulgate cycle (partly through a derived English poem, 'Le Morte Arthur') with additional material from the third romance and Malory's invention. Its five episodes follow Lancelot's resumption of his affair with Guinevere after the grail quest, through repeated risk of discovery. The eighth tale completes the vulgate cycle story, relating the discovery of the affair, the internecine war that it provokes, and the deaths of nearly all the principal characters. 
Malory made his story one of the rise and fall of a great king and his kingdom. The symbolic power provided by this, by the innumerable quests and adventures contained in the book, and by the half-strange, half-familiar world of chivalric romance, reinforced by a transparent colloquial style that made events seem to stand free of any controlling author, quickly made it popular. For sixteenth-century England, despite humanists and puritans, it was the definitive retelling of the Arthurian story. When the round table in Winchester Castle was repainted for Henry VIII, the names of the individual knights on it were mostly taken from the 'Morte Darthur'. In the next two centuries different tastes meant that the few readers interested in the 'matter of Britain' mostly looked to Geoffrey of Monmouth; but nineteenth-century medievalism raised the status of Malory's book to previously unimagined heights: Dante Gabriel Rossetti put it second only to the 'Bible'. The twentieth century has seen it less admired but perhaps even more influential, affecting the media of films, cartoons, and computer games as well as established literary genres. 
Malory's own reputation followed an even more erratic course. John Bale in 1548 asserted that Malory came from Maelor in Denbighshire, and the 'Biographia Britannica' in the mid-eighteenth century misread the closing words of the 'Morte Darthur' as implying that its author was a priest. It was only in the 1890s that scholarship jettisoned the imaginary Welsh priest and discovered a trio of real Thomas Malorys, whose various claims to authorship became the subject of vigorous debate. As the only indubitable knight among them, Sir Thomas Malory of Newbold Revel began with a head start over his namesakes of Hutton Conyers in Yorkshire and Papworth St Agnes in Cambridgeshire, but when the criminal charges against him were discovered, many found them difficult to reconcile with the idealism that was commonly seen in the 'Morte Darthur'. Renewed investigation, however, has established that he was the only knight of the right name alive at the right time. If an author's life and writings must echo one another, the criminal charges must be false, or the perceived idealism exaggerated, or the author's personality must have changed in the course of eighteen years, mostly spent in fifteenth-century prisons. It seems most likely that all three notions contain an element of truth. 


@@@@@


doc= 17900


Maltby, Edward (1770-1859), bishop of Durham, was born on 6 April 1770 in the Norwich parish of St George Tombland, fourth son of George Maltby (1730/31-1794), master weaver and merchant, and his wife, Mary, 'nee' Fearman (1737/8-1804). He was baptized on 8 April by the Presbyterian Samuel Bourn, minister of the Octagon Chapel where George Maltby was deacon. The family was, however, well-disposed towards the established church: a memorial in the parish church commemorates Maltby's parents and grandparents, while in 1789 George and his brother each contributed 5 guineas to the parish augmentation fund. 
Maltby entered Norwich grammar school in January 1778, a year before Samuel Parr became headmaster. Parr, an Anglican priest notorious for whiggery, respected dissenters and was Bourn's close friend. His influence on Maltby was profound. Parr retired in 1785; on his advice Maltby transferred to Winchester College, studying under Joseph Warton from 1785 to 1788. Taylor and Taylor's 'History of the Octagon Chapel' states that he also studied under William Enfield. In 1784 his cousin Elizabeth Maltby married George Pretyman, later George Pretyman Tomline, confidant to Pitt the younger, who in 1787 became bishop of Lincoln. Pretyman entered Maltby at Pembroke College, Cambridge, in 1789. 
At Cambridge Maltby won four medals, was 1791 Craven scholar, and graduated BA as eighth wrangler in 1792, MA in 1794, BD in 1801, and DD in 1806. Unlike his cousin William, he conformed to the Church of England and took his degrees without problem. In 1794 he became Pretyman's domestic chaplain, with a Lincoln prebend and two vicarages: Buckden in Huntingdonshire and Holbeach in Lincolnshire. On 10 July 1794 he married Mary, daughter of Jeremiah Ives Harvey of Catton, Norfolk, with whom he had at least four sons. His 'Illustrations of the Truth of the Christian Religion', published in 1802, enjoyed two further editions in 1803 and helped to establish his reputation as a whig 'bishop-in-waiting'. However, the political upheavals of the new century stalled his career: his intervention in the 1807 Huntingdonshire elections, and an 1809 pamphlet denouncing the Portland administration's nepotism, stranded him at Buckden during the long tory political ascendancy, though, aided by Parr's influence with Canning, he became preacher of Gray's Inn in 1817 and was preacher of Lincoln's Inn from 1824 to 1835. In these years Maltby devoted himself to scholarship, publishing an 1815 'Lexicon Graeco-prosodiacum', based on Thomas Morell's 1762 'Thesaurus', which went through two full and three abridged editions, and co-compiling an 1815 hymn collection (revised 1824); a 'New Testament' edition discussed with Parr was never completed. He also tutored private pupils, including E. B. Pusey. He became a fellow of the Royal Society in 1824 and was a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries by 1834. A committee member of Brougham's Society for the Diffusion of Useful Knowledge (founded in 1827), the Utilitarian counterblast to the Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge, Maltby became a senator of University College, London, and offered the blessing prayer when its foundation stone was laid (1827). His first wife, Mary, died on 2 May 1825 and he remarried on 31 August 1826; his new wife was Margaret, youngest daughter of Major Green. 
The 'Reform Bill' crisis of November 1830 put Earl Grey in office, needing Maltby's vote in the House of Lords. Folliott Cornewall, bishop of Worcester, died in September 1831; Grey translated Carr of Chichester to Worcester and appointed Maltby to Chichester, so hastily that the 'conge d'elire' for Worcester arrived before Cornewall's funeral and caused a scandal. Maltby was in his place in time to vote for the 'Reform Bill' in the House of Lords on 8 October 1831. The sole active whig among the episcopate -- Bathurst of Norwich was eighty-seven and incapacitated -- Maltby, branded a 'black swan', met the other bishops' hostility with plainspoken resolve to do his duty 'equally regardless of their smiles or their frowns' (Grant, 401-3). A former schoolfellow at Winchester, Sydney Smith, disappointed to be passed over for the Chichester see, regarded him as an 'excellent man and a great fool' (P. Virgin, 'Sydney Smith', 1994, 27). Scandal certainly dogged his episcopate. He invited a Unitarian minister to a public dinner (1834), and did nothing to quieten the outcry by inviting a Catholic priest to dinner two weeks later. 
Translated in March 1836 to be the first bishop of 'reformed' Durham, Maltby had charge of the orb at Queen Victoria's coronation, but presented it at the wrong moment; the queen called him 'remarkably 'maladroit'' ('Letters of Queen Victoria', ed. A. C. Benson and Lord Esher, and G. E. Buckle, 1st ser., 1907, 1.155). In 1838 Maltby again outraged the orthodox when he and Bathurst's successor Stanley subscribed to a volume of sermons by the Unitarian William Turner. Charles Thorp, archdeacon of Durham, denounced Maltby in 'The Times', and an effigy inscribed 'Unitarian Bishop' was burnt in Bishop Auckland market place. He delivered a series of episcopal charges against Tractarianism from 1840 onwards, and in 1845 also attacked the evangelical party for 'believing that they alone possessed true understanding' (E. Maltby, 'Charge', 1845, 8). His continuing scholarly interests were reflected in calls for the training of ordinands to be based on sound biblical learning. He was a generous benefactor to Durham University (founded 1833) and helped negotiate its royal charter, even persuading the government to honour the agreement with his predecessor Van Mildert that students must subscribe to the 'Thirty-Nine Articles' before graduation. In 1847 criticism arose over his income, which averaged about $12,000 a year and in 1841 exceeded $21,000, whereas the 1836 'Established Church Act' set it at $8000 (reduced from $19,000). In 1848 he established the Maltby Fund, giving more than $21,000 over ten years for allocation by the ecclesiastical commissioners to parsonage building in Durham diocese. 
Considered for archbishop of York in November 1847 by his friend Lord John Russell, Maltby declined; he was growing weary. In 1850 his letter to Russell denouncing the establishment of a Roman Catholic hierarchy in England inspired Russell's 'Durham Letter', which declared the Tractarians a worse threat. In 1855, eighty-five and nearly blind, he offered to retire on a $4500 annuity from the Durham revenues. No bishop since the Reformation had been permitted retirement, and Gladstone denounced the pension request as simony; but after acrimonious debate an 1856 act of parliament granted both Maltby and Blomfield of London pensioned retirement. Maltby died on 3 July 1859 at his London residence, 1 Upper Portland Place; the 'Times' obituary took one last swipe at his huge pension. Buried on 11 July at Kensal Green cemetery, London, he shared a family vault with his eldest brother. 


@@@@@


doc= 17901


Maltby, William (1763-1854), bibliographer and librarian, is said to have been born in London on 17 January 1763 ('DNB'), though his baptism was not recorded until 13 February 1765 at the Old Jewry Presbyterian Church. He was the youngest of ten children of Brough Maltby ('bap'. 1719), wholesale draper of Mansion House Street, London, and Ann Dyer. The Maltbys came originally from Norwich, where several were elders of the Presbyterian church. Edward Maltby, bishop of Durham, was a first cousin, as was John Dyer Collier (Dyce, 300), father of John Payne Collier, the editor and literary forger. Through the Brough family he was related to Thomas Secker, archbishop of Canterbury. Maltby was educated under the Revd James Pickbourne at Grove Street, Hackney, where he formed a lifelong acquaintance with the poet Samuel Rogers, a fellow pupil; he is frequently mentioned in Archibald Dyce's 'Recollections of the Table-Talk of Samuel Rogers' (1856). 
Maltby entered Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge, but as a dissenter did not take a degree. Here he was to acquire the classical and literary tastes which lasted throughout his life. He was well versed not just in the classics, but also in the literature of France and Italy. On 23 June 1787 he was called to the bar at Gray's Inn, and practised as a solicitor in partnership with his brother, Rowland Maltby, clerk to the Fishmongers' Company ('Law Lists'). But literature was a greater lure than the law, and Maltby became a familiar figure in the literary circles of his day, particularly in company with Rogers. 
Following the death in 1808 of Professor Richard Porson (whom he had known socially for more than twenty years), Maltby was on 1 February 1809 appointed to succeed him as principal librarian of the London Institution. This was a society in the City for subscribers, modelled on the Royal Institution in the West End, and offered lectures, particularly on scientific subjects, and an extensive reference library. Porson was better known for his fondness for the bottle than for books, but Maltby was in his natural element there as a book lover. He assiduously attended the major book auctions and made many large additions to the library. By 1811 the institution (founded only in 1806) already held 12,000 volumes. He had an extraordinary memory and knowledge of books, and was a fount of wisdom on bibliographical matters. Visiting Rome in 1821 Rogers wrote: 'I never pass a bookseller's shop here but I think of M[altby]' (Clayden, 1.329). 
Twice Maltby was responsible for the removal and rearrangement of the books. The first occasion was in 1811, when the institution moved from its original home in Old Jewry to King's Arms Yard, Coleman Street. These premises were always too small, and in 1819 the institution removed to a new building in the recently laid out Finsbury Circus. He assisted in the compilation of the original catalogue, printed in 1813, as well as in the first volume (1835) of the new edition. The institution grew slowly and suffered a number of crises in its management, but its heart was always the library, whose development into a major reference library was entirely due to Maltby's labours. 
From the beginning the assistant librarian of the London Institution had been William Upcott, the autograph collector. When he was asked to resign in 1834 following unspecified complaints (London Institution minute books), Maltby (then aged seventy-one) expressed his desire to retire at the same time if he could keep his apartments. This was granted, and he was awarded a pension of $100 per annum. He died at the London Institution on 5 January 1854 and was buried at Norwood cemetery, where a memorial was erected by Rogers. He was unmarried. Although Maltby had a reputation for his willingness to communicate his great knowledge of books to others -- he was masterly at literary and classical quotations -- he never published a single book himself. His sole contribution to literature was his memoir of Porson, published as 'Porsoniana' in Dyce's 'Table-Talk'. 


@@@@@


doc= 17902


Malthus, (Thomas) Robert (1766-1834), political economist, was born on 13 February 1766 and baptized on 14 February at his parents' home, The Rookery, near Wotton, Surrey. In formal situations he used his full name, but in less formal correspondence referred to himself as T. Robert Malthus or Robert Malthus, and among family and close friends was always called Robert or Bob. 
Malthus's great-grandfather Daniel Malthus (1651-1717) was apothecary to Queen Anne and George I. His grandfather Sydenham Malthus (died 1757) was a barrister of Lincoln's Inn. His father, Daniel Malthus (1730-1800), being an only son, appears to have inherited considerable wealth and property, and these independent means enabled him to travel and to cultivate his literary, artistic, theatrical, and scientific interests. He entered Queen's College, Oxford, in 1747 but did not graduate. He was an admirer of Rousseau, who once visited The Rookery when Malthus was an infant. He was said to have published some literary pieces anonymously, but the statement by an obituarist that he had translated works from French and German was firmly contradicted by Malthus. He supported the views of the marquis de Condorcet and William Godwin on the perfectibility of mankind, but also encouraged his son's publication of opposing views. Aspects of his behaviour -- for example, the unconventional education he chose for Malthus, and his refusal to allow his wife to wear her wedding ring -- were regarded as eccentric, and perhaps show the influence of Rousseau. He married (on 6 May 1752) Henrietta Catherine Graham (1733-1800), his second cousin, the daughter of Daniel Graham (1695-1778), apothecary to George II and George III. She can be seen as a young girl with her brother and two sisters, in Hogarth's painting 'The Graham Children' (1742), now in the National Gallery, London. Malthus was the sixth of their seven children (two boys and five girls). 
Malthus's elder brother, Sydenham (1754-1821), was the grandfather of Colonel Sydenham Malthus (1831-1916) and the great-grandfather of Robert Malthus (1881-1972), whose family papers have provided much valuable information about the life and career of Malthus. Other descendants of Sydenham emigrated to New Zealand, where there are now many Malthus families. Malthus's youngest sister, Mary Anne Catherine (1771-1852), married Edward Bray, of Shere, Surrey. Their daughter Louisa, in her unpublished 'Recollections', provides further insights into the lives of the Malthus and Bray families. 
Little is known of Malthus's schooling before the age of twelve. One source (Payne) says that he was educated in private at High Wycombe 'by men well qualified as tutors' (Payne, 101), but no further details are given. It is possible that Malthus's father undertook at least some of his early education at home. Malthus's five sisters were brought up at home without a governess. 
For at least three school years, from 1778/9 to 1780/81, Malthus attended a school conducted by Revd Richard Graves at his home, Claverton rectory, near Bath. In letters to Daniel Malthus, Graves commented on the rapid progress made by Malthus in his classical studies and on his precociousness in appreciating the humorous passages. He also reported that the young Malthus loved 'fighting for fighting's sake', but that he and his antagonist were 'the best of friends in the world' -- a situation that William Empson later saw as prefiguring Malthus's relationship with Ricardo. 
During the academic year 1782/3 (and perhaps earlier) Malthus was sent by his father to the dissenting academy at Warrington, near Liverpool. The dissenting academies of Warrington and elsewhere had been established to provide an education for the sons of dissenters, who at that time, because they refused to subscribe to the 'Thirty-Nine Articles' of the Church of England, were not admitted to the universities of Oxford and Cambridge and were therefore debarred from professions requiring university degrees. It is not clear why Daniel Malthus chose to send his son to a dissenting academy, rather than to a public school, or why he chose one at such a distance from Surrey. There is no evidence that either Daniel Malthus or Malthus was ever a dissenter. Malthus himself later became a clergyman of the Church of England. It is possible that the concept of a dissenting academy appealed to a radical trait in Daniel's character, or that he was impressed by the scholarly reputation and independence of spirit of the tutors at the academy. According to Gilbert Wakefield, the classical tutor at the Warrington academy from 1779 to 1783, at least one third of the students at that time were members of the 'establishment', who preferred an education at the academy to the 'restrictions and licentiousness' of the universities (Wakefield, 199). 
When the academy at Warrington closed down in 1783, Malthus became a private pupil of Gilbert Wakefield for the year 1783/4 at his home in Bramcote, near Nottingham, where he pursued a rigorous and regular programme of study in classics and mathematics, interspersed with walking and shooting in the company of Wakefield, who treated him more as a companion. Wakefield was later to become famous for his radical political views, notably his argument that the poor and labouring classes of England would lose nothing if Napoleon conquered England and imposed on England the egalitarianism of the French Revolution. For these seditious remarks he was imprisoned in Dorchester gaol for two years, 1799-1801. 
With the advice and help of Wakefield, Malthus on 8 June 1784 was entered as a pensioner at Jesus College, Cambridge, where Wakefield had been a fellow; he took up residence in October that year. His father supported his desire for a university education, although his mother, it seems, was originally opposed to the idea. Malthus graduated BA and ninth wrangler early in 1788. His studies were mainly in mathematics and classics, although later, after graduation, he was reading books on mineralogy, chemistry, geography, and history. He obtained a prize for a Latin declamation on the ironical topic that knowledge of classical texts would be facilitated if they were studied in translation. He proceeded MA in 1791 and became a fellow of Jesus College on 10 June 1793. He held his fellowship until his marriage in 1804. As an undergraduate he was taught by yet another radical tutor, William Frend (1757-1841), who was later expelled from the university for opposing the policy requiring subscription to the 'Thirty-Nine Articles'. 
As early as 1783 Malthus had expressed a desire to enter the church. The only difficulty seems to have been a speech defect resulting from a congenital cleft lip and palate. He was advised that it would prohibit his rising to an eminent position in the church, but, although it proved troublesome to some acquaintances, it did not prevent the successful performance of his preaching and teaching duties. He was ordained deacon by the bishop of Winchester on 7 June 1789 and licensed to the curacy of Oakwood (or Okewood) Chapel in the parish of Wotton, at a stipend of $40 a year. The appointment at Oakwood appears to have been negotiated by his father. He held his stipendiary curacy of Oakwood until about 1805, when he was appointed to the East India College. During this time he probably lived mainly with his parents in the village of Albury, about 9 miles north of Oakwood, where they had moved in 1787, although he also spent time in a 'garret in Town' and resided occasionally at Jesus College. He was ordained priest on 20 March 1791, and on 5 April 1824 he was licensed perpetual curate of Oakwood Chapel. On 21 November 1803 he had been appointed rector of Walesby, in Lincolnshire, a living in the gift of a distant relative, Henry Dalton. He visited Walesby occasionally, but the parish duties were carried out mainly by a succession of curates. William Otter and William Empson attest that Malthus was imbued with the spirit of the gospel and with the doctrines of Christianity; and that in the performance of his clerical duties he was conscientious, devout, and pious. In turn with the other professors, he read prayers and preached regularly in the chapel of the East India College. His sermons, some of which have survived, were said by Otter to have become more earnest and edifying over the years. In his publications Malthus nearly always described himself as Rev. According to Payne, Malthus changed the family motto from 'Honor justitiae praemium' to 'Honor virtutis praemium' ('Honour is the reward of virtue'). 
Malthus's first known publication venture occurred in 1796, when he unsuccessfully submitted to the publisher Debrett a paper entitled 'The Crisis', a criticism of the administration of William Pitt. His father urged him to persist in trying to find a publisher, even though it might have jeopardized his clerical career ('might not get you a Deanery'). Extracts were quoted by Otter and Empson, but the paper has not subsequently been found. 
In 1798 Malthus published (anonymously) his first and most famous book, 'An Essay on the Principle of Population'. It arose from discussions with his father on the utopian hopes of Condorcet and Godwin, and argued that they had overlooked the difficulties arising from the tendency of population to increase more rapidly than the food supply. Population, he argued, increases in a 'geometric ratio' (1, 2, 4, 8, 16... ), doubling every twenty-five years, but the food supply can increase at the utmost only in an 'arithmetic ratio' (1, 2, 3, 4, 5,... ). Consequently, population is kept in balance with the food supply by various 'checks'. These checks were classified as either 'vice' or 'misery', and included wars, famines, plagues, delayed marriages (later called 'prudential restraint'), prostitution ('vicious customs with respect to women'), and contraception ('unnatural' practices; 'Essay on the Principle of Population', 1798, 100, 154). He also classified the checks as either 'positive' (those that increase the death rate) or 'preventive' (those that reduce the birth rate). 
In 1803 Malthus published a greatly expanded second edition of the 'Essay', incorporating details of the population checks that had been in operation in many different countries and periods. Although nominally a second edition, it was regarded by Malthus as a substantially new work. He did not claim originality for the idea that population tends to outrun the food supply. In the preface to the second edition he stated that in writing the first edition he had deduced the principle of population from the writings of David Hume, Robert Wallace, Adam Smith, and Richard Price, but that in the intervening period he had become aware that much more had been published on the subject. He nevertheless believed that even more remained to be done, especially in describing the means by which populations are checked and in drawing out the practical implications of the principle of population. 
In the second edition, he made clear what was only implicit in the first, that prudential restraint should, if humanly possible, be 'moral restraint' -- that is, delayed marriage accompanied by strictly moral pre-marital behaviour, although he admitted that moral restraint would not be easy and that there would be occasional failures. Whereas in the first edition he had said that all the checks to population would involve either misery or vice, in the second edition he attempted to lighten this 'melancholy hue' ('Essay on the Principle of Population', 1st edn, 1798, iv) and 'to soften some of the harshest conclusions of the first essay' (2nd edn, 1803, vii) by arguing that moral restraint, if supported by an education emphasizing the immorality of bringing children into the world without the means of supporting them, would tend to increase rather than diminish individual happiness. 
In the concluding two chapters of the first edition of the 'Essay' Malthus had argued that the pressure of population on the food supply was providentially ordained by God as a stimulus to human development ('the growth of mind') and was consistent with the notion of divine benevolence. These two chapters, which also contained some radical opinions on other theological questions, were omitted from the second and later editions of the 'Essay', but whether Malthus ever relinquished the views they contain is debatable. 
Malthus was despised by some famous contemporaries. Samuel Taylor Coleridge referred to 'the stupid Ignorance of the Man' (MS note in Coleridge's copy of the 'Essay', BL, 6), Robert Southey described him as a 'mischievous booby' ('New Letters of Robert Southey', ed. Kenneth Curry, 1.357) and a 'precious philosophicide' (ibid., 1.551), and William Cobbett wrote of 'the barbarous and impious Malthus' ('Rural Rides', ed. G. D. H. Cole and M. Cole, 1930, 1.26). But Charles Darwin acknowledged Malthus's influence in the development of his theory of natural selection ('The Life and Letters of Charles Darwin', ed. F. Darwin, 1898, 68, 465), and the principle of population became accepted as a central tenet of classical political economy. 
Further editions of the 'Essay' appeared in 1806, 1807, 1817, and 1826, with important alterations and additions, particularly the appendices added to the third and the fifth editions, in which Malthus replied to some of his many critics. He was accused of advocating wars and immoral practices as ways of controlling population growth, but he insisted that this was a gross misinterpretation and that the only check he advocated was prudential restraint, or preferably moral restraint. Critics also argued that the latter would not be feasible as a general method of controlling population and that in advocating it Malthus was guilty of the very perfectibilism he had condemned in Godwin, but he remained cautiously optimistic about the success of his preferred check. He rejected contraception as a means of population control, partly on moral grounds and partly because he believed that, by providing an easy means of control, it would remove the desirable stimulus to work and self-improvement arising from the need to provide for one's children. He would therefore have been strongly opposed to the later usurpation of his name by organizations such as the Neo-Malthusian League, which advocated contraception. He would also have objected to those who link his name with zero population growth. He insisted that he was not 'an enemy to population' ('Essay', 3rd edn, 1806, 2.508). He regarded the growth of population as a desirable end in itself, and even as a necessary cause of economic growth, provided that it did not exceed the growth of the food supply. Variorum editions of the 'Essay' were published in 1986 and 1989. 
For today's readers, living in a post-Malthus era, the world's population problems are well known and serious, but no longer sensational. It is difficult therefore to appreciate the radical and controversial impact made by the 'Essay' at the time of publication. It challenged the conventional notion that population growth is an unmixed blessing. It discussed prostitution, contraception, and other sexual matters. And it gave vivid descriptions of the horrendous consequences of overpopulation and of the brutal means by which populations are checked. But perhaps most controversial of all was Malthus's argument against the poor laws, and his denial that the poor have a right to be supported -- arguments that were continued through all editions of the 'Essay' and in other writings. The arguments were based on a variety of economic, psychological, and political considerations. The poor laws tended to increase the price of food, to undermine the spirit of independence of the people, to encourage early and improvident marriages, and thus to create the poor they sought to maintain -- although this last tendency would be offset to some extent by the exercise of prudential restraint. For these and other reasons Malthus hoped for and advocated as a long-term goal the gradual abolition of the poor laws, but in later years, acknowledging that under the current state of public opinion abolition would not be politically practicable, he placed greater emphasis on an amelioration of the existing system through administrative improvements. 
In the summer of 1799 Malthus travelled with Otter, E. D. Clarke, and J. M. Cripps to northern Europe. Malthus and Otter travelled through Sweden and Finland to St Petersburg, and returned to Britain at the end of the summer. Clarke and Cripps travelled further north, and then extensively throughout Europe. Malthus kept a diary of his journey, part of which has survived and been published. It shows him busily recording local details of the pressure of population on food supplies, and of the various local customs and institutions by means of which populations were held in check. The other part was lent to Clarke and lost. 
In the summer of 1802 Malthus had a five-month holiday with relatives in France and Switzerland. The party included Harriet Eckersall (1776-1864), his first cousin once removed, whom he later married, on 12 April 1804. Her parents were John Eckersall (1748-1837) and Catherine Eckersall (1755-1837), both of whom were first cousins of Malthus, as well as first cousins of one another. Malthus and his wife had three children: Henry (1804-1882), who became vicar of Effingham and of Donnington, and who married Sophia Otter, daughter of William Otter; Emily (1806-1885), who married John Watson Pringle; and Lucy (1807-1825). There were no grandchildren. 
In 1805 Malthus was appointed professor of history and political economy at the newly founded East India College, set up by the East India Company to educate young men for service in India. The college was initially situated in Hertford, but new buildings including accommodation for the professors and their families were soon after constructed at Haileybury, about 2 miles south-east of Hertford. Malthus taught and lived at Haileybury for the rest of his life, apart from short holidays to Ireland, Scotland, and Europe, and visits to his relatives and friends. 
At times, life at the college was disturbed by the unruly behaviour of the students. Their commotions and riots, resulting in damage to property and on one occasion injury to a college servant, received much adverse publicity, and the college was threatened with closure. Malthus was asked to act as spokesperson for the college, and wrote two pamphlets in its defence: 'A Letter to the Rt. Hon. Lord Grenville' (1813), and 'Statements Respecting the East India College' (1817). Malthus was apparently well liked by the students. His nickname was Pop, or Old Pop, an abbreviation of Population Malthus, and according to one student he was 'both the favourite and the hero' of the college. Brief records of some lectures he delivered at the college have survived. They include notes written in 1828 by a student, J. D. Inverarity, in an interleaved copy of Adam Smith's 'Wealth of Nations', which Malthus was apparently using as a text. Examination papers on political economy and on history set by Malthus in 1808 have also survived. 
The population question was not Malthus's only concern. He became increasingly involved in other aspects of political economy, both theoretical and applied. In 1800 he published 'An Investigation of the Cause of the Present High Price of Provisions', in which he argued that food prices were increasing because of the large amount of money being spent to support the poor. In 1807 he published 'A Letter to Samuel Whitbread', which dealt with Whitbread's proposed amendments to the poor laws. In 1808 and 1809 he published in the 'Edinburgh Review' two articles on the problems of Ireland, and a third on '[William] Spence on commerce', although his authorship of the last has been disputed. In 1811 two further articles in the 'Edinburgh Review', on currency and bullion matters, initiated a friendship with David Ricardo. Their extensive correspondence provides a unique insight into the characters, ideas, and mental processes of the two most important economists of this formative period in the history of political economy in England. Although they differed on some essential points -- notably, on the theory of value, the nature of rent, and the role of effective demand -- their friendship remained close. Eleven days before his death, Ricardo concluded his last letter to Malthus: 'And now my dear Malthus I have done. Like other disputants after much discussion we each retain our own opinions. These discussions however never influence our friendship; I should not like you more than I do if you agreed in opinion with me. ('Works and Correspondence', 9.382)' And later Malthus said of Ricardo: 'I never loved any body out of my own family so much' (Empson, 499). 
In 1815 Malthus published a pamphlet on rent (he is credited with being one of the discoverers of the classical theory of rent). In 1814 and 1815 he wrote two pamphlets on the corn laws, in the second of which he astonished his whig friends by departing from absolute adherence to Adam Smith's doctrine of free trade, and arguing in favour of some restrictions on the importation of foreign corn. Some commentators have argued that in later life he abandoned his policy of agricultural protection; but whether he did or not, his departure from 'laissez-faire' in this instance was clearly reluctant, and motivated by considerations of national security, by a desire to maintain a balance between agriculture and manufacturing, and (particularly in his earlier writings) by a fear of the unwholesome and destabilizing effects of an excessive development of manufacturing. 
In 1820 Malthus published his 'Principles of Political Economy'. The title was something of a misnomer, as the book was conceived as a series of tracts rather than a comprehensive and systematic treatise. For the rest of his life he assembled copious notes in preparation for a second edition of the 'Principles', but he died before completing it. A second edition was published in 1836 by an anonymous editor, probably John Cazenove, with a considerable number of additions and deletions, and including a 'Memoir of Robert Malthus' by Otter. However, it is not clear to what extent the second edition reflects Malthus's final thoughts. The editor did not incorporate all of Malthus's manuscript revisions, and states that he made other editorial variations, omissions, and additions. Variorum editions of the 'Principles' were published in 1986 and 1989. 
The 'Principles' had only a limited impact at the time, and was severely criticized by J. R. McCulloch and Ricardo; the latter prepared extensive critical notes. But more recently it has received greater recognition, largely as a result of the comments by J. M. Keynes in the 1930s. Keynes argued that Malthus's theory of effective demand provided a scientific explanation of unemployment, and that the hundred-year domination of Ricardo over Malthus had been a disaster for the progress of economics. Keynes believed that if economics had followed Malthus instead of being constrained by Ricardo in an artificial groove, the world would be a much wiser and richer place. When Karl Marx referred to Malthus as 'the contemptible Malthus' (Meek, 121) and as 'a shameless sycophant of the ruling classes' (ibid., 123), he obviously overlooked the passages in the 'Principles' dealing with the importance of distribution and effective demand as causes of economic growth. 
Between the publication of his 'Principles' in 1820 and his death in 1834, Parson Malthus (as he was sometimes referred to) published a further ten works, and appeared as a witness before two select committees of the House of Commons. In 1821, in an 'Edinburgh Review' article, he replied to Godwin's 'Of Population' (1820). In 1823, in a small work entitled 'The Measure of Value Stated and Illustrated', he thought he had proved that the quantity of labour commanded in exchange is the only, and an invariable, measure of value -- an argument that commentators have not found convincing. Also in 1823 he wrote an article for the 'Quarterly Review' on Thomas Tooke's 'Thoughts and Details', and another on 'Population' for the 'Supplement... to the Encyclopaedia Britannica'. In 1824 in the 'Quarterly Review' he criticized the article by McCulloch on 'Political economy' in the supplement, declaring that Ricardo, McCulloch, and James Mill were representatives of a 'new school of political economy' which had departed from the school represented by Adam Smith and himself. The fact (noted above) that Malthus in 1828 was using Smith's 'Wealth of Nations' as a text rather than his own 'Principles of Political Economy' indicates his great esteem for Smith. In 1825 he was elected one of the ten royal associates of the Royal Society of Literature and in 1825 and 1827 he presented two papers on the subject of value, neither of which appears to have had any impact on the subsequent development of the theory of value. In 1826 he published the sixth edition of the 'Essay'. His 'Definitions in Political Economy' (1827) was a valiant attempt to resolve differences of opinion in political economy by codifying its terminology and establishing rules for the definition of terms. It could be regarded as one of the earliest works on the methodology of economics. Finally, in 1830 he published 'A Summary View of the Principle of Population', which was a shorter version, with a few small additions, of his 1823 'Encyclopaedia Britannica' article, motivated by a desire to respond to criticisms being levied at that time by Michael T. Sadler. In addition to these ten post-1820 publications, he gave evidence in 1824 before the select committee on artisans and machinery, and in 1827 before the select committee on emigration. His replies to questions provide an important insight into his views on matters not dealt with explicitly in his published works. 
While engaged in these extensive literary activities, Malthus carried out his normal teaching duties at the East India College, often under great pressure to meet examination deadlines, and conducted an extensive correspondence. More than 230 letters to or from more than fifty correspondents are known to have survived, in addition to the Ricardo-Malthus letters. His correspondents included Charles Babbage, Bewick Bridge, Thomas Chalmers, Francis Horner, Robert Wilmot-Horton, John Murray, Macvey Napier, Henry Parnell, Jean-Baptiste Say, Nassau William Senior, William Whewell, Samuel Whitbread, Arthur Young, and his close family. 
Malthus became a fellow of the Royal Society in 1818 and, as already noted, a fellow of the Royal Society of Literature in 1825. He was one of the initial members of the Political Economy Club, founded in 1821, and regularly attended the monthly meetings. He proposed questions for discussion and participated in the debates, where with the support of Cazenove he was often opposed to Ricardo and James Mill. In 1834, with Richard Jones, Charles Babbage, and others, he inaugurated the Statistical Society of London (later the Royal Statistical Society). 
In appearance Malthus was described as tall, slender, elegantly formed, and handsome, with dark eyes and naturally curled hair. When he was an undergraduate his hair was fair and he let it hang in ringlets on his neck -- which was unusual at the time, when the fashion was pigtails and powder -- but in later life (as in the 1833 portrait by J. Linnell in Haileybury College) his curled hair was auburn and cut short. In character he was said by Maria Edgeworth to be 'a perfectly unaffected, amiable, gentlemanlike man, who really 'converses'; that is, listens, as well as talks' ('Letters from England', 64), and she declared him to be 'of strict truth, perfect integrity and rational benevolence' (ibid., 331). Her views are corroborated by Otter, who believed that the most remarkable feature of Malthus's mind was his love of truth. Otter and other friends also paid tribute to his steadiness and moderation -- characteristics that reflected in his own person the 'doctrine of proportions' (or the concept of the optimum), which played such a key role in his political economy. 
Malthus's seriousness of purpose and moderation co-existed with a keen sense of humour and an enjoyment of physical recreation. Especially in his younger days he was said to be habitually cheerful and playful, and a source of amusement to his companions. He once acknowledged that, even as a boy, he had always been of a remarkably mischievous disposition. His recreational activities, encouraged by his father, included skating, boating, cricket, swimming, and shooting, but were interrupted at Cambridge by severe bouts of rheumatism. His correspondence with his father shows that they shared a great interest in the theatre and in botany. 
Alongside this mildness and humour there was a combative side to Malthus's character. He insisted that he preferred discussion in private to controversy in public, and he stated that he wished for nothing more than a quiet living in the country, but when the occasion arose he was prepared to debate vigorously in the public arena, and was eager to exert an influence on the course of political events. Empson remarked that Malthus, unlike the storm petrel, did not relish storms, but 'usually turned out in one' (Empson, 496). 
Malthus died on 29 December 1834 at Bath while on a family visit to his wife's parents. He died after a few days' illness, the cause being described as a 'disorder of the heart, of which it was believed that he was never conscious' (Otter, xlii). He was buried on 6 January 1835 in Bath Abbey. A memorial tablet, probably written by Otter, reads 'one of the best men and truest philosophers of any age or country... He lived a serene and happy life devoted to the pursuit and communication of truth' (James, 'Travel Diaries', 302). He bequeathed all his personal property to his wife, and recommended that she in turn divide her property equally between their two surviving children, a request that she duly carried out. In 1949 a great-great-nephew of Malthus, Reginald Arthur Bray, of the Manor House, Shere, presented the 'Malthus Library' (containing items collected by Daniel Malthus, by Malthus, and by other members of the family) to Jesus College, Cambridge, and donated Malthus's working copy of his 'Principles of Political Economy', with extensive manuscript revisions, to the Marshall Library of Economics at Cambridge. 


@@@@@


doc= 17903


James Malton (d. 1803), architectural draughtsman and author, accompanied his father to Dublin, where he found employment in the office of the distinguished architect James Gandon, despite a suspicion that the elder Malton had anonymously published severe criticism of Gandon's designs for the Royal Exchange in Dublin. After three years, however, James Malton 'so frequently betrayed all official confidence, and was guilty of so many irregularities that it became quite necessary to dismiss him from employment' (Gandon, 67). Subsequently Gandon suspected that Malton was responsible for 'Letters Addressed to Parliament' (1787), which expressed hostile views on the architect's work, but the authorship was not proved. 


@@@@@


doc= 17904


Malton, Thomas, the elder (1726-1801), architectural draughtsman and writer on geometry, began his career as an upholsterer in the Strand, London. He exhibited two drawings of St Martin's Church with the Free Society of Artists in 1761 and others with the Society of Artists in 1766 and 1768; from 1772 to 1785 he showed perspective drawings at the newly established Royal Academy. In 1774 he published 'The Royal Road to Geometry, or, An Easy and Familiar Introduction to the Mathematics', a school book intended as an improvement on Euclid, and in 1775 'A complete treatise on perspective in theory and practice, on the principles of Dr. Brook Taylor'. He also lectured on these subjects, having moved to a house in Poland Street, Soho. On 2 March 1776 a fire in the Savoy destroyed 350 copies of the book on geometry and 200 of that on perspective; Malton was sued by his printer and paper merchant and from this point his financial troubles seem to have begun. In 1785 he moved with his family to Dublin, a city with which he already had some acquaintance, where he struggled to support himself by teaching perspective, and where he died on 18 February 1801. Examples of his work are to be found in the Victoria and Albert Museum; the Witt collection at the Courtauld Institute holds a very fine, if incomplete, perspective drawing of Temple Bar in the Strand with the houses on either side of the thoroughfare. 
His son 
In the 1790s James Malton returned to London, where he supported himself as a topographical artist, exhibiting some fifty-one drawings, designs for, and elevations of buildings at the Royal Academy between 1792 and 1803. From 1794 his address was 17 Norton Street (later Bolsover Street), Portland Place. In 1797 he published a handsome volume of illustrations with text, 'A Descriptive View of Dublin'. In the following year he published 'An Essay on British Cottage Architecture' (which went into a second edition in 1804) and in 1802 'A Collection of Designs for Rural Retreats', which was attacked by R. Elsam in his 'Essay on Rural Architecture' of 1803. These two works of Malton's have aquatint illustrations of an exceptionally high quality and delicacy. Malton's importance as a pioneer of the 'cottage orne' has been recognized. 
James Malton died at his home in Norton Street on 28 July 1803 from brain fever and was buried in Marylebone churchyard. The brief notice in the 'Gentleman's Magazine' describes him as 'an ingenious and distinguished artist' ('GM', 1st ser., 73/2, 1803, 791). The contents of his studio and his effects were auctioned at Christies on 8 and 9 March 1804. In addition to many original drawings for his various publications, several lots consisted of apparatus and models apparently relating to his father's work on perspective. There are good examples of James Malton's work in the Victoria and Albert Museum and in the British Museum, and two interesting designs in the drawings collection of the Royal Institute of British Architects (RIBA), for a hunting-lodge and a villa 'in the Norman style'. 


In addition to these activities, Malton painted scenery for the theatre. In 1780-81 he was working for Drury Lane, and from 1790 to 1794 he worked at Covent Garden. Here, among the ambitious sets for James Wild's pantomime 'Harlequin and Faustus', Malton received particular praise for 'a representation of the scaffolding prepared for the building of the new Drury Lane Theatre as it appeared in July [1793] and which changed to a view of that theatre as it would appear when completed' (Highfill, Burnim & Langhans, 'BDA', 19) and in his 'London Theatres' (1795) Thomas Bellamy acclaimed his skills: '
Judicious Malton! Thy receding scene 

Of architectural beauty so deceives 

The eye of Admiration, that we ask -- 

'Is this majestic view 'unreal' ALL? 

The rising column, and the stately arch 

Can ne'er be pictured 'thus'! 'tis not in art' 
(p. 28)' The younger Thomas Malton felt himself to be well fitted for loftier professional employment. On 10 October 1794 the artist Joseph Farington recorded in his diary that Malton had solicited his vote at the forthcoming Royal Academy elections and had said that there was $350 owing to him from Drury Lane; Farington avoided any commitment. In November of the following year Malton sought election in direct competition with John Soane. Farington recorded: 'Smirke came to us and we conversed on the means to be employed to prevent Malton succeeding'; it was decided that the luckless man should be ruled out as 'only a Draughtsman of Buildings, but no Architect'. A few weeks later, on 17 December 1795, Farington noted 'Hamilton told me Malton proposes to paint views of London in order to qualify himself for the Academy as a painter' (Farington, 'Diary', 1.253, 2.395-7, 399). This stout-hearted response to the academicians' rebuff inspired what was to be Malton's most important work -- the 100 aquatint plates which make up 'A Picturesque Tour through the Cities of London and Westminster' (1792-1801). These catch the expanding metropolis at its most elegant and most self-assured. Among so much good topographical work at this period, Malton's views are particularly valuable because they often show an unexpected angle or record an otherwise neglected building. For example, he shows the north, Threadneedle Street, facade of the second Royal Exchange as well as its better-documented Cornhill, southern, frontage and for good measure he throws in another plate of the now vanished arcade on the northern front as well. The elegant little figures, which lend humanity to the building and which include a street vendor with a trayful of toys and novelties, may well be by Francis Wheatley. 
But in spite of the excellence of the work, in spite of a new series begun on Oxford, and in spite of his illustrations of buildings by Sir Robert Taylor, the academicians' ranks remained closed against Malton, and the next reference to him in Farington's diary (24 March 1804) grimly recorded his death at home in Long Acre from a putrid fever on 7 March, leaving seven children (Farington, 'Diary', 6.2274). 
The 'Gentleman's Magazine' speaks of Malton as an 'ingenious and much-respected artist' and says that he had left 'a wife and six young children' ('GM', 1st ser., 74/1, 1804, 293). Later that year, on 4 and 5 May, his drawings, 'many of them enriched with Figures by the late W. Hamilton RA', were put up for auction at Christies, along with a 'pianoforte by Beck' and 'the original design for the drop curtain at the opening of the present Theatre, Drury Lane' (Christies catalogues). The drawings and engravings sold well: the piano and a view of the Adelphi went to the Adam brothers, Lord Bessborough bought views of Oxford and Bath, and the collector William Crowle scooped up everything that he could on London. At the time of Malton's death, his eldest son was a cadet in India; the second son, Charles, served a seven-year apprenticeship to John Soane, but the one surviving letter suggests that it was not a happy relationship and the young man does not seem to have practised as an architect. 
Works by the younger Thomas Malton are to be found in the Victoria and Albert Museum, the British Museum, and the Ashmolean at Oxford. The Guildhall has some excellent examples of his work, but perhaps the best of all is a large (660 mm x 960 mm) pen and wash drawing of the west front of St Paul's Cathedral, engraved as the last plate of the 'Picturesque Tour' (now in the drawings collection at the RIBA); it is for such work that Thomas Malton deserves to be remembered. 


@@@@@


doc= 17905


Thomas Malton the younger (1751/2-1804), architectural draughtsman, son of Thomas Malton the elder, joined his father about 1790 in Dublin, where his portrait was painted handsomely by the American Gilbert Stuart; the original can no longer be traced, but it was engraved by W. W. Barney and copies are to be found in the British Museum and the National Portrait Gallery, London. Before his departure for Ireland, he had, in 1774, won a premium from the Society of Arts and had exhibited at the Society of Artists, the Free Society of Artists, and the Royal Academy, where in 1782 he was awarded a gold medal; between 1773 and 1803 he showed at the Royal Academy no fewer than 128 drawings, paintings, and designs of streets and buildings in London, Oxford, and Cambridge and of various mansions in the home counties, East Anglia, Yorkshire, and Bath. Between 1774 and 1796 he lived at 3 (later 56) Poland Street and thereafter at 103 Long Acre, Covent Garden, where he gave drawing classes; among his pupils were Thomas Girtin and the young J. M. W. Turner. The latter was sent away by Malton, who found his pupil's approach too imaginative for the exact representation required from an architectural draughtsman, but the youth was afterwards readmitted and in later life would say: 'But my real master, you know, was Tom Malton of Long Acre' (Thornbury, 26-7). The Westminster rate books also show him at an address in Conduit Street between 1783 and 1789 and at Great Titchfield Street from 1791 to 1796. 


@@@@@


doc= 17906


Sir John Maltravers (1266-1341) of Lytchett Matravers, Dorset, and Alinore, his first wife. Maltravers the elder spent much time in Ireland as a young adult. He was knighted with the prince of Wales in 1306, was a conservator of the peace in Dorset in 1307, 1308, 1314, and 1329, and took part in the Dunstable tournament of 1308. He served the king in Scotland and Gascony, but does not ever seem to have been summoned to parliament. In 1325, however, he joined the anti-Despenser movement. In July that year he was accused of burglary and theft at the royal manor of Kingsbury in Somerset, and in October he caused a riot at a fair in Dorset. In 1326 his manors were confiscated on the grounds that he was a 'rebel'. Besides his son, he also had a daughter called Matilda, who married, by 1313, John Lenham the younger. His second wife was Joan (died 1348/9), daughter of Sir Walter Foliot, with whom he had three daughters: Alice, Joan, and Elizabeth. After his death, which occurred in 1341, she married Alexander Venables. 


@@@@@


doc= 17907


Maltravers, John, first Lord Maltravers (c.1290-1364), baron, was the son of 
John Maltravers the younger, who was also knighted in 1306, probably fought at Bannockburn, and in 1319 he was returned as a knight of the shire for Dorset. In 1320 he accompanied Maurice Berkeley to Gascony on royal service. In the same year he was associated with Thomas Gournay in a case of false arrest, the beginning of a disastrous acquaintanceship. In 1321 Maltravers was pardoned for opposition to the Despensers, but, having sided with Thomas of Lancaster at the battle of Boroughbridge, his estates were confiscated. Throughout 1322 he was involved in attacks on the king's supporters, including one with Roger Mortimer on Despenser holdings in Newport. He probably then fled abroad, but by summer 1326 had joined Mortimer and Isabella to overthrow Edward II. In March 1327 he was granted some Despenser holdings -- the manor of Winterborne Houghton and land in Sutton Maudite 'for service to Queen Isabella and the king abroad and at home' ('CPR', '1327-30', 5.9). 
From the end of 1328 Maltravers became a key member of Mortimer's inner circle, and was heavily implicated in the murder of Edward II. In April 1327 he and Thomas Berkeley, his brother-in-law and a relative of Mortimer, were in attendance on the deposed king at Berkeley Castle, for which accounts still survive. Maltravers is accused by the chroniclers Murimuth and Baker both of treating the deposed king harshly and of ordering his murder on the night of 21 September. At the parliament that followed the coup of 1330 against Mortimer, Berkeley, who was absent on the night, gave a sworn statement that Edward had been murdered by William Ocle and Gournay, but the Bridlington chronicler, the St Paul's chronicler, and Adam Murimuth all write that Maltravers, too, had been responsible. 
During the minority of Edward III Maltravers frequently served on commissions of oyer and terminer, and was made keeper of the forest south of the Trent on 5 April 1329. He opposed Henry of Lancaster's rebellion in 1328-9 and then was commissioned to try the rebels, and in 1329 he became a household banneret, accompanying Edward III on his journey to do homage in France that year. By May 1330, still acting for Roger Mortimer, he was steward of the household, and received the forfeited manors of John Giffard of Brimsfield. During 1330 he twice received individual summonses to parliament, being consequently regarded as having become Lord Maltravers. In October 1330 he was made keeper of Clarendon Park. As keeper of Corfe Castle, a post he had occupied since at least September 1329, Maltravers was involved in the conspiracy to convince the earl of Kent early in 1330 that Edward II was still alive, thus leading to the earl's execution for treason. Although the Bridlington chronicler says that Maltravers was arrested in the coup that overthrew Mortimer at Nottingham on 19 October 1330, in fact he was not there. Instead he was indicted in his absence for plotting the murder of Kent, and a reward was placed on his head of 1000 marks. His confiscated lands went to Kent's widow and to William Montagu. In December 1330, along with Ocle, Gournay, and others, he tried to flee the realm, while in July 1331 men from Mousehole, Cornwall, were charged with having helped them to escape to the continent. Murimuth and Walsingham claim he spent many years in Germany, though other evidence suggests he may have been in the Low Countries. 
In February 1331 Queen Philippa obtained an income for Maltravers's wife, Agnes (died 1375), from the dowers of John Nerford (died 1329) and John Argentine (died 1318), her former husbands, in order to maintain her family, now destitute following the confiscation of Maltravers's lands. In August 1332 Agnes went abroad, ostensibly on pilgrimage, though this may have been a cover for a visit to her husband. In March 1334 William Montagu was appointed to get in touch with Maltravers, who was said to be 'desirous to reveal to him many things concerning his honour and the estate and well-being of the realm' ('CPR', '1330-34', 59). Other unofficial contacts appear to have been taking place around this time, as pardons were issued in 1335 to Montagu, Edmund Bereford (Maltravers's brother-in-law), Maurice Berkeley, John Moleyns, and Nicholas Beche for receiving Maltravers on the continent. As a result in 1339 Maltravers was granted a life annuity of $100. A further thawing of relations occurred in 1342 when Agnes was permitted to stay with Maltravers abroad for as long as she wished. Edward III's apparently incongruous attitude towards a condemned traitor is one of the factors regarded as giving weight to fourteenth-century rumours and present-day theories, that Edward II, far from being murdered in 1327, may have survived and fled to the continent in 1330. However, Maltravers's own part in the events surrounding the deposed king's supposed flight is less than clear. According to the letter from Manuel Fieschi to Edward III, composed between 1336 and 1343, the latter's father made his way from Berkeley to Corfe Castle, of which Maltravers was keeper. But although he then stayed at Corfe for eighteen months, he did so without Maltravers's knowledge. Hence it was by pure chance that Maltravers was correct in assuring the earl of Kent that Edward II was still alive, although he was on safer ground in claiming to be innocent of Edward's murder. Maltravers's extended exile from England, from 1330 to 1351, would thus have been intended to prevent the truth about the late king's survival coming to light, and thereby presenting a threat to the position of Edward III. 
In 1345 Maltravers was refused permission to return to stand trial for the murder of Edward II, but he was active in Calais during the late 1340s, and appears to have become a self-appointed royal agent in an attempt to win the king's favour. In 1347 he was given permission to return to England to attempt to clear his name, following a meeting with the king at the mouth of the Swyn, which also resulted in his being granted an inn and house in Calais, along with the title of 'Regarder of the land of La Lewe' in France. His restoration to royal favour continued over the next five years. In June 1348 he was sent in a delegation to Ghent, Bruges, and Ypres to negotiate on the king's behalf, and was appointed keeper of the Channel Islands, founding a hospital at Bowes in St Peter Port, Guernsey. Finally, on 20 June 1351, all his confiscated lands and his former position were restored in consideration of his faithfulness 'and of the great place which he afterwards held for [the king] in Flanders and elsewhere with great loss to himself and in spite of large offers from the king's adversaries to draw him from his allegiance' ('CPR', '1330-34', 110), and he was summoned to parliament in November. His restoration was confirmed by parliament in February 1352. In the final years of his life he settled in England. 
Maltravers married twice. With his first wife Ela (also recorded as Milicent), sister of Thomas Berkeley, he had a son, John, who died in 1350. Ela had died before about 1329, and it was probably at about that time that Maltravers married again; his new wife was Agnes, daughter of Sir William Bereford. He died on 16 February 1364 and was buried at Lytchett Matravers. A grandson, Henry, had also predeceased him, and his heirs were his two granddaughters, Joan, wife of Sir John Kaynis, and Eleanor, wife of Sir John Arundel, a son of Richard (II) Fitzalan, earl of Arundel. 


@@@@@


doc= 17908


Malvern, William (1485x90-1539), abbot of Gloucester, was born into a Gloucestershire family named Parker, and received his early education at St Peter's Abbey in Gloucester. The monks then sent him to Oxford, where he had received the degree of BCL by April 1507; he subsequently returned to the abbey and became a monk there. Presumably it was then that he took the name of Malvern. Oxford later awarded him three additional degrees: DCL (1508), BTh (1511), and DTh (1515). At St Peter's he soon became supervisor of the works before being elected abbot on 4 May 1514. Like a number of other heads of religious houses of his generation Malvern devoted himself to improving the fabric of the abbey in order to assert its antiquity and wealth. Thus he built a tomb for King Osric, who had founded the abbey about 680, thereby emphasizing St Peter's claim to be one of the oldest religious foundations in the realm, and in 1524 he wrote a history of the founding of the abbey in rhyming verse. He also built an elaborate tomb and chapel for himself, and was probably responsible for adding a gallery range along the inside of the north precinct wall, and for rebuilding the two gates in the south wall. In addition, he carried out other responsibilities incumbent on his office. As a mitred abbot he sat in parliament on several occasions. He also received royal visitors: Princess Mary in 1525 and Henry VIII and Anne Boleyn in 1535. 
The abbey was not only the most imposing edifice in the city of Gloucester, it was also the dominant local landlord, holding property worth $155 3's'. 5died in 1539. This, as well as the commoning rights it shared with the city, created animosity that had exploded in conflict just a year before Malvern became abbot. However, his tenure seems to have been relatively peaceful in that respect. He was able to turn his attention primarily to activities and responsibilities that would enhance his own reputation and that of his community. Hence he concelebrated the mass with the archbishop of Canterbury and numerous others when Wolsey received his cardinal's hat on 18 November 1515, and he was one of several abbots chosen to attend upon Wolsey at Dover when Charles V visited England in 1522. He also represented the abbot of Westminster in a reforming visitation of Malmesbury Abbey in 1527. 
During the last fifteen years of his life Malvern seems to have dealt with conflicting demands on his position with relative success. In particular, when he had to choose between supporting the king and the pope, he supported the king. He was one of the many signatories to a letter to Pope Clement VII 'praying him to consent to the King's desires' for a divorce ('LP Henry VIII', 4/3, no. 6513). He also subscribed to the royal supremacy in June 1534 (along with thirty-six members of his house). However, he did not reject traditional theology. In response to questions relating to the 'Act of Six Articles', he opposed priests' marrying, stated that scripture did not prohibit either auricular confession or private masses, and asserted that administration of the sacrament in both kinds was not necessary. At the time of his death, on or about 9 June 1539, the dissolution of the major monasteries was already in progress, and he undoubtedly realized what lay ahead for his community. Others would surrender St Peter's Abbey, but the chaos surrounding the dissolution may explain why he was not buried in the elaborate tomb he had constructed for himself; his place of burial is unknown. 


@@@@@


doc= 17909


John Malvern (d. in or before 1414?), chronicler and monk, of Worcester, who is probably to be identified with the sacrist of that name who became prior of Worcester in 1395 and died before November 1414. What is known as the 'Rolls Series A' continuation of the 'Polychronicon' (1348-81) is ascribed to John Malvern in Cambridge, Corpus Christi College, MS 197A. Although in the Corpus manuscript Malvern is credited with the continuation from 1346, it seems certain that his work only began in 1348, and that the text from 1346 to 1348 was by an unknown author. 


@@@@@


doc= 17910


Malvern, John (d. 1422), physician, was probably born in or near the town of Malvern in Worcestershire. His origins remain obscure, but his presence at heresy trials held in the diocese of Hereford, in 1393, and his appointment at some point before 1398 as master of the hospital of St Catherine in Ledbury, Herefordshire, suggest that he came from this area. By 1393, when he took his place among the distinguished commissioners appointed to try the two Lollards, William Swinderby and Walter Bryt, Malvern had already served as a chaplain at Balliol College, Oxford. He had also graduated as a master of arts and doctor of theology, at Oxford University, and may, in addition, have obtained there the doctorate in medicine credited to him later in copies of his short tract, 'Contra pestilenciam'. 
Malvern owed much of his success to an early connection with Henry Bolingbroke, the future Henry IV, who retained him as one of his domestic physicians in 1395 and may have enlisted his professional services while attempting to restore order in the north ten years later. It is, however, possible that Malvern had actually travelled to York in 1405 to attend the leader of the rebel forces, rather than the king. Malvern was reputedly one of the last bystanders to whom Richard Scrope, archbishop of York, spoke before his execution outside the city walls, on 8 June, and is said to have known him well. If he had, indeed, been treating Scrope as a patient, the latter's parting words appear especially poignant. Not even Malvern's battery of cures, he remarked, could save the life of one who was now beyond earthly medicine; and so he had no further need of physic. Such a potentially embarrassing attachment had no apparent effect upon the upward trajectory of Malvern's career or the support of his royal patron, who continued to regard him with favour. In 1408, for instance, he was promoted to a canon's stall at St George's Chapel, Windsor. 
Malvern's other distinguished patients included Richard Mitford, bishop of Salisbury, who employed him at considerable expense during his last illness in 1407. He also had links with Archbishop Thomas Arundel. He acted at the trial of John Badby before the archbishop in 1409, while the Lollard, William Thorpe, in his account of his interview with Arundel at Saltwood Castle in 1407, tells how when the laymen were dismissed, and the archbishop withdrew into a 'privy closet', among the clerics in attendance was 'a phisician that is clepid Maluerne' (Hudson, 29). That his practice was not confined to the narrow, theoretical world of academic medicine is evident from the survival of a vernacular receipt for a prophylactic for 'purging phlegm, choler and melancholy' attributed to him; and, although it was composed in Latin for an educated readership, his plague tract likewise suggests a pragmatic approach to preventative medicine. It provides a succinct precis of the scholarly literature and survives in many copies. 
Medieval English physicians were customarily rewarded with lucrative benefices, and Malvern's impressive collection attests his skill as a practitioner. In addition to his mastership of St Catherine's Hospital in Ledbury, which he retained until after 1409, he held a succession of rectories, notably that of St Dunstan-in-the-East, London, which he occupied from 1402 until his death. His appointment as a canon of St Paul's Cathedral followed two years later, and he acquired and exchanged several other livings. Yet London, where the richest and most influential patients were to be found, remained his home. He died there between 12 and 14 March 1422, having requested burial at St Dunstan's, to which he left four of his books. These included a collection of sermons, a 'prophecy of Merlin', a copy of the 'Golden Legend', and works by Seneca and Guillaume d'Auvergne. To Balliol, his old college, went a book of commentaries on Aristotle's 'Ethics' and 'Politics'. His short, businesslike will contains no mention of any surviving relatives. 


@@@@@


doc= 17911


Malveisin, William (d. 1238), bishop of Glasgow and of St Andrews, may have been a son of his namesake, the Norman nephew of Odo, count of Brittany, or he may have derived from a Malveisin family in the Seine valley nearer Paris; and he may have been born in either France or England. All of this bears inconclusively on the suggestion that he was the Guillaume le Clerc ['see 'William the Clerk] who wrote the 'Roman de Fergus', showing accurate knowledge of Scotland, with expletives 'by St Mungo', and surviving in Picard manuscripts. Since the chronicler Roger Howden (whom he certainly met in 1195) knew details of, for example, Malveisin's consecration in 1199, the latter seems to have been one of his informants at the end of his life. But later Scottish chroniclers have used a lost set of annals for the early thirteenth century, of St Andrews provenance, which fit with Malveisin's career there, and he has been suggested as their author, inspired by the example of Howden. 
Malveisin was probably young when he took service as clerk of King William the Lion in the 1180s, receiving the archdeaconry of Lothian as a benefice (1189-93) and becoming the king's chancellor on 8 September 1199, after the death on 10 July of Hugh the Chancellor, who had been first choice to succeed Jocelin as bishop of Glasgow. Only a month later, in October, William was elected to the see of Glasgow and was consecrated at Lyons by its archbishop on 24 September 1200. In his short time at Glasgow he put both the canons and the vicars-choral firmly in their place and his translation to St Andrews in 1202, after the death of Bishop Roger, was a wise decision by the king and (probably) the legate, Giovanni da Salerno. He ceased to be chancellor at about this time. 
As bishop for over thirty-five years, Malveisin played a large role in his diocese, in the Scottish church, and at the papal curia, and there is no doubt that, even if he did not attend a law school, he was learned in canon and civil law, for he was involved as litigant and judge in many disputes. He curbed the efforts of the religious of Durham and Arbroath to establish exemption from visitation and procurations, and earned a reputation for suffering no nonsense from other houses; in 1207 he went to Rome to secure support in dealing with the religious, and met there Stephen Langton, archbishop of Canterbury, whose father was given refuge in St Andrews Priory during the quarrel between Langton and John, king of England. Yet Malveisin was an acceptable envoy to John's court. 
In 1208 the bishop of Durham built a new and threatening castle at Tweedmouth, calling it Malveisin after the bishop to whose diocese it was a 'bad neighbour'. King William the Lion, who had long been pressing his claim for the earldom of Northumberland, seems to have provoked John, king of England by entertaining overtures from Philip Augustus of France. Bishop William had been in abortive embassies to John after 24 May 1209, and he accompanied his king to meet John at Norham on 7 August 1209, when there was a humiliating Scottish climb-down. The bishop must have played a part, for he witnessed the text, and the terms were kept as secret as possible though they included demolition of the castle of Malveisin. Malveisin was also party to the supplementary agreement between the two kings reached in early February 1212. Later chronicle evidence says that he went to France in that year to visit relatives, but if so the visit was brief, for he was back in 1213, acting as legate with Bishop Walter of Glasgow to preach and collect money for the Albigensian crusade. He helped inaugurate Alexander II at Scone on 6 December 1214 and on 7 July 1215 was sent as envoy to King John, possibly to demand fulfilment of chapter 59 of 'Magna Carta'. But he did not return then, and was overseas during the Anglo-Scottish wars of 1215-17, when the southern part of his diocese was ravaged. 
With three other Scottish prelates Malveisin attended the Fourth Lateran Council in November 1215, remaining behind at the curia as Alexander II incurred excommunication, his kingdom interdict. Not until December 1217 did the bishop come home via England, probably attending Alexander II's homage to Henry III at Northampton in that month. His absence from Scotland enabled him to press with Honorius III the Scottish case that the English kings had defaulted on the treaties of Norham, and the matter was remitted in 1218 to the legate Pandulph and inaction. Malveisin was at York to negotiate the marriage of Alexander II to Henry III's sister Joan on 15 June 1220, and for the marriage itself there on 18 June 1221, having presumably attended the three-day council held by the legate James at Perth on 9-11 February 1221. 
But the Scottish church remained unable to carry out reforms through a provincial council. Since 1199 several legates had visited, including James seeking a crusading subsidy in 1220. Was the Scottish church to be in need of recurrent legates? Malveisin had helped to establish the cathedral of Moray at Spynie, had claimed unsuccessfully that the bishop of Dunkeld must be consecrated by the bishop of St Andrews, and did consecrate other Scottish bishops without adequate papal authority, all signs of a pretension to metropolitan functions. It was perhaps to halt those ambitions that Honorius III agreed on 19 May 1225 to the bishops of the Scottish kingdom holding 'provinciale concilium' by papal authority, a decision, apparently, not for a one-off council, but followed by occasional councils representing all dioceses. Only one such council is known before William's death, held in Brechin diocese in 1230-31, and provincial statutes or diocesan synodalia for reform (as envisaged at the Lateran Council) are unknown until after the visit of the legate Otto to Britain in 1237-9. 
None the less, Malveisin was a busy man in the affairs of his diocese and the Scottish church, after 1218 as before 1215. His problems with his own church of St Andrews are the best attested, for he first sought to resolve the differences between the Augustinian and secular (Culdee) canons of St Andrews. A party of the former brought a case against him at the curia in 1216, and charges flew back and forth over the succeeding years. The bishop certainly seems to have forcibly presented clerics to benefices in the patronage of the priory, but he had a large 'familia' to provide for -- thirty or more of whom were 'magistri'. In 1228 the pope was still protecting the priory from further exactions of pensions in favour of such clerks. None the less, the overwhelming impression left by Bishop William's career is of an able, hard-working ecclesiastical civil servant, learned in the law, who knew how to please his masters, both king and pope, who tried to be fair, but who had little spirituality himself and little feeling for it in others. 
In his last ten years Malveisin was probably in declining health, yet about 1232 was commissioned by the pope, with two colleagues, to find a bishop for the vacant see of Dunblane; their nomination of the Dominican Clement (whom he consecrated, not at St Andrews or Dunblane, but at Stow in Lothian, on 4 September 1233) shows appreciation of a new force in the church. He was presumably a very old man when he died on 9 July 1238 at Inchmurdo, near St Andrews. He was buried in the cathedral then slowly rising; he is not known to have raised funds for it with any vigour. 


@@@@@


doc= 17912


Malynes, Gerard (fl. 1585-1641), merchant and writer on economics, was the son of a 'mint-master' (Malynes, 281). He claimed that Lancashire was the 'countrey' of his 'ancestors and parents', but he was actually born in Antwerp, close to the town of Malines (Mechelen) itself (ibid., 263). His early life remains obscure, but in 1622 he boasted fifty years of 'observation, knowledge and experience' of trade, which suggests that his commercial career started in the early 1570s (ibid., 8). By 1585 he had settled in London as a merchant, and, judging by his $200 loan to the crown three years later, was able to establish himself as a successful European trader. He became a member of the City's Dutch church, and remained a merchant stranger without attempting to secure denizen or naturalized status. His foreign connections were further strengthened by 1590 through his marriage to Marie ('fl'. 1590-1602), the daughter of his business partner Guilliame van Ameyden. This union produced at least three sons and one daughter. 
Throughout his career Malynes demonstrated an uncompromising ambition, and the international crises of the age presented him with several opportunities to advance himself. Keen to play the patriotic subject in his adopted country, he acted as an informant for the government, using his international contacts in France and Spain to supply the secretary of state, Sir Francis Walsingham, with news of foreign events. His business dealings were equally full of intrigue, and in the 1590s he became embroiled in a series of legal disputes which threatened to ruin him completely. He was partly to blame for these misfortunes, for he seems to have been ruthless in pursuit of financial gain. He was even charged with having arrested members of a Dutch diplomatic party for a debt, and English observers remarked upon his obstinacy and suspect motives. His key test came from a dispute with Amsterdam merchant John Honger, who accused Malynes and his father-in-law of conspiring to spirit away some $18,000 which he had entrusted to them as his factors in London. Malynes counter-claimed that Honger owed him significant sums, but his adversary was backed by powerful allies such as the Dutch envoy in London, and it was Malynes who ended up in gaol. It appears that he was imprisoned twice, in 1590-93 and from 1594 to at least 1596, although his enemy Honger suggested that he used the stolen money to live 'in riotous sort' during captivity ('Salisbury MSS', 6.15-16). Malynes sought to use his government contacts to extricate himself from this mess, reminding Sir Robert Cecil of his services for the crown and his concern for 'the advancement of the true gospel and doctrine' (ibid., 262-3). A bill to settle the affair was unsuccessfully submitted to parliament early in 1598, but his connections served him well, for in June 1600 it was reported that 'for some time' he had been granted royal protection from arrest 'for special considerations' ('APC', '1599-1600', 365). According to an intelligence report of September 1598, Malynes had dealings with a Spanish agent who had been in England, and thus he might have resumed his espionage duties on gaining his liberty ('CSP dom.', '1598-1601', 91). There is no evidence to suggest that Honger ever regained his money, and this and other civil suits were reported to be still 'undecided' in July 1602. However, Malynes informed Cecil several months later that he was now 'out of danger of all arrest', and hoped that the minister would 'create me 'de novo'' ('Salisbury MSS', 12.245, 528). 
Malynes's decision to embark on a career as an economic writer must be linked to these personal misfortunes. Perhaps inspired by his father's profession, Malynes sought to establish himself as an authority on currency and exchange, using his government contacts to resurrect his flagging fortunes. In 1600 he was appointed one of the commissioners to establish the true par of exchange, and although frequently rebuffed in the course of public debate, his concern to free the English coinage from the perceived exploitation of foreign money dealers remained the dominant theme of his life's work. So relentlessly did he explore this field that a leading modern authority sees him as 'something of an exchange crank' (Ashton, 4). His views were first published in two tracts which appeared in 1601-2: 'St George for England, Allegorically Described', and 'A Treatise of the Canker of England's Commonwealth'. The latter tract suggested that he had had the opportunity to communicate his ideas to the queen in person, and he boldly claimed that he could save the country $500,000 a year. However, the dedication of the 'Treatise' also highlighted his continuing notoriety, since he still feared rivals who would 'endeavour to make me generally odious amongst all men'. He advertised his talents by more direct means, reportedly giving evidence to the Commons concerning a marine insurance bill in November and December 1601, and several months later he offered to settle the exchange between England and war-ravaged Ireland. He subsequently ransacked French history to publicize further his views on exchanges, publishing in 1604 'England's view in the unmasking of two paradoxes, with a replication unto the answer of Maister J. Bodine'. 
During the reign of James I, Malynes sought to turn his fiscal expertise to more direct financial benefit, becoming involved in a series of projects associated with the coinage. He first turned his hand to mining, gaining the backing of Lord Eure and several London merchants to extract lead and alum in Yorkshire and silver in Durham. However, this scheme had already come to grief by 1606, despite the recruitment of mining experts from Germany and 'the commodiousness of foreign contracts' of his partners ('Salisbury MSS', 18.271). He darkly suggested that 'a great personage then in authoritie' had let him down on this occasion in order to pursue 'some other private designs', and also blamed the machinations of other business associates (Malynes, 262). Once again he turned to Cecil (now the earl of Salisbury) for aid, and may well have gained his assistance, for in 1607 Malynes was granted another royal protection against arrest, presumably to save him from his creditors. Two years later he was appointed a commissioner on mint affairs, a position which promoted further commentary on monetary schemes. In 1610 he prepared another tract on his favourite topic, 'A Treatise of Tripartite Exchange According to the Three Essential Parts of Trafficque', stating his patriotic intent to halt the nation's commercial decline. He also proudly recalled his recent summons by the House of Commons to advise on ways to halt the export of bullion. The experience also encouraged him to draft 'A Treatise of the Royal Merchant of Great Brittayne' (1610), in which he lectured the sovereign on his duty and interest in attending to the nation's finances and commerce. 
In 1612 Malynes prepared another paper attacking foreign money dealers as the cause of the country's export of bullion, and in the following year proposed to coin copper and brass farthings to ensure that small-denomination silver pieces did not leave the country. He was successful in his bid and a patent was duly granted to Lord Harrington to oversee the implementation of the scheme. However, it soon ran into trouble, and after six months only $600 of the tokens had been issued, several counties having refused to take them. Harrington's death further complicated matters, and by 1617 Malynes had to contend with the competition of the countess of Bedford, who had also started to mint the coins. He again sought to use court contacts to salvage his fortune, claiming that his family stood to lose $2500 on account of this project, but compensation was not forthcoming. He also appears to have met further disappointment in 1617 when lobbying to secure part of the income from duties levied on foreigners for fishing in royal waters. Ministerial patience with the truculent courtier was clearly running out, for in the following year the privy council prevented Malynes from using his royal protection of 1607 to avoid paying his arrears for rent. Personal ruin again beckoned, and in February 1619 he was back in debtors' prison, whence he petitioned the king for aid, his debtors having had the temerity to pay him back with his own tokens. 
Demonstrating remarkable resilience, Malynes once again managed to survive this ordeal, and embraced the economic crises of the 1620s as an excellent opportunity to put forward his ideas on the currency. His rant against foreign dealers duly resurfaced in a tract of 1622, 'The Maintenance of Free Trade, According to the Three Essentiall Parts of Traffique'; this constituted a direct attack on a recent work by Edward Misselden, who argued that the root of the country's monetary problem was an undervaluing of English coins, rather than the rate of exchange. Malynes took pride in declaring his long experience of advising ministers on such matters, and gave evidence to the standing commission on trade about the state of the coinage. The controversy continued into the following year, when he published 'The centre of the circle of commerce, or, A refutation of a treatise intitled the Circle of commerce, lately published by E[dward] M[isselden]', a work which described exchange as 'the heavenly mystery' (p. 139). However, the essential flaws of Malynes's argument were clear to see, and were most damagingly exposed by Thomas Mun, who argued more successfully that the rate of exchange was only a symptom of a deeper malaise, namely a fundamental imbalance in the nation's trade with other countries. 
Although Malynes's reputation was severely bruised by this debate, it was during this controversy that he produced his most influential work, 'Consuetudo, vel, Lex mercatoria, or, The ancient law merchant; divided into three parts, according to the essential parts of traffic' (1622). At 500 pages, it is a most impressive testimony to his commercial experience, and became the standard English-language work on the law merchant. A modern study has indeed called it 'the most popular merchants' handbook of its time' (Letwin, 101). Its tripartite format analysing commodities, money, and exchanges had appeared in his earlier works, and he predictably took the opportunity to indulge his views on the abuses of foreign exchanges. However, he ranged much further in his economic remit, and sought to promote several new schemes, most characteristically a regulated system of pawnbrokers to relieve the poor from the tyranny of moneylenders. He claimed to have collected a list of 1500 subscribers to back this scheme to the tune of $2000 p.a., but his hopes once again had been dashed by 'a great personage, who (as it seemeth) was not worthy of the honour thereof' (Malynes, 335-6). The general value of the work as a compendium of mercantile expertise ensured its continuing popularity among seventeenth-century publishers, with further editions in 1629, 1636, and 1686, and several excerpts were also published separately, Samuel Hartlib including a section from this 'great book' in his edition of 'The Reformed Commonwealth of Bees' in 1655. Economic historians have also found it a most useful, if not entirely unimpeachable, source. 
In the 'Lex mercatoria' Malynes confessed to be 'stricken in years' and ready to 'number my days'. His financial difficulties and advanced age can account for the general obscurity of his later years, although he surfaced briefly in 1641 to lobby the House of Commons for controls on exchanges, thereby displaying his unquenchable belief in the propriety of his lifelong campaign. No details concerning his date of death have been found, and, as he himself feared, his continuing money problems helped to ensure that none of his offspring rose to prominence. 


@@@@@


doc= 17913


Man, Henry (1747-1799), writer, was born in the City of London. His father, a well-known builder in the City, sent him to be educated under the Revd John Lamb at a house school in Croydon. He was a quick learner and soon distinguished himself as a scholar. Family pressure and a nonconformist background meant that progressing to university was impossible, so Man left school at fifteen and became a clerk in a mercantile house in the City. 
In 1770 Man published a small work called 'The Trifler'. This volume of essays established him as a writer. In 1774 he contributed a series of letters on education to Woodfall's newspaper the 'Morning Chronicle'. In the following year he published a novel, 'Bentley, or, The Rural Philosopher'. In 1775 he retired from business and published a dramatic satire entitled 'Cloacina'. In the following year Man married. The couple had one daughter, Emma Claudiana. Shortly after his marriage Man obtained a post in the South Sea House, and within a matter of months he was elected deputy secretary there. 
It was while Man was deputy secretary that he became acquainted with the writer Charles Lamb, who worked at South Sea House as a teenager between 1791 and 1792. Although they worked together for only a brief time, Man impressed Lamb. Praising Man in 'The Essays of Elia' Lamb remarked that in him 'common qualities become uncommon', and that he had a genuine wit and geniality (C. Lamb, 'Essays of Elia', 1902, 10). 
Working at South Sea House did not interfere with Man's literary interests. He continued to write letters and essays for the 'Morning Gazette' until his death on 5 December 1799. His only daughter died in Sevenoaks, Kent, on 14 August 1858. 
Man's works were collected and published in two volumes, with a 'Memoir', in 1802. They consisted of essays, letters, and various other literary fragments. In 'The Essays of Elia' Lamb lamented that they had been all but forgotten in so short a space of time, as was his style, 'terse, fresh epigrammatic, as alive'. Lamb owned a set of Man's works and often read them. He was particularly fond of Man's epigram on lords Spencer and Sandwich, credited respectively with making the waistcoat a fashionable item and inventing the sandwich: '
Two noble Earls, whom if I quote, 

Some folks might call me sinner; 

The one invented half a coat; 

The other half a dinner. 

The plan was good, as some will say 

And fitted to console one: 

Because, in this poor starving day, 

Few can afford a whole one. 

' 



@@@@@


doc= 17914


Man, James (1700?-1761), philologist, was born at Whitewreath, Elgin, Moray, the son of John Man, an impoverished small farmer. He was educated at the parish school of Longbride, Elgin, and King's College, Aberdeen, where he graduated MA on 15 April 1721. He was licensed to preach but, being unable to obtain a church, was never ordained as a minister. He became schoolmaster of Tough (Kirkton-on-Tough), Aberdeenshire, before being appointed master of the poor's hospital in Aberdeen on 11 December 1742. 
In 1741 Man advertised his projected 'Memoirs of Scotish Affairs from 1624 to 1651', collected from unpublished manuscripts, to be published in parts at three-halfpence per sheet; but it seems that only the first part was printed, consisting of Man's introduction and four pages of memoirs, mostly extracted from a manuscript 'History of Scots affairs' by James Gordon (1615?-1686), borrowed from Gordon's grandson. However, two volumes of Man's extracts from seventeenth-century manuscripts survive in the National Library of Scotland. 
Other uncompleted projects were an edition of the Latin poems of Arthur Johnston (1587-1641) and a history of the Church of Scotland in which Man was encouraged by the general assembly of the church and for which he was qualified 'by learning and diligence, and above all by his zeal of Presbytery and ardour of Whiggism' (Chalmers, 263-4). He did, however, complete 'A censure and examination of Mr Thomas Ruddiman's philological notes on the works of the great Buchanan' (1753), a learned but abusive work, 574 pages long, attacking what Man, like other vocal presbyterian scholars before him, believed was anti-protestant bias and poor Latinity in an edition of George Buchanan's works (1715) by Thomas Ruddiman (1674-1757). Ruddiman responded with only marginally less scurrilous attacks on Man in 'Anticrisis' (1754) and 'Audi alteram partem' (1756). 
Man died in October 1761, bequeathing $60 to his relations and $95 to the hospital of which he was master. His own edition of Buchanan's 'Rerum Scoticarum historia' was published in 1762 and proved to be textually inferior to Ruddiman's. It was said that Man 'had from nature a vigorous intellect, and a peevish temper, with a small stature, and a mean look' (Chalmers, 248). 


@@@@@


doc= 17915


Man, John (1514/15-1569), diplomat and dean of Gloucester, was a fellow of New College, Oxford, but the presence of two men there of the same name (one from Essex, one from Wiltshire) has caused confusion. It would seem that Anthony Wood, who gives the dean's birth as 1512 at Lacock (alternatively Winterbourne Stoke), was wrong to identify him as the Wiltshire fellow. The latter entered Winchester College in 1523, took his BA in 1530 and his BCL in 1540, was principal of St Alban Hall (later absorbed by Jesus College) from 1548 to 1552, and died in 1565. The future dean, born at Letcombe in Berkshire but later resident at Writtle in Essex, entered Winchester in 1527 aged twelve, became a scholar of New College in 1531, BA and fellow in 1533, and MA in 1538. His knowledge of Italian might suggest that he travelled, but the question is obscure. 
Senior proctor of the university in 1540, Man became prebendary of Biggleswade in Lincoln Cathedral in 1542, but was not ordained subdeacon until five years later, when he leased out the prebend for $50 p.a. In 1549 he was made master of St Bartholomew's Hospital, Gloucester, 'although he be not of clerical orders and perhaps married' ('CPR', '1548-9', 244), later resigning the office to the city for a pension of $38. Though he lived quietly during Mary's reign, suspicions concerning his religion caused him to lose his fellowship in 1553 and his prebend the following year. His retaining his fellowship that long suggests that it was then, rather than 1549, that he married Frances, daughter of Edmund Herenden (died 1563), a London mercer whose will he witnessed in 1560. One of his children was old enough to accompany him to Spain in 1566. 
Man had been restored to his Lincoln prebend by September 1560. A chaplain to Archbishop Matthew Parker, Man was nominated by the latter to the wardenship of Merton College, Oxford, on 27 May 1562, after disagreement among the fellows. His entry was opposed by the conservative sub-warden, William Hall, who (according to Wood) boxed Man's ears when the new warden gained entry. This was probably an over-dramatization: in Parker's account it was a servant who received the blow. Hall was expelled; other fellows, such as Roger Giffard, resigned. Man expressed gratitude to Parker by dedicating to him his popular translation of Wolfgang Musculus, 'Commonplaces of Christian religion' (1563; repr. 1578). On 12 January 1566 Elizabeth named Man ambassador to Spain; to raise his status he was made dean of Gloucester three weeks later, apparently without any expectation of residence. Elizabeth allegedly punned that as Philip II 'had sent her a goose-man [Guzman de Silva], so she could not return the compliment better than by sending to him a man-goose' (Wood, 2.151). 
Man thus followed the slightly old-fashioned pattern of the decanal diplomat. How he was thought to be qualified is obscure. The Catholic Henry Fitzalan, twelfth earl of Arundel, advertised him to Silva as 'a man of low position and small merits'; Elizabeth, apparently calling him 'Curtene', as 'a worthy person who speaks Italian' ('CSP Spain', '1558-67', 525, 517). His verbatim quotations of Spanish utterances suggest that he could understand, if not necessarily speak, that language -- an ability perhaps uncommon among men Elizabeth could trust. Elizabeth later claimed, ludicrously, to have thought that Man was 'rather an adherent of the old religion than a protestant' or, more reasonably (since he had not been a Marian exile), that he was 'a moderate in religion and had no love for the French' ('CSP Spain', '1568-79', 30, 33). However, he was associated not only with Archbishop Parker but (as Herenden's son-in-law) with the influential protestant coterie surrounding John Day and John Foxe in the parish of St Anne and St Agnes, Aldersgate, London. 
Greater administrative experience has been attributed to Man through identification with the John Man heavily involved in military finance, supply, and fortification from 1545. Some of this might seem rather out of the Oxonian's ambit, and the signature of John Man on the treasurer of the ordnance's accounts in 1547 does not resemble the ambassador's. More probably this John Man was the Lincolnshire gentleman to whom Mary confirmed leases of ex-monastic land on the grounds of service to the crown. Perhaps Robert Hogan, an English retainer of the count of Feria, confused two different men when he gibed that the ambassador had been 'overseer of labourers at Dover' and was 'no gentleman' ('Pepys MSS', 81). 
Man arrived in Bilbao in March 1566; proceeding to Madrid he found the papal nuncio (and future Pope Urban VII) Gianbattista Castagna and others watching for indiscretions, which he was not slow to commit. The hostile Hogan complained Man did 'but dishonour the queen and shame the country' and seemed 'to be meeter to sow sedition than to maintain amity, he is of so simple a judgement and small understanding' ('CSP for.', '1566-8', 417). Philip II came to describe him as not so much ''embajador'' as ''perturbador'' (Gonzales, 84), accusing him of circulating protestant literature. Man himself traced his problems to 'the exceeding hatred of the Conte di Feria' (BL, Cotton MS Galba Cii, fol. 146'r'), resulting from his intervention in the count's quarrel with Arundel over the financial affairs of his English in-laws. Elizabeth agreed that Man had been the victim of malice. 
It seems to have been Man's own idea early in his embassy to request religious freedom like that granted to Spanish ambassadors in England, for his household as well as himself. His petition was refused, albeit without arousing particular outrage among the Spanish, but things were different by January 1568, when Elizabeth officially supported his request for free protestant worship, against a background of religious tension provoked by the situation in the Netherlands. In any case Man finally disabled himself from diplomatic function in Spain by calling the pope 'a canting little monk' ('CSP Spain', '1568-79', 29). In June Elizabeth yielded to pressure for his recall but only after Philip II, not content with subjecting Man to loud prayers for England's conversion under his window, expelled him from Madrid to the village of Barajas. 
Philip explained that he had no choice in questions of 'offence to God Almighty'. 'Nobody had been in fault except the ambassador himself', who 'richly deserved to be burnt at the stake'; Philip hoped for a replacement who would 'avoid similar occurrences' and indeed in 1575 was still suggesting reversion to 'the same order of things as had always existed before the time of John Man' ('CSP Spain', '1568-79', 30-31, 59, 510). His reaction to Man's indiscretions may have been over-demonstrative, but (as he was still disinclined to offend Elizabeth) it was probably not just 'a ploy' (Bell, 'Man', 88). It was an English decision, not a Spanish requirement, that no replacement for Man as resident was sent. Meanwhile Man was cited as a precedent justifying successive expulsions of Spanish ambassadors from England. 
The Spanish and English governments may have used the Man debacle to test each other, but it had not occurred without personal ineptitude on his part. It is hard to see him as 'conscientious and competent' (Bell, 'Man', 93). Castagna even claimed that he was 'rather touched in the head' ('CSP Rome', '1558-71', 272). Man apparently returned broken in health (which encouraged later reports of Spanish mistreatment): his journey absorbed the large sum of $276 2's'. 2died, which included provision of a litter from London to Windsor. He seems not to have returned to Merton, where Parker had repeatedly had to enforce order in his absence. He died apparently intestate in the London house of his mother-in-law, Millicent Herenden, on 18 March 1569, and was buried in the chancel of St Anne and St Agnes, Aldersgate. His widow remarried: in 1581, as Frances Stauntonne, she received $20 in her mother's will. Mrs Herenden also left $20 to William Man, presumably Frances's son from her first marriage. 


@@@@@


doc= 17916


Menasseh ben Israel (1604-1657), rabbi and campaigner for the readmission of Jews to England, was born in Portugal. His parents, Joseph (ben Israel) Soeiro and Rachel Abrabanel, were Marranos (secret Jews) and they emigrated to Amsterdam while Menasseh was still a child. He studied with the celebrated Rabbi Isaac Uziel, but never really succeeded in establishing himself as a respected and financially secure scholar in the Jewish community at Amsterdam. His first appointment came in 1622, as rabbi of the Neveh Shalom congregation, the 'poor relation' of Amsterdam's three synagogues. About this time, or within the next few years, he married Rachel, whose other name is unknown. His salary was extremely low, so Menasseh supplemented his income by establishing the city's first Hebrew printing house, enjoying a monopoly until about 1633, and continuing to publish Hebrew books until he left for England over twenty years later. Menasseh was the only Jew to take part in the Frankfurt bookfair in 1634, and one of his booklists from the 1640s survives among the papers of John Selden, noting the names of eight used books and the prices paid for them. When Menasseh's congregation was united with that of the other two synagogues in 1639, he was relegated to the task of teaching the primary school, with the face-saving perk of a monthly sermon to the newly organized community. 
Yet Menasseh's lack of success in Amsterdam's Jewish world stood in stark contrast to his high reputation outside it. Indeed, after his first book, published in Hebrew in 1628, Menasseh wrote only one more work in that language, which in any case was dedicated to a Christian sovereign and had an argument in Latin. Most of the rabbi's books were published in Spanish or Latin, and sometimes simultaneously in both. His most famous early work was undoubtedly his 'Conciliador', published in Spanish in four parts between 1632 and 1651. Part one was an analysis of 180 discrepancies in the 'Pentateuch', achieved by the citation of 221 Jewish and 54 gentile authorities. The other parts of the work dealt with the rest of the 'Old Testament' in turn. The 'Conciliador' was an overnight success among non-Jewish theologians, in no small measure because it was a learned Jewish work that contained not a single attack against Christianity. His entry into the bibliographies of Christian theology assured, Menasseh followed his advantage with several other learned works. 'De creatione problemata XXX' appeared in 1635, followed by 'De resurrectione mortuorum' in 1636, and 'De termino vitae' in 1639. Only the appearance of his 'Dissertatio de fragilitate humana' in 1642 in Spanish and Latin marked some measure of acceptance by Jews as well as Christians. Menasseh also published a Portuguese compendium of Jewish law for returning Marranos, which must have found its way into the hands of Christians seeking a concise outline of Hebrew customs. 
By the 1640s Menasseh ben Israel had very nearly become the ambassador of western Jewry to European Christendom. His correspondents included G. J. Vossius, his son Isaac Vossius, Hugo Grotius, John Durie, and many others. Nevertheless, Menasseh's reputation among Christian scholars was not matched either by his financial or intellectual standing among the Jews of Amsterdam, a fact underscored in May 1640 when he was actually excommunicated for one day, and a fine (valued at nearly half of his annual salary) levied against him as punishment for an overly heated defence of his brother-in-law at a synagogue meeting. Menasseh made preparations to emigrate to Brazil, to the astonishment of Grotius and others, but in the event managed to obtain a position in Amsterdam as director of the community school and a lecturer at the 'yeshivah' (religious academy). In 1644 he was appointed principal of the newly established Talmudic academy founded by the affluent Pereira brothers, Abraham and Isaac, who had just arrived from Venice. 
Despite having achieved a measure of financial security, Menasseh carried on with the business contacts that he had already established during the lean years. Both of his sons were involved in the family printing house, and the elder one, Joseph, acted as Menasseh's personal emissary to agents in Poland. It was there, in Lublin, that Joseph ben Israel died in 1648, consigning to oblivion the large quantity of goods and cash that he had in his possession. This was the final blow for Menasseh's foreign investments: he shared commercial interests with his brother Ephraim Soeiro in the Dutch port of Pernambuco (Recife) which was under Portuguese siege from 1645, and by the time Joseph died Menasseh was out of business in the New World as well as the Old. 
Menasseh's mission to secure the readmission of the Jews to England began when a Jew by the name of Antonio Montezinos returned to Amsterdam in 1644 from South America, claiming that he had made contact there with Hebrew-speaking remnants of the lost ten tribes of Israel. Menasseh was entranced by this revelation, and saw it as fulfilling another part of the messianic precondition of the scattering of the Jews to all corners of the globe. A Jewish presence in England would complete the square, but they had been expelled by Edward I in 1290. When an English trade delegation led by Oliver St John visited Menasseh in his synagogue in 1650, the question of Jewish readmission was broached, and the rabbi's campaign was launched. 
Menasseh received a passport and permission to visit England in 1650 and in every year until his arrival in September 1655, after the end of the trade war between England and the Netherlands. He became well known to the English public with the appearance of his book about the Montezinos affair, 'The Hope of Israel' (1650). Menasseh himself spent the years 1650-55 in an effort to win a place at the court of Queen Kristina of Sweden, hoping to turn himself into the Jewish Descartes of the north. When Kristina abdicated in June 1654 she left unpaid a large book bill owed to Menasseh, and he took the bold and quite illegal step of travelling to her retreat at Antwerp, where she received him favourably and eventually gave him his due. Menasseh was now free from the distractions of this troublesome side-show and could concentrate on the readmission. 
Menasseh's son Samuel ben Israel came to England in October 1654 in order to test the waters, accompanied by another Jew named Manuel Martinez Dormido, who immediately petitioned Oliver Cromwell for the recovery of lands lost in the Portuguese conquest of Dutch territory. On 26 February 1655 the protector did indeed write to the king of Portugal on Dormido's behalf, perhaps an indication of Cromwell's favourable disposition to the Jews at that moment. Samuel also reported to his father that he had received a doctorate from Oxford University in the dual fields of medicine and philosophy. The document was forged, but Menasseh was unaware of this. Moved by his son's report, in September 1655 Menasseh addressed an open letter to the Jewish people, informing them of his mission and recent favourable messianic developments. By the Jewish new year (22 September 1655) Menasseh was in London, and on 31 October he formally submitted a petition for the readmission of the Jews to England. 
The council of state received Menasseh's requests, and on 13 November 1655 appointed a subcommittee, which seems to have returned its favourable report on the very same day, consisting as it did of seven of the eleven members of the council physically present. They also adopted Cromwell's strategy of spreading the political risk by appointing a conference to meet at Whitehall, directed to thrash out the pros and cons of readmitting Jews to England. The conference was opened by Cromwell himself on 4 December near the chambers of the council of state. The delegates were theologians, politicians, and merchants, and they held further sittings on 7, 12, 14, and 18 December. Menasseh ben Israel was not invited, and did not attend even the final, public session. In the event, Cromwell was unable to obtain an unequivocal endorsement of readmission, so he dissolved the conference rather than suffer a formal rejection of the proposal. 
The irony of Menasseh's mission was that there already were a number of secret Jews in England, pretending to be Roman Catholic Spanish and Portuguese, and his campaign cast an unwelcome spotlight on their affairs. Most probably they would have continued in this clandestine Marrano fashion for much longer had not England gone to war with Spain at the beginning of 1656, rendering their goods and property liable to confiscation as belonging to enemy aliens. The denunciation of one of their leaders forced England's secret Jews to throw off their Spanish disguises and to jump on Menasseh's tarnished bandwagon. 
The famous petition of England's Jewish community was received by Cromwell on 24 March 1656. Little choice had been left to them but to request readmission and to throw themselves on the mercies of the protector, whose sympathetic views had already been amply revealed. Menasseh ben Israel was the first signatory, and within a few weeks had completed his 'Vindiciae Judaeorum', his powerful refutation of slanders against the Jewish people, which has been translated and reprinted many times during the past three centuries. 
But Cromwell never gave a formal answer to the Jews' petition, preferring to turn a blind eye to their presence. After the failure of the Whitehall conference he could hardly do otherwise. Yet Menasseh ben Israel failed to realize that a new era had begun for Jews in England. His single-minded dedication to obtaining a formal declaration of Jewish toleration and freedom of worship blinded him to the substantial benefits which had been achieved informally, and to the practical determination of the English government to allow the Jews to continue living in England unmolested. Menasseh thus alienated the leaders of Anglo-Jewry, who were anxious to effect a smooth transition to toleration, and they turned their backs on him. Sometime during 1656 they agreed to bring over Rabbi Moses Athias from Hamburg to lead their congregation. Menasseh may have been considered for the post, but there is no evidence that his name was put forward at all. He seems to have been ill for some time in any case, and was forced to turn to Cromwell for assistance. The protector granted him a state pension of $100 per annum, payable quarterly and commencing from 20 February 1657. At least two payments of $25 each were made to Menasseh between Michaelmas 1656 and Michaelmas 1658. 
By the middle of September 1657 Menasseh's hopes and patience were finally exhausted. His son Samuel having recently died, Menasseh turned to Cromwell once again for financial help to enable him to carry the body back to the Netherlands. Menasseh offered to surrender his pension seal for $300, and to cease troubling Cromwell with his millennial dreams and pleas for aid. Menasseh apparently was willing to renounce his pension for even $200 because of the intense pressure of his debts and his need to return to the Netherlands immediately. The sum seems not to have been paid, and in November Menasseh was forced to return empty-handed, but he never reached Amsterdam, and died 'en route' in Middelburg on about 20 November. Samuel ben Israel was buried there, but Menasseh's body was carried to the Jewish cemetery at Ouderkerk near Amsterdam, where he was laid to rest. 
Menasseh's widow, Rachel, was left destitute and was forced to rely on charity. Before Cromwell's death in September 1658 she sent him several begging letters, which were entrusted to John Thurloe and John Sadler, long a friend of the Jews. By the beginning of January 1659 she had persuaded Sadler to plead her case before Richard Cromwell. Sadler asked the new protector to pay the $200 'to the said Widow, & Relations of a Man so Eminent & ffamous in his owne & many other Nations; & for the honour of Christian Religio with many other Reasons'. It is not known whether Richard Cromwell honoured his father's debt. 


@@@@@


doc= 17917


Manby, Aaron (1776-1850), engineer, was born at Albrighton, Shropshire, on 15 November 1776, the second son of Aaron Manby of Kingston, Jamaica. His early years were spent working in a bank on the Isle of Wight. He married Juliana Fewster, with whom he had a son, Charles Manby. His first wife died in 1806, and in 1807 he married Sarah Ann Haskins (died 1826), with whom he had one daughter, Sarah Maria (died 1826), and four sons, three of whom became civil engineers. 
By 26 November 1812 Manby was in business at Tipton, south Staffordshire, as a managing partner of the Horseley Coal and Iron Company, a mixed concern operating coal mines, blast furnaces, and engineering workshops, established some forty years earlier. Under Manby, the engineering side of the Horseley business developed greatly, and in 1813 Manby was granted one of his earliest patents, for a means of casting the refuse slag from blast furnaces into bricks and blocks for building. Eight years later, in 1821, he took out a patent for a form of steam engine well suited to marine use, which he called an 'oscillating engine'. He was not the original inventor of this form of engine as it had been proposed by William Murdock in 1785, and patented by R. Witty in 1811, but, with his son Charles, he was the first to build and operate it commercially. The same type of engine was patented by him in France in the same year; he included in the specification a claim for making ships of iron, and an improved feathering paddle wheel. By February 1822 the oscillating engine was in use in at least three wooden steamships owned by the Societe des Transports Acceleres par Eau, of 2 rue de Valois, Paris. 
Manby's fame rests on the iron steamships he built. The first of these, the 'Aaron Manby', was some 120 feet long and 18 feet in beam. It was made at Horseley, conveyed in pieces by canal to the Surrey Canal dock, Rotherhithe, and assembled. It was completed by 30 April 1822 and tried on the Thames on 9 May. A few days later it left London with a cargo of linseed and iron castings, under the command of Captain Charles Napier (1786-1860), who with Manby had formed a French company, in early 1820, with the intention of establishing a line of steamers to France. On 18 May it arrived at Boulogne, after a voyage of only fifty-five hours, and went on to reach Paris on 10 June after a brief stop in Rouen. The 'Aaron Manby' is widely regarded as the first iron ship ever to go to sea. It continued to ply upon the Seine for many years, and it was still running on the Loire in 1846, but was broken up in France in 1855. Another iron vessel, the 'Commerce de Paris', was also made at Horseley, between 1821 and 1823. 
In 1822 Manby set up an engineering works at Charenton, near Paris, entrusting its management to Daniel Wilson, a chemist who was the first to patent the use of ammonia for removing sulphuretted hydrogen from gas. The Charenton establishment was of especial importance, and had great influence over the French iron and engineering industries. In 1825 a gold medal was awarded to the founders by the Societe d'Encouragement pour l'Industrie Nationale, at which time upwards of five hundred workmen were employed in the works. The effect of Manby's efforts was to render France largely independent of English engine builders, who, for a time, displayed some resentment against him -- as was made clear in evidence given before the 1824 parliamentary select committee on artisans and machinery. 
On 12 May 1821 Manby, in conjunction with Wilson and another partner, took out a patent in France for the manufacture and purification of gas, and for what was then called 'portable gas' -- that is, compressed gas that was supplied to consumers in strong containers. In May 1822 Manby and Wilson were among the first to obtain a concession to provide gas lighting for several streets in Paris. Their company, known as the Compagnie Anglaise, survived until 1847, despite strong competition from rivals such as the Compagnie Royale. In 1826 Manby purchased the Le Creusot ironworks. These were reorganized and provided with new and improved machinery made at Charenton, and about two years afterwards the two concerns were amalgamated under the title of Societe Anonyme des Mines, Forges et Fonderies du Creusot et de Charenton. 
Manby returned to England from France at some time about 1840 and went to reside at Fulham, moving afterwards to Ryde and then to Shanklin on the Isle of Wight, where he died on 1 December 1850. 


@@@@@


doc= 17918


Manby, Charles (1804-1884), civil engineer, was born on 4 February 1804, at West Cowes, Isle of Wight, the eldest son of Aaron Manby (1776-1850), engineer, and his wife Juliana, 'nee' Fewster. He received his early education at a Roman Catholic seminary, from where he was sent in 1814 to the semi-military college of St Servan at Rennes in Brittany. His uncle, Captain Joseph Manby, private secretary and aide-de-camp to the duke of Kent, had already obtained a commission for him, but the end of the Napoleonic wars caused him to change his plans. He joined his father at the Horseley ironworks, Tipton, in 1815 and assisted in building the first iron steamboat, the 'Aaron Manby'. About 1823 Manby went to Paris to take charge of the gasworks established there by his father, and he subsequently superintended his father's foundry at Charenton. After a short stay at the Creusot ironworks, which his father had undertaken to reorganize, he was employed by the tobacco department of the French government, and he also received a commission in the French military engineers. In 1829 he returned to England and took the management of the Beaufort ironworks in south Wales. There he met his first wife, Ellen Jones, whom he married in 1830. After spending a short time at the Ebbw Vale ironworks and the Bristol ironworks, he established himself in London in 1835 as a civil engineer, specializing in the heating and ventilating of buildings. In 1838 he became connected with Sir John Ross's steamer service to India, which was soon absorbed by the Peninsular and Oriental Company. 
In 1839 he was appointed secretary to the Institution of Civil Engineers, performing the duties of this office for seventeen years with conspicuous success, his wide range of social contacts being of great help in establishing the status of the institution. Upon his retirement in 1856 he was elected honorary secretary, in which capacity he continued to be heavily involved in institution activities until his death. From 1856 he was the London agent for Robert Stephenson & Co., travelling widely in Europe to secure work for them. 
In 1853 Manby was elected a fellow of the Royal Society, and he received many foreign awards and honours. He was a member of the international commission which met in Paris to consider the feasibility of constructing the Suez Canal. His perfect command of the French language was of considerable service in maintaining a good understanding between the engineers' societies of London and Paris. In 1864 he helped to establish the engineer and railway volunteer staff corps. His interests ranged beyond the engineering world, and for many years he was involved in the management of the Adelphi and Haymarket theatres. His first wife predeceased him and in 1858 he married Harriet, daughter of Major Nicholas Willard of Eastbourne, and widow of W. C. Hood, formerly a partner in the publishing house of Whitaker & Co. There were no children of either marriage, and towards the end of his life he lived with his stepson, Arthur Robert Hood, at The Grays, Eastbourne. He died at his London home, Ranelagh House, 10 Lower Grosvenor Place, on 31 July 1884. 


@@@@@


doc= 17919


Manby, George William (1765-1854), inventor, was born at Denver, near Downham Market, Norfolk, on 28 November 1765, the son of Matthew Pepper Manby, a captain in the Welch fusiliers. Thomas Manby (1769-1834) was his younger brother. He attended a school at Downham, kept by Thomas Nooks and William Chatham. He then attended school at Bromley, Kent, studying under Reuben Burrow, then teacher of mathematics in the military drawing-room at the Tower. After a short time he entered the Royal Military Academy at Woolwich, but because of a delay in obtaining a commission in the artillery he joined the Cambridgeshire militia, eventually attaining the rank of captain. 
Manby married, in 1793, the only daughter of a Dr Preston, and went to live near Denver, but in 1801 domestic problems caused him to leave home and settle at Clifton, near Bristol. Here he devoted himself to literary pursuits and in 1801 he published 'The History and Antiquities of St David's', followed by 'Sketches of the History and Natural Beauties of Clifton' (1802) and 'A Guide from Clifton to the Counties of Monmouth, Glamorgan...' (1802), all of which were illustrated by engravings from his own drawings. In 1803 Manby wrote a pamphlet entitled 'An Englishman's Reflexions on the Author of the Present Disturbances', in which he dealt with the threatened invasion of England by Napoleon. This work attracted the notice of Charles Yorke, then secretary of war, and in August of the same year Manby was appointed barrack-master at Great Yarmouth. 
Manby's attention was first drawn to the subject of saving life from shipwrecks when he witnessed a naval ship, the 'Snipe', off Great Yarmouth during a storm in February 1807, when sixty-seven persons perished within 60 yards of the shore, and 147 bodies were picked up along the coast. It occurred to him that the first thing, when effecting a means of rescue, was to establish communication with the shore. To this end he borrowed a mortar from the Board of Ordnance, and in August and September 1807 carried out some experiments before members of the Suffolk Humane Society. The apparatus, by which communication was established between land and sea, was used successfully on 12 February 1808 at the wreck of the brig 'Elizabeth'. The invention had previously been submitted to the Board of Ordnance, who reported upon it in January 1808. It received rapid acceptance and the Navy Board began to supply it to various stations round the coast. In 1810 the apparatus was investigated by a committee of the House of Commons, and the report was published. Manby embodied the results of his work in a pamphlet published in 1812 entitled 'An essay on the preservation of shipwrecked persons, with descriptive account of the apparatus and the manner of using it', which was reprinted in many different forms. In 1823 the subject again came before the House of Commons on Manby's petition for a further reward (up to that time 229 lives had been saved by his apparatus), and the committee recommended payment to Manby of $2000. The use of the apparatus gradually extended to other countries, and Manby received numerous medals to mark his achievement. After 1878, however, the mortars were superseded by rope-carrying rockets. Manby's claim was disputed by the supporters of Lieutenant Bell, who in 1807 presented a somewhat similar plan to the Society of Arts. Bell's idea was to throw a rope from the ship to the shore; Manby's plan simply reversed this order of procedure. 
Manby also interested himself in the improvement of the lifeboat, and about 1811 he submitted his new boat to the Navy Board, who reported on the trial. The boat was tried again at Plymouth in 1826, but does not appear to have come into general use. 
About 1813 Manby commenced experiments with a view to the prevention of accidents on ice, and on 19 January 1814 he read a paper before the Royal Humane Society. The paper embodying his experimental results contained numerous illustrations and was subsequently published. He also directed his attention to the extinction of fires, being the first to suggest an apparatus known as the extincteur, consisting of a portable vessel holding a fire extinguishing solution under pressure. This was exhibited before the barrack commissioners in March 1816, and also at Woolwich before a joint committee appointed by the Admiralty and the Board of Ordnance on 30 August 1816. Manby's first wife died in 1814, and in 1818 he married Sophia (died 1843), daughter of Sir Thomas Gooch of Benacre Hall, Suffolk. In 1832 he published 'A description of instruments, apparatus, and means for saving persons from drowning who break through the ice'. Among his other works were his 'Reflections and Observations on the Practicability of Recovering Lost Greenland' (1829) and a book entitled 'A Brief and Historic Sketch of the Life and Public Services of George William Manby' (1852). He was elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1831. Manby died at his house at Southtown, Great Yarmouth, on 18 November 1854. 


@@@@@


doc= 17920


Manby, Peter (d. 1697), dean of Derry and religious controversialist, was of unknown parents and background. He was educated at Trinity College, Dublin, and took orders in the Church of Ireland before 1660, when he became a minor canon at St Patrick's, Dublin. In 1666 he became chancellor of that church. He found favour with Dr Michael Boyle, archbishop of Dublin, who made him his chaplain and promoted him to a canonry at Kildare Cathedral in 1670. Manby became dean of Derry in 1672. Little is known of his personal life at this time beyond that he married a wife, Mary, and started a family. He published some unremarkable sermons and hoped for promotion to a bishopric. 
In 1687 Manby became notorious when he published 'The Considerations which Obliged Peter Manby, Dean of Derry, to Embrace the Catholique Religion'. His stated reasons for converting included concerns about the lack of authority of the reformers at the English Reformation, a commitment to confession which he saw as a shocking omission in protestantism, and, finally, an insistence that Catholicism was not to be reviled as idolatrous since it was the origin of the Anglican religion. Manby declared that there was much to be admired in Catholic writings and credited the mass as the ultimate inspiration for his conversion. There was nothing original in Manby's arguments, but his timing, his position, and some of his recent activities caused a stir. He fully expected that protestant readers would attack him, and he was not disappointed. William King, then chancellor of St Patrick's, Dublin, his most tenacious and cynical critic, challenged Manby's motives. King accused him of converting because he had not received a promotion and because he was an informer to James II's Catholic court. King's criticisms were justified. In 1686 the dissatisfied Manby had come to the attention of James, who took a personal interest in his case. Manby was to provide a prominent example of the advantages to be had when embracing Catholicism and openly supporting James. The state papers reveal that Manby received James's protection when he turned informer, and that James wished to reward Manby for his services. The king arranged for the proceeds from the deanery of Derry be paid to the exchequer, which would then pay an allowance to Manby, who, 'being a married man', could not be given a living in the Catholic church. By April 1687 this plan had changed, and Manby was given a royal dispensation 'to hold the said deanery with all rights, profits and advantages, any law, statute or custom to the contrary notwithstanding' ('CSP dom.', '1686-7', 415). 
Meanwhile, Manby responded to King's attacks with 'A Reformed Catechism in Two Dialogues' (1687), in which he attempted to use the writings of protestant historians of the Reformation to prove the validity of his conversion. King and others were still not convinced of his sincerity. Manby repeated his themes in 'Some Queries Humbly Offered to the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury' in 1688. James II continued to favour Manby and made him an alderman of Londonderry as part of a scheme to increase the Catholic presence in the local government of Ireland. When James brought his army to Ireland in 1688 Manby's position in Londonderry became untenable. He was not present at the famous siege of the town in 1688-9, and he fled to France with James's forces after the battle of the Boyne in 1690. Manby died in London in 1697 attended by the prominent Catholic scholar Cornelius Nary. The fate of his immediate family is unknown. Although his writings were heavily criticized and his motives were questioned by his opponents, Manby managed to inspire others to convert. His brother, Robert, left the established church to become a friar, and both Robert's sons joined the Society of Jesus. One of these sons, 


@@@@@


doc= 17921


Peter Manby (b. 1681), was born in Leinster and educated at the University of Coimbra. He had returned to Ireland by 1724, when he published 'Remarks on Dr Loyd's Translation of the Montpelier Catechism' in Dublin, arguing that the catechism contained the condemned propositions of Jansenius and Quesnel. His date of death is unknown. 


@@@@@


doc= 17922


Manby, Thomas (bap. 1633?, d. 1695), landscape painter, was probably baptized on 30 May 1633 at St Martin-in-the-Fields, Westminster, the elder of the two children of Robert Manby and his wife, Susanna. Little is known about his life or career, but he was one of the earliest British artists to work in Italy, and was described by a contemporary as 'a good 'English' Landskip-Painter, who had been several times in Italy, and consequently painted much after the 'Italian' manner' (Buckeridge, 406). A group of eleven drawings (exh. Sothebys, 10 June 1931, lot 149) constitutes all that is known of his 'oeuvre'. Italian views in pen and ink with grey wash, they chiefly depict the Roman Campagna. 'The Ruins of the Colosseum' is in the Tate collection, and four others are in the British Museum. They show similarities to drawings by Francis Place, both men having been influenced by Dutch-Italianate artists such as Bartholomeus Breenbergh. 
Manby was a friend of the portrait painter Mary Beale, and is mentioned several times in her husband's notebooks. On 16 February 1677 Charles Beale recorded that, in return for a landscape which Manby had added to Mary's portrait of the countess of Clare (after Lely), he was rewarding him with some expensive oil-pigments (Beale, 1676/7). This portrait cannot now be identified, nor is it known whether Manby contributed further landscapes to works by Beale or other artists. 
Manby acted as a picture dealer, and is recorded as having brought from Italy 'a good Collection of pictures', which were sold at the Banqueting House, Whitehall, 'c'.1680 (Buckeridge, 406). He shared this interest with the sculptor Edward Pierce, and, following their deaths, a large group of their artworks were auctioned on 4 February 1696. The auction, held at the premises of John Cocks, the Golden Triangle, Long Acre, London, included books, drawings, prints, and models of plaster figures. Some lots are thought to have comprised works by Manby and Pierce as distinct from works they acquired in Italy. 
Manby died in 1695, and was buried at St Martin-in-the-Fields, London, on 24 November. 


@@@@@


doc= 17923


Manby, Thomas (1769-1834), naval officer, born on 1 January 1769 of a family long settled at Manby in Lincolnshire, was the son of Matthew Pepper Manby (died 1774) of Hilgay in Norfolk, lieutenant of marines, captain in the Welch fusiliers, and afterwards aide-de-camp to Lord Townshend when lord lieutenant of Ireland (1767-72). George William Manby was his elder brother. Townshend, when lieutenant-general of the ordnance, gave Thomas Manby a post in the department, but the boy, preferring to go to sea, was entered on the frigate 'Hyaena', on the Irish station, in 1783. In 1785 he was moved into the sloop 'Cygnet', in which he went to the West Indies. He was afterwards in the 'Amphion' and, returning in her to England, served briefly in the 'Illustrious'. Towards the end of 1790 he joined the 'Discovery', then fitting out for a voyage to the Pacific and the north-west coast of North America, under the command of Captain George Vancouver. In early 1793, when it was necessary to send some of the officers of the expedition to England and to China, Manby was appointed master of the brig 'Chatham', the 'Discovery's' consort, in which he remained for the next two years engaged in the arduous work of the survey. In 1795 he was moved back into the 'Discovery' as acting lieutenant, and on his return to England was confirmed in that rank on 27 October 1795. In 1796 he was a lieutenant of the 'Juste', and when Lord Hugh Seymour was preparing for an expedition to the Pacific, Manby, at Seymour's request, was promoted on 5 February 1797 to command the 'Charon', a 44-gun ship that was armed 'en flute' as a store ship. The proposed expedition was afterwards countermanded, and the 'Charon' was employed in transporting troops to Ireland during the Irish rising (1798). Reportedly on one occasion she took on board a thousand men at Portsmouth, landed them at Guernsey within twenty-four hours, embarked another thousand, and landed these on the following day at Waterford. She also convoyed the local trade and cruised against privateers. In the two years during which Manby commanded her he is said to have given protection to no fewer than 4753 vessels, not one of which was lost. 
Manby was advanced to post rank on 22 January 1799 and towards the end of the year was appointed to the 'Bordelais', a remarkably fine and fast vessel built as a French privateer and captured on her second trip by the 'Revolutionnaire', herself a prize and the work of the same builder. The 'Bordelais' was considered to be a most attractive vessel, though dangerous because of the weakness of her frame. During 1800 she cruised off the Azores. Afterwards she was on the blockade of Flushing but proved very unfit for this service, being long, narrow, and low in the water and consequently so wet that her crew became very sickly. She was therefore ordered to Spithead, and thence to the West Indies, sailing at the end of the year with the frigate 'Andromache' and a large convoy. The convoy was dispersed in a gale off Cape Finisterre, Spain, and Manby was afterwards sent to look out for the stragglers to the eastward of Barbados. On his way he recaptured two of them, already prizes to a French privateer, and on 28 January 1801 fell in with two large brigs and a schooner, French warships, which had been sent by the governor of Cayenne to prey on the British West India fleet. The brigs had very inferior armament to that of the 'Bordelais', but they carried nearly twice the number of men and apparently thought to carry her by boarding. No sooner, however, did the 'Bordelais' open fire on the leading brig, the 'Curieuse', than the others turned and fled. Following a brave fight the 'Curieuse' surrendered and sank shortly after. This action helped to save the scattered convoy from danger. During the year Manby was employed in cruising, and when peace came he was moved into the 'Juno', one of the squadron on the coast of San Domingo, and in her returned to England in August 1802. 
Manby was shortly afterwards appointed to the 'Africaine', a 48-gun frigate in which, on the renewal of the war, he was stationed off Helvoetsluys with a 24-gun frigate to blockade two large French frigates there with troops on board. This irksome service lasted for nearly two years until, the French frigates having been dismantled and having passed through the canal to Flushing, the 'Africaine' joined the squadron off Texel. After serious damage in a heavy gale, she had to go to Sheerness to refit. She was then sent to the West Indies with convoy and arrived at Barbados with a crew of 340 men, all in perfect health. Her orders were to return to England with the homeward-bound trade and to take on some invalids from the hospitals. Within forty-eight hours of her departure from Carlisle Bay virulent yellow fever was raging on board. The surgeon and the assistant surgeon died on the second day. Manby himself carried out their duties and, on the advice of a doctor at St Kitts, dealt out large doses of calomel. However, his anxiety brought on an attack of the fever, which nearly proved fatal. At Tortola in the Virgin Islands a surgeon was procured, and after a terrible passage of six weeks, during which a third of her crew was lost, the 'Africaine' arrived at Falmouth. From there she was sent to do quarantine at the Isles of Scilly, after which she was paid out of commission. 
About the time of Manby's appointment to the 'Africaine' he was presented by Lady Townshend to the princess of Wales, who was friendly towards him. Afterwards several witnesses swore that she conducted herself towards him with undue, if not criminal, familiarity; on 22 September 1806 Manby made affidavit that this testimony was 'a vile and wicked invention, wholly and absolutely false' (''The Book!'', 181-2). These allegations continued, however, sometimes making Manby the father of a child of the princess. She herself always maintained that she had humbugged him in this business. 
In 1807 Manby, in the 'Thalia' in command of a small squadron, was stationed at Jersey, and in 1808 he was sent, in company with the frigate 'Medusa' and a brig, to look out for two French frigates supposed to have gone to the Davis Strait to prey on the whalers. After a trying and unsuccessful cruise of twelve weeks, he and his crew stocked up with wood and water at a harbour on the coast of Labrador, which he surveyed and named Port Manvers. They then returned to England by way of Newfoundland, the Azores, and Gibraltar. The Arctic service had severely tried Manby's constitution, which was already impaired by yellow fever. His health was ruined, and he was obliged to give up his command. He purchased an estate at Northwold in Norfolk, where he settled for the rest of his life. 
In 1810 Manby married Julia Hamond of Northwold; they had two daughters. On 27 May 1825 he was promoted to the rank of rear-admiral. He died from an overdose of opium at the George Hotel, Southampton, on 13 June 1834. 


@@@@@


doc= 17924


Manderston, William (c.1485-1552), philosopher and logician, was born in Haddington, east of Edinburgh, and was educated at the University of Glasgow, where he matriculated in 1503 and graduated BA in 1506. By 1507 he had matriculated at the University of Paris and was attached to the College de Montaigu, where he lived with other Scots including John Mair, George Lokert, and David Cranston. He graduated MA in 1510, and eight years later became a bachelor of medicine. 
Manderston's name first appears in connection with a publication in 1516, when he was one of the two editors of the index of Lokert's edition of the fourteenth-century writings on physics by Jean Buridan, Judaeus Thimon, and Albert of Saxony. In the following years he published three books. The first, in 1517, was 'Tripartitum', a three-part work on the principles of logic, dedicated to Andrew Forman, archbishop of St Andrews. This was followed a year later by 'Bipartitum', a two-part work on moral philosophy whose first edition likewise was dedicated to Forman. His last book, published in 1522, was on the theologically important topic of future contingent propositions -- in particular, propositions about future human acts. Like many medieval theologians Manderston investigated such propositions because he was interested in the question of whether God's certain foreknowledge of our future free acts implied that those acts were bound to be performed and were therefore not, after all, free. 
Manderston rose to become a professor at the College de Ste Barbe in Paris. His servant in the college was George Buchanan, who would in due course be recognized as one of the great Latinists of the age. Buchanan had attended St Andrews University while Mair was working there, and had followed Mair to Paris. During this period Manderston was also the teacher of Patrick Hamilton, who within the decade became the first martyr of the Scottish Reformation. 
In 1525 Manderston was elected rector of the University of Paris. His rectorship was a troubled one, for around the time of the election the anti-Lutheran theologian Jerome de Hangest accused Manderston of plagiarizing him in the 'Tripartitum'. Whatever the justice of the claim, and whatever the precise reason for Hangest's animosity towards Manderston, the latter left France and did not return. It has been suggested that Mair's departure from France at about the same time was a by-product of that same accusation. The loss to Paris was a gain for Scotland. Manderston left Paris early in 1528, the year in which his former pupil, Patrick Hamilton, was burned at St Andrews for his Lutheran beliefs. In 1530 Manderston was elected rector of the University of St Andrews. The rectorship was solely an administrative position, but Manderston continued to teach, for in 1536 he is described as lecturer 'in actu', and it was expected that he would be appointed mediciner (lecturer in medicine) at St Mary's College in the university. Two years later he was granted tax exemption in light of his work for the common good of the university. In 1540 he and Mair jointly founded a bursary in theology at St Salvator's College, and in 1546 he founded a bursary in arts. 
Manderston died in 1552, some time before 16 May in that year, when arrangements were made for services for his soul in the parish church of Cupar in Fife. He had been one of the leading Scottish intellectuals of his age. His work on logic, and perhaps even more his work on moral philosophy, repay close study. In particular Manderston offers many illuminating insights into the nature of human action and into the determinants of moral goodness, and he pays special attention to the question of whether it is possible to perform a morally good act without God's grace. Like his friend and colleague John Mair, Manderston dedicated his life to the maintenance of the old order in the church and in the universities; it was his pupil Patrick Hamilton who represented the new. 


