@@@@@


doc= 17925


Mandevile, Robert (1578/9-1618), Church of England clergyman, was born in Cumberland of unknown parents. He matriculated from Queen's College, Oxford, on 25 June 1596, aged seventeen, graduated BA on 17 June 1600, and proceeded MA from St Edmund Hall on 6 July 1603. Like many of his fellow students of humble origins under Henry Airay's provostship at Queen's, he was prepared for the ministry in the north-west, and in July 1607 he was elected to the university living of Abbey Holme or Holm Cultram, Cumberland. Here, according to Anthony Wood, he proved 'a zealous puritan', an active 'enemy against popery', and a promoter of sabbath observance (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 2.251). 
Although Wood ascribes to Mandevile the authorship of theological discourses, his only known work was 'Timothies Taske, or, A Christian Sea-Card' (1619), edited by Thomas Vicars and published in Oxford with a dedication to the vice-chancellor, Thomas Godwin. Consisting of two addresses given to the diocesan synod at Carlisle, it is a scripturally grounded and anti-Catholic exhortation to pastors to live godly lives and faithfully discharge their duties. Mandevile died in 1618. Nothing is known of a wife or family. 


@@@@@


doc= 17926


Mandeville, Bernard (bap. 1670, d. 1733), physician and political philosopher, was baptized in Rotterdam on 20 November 1670, the second child of Michael de Mandeville ('bap'. 1639, died 1704/5) a leading physician in Rotterdam, and his wife, Judith, daughter of Bernard Verhaar, captain in the Rotterdam admiralty. 
Notwithstanding the particle (which Bernard dropped when he settled in England), no French ancestry has been traced for the de Mandevilles. They were an established Netherlandish professional family. At least some members of each generation were university-educated back to the sixteenth century. Bernard's great-great-grandfather Johannes de Mandeville can be traced to Leeuwarden in Friesland about 1580. His great-grandfather Michael de Mandeville studied medicine at the University of Franeker; he was appointed city physician and rector of the Latin school in Nijmegen in 1601. His grandfather Immanuel de Mandeville studied law at Leiden, nevertheless succeeding his father as city physician. Bernard's father, Michael, having studied law as well as qualified in medicine at Leiden, was appointed plague doctor in Nijmegen in 1666. After his marriage to Judith Verhaar in July 1667, the couple moved to Rotterdam. Michael established a (successful) medical practice and held the offices of city physician, regent of the hospital (1679-87), lieutenant of the Rotterdam militia (1673-5, 1686-91), and a minor judicial position in the dependency of Schieland. 
The young Mandeville attended the Erasmian School, Rotterdam; he is likely to have heard the two notable French protestant exiles, Pierre Bayle and Pierre Jurieu, appointed professors of the Illustrious School in Rotterdam. In 'De medicina oratio scholastica' (1685), he announced his intention of studying medicine. Matriculating in October 1685 at the University of Leiden, he studied philosophy and medicine until 1690. His doctoral thesis in philosophy, 'Disputatio philosophica de brutorum operationibus' (1689), adopted the Cartesian view of animals as automata which he later rejected. He returned briefly in 1691 to present his medical thesis, 'Disputatio medica inauguralis de chylosi vitiata', which dealt with the process of digestion and its effects on the brain -- hypochondria and hysteria were Mandeville's medical specialism. 
In the preface to the revised versions of his 'Treatise of the Hypochondriack and Hysterick Diseases' (1730, xiii), Mandeville claimed that he went to London to learn English, found it agreeable, and stayed. But it seems likely that there were other reasons for his decision to emigrate. In 1690 he and his father (who had connections with the anti-Orangist, republican states party) had been involved in the Costerman riot in Rotterdam. The city bailiff, Jacob Van Zuijlen van Nievelt, had prosecuted and executed Costerman, a citizen member of the militia, for killing (with his sword) a tax agent who had discovered a group drinking untaxed wine. On 5 October, verses written by the de Mandevilles, denouncing the bailiff as a hypocritical 'sanctimonious atheist' and petty tyrant, were posted at the merchants' exchange. This ridicule was concerted with an attack upon and partial destruction of the bailiff's house. The city government dismissed Van Zuijlen from his office the following day. But the provincial government and then the stadholder, William of Orange, intervened. Van Zuijlen was restored to office (1692) and took revenge on his enemies. In 1693 Michael de Mandeville was banished; he moved to Amsterdam to set up in practice there. Bernard would have found his prospects adversely affected by having to establish himself in the very competitive medical environment of Amsterdam. By 17 November 1693 he was sufficiently known in London medical circles to have been summoned to appear by the Royal College of Physicians for practising without a licence. Latin verses, 'In authorem de usu interno cantharidum scribentem', contributed to 'Tutus cantharidum in medicina usus internus' (1698), by Johannes Groenevelt, a Dutch physician and surgeon prosecuted for malpractice by the college, indicate Mandeville's continued hostility to its authority. (He remained unlicensed.) On 1 February 1699 he married Ruth Elizabeth Laurence ('b'. 1673/4), who was twenty-five years of age, at St Giles-in-the-Fields, Westminster, London. Their first child, Michael, was born on 1 March 1699; the date of the birth of their daughter, Penelope, is not known. 
Mandeville seems to have wished to establish himself as an author, first attempting to launch a career through verse; 'The Pamphleteers' (1703), which defended William III's memory against his (tory) detractors, was followed by translations of La Fontaine's fables ('Some Fables after the Easie and Familiar Method of Monsieur de la Fontaine', 1703; enlarged to 'Aesop Dress'd', 1704) and a burlesque epic, 'Typhon' (1704), after Paul Scarron. 'The Grumbling Hive' (1705), a 423-line verse fable deprecating the grumbling of the English (incorporated into 'The Fable of the Bees' in 1714) followed. The wealthy, powerful bees of a hive discontentedly grumbled about the prevalent vices -- these disgruntled bees being themselves as guilty of the deceits in their own callings as those of which they complained. Granted their prayers, the bees become virtuous. Consequently their wealth and numbers decline. The moral is that vice is beneficial when it is restricted by justice: '
they, that would revive 

A Golden Age, must be as free 

For Acorns, as for Honesty 
(Mandeville, 'Fable', 1.37)' These efforts being (apparently) unsuccessful, Mandeville turned to prose. 'The Virgin Unmask'd' (1709) consisted of dialogues between 'an elderly maiden aunt' and her niece. The initial suggestion of a pornographic content quickly disappeared as the discussion turned to the undesirability of marriage and the harmful effects of child bearing on women, two proto-novels, and a discussion of the dangers posed by Louis XIV to Europe's peace and security. Next Mandeville disguised himself as sisters, Lucinda and Artesia, who were members of the 'Society of Ladies' which took over the 'Female Tatler' (1709-10), an imitator of Richard Steele's 'Tatler', from its original author, Mrs Crackenthorpe (probably Thomas Baker). Mandeville wrote thirty-two issues from November 1709 to the end of March 1710. These papers foreshadowed his later works in asserting that the main engine of social development had not been those who pursued virtue, learning, and the public interest (as Steele claimed in 'The Tatler'), but rather those 'who by the Sollicitous Care they take of their Backs and Bellies, make Money Circulate, and are the real Encouragers of every useful Art and Science' (Mandeville, 'Society of Ladies', 105). Other issues discussed 'honour' and the eligibility of a life devoted to money-making. Perhaps most notable are eight issues, again responding to 'The Tatler', devoted to contending that women are as capable as men of achieving the cardinal virtues, leading armies, and governing states. To support this view Mandeville cited numerous examples, modern as well as classical, biblical, and mythical, many derived (without acknowledgement and often nearly verbatim) from the English translation of Pierre le Moyne's 'La gallerie des femmes fortes' (1647) as 'The Gallery of Heroick Women' (1652). 
Mandeville returned to his professional specialism for his next work, 'A Treatise of the Hypochondriack and Hysterick Passions' (1711). In a set of dialogues between a physician and several patients, Mandeville used a classically educated hypochondriacal patient, Misomedon, to describe the history of his ailment and the (failed) attempts to cure it by physicians addicted to various speculative theories. He gave details of and criticized the remedies prescribed by apothecaries as well as by physicians. The medical practitioner, Philopirio, reveals an adherence to 'medical materialism', denigrating theoretical medicine while praising extensive, careful empirical observation, in opposition to the training in the traditional English universities. The book presumably illustrates Mandeville's own practice, with its extensive 'talking cure' of the patient backed by the recommendations of exercise along with moderation in food and drink. Part of the point of the book's publication was to advertise Mandeville's practice -- that itself was a rejection of the authority and standards of the Royal College of Physicians. (Of all his publications in England, it was only in this work, and in its 1715 reissue as a 'second edition', that he subscribed himself 'de Mandeville', presumably to enhance his social status.) A variant title-page of the 1711 edition reveals that Mandeville was then living in Manchester Court, Channel Row, Westminster. A letter written by Mandeville to the well-known physician Sir Hans Sloane (after 4 April 1718) suggests that Mandeville achieved a reasonably successful practice. Philopirio's remarks on his own supposed character in 'A Treatise of the Hypochondriack and Hysterick Diseases' (the enlarged and retitled 1730 printings, pp. 351-2) may depict Mandeville. If so, he presents himself as too devoted to his enjoyments and diversions to 'slave at an Employment' (ibid.) as well as not being especially acquisitive. 
At least one of Mandeville's diversions remained writing and publishing. A small collection of verses in English and Latin appeared as 'Wishes to a Godson' (1712). It was followed by his notorious 'The Fable of the Bees, or, Private Vices, Publick Benefits' (1714). This first edition of the 'Fable' was composed of a short preface, 'The Grumbling Hive' of 1705, a very brief introduction, 'An enquiry into the origin of moral virtue', and twenty 'remarks' which purported to annotate and explain various lines in the verse fable. 
The 'Fable' anatomizes human nature, alleging that their 'vilest and most hateful Qualities', their passions, render humans sociable animals and make them 'fit for the largest, and according to the World, the happiest and most flourishing Societies' (Mandeville, 'Fable', 1.3-4). Here Mandeville explicitly refers to Montaigne and apparently relies on exponents of the French Augustinian tradition, such as Pascal, La Rochefoucauld, Jacques Esprit, Pierre Nicole, and Pierre Bayle, who emphasized the worldly benefits of the passions. While claiming that almost every profession and calling is marked with its peculiar vices, that the vile ingredients result in a wholesome mixture, and that wealth, power, and politeness are incompatible with innocence and virtue, Mandeville denied (as he was repeatedly to do throughout his works) that he was commending vice. On the contrary, he claimed that he did not recommend vice to individuals, that he exhorted governments to punish crimes and regulate trade, and that he was deprecating the implicit hypocrisy of those who desired a flourishing society but grumbled about its concomitant conditions. Only if London were less flourishing would the streets be cleaner; their dirtiness was a necessary evil. Mandeville admitted that he would prefer to walk in a garden or a grove rather than a 'stinking' London street; and 'true Happiness', he conceded, was more probable in a 'small peaceable Society' than in a great warlike commercial nation. But this was so only if one laid aside considerations of 'the interest or happiness of the city' and all worldly greatness (ibid., 1.6-13). 
The 'Enquiry into the origin of moral virtue' reiterates the 'Female Tatler''s rejection of the distinctiveness and dignity of human nature, with its emphasis on rationality, which Mandeville continued to attribute to Richard Steele. Its version of the origin of morality and society transmutes the discussion in the 'Female Tatler'. There Mandeville had pitted an Augustinian-Hobbesian view, which emphasized the inherent strife that resulted from conflicting desires, against one that attributed the improving of mankind to public-spirited benefactors. Both were then trumped by the 'Oxford gentleman', who credited civilization to those who invented new luxurious desires as well as seeking to satisfy existing ones. The Augustinian-Hobbesian self-interested element of human nature is retained in the 'Enquiry' which opens the 'Fable'. But Mandeville now suggested that 'skilful Politicians' (moralists, lawgivers, and philosophers) had persuaded humans to sacrifice their selfish desires for the praises of others, thus enhancing their good opinions of themselves as virtuous superior beings: 'This was (or at least might have been) how Savage Man was broke' (Mandeville, 'Fable', 1.46). The 'first Rudiments of Morality, broach'd by skilful Politicians' had resulted from distinguishing vice, that is, indulging one's appetites, from virtue: 'every Performance, by which Man, contrary to the impulse of Nature, should endeavour the Benefit of others, or the Conquest of his own Passions out of a Rational Ambition of being good' (ibid., 42-9). Thus 'the Moral Virtues are the Political Offspring which Flattery begot on Pride' (ibid., 51). The procedure can be observed in the training of children into proper behaviour, whether it be Miss Mollie being taught to curtsy or a boy learning the manners of a gentleman; the results can be equally observed in the ambitions of heroes like Caesar and Alexander (ibid., 53-5). Ultimately, in order to judge human conduct, it is necessary to reveal the motives and passions that produce it. 
The 'remarks' further illustrate Mandeville's main contentions (remarks are here denoted by the letters in editions from 1723 rather than those of 1714). Pride, the desire to be thought well of, features in several of them. For example, remark R examines honour and in particular courage. Natural courage occurs when the passion of anger overcomes that of fear. Sociable relations, however, require that fear be strengthened in order to inhibit aggression and at the same time that a substitute for natural courage be provided so that society can be defended. Thus the passions of pride and shame are harnessed to produce 'Artificial Courage'. More generally, Mandeville contrasted 'ancient' and 'modern' honour. Ancient honour was a 'massy' chivalrous compound of courage, honesty, justice, and other virtues. By contrast, modern honour was new-minted on the basis of pride; with the same weight of courage, half the quantity of honesty, and a very little justice, but not a scrap of any other virtue. Modern honour was much more 'portable' than ancient had been. Yet 'such as it is there would be no living without it in a large nation': a man of honour may never go back on his word; he must pay his gambling debts but may put off other creditors; he must protect any woman entrusted to his care but may act as he pleases toward others. He must also fight if insulted; and the resulting practice of duelling, Mandeville pointed out, had effectively curtailed verbal abuse. Honour may be contrary to religion, but it is far easier to achieve than virtue -- that requires restraining many passions with little apparent reward; honour requires less restraint and is immediately recompensed by pride (Mandeville, 'Fable', 1.198-223). 
Pride is also a passion that promotes luxury. If everything beyond bare subsistence is luxury, then even 'naked Savages', having made some improvement in their way of life, are luxurious -- 'in one Sense every Thing may be call'd [luxurious], and in another there is no such Thing'. What is thought to be luxurious is relative to a person's position. Far from being a danger to society, luxury is inseparable from a wealthy, flourishing nation. Moreover, whatever the situation of the rich, the 'working slaving People' will be sufficiently hardy for soldiering (remark L, Mandeville, 'Fable', 1.107-23). Continuous refinement in dress, diet, habitation, and ornament is driven by pride, for humans will aspire to emulate their betters, who will in turn adopt new fashions (ibid., remark M, 124-34; see also D, 80-81). The famous frugality of the Dutch, Mandeville argues, actually stems from their paucity of natural resources and the heavy taxes they pay in order to protect themselves from the sea. Moreover, the virtue of frugality is not apparent in their extravagant expenditure on untaxed goods, while the government actually encourages the luxury and extravagance of seamen arriving in port after long voyages (ibid., remark Q, 181-98). The other great example of a virtuous simplicity and hardiness, Sparta, provides a model not desired by the English (ibid., remark X, 246-7). 
Remark P explicitly elaborates the suggestion that there has been a gradual evolution of human society from simplicity to opulence, that luxuries formerly available only to the very rich, such as a white linen shirt, have become common even among the poorest. Many distinct operations must be combined to produce such items. Humans have developed such processes as brewing and baking, even without full knowledge of the chemistry involved (Mandeville, 'Fable', 1.169-73). Among those luxuries now enjoyed even by the poor is eating meat, which clearly requires pain and suffering to animals structurally similar to humans (ibid., 172-6). This leads Mandeville to an attack on human pretensions to superiority over animals in a dialogue between a lion and a Roman merchant (ibid., 176-81). 
Many of the remarks explain how contraries are mutually dependent. Avarice and prodigality, prostitution and chastity, protestantism and Roman Catholic reform, the Church of England and learning in the sects, all depend on each other. Society itself is like a punch: a mixture balancing individually unpleasant elements (remark K, Mandeville, 'Fable', 1.105-6). Every calling and trade exhibits the human vices of self-interest and pride. Decio, the sugar dealer, vies with Alcander, a West India merchant -- each seeking to get the best of the bargain by relying on information not known to the other (ibid., remark B, 61-3). Merchants rely on secret marks, hiding the real cost of goods from their customers (ibid., remark D, 80-1). The apparently lazy porter who refuses to take a letter to Bow for a penny is astonishingly the messenger willingly to rise from his bed on a stormy winter night to run to Hackney and back with a bill of exchange for a crown (ibid., remark V, 240-1). Self-denying virtue is a pretence: the real human pleasures are sensual and worldly ones. John claims he loves pudding, but eats as little as possible while devouring the beef. Mandeville asserted he could outdo the Stoics in contemning riches for a tenth of Seneca's wealth, as well as teaching 'the way to his 'Summum bonum' as exactly as I could my way home' (ibid., remark O, 147-68). Mandeville's claim to anatomize human nature and society meant tracing human actions to their motivating passions and showing how luxury and even such evils such as drunkenness, theft, and prostitution contributed to the wealth, power, and worldly happiness of a trading society. Not only moral but also natural evils like the great London fire (1666), it was suggested, produced some good. 
The 'Fable', notwithstanding its having two printings in 1714, attracted little immediate attention. Later in the year Mandeville published 'The Mischiefs that Ought Justly to be Apprehended from a Whig-Government' (1714), a minor, anonymous pamphlet defending the Hanoverian succession. In 1720 a more substantial work, 'Free Thoughts on Religion, the Church, and National Happiness' urged toleration while objecting to priestcraft and exhibiting anti-clerical attitudes: the clergy, and especially those of a state church, had an interest in inciting hostility between religious denominations. In the book Mandeville relied heavily on Pierre Bayle, in fact transcribing substantial passages. 'Free Thoughts' maintained a moderate whiggish position. While passive obedience was required to the sovereign authority in all states, in Britain this authority was the triune king, lords, and commons. The book was reissued in 1721 and 1723 with a second edition in 1729; it was also published in French (1722, 1723, 1729, and 1738), in Dutch (1723), and in German (1726). 
In 1723 Mandeville published a second edition of the 'Fable', enlarging the remarks, including for example in remark G the contention that even thieves contribute to the public good as well as both a denunciation of gin ('this Liquid Poison') and a demonstration of its benefits by 'a sharp-sighted good humour'd Man' (Mandeville, 'Fable', 1.86-93). He also added 'An essay on charity and charity schools' (hostile to them and their sponsors) and 'A search into the nature of society' (against the third earl of Shaftesbury's moral and aesthetic philosophy and its contention that virtue is natural to humans). His notoriety and his success as an author was guaranteed by the presentation of this edition by a Middlesex grand jury for denigrating virtue and religion as harmful to society and recommending vices as beneficial to it. Middlesex grand juries were selected by London sheriffs, themselves elected by the City's livery companies. The sheriffs involved, elected unopposed in 1722, were both tories. Accordingly the grand jury was predominantly tory and crypto-Jacobite. On 3 July, at the height of a shrieval election hotly contested between tories and opposition whigs, the grand jury had presented the letters of Cato (John Trenchard and Thomas Gordon, 'country' whigs) in the 'British Journal'. Trenchard had attacked high-church charity schools as being Jacobite. He was censured for reflecting on the government and the Church of England. Presenting the 'Fable' on 8 July along with Cato (for a second time) appears to have been an attempt to reconcile 'country' whigs with tories in attacking the existing Walpole ministry by denouncing a 'court whig'. Mandeville replied with 'A vindication of the book' in the 'London Journal' (10 August 1723) -- a government-supported newspaper. The 'Vindication' reproduced the grand jury's presentment, along with what Mandeville labelled 'An abusive letter to Lord 'C'' which denigrated the 'Fable', before defending the book by reiterating many of its themes and quoting some of its most offensive passages, while denying that it advocated vice rather than exposed its ubiquity in the world. The 'Vindication' was immediately reissued in a format matching that of the 'Fable' and then incorporated in subsequent editions. 
Mandeville's immunity from prosecution in 1723 and when the 'Fable' was again presented in 1728 may well have been due to his political connections. He is known to have been on good terms with Thomas Parker, earl of Macclesfield (1666-1732); a letter from Mandeville to the former lord chancellor (in 1726) reports details of Mandeville's son's illness and refers familiarly to Macclesfield's family (Mandeville, 'Fable', 1.xxvi-xxvii; letter reproduced facing p. xxvii). 
There were further editions of 'The Fable of the Bees' during Mandeville's life in 1724, 1725, 1728, 1729, and 1732. 'A modest defence of publick stews, or, An essay upon whoring as it is now practis'd in these kingdoms' (1724), which advocates a scheme of public houses of prostitution, is generally attributed to Mandeville, partly on the basis of remark H of the 'Fable', which notes the wisdom of the Amsterdam authorities in tolerating 'Temples of Venus' complete with organ music. Nevertheless the attribution has not been firmly established, especially since the 'Modest Defence' was entered in the Stationers' register (13 July 1724) to Lawrence Lefever, who signed 'Law Lafevre' (Goldsmith, 'Private Vices', 149-50). Mandeville also published some short essays in the 'St James's Journal' (20 April, 1 May 1723) and the 'British Journal' (27 April-4 May 1725). The latter were collected and published as 'An enquiry into the causes of the frequent executions at Tyburn, and, A proposal for some regulations concerning felons in prison, and the good effects to be expected from them' (1725). 

'The Fable of the Bees, Part II' (1729) 'by the Author of the First', was in fact an entirely new work. In six dialogues Mandeville has Cleomenes persuade Horatio that the 'Fable' is an entirely moral and religious work which has been grossly misrepresented. In addition to explaining and defending the 'Fable' and quoting a number of passages from it, the work develops an extensive 'conjectural history' of how human beings developed from savagery to civilization. Now postulating two basic instinctive drives, self-love (the desires aiming at self-preservation) and self-liking (replacing pride and shame), Mandeville explained how society, language, and the arts and sciences gradually developed over a long period of time. Humans came to live together to defend themselves against wild animals; they then developed restrictions on their actions to control the conflicts arising from their striving for superiority over each other; the third step to society was the invention of written language. It turns out that the material arrangements and social institutions at which humans have arrived have been the result of the 'joynt Labour of many Ages' rather than of the literal machinations of 'skilful politicians' (Goldsmith, 'Private Vices', 63-77). Both Cleomenes' account of the development of civilization from savagery and his naturalistic explanation of the origins of religion implicitly undermine the literal truth of the 'Bible'. Horatio challenges Cleomenes, Mandeville's designated spokesman, to explain how there can be savage peoples if all humans originated from a single source (Mandeville, 'Fable', 2.196-9) and accuses him of inconsistency in accepting Moses's divine inspiration and the miracle of Adam and Eve, created as perfect humans with language, while rejecting the equally fabulous pagan myths (ibid., 306-12). There were further editions of 'Part II' in 1730 and 1733. After that the 'Fable' and 'Part II' were published as if they were a single work in two volumes. 
Mandeville went on to produce a further set of dialogues between the same interlocutors: 'An Enquiry into the Origin of Honour, and, The Usefulness of Christianity in War' (1732). In the book Mandeville repeated his view that the passions of pride and shame are both forms of self-liking. Honour and (worldly) religion are treated as devices that are useful for socializing humans. Honour is discovered to be even less demanding than virtue or the artificial courage discussed in the 'Fable of the Bees'. The work again reveals Mandeville's anti-clericalism in his account of how a perverted version of the truly peaceful doctrine of Christianity can be used to motivate soldiers. 
Mandeville's last work was a pamphlet entitled 'A Letter to Dion, Occasion'd by his Book call'd 'Alciphron', or, 'The Minute Philosopher'' (1732). In the second dialogue in his 'Alciphron' (1732), George Berkeley had lampooned Mandeville through Lysicles, a conceited but intellectually shallow, antinomian freethinker and atheist. Not only did the 'Letter' contend that Berkeley was mistaken about the views expressed in the 'Fable of the Bees', which Mandeville reiterated, contending that they were entirely consistent with strict morality and true Christianity, but also it maintained that a person of Berkeley's intelligence and character could only have so mischaracterized the doctrine of the 'Fable' because he had accepted common reports of the work rather than actually having read it himself. 
On 21 January 1733 Mandeville died in Hackney, possibly of influenza. His will, dated 2 April 1729 (reproduced in Mandeville, 'Fable', 1, after p. xx), left 20 shillings to his daughter for a ring, $100 out of $500 of South Sea annuities to his wife, and the remainder of the annuities and the rest of his estate to his son. An annotation on the will indicated that he had been living in the parish of St Stephen's, Coleman Street. He requested that he be buried 'as near by and in as private a manner as shall be consistent with the cheapest Decency'. 
There are no known portraits of Mandeville and the only authentic contemporary personal report about him we have is by Benjamin Franklin: Dr Lyons (a surgeon and author of 'The Infallibility of Human Judgment') 'carried me to The Horns pale ale house in -- Lane, Cheapside, and introduc'd me to Dr Mandeville, Author of the 'Fable of the Bees', who had a Club there, of which he was the Soul, being a most facetious entertaining Companion' ('Franklin's Memoirs', 110; Mandeville, 'Fable', 1.xxix). 
Mandeville's 'Fable' evoked a number of responses (see references to Mandeville's works up to 1923 in 'Fable', 2.418-53). Robert Burrow seems to have been the earliest of Mandeville's contemporary critics to publish, preaching against the 'Fable' in a sermon before the lord mayor in September 1723, 'Civil Society and Government Vindicated' (1723), alluded to in Mandeville's preface. Sermons and essays by William Barnes (preached March 1724, published 1727), William Hendley (1725), Samuel Chandler (1728), and Isaac Watts (1728), specifically defended charity schools, claiming that they promoted loyalty and religion or that they did not educate children beyond their stations. But many replies to the 'Fable' also objected more generally to its denigration of rational morality, irreligious tone, or apparent justification of vice. William Law, in 'Remarks on a Late Book' (1724), Richard Fiddes, in the preface to his 'General Treatise of Morality' (1724), and John Thorold, in 'A Short Examination of the Notions Advanc'd in a Late Book' (1726), all attacked the 'Fable' in defence of religion and morality. John Dennis, in 'Vice and Luxury Publick Mischiefs' (1724), saw the 'Fable' as attack on virtue, liberty, and religion. George Bluet's extensive 'Enquiry whether a general practice of virtue tends to the wealth or poverty, benefit or disadvantage of a people?' (1725) disputed many of Mandeville's contentions. 'The True Meaning of the 'Fable of the Bees'' (1726) did not defend the book but claimed that Bluet had missed the point: the 'Fable' really favoured domination by a select few who reaped the benefit of others' vices. 
There were other substantial replies in addition to Berkeley's caricature of Mandevilleans in 'Alciphron'. Alexander Innes's 'Arete-Logia' (1728), a plagiarized version of Archibald Campbell's 'Enquiry into the Original of Moral Virtue' (1733) with his own preface challenging Mandeville to burn his book, as he had promised, should it be shown to be immoral. Innes's advertisements falsely reported that Mandeville had actually done so. 
Francis Hutcheson's title-page to his 'Inquiry into the Original of our Ideas of Beauty and Virtue' (1725) purported to defend Shaftesbury and oppose the 'Fable', but only a few passages were explicitly concerned with Mandeville. Hutcheson, a Presbyterian and a member of the 'old whig' Molesworth circle, extended his attack on the 'Fable' in the following year in the 'Dublin Journal'. He identified five distinct meanings of Mandeville's paradox and contended that the social affections and virtues were natural, conducive to happiness, and consistent with prosperity. The criticism was republished in James Arbuckle's edition of 'A collection of letters and essays on several subjects, lately publish'd in the 'Dublin Journal'' (1729) and again in 'Reflections on Laughter and Remarks on the 'Fable of the Bees'' (1750); the basic view is repeated in Hutcheson's posthumous 'A System of Moral Philosophy' (1755). 
Mandeville's views were so widely known in the eighteenth century that there is scarcely any intellectual at the time who did not at least mention them. His conjectural history of society and language, emphasis on the role of the passions rather than reason, and claims that progress and commercial civilization were founded on necessary and beneficial vices set the terms for further moral, historical, and economic discussion in the Enlightenment. At the beginning of his 'Treatise of Human Nature' David Hume named Mandeville among significant moral philosophers, while denying in the 'Enquiry into the Principles of Morals' as well as in the 'Treatise' that moral distinctions were entirely the artifice of politicians. His essays 'On refinement in the arts' (originally 'Of luxury') and 'Of the dignity or meanness of human nature' explore Mandevillean themes. Adam Smith devoted a chapter of 'The Theory of Moral Sentiments' to rebutting Mandeville's moral theory but adopted some of his descriptions of commercial society in the 'Wealth of Nations'. The defence of luxury by Voltaire in 'Le mondain' and by Jean Francois Melon in his 'Defense de 'Le mondain'' relied on Mandeville. In the 'Discours sur les sciences et les arts' and the 'Discours sur l'origine et les fondements de l'inegalite parmi les hommes', Jean-Jacques Rousseau accepted that material progress coincided with a shift in morality away from primitive simplicity, treating the change as moral decline. Later in the century Mandeville's accounts of human nature and historical development were also used in the work of Immanuel Kant. 


@@@@@


doc= 17927


Mandeville, Geoffrey de, first earl of Essex (d. 1144), magnate, was the son and heir of William de Mandeville, constable of the Tower of London, and Margaret, daughter of Eudo de Ryes, royal 'dapifer' ('steward') and lord of Colchester. According to a charter of the 1140s in favour of Geoffrey de Mandeville, his paternal grandfather, also Geoffrey, had been constable of the Tower and sheriff of Essex, London and Middlesex, and Hertfordshire. The elder Geoffrey de Mandeville was one of William I's wealthier tenants-in-chief, eleventh (and last) among Corbett's 'Class A' Domesday landholders, with lands worth a total of $740 a year concentrated in Essex, Middlesex, and Hertfordshire, and extending into seven other counties. Unlike the ten other 'Class A' magnates, all of whom came from prominent continental families, Geoffrey and his family were of such minor importance before the conquest that their place of origin in Normandy defies certain identification. It may have been Colmesnil-Manneville ('arrondissement' Dieppe, 'canton' Offranville) but it is impossible to be certain: place names such as Manneville, Magna Villa, and Magnevilla occur in France with perplexing frequency. 
It was during the constableship of William de Mandeville that Henry I's dangerous prisoner, Ranulf Flambard, bishop of Durham, escaped from the Tower of London early in 1101 and fled to Normandy. There Ranulf served as chief organizer of Robert Curthose's invasion of England in summer 1101 that nearly cost Henry his newly won crown. For his carelessness (or worse) William de Mandeville was burdened with an immense fine of more than $2200 and was forced to relinquish his three most valuable demesne manors -- Sawbridgeworth, Hertfordshire, and Walden and Great Waltham, Essex -- until the debt was paid in full. The Domesday value of these manors ($50, $50, and $60 respectively) amounted to about a third of the value of the entire Mandeville demesne in England ($489), and their confiscation therefore thrust the Mandeville family from the upper ranks of the English aristocracy. 
At some time between 1103 and 1105, but probably in 1103, Henry I notified the chief men of Essex and Hertfordshire that, until such time as the debt was repaid, he had granted custody of the three Mandeville manors to his loyal follower and steward Eudo de Ryes, whose daughter Margaret was William de Mandeville's wife. Thus control of the three manors remained in the family but out of William de Mandeville's reach. At his death some time between 1105 and 1116 his son Geoffrey, probably still a minor, stood to inherit only a truncated portion of his ancestral Domesday honour. The pipe roll of 1130 discloses that Geoffrey was burdened with a substantial relief (1300 marks in 1129) for what remained of his inheritance. His chances of having the three lost manors restored to him had been much reduced by the marriage of his widowed mother, Margaret de Ryes, to the royal favourite Othuer fitz Earl, the natural son of Hugh, earl of Chester and vicomte d'Avranches, and the tutor of Henry I's only legitimate son, William AEtheling. Othuer appears to have come into possession of the three forfeited manors well before the death of Eudo de Ryes in February 1120, and he had also acquired William de Mandeville's former constableship of the Tower of London. Besides these Mandeville assets Othuer probably stood to inherit some or all of the cross-channel estates of his father-in-law, Eudo, thus ascending to the heights of the Anglo-Norman aristocracy while Geoffrey de Mandeville floundered. But Othuer's rise was cut short by his death, along with that of his royal pupil, in the wreck of the 'White Ship' in November 1120. 
As a result of the disaster, which severely damaged Henry I's plans for the peace of north-western Europe, the lands of Eudo de Ryes escheated to the crown and the three Mandeville manors reverted to the king. The constableship of the Tower passed to a certain Aschuill, probably Hasculf de Tanis (south-west of Avranches), who may have been a kinsman of Othuer. The shipwreck also opened prospects for Mandeville. The death of his stepfather meant that he might hope once again to recover the family fortune. 
Mandeville's attestations of three royal charters during Henry I's final year in Normandy suggest that he was seeking to rise through service in the king's military 'familia' during Henry's campaign against Guillaume Talvas. His hopes remained unrealized at Henry I's death in December 1135 and in the initial years of Stephen's reign, when Hasculf continued to command the Tower and the three confiscated manors remained under royal control. 
Mandeville's fortunes suddenly improved in 1139-40, at a time when the spread of rebellion far and wide across the land compelled King Stephen to delegate much of his regional power to a flock of newly created earls. Between 1138 and 1141 he added no less than eighteen earldoms to the eight that had existed at the close of Henry I's reign. One of the new earls was Geoffrey de Mandeville whom Stephen appointed earl of Essex in a charter issued at Westminster probably between December 1139 and December 1140. It was at about this time, and perhaps as a result of the charter, that Mandeville recovered his ancestral right to the constableship of the Tower of London. 
According to the late testimony of William of Newburgh, which most historians have accepted at least guardedly, King Stephen, having negotiated the betrothal of Constance, sister of Louis VII of France, to his own son Eustace, suffered humiliation at Mandeville's hands when the latter seized Constance while she and her mother-in-law, the Queen Matilda, were in London 'c'.1141. Mandeville, who was then (according to Newburgh) constable of the Tower, kept Constance as his prisoner despite Matilda's urgent protests, until at length he yielded to King Stephen's demand that she be released. Newburgh believed that Stephen, although disguising his anger for the time being, never forgave Mandeville for the affront. 
The rise of Mandeville to the height of his power is documented by four charters -- two from Stephen, including the aforementioned grant of the earldom of Essex, and two from the Empress Matilda. Round dated these charters in the order of ascending benefits to Mandeville and then reached the fearlessly circular conclusion that Mandeville gained greater benefits from each successive charter: 'To determine from internal evidence the sequence of these charters, we must arrange them in ascending scale. That is to say, each charter should represent an advance on its immediate predecessor... We find each successive change of side on the part of this unscrupulous magnate marked by a distinct advance in his demands and in the price he obtained. (Round, 43, 98)' Playing one side against the other in the most ruthless and devious fashion, so Round supposed, Mandeville was thus 'the most perfect and typical presentment of the feudal and anarchic spirit that stamps the reign of Stephen' (Round, v). Having obtained from Stephen's first charter (usually designated S1) the earldom of Essex, Mandeville then received from the Empress Matilda (midsummer 1141, Westminster) a recognition of his right to the earldom and to the third penny of the shire, along with a grant in fee and heredity of all the lands of his grandfather Geoffrey de Mandeville, including presumably the three lost manors (the castle of Walden is mentioned explicitly), the hereditary shrievalty and chief justiciarship of Essex, the crown manors of Maldon and Newport in that shire, and other properties (M1). Next on Round's list is King Stephen's second charter (S2), dated Christmas 1141 at Canterbury, after the king's release from imprisonment following his capture at the battle of Lincoln on 2 February 1141. Stephen confirmed in this charter all that Mandeville had received from the empress in M1, along with the Essex manors of Writtle and Hatfield and certain escheated lands, worth collectively $300 a year, an additional fee of sixty knights along with other lands, and the shrievalty and justiciarship of Hertfordshire and of London and Middlesex. Finally, in the empress's second charter, issued at Oxford between mid-1141 and mid-1142 (M2), Mandeville obtained in addition to the aforesaid grants (including once again all the lands held by his grandfather Geoffrey and his father, William), the lands of his grandfather Eudo de Ryes in both Normandy and England and Eudo's office of royal 'dapifer'. 
Round's ordering of these four charters was challenged in 1964 by R. H. C. Davis ('EngHR', 79), who accepted, more or less, Round's dating of S1, M1, and S2, but dated M2 July 1141, thus placing it before S2 and reducing Mandeville's shifts in allegiance from three to two. If Davis is correct, Mandeville defected from Stephen only after the king had been taken captive at Lincoln in February 1141 and had released his adherents from their allegiance to him. Mandeville had then returned to Stephen's cause after the empress had been driven out of London. If this chronology is correct, Mandeville had precisely followed the shifts in allegiance of Stephen's own brother, Henry, bishop of Winchester, who in fact attested M1 for the empress. 
Davis's chronology of the four charters -- S1, M1, M2, S2 -- was challenged in 1988 by J. O. Prestwich, who argued cogently for a return to Round's sequence -- S1, M1, S2, M2 -- indicating three changes of allegiance rather than only two. The disagreement turns on the question of whether M2 was issued (at Oxford) in July 1141 (Davis) or between January and June 1142 (Round and Prestwich). The factors to be considered in dating this charter are complex and depend in part on whether the persons listed as 'hostages' were or were not present. Davis's analysis of correspondences between attestors of M2 and persons attesting for the empress at Oxford in July 1141 is very persuasive. But just as persuasive are Prestwich's arguments that Geoffrey de Mandeville, far from epitomizing the 'feudal and anarchic spirit', was a royalist who, in the tradition of his family, sought advancement through service to the king. The freewheeling Ranulf (II), earl of Chester, whom Round regarded as a kindred spirit to Mandeville, was in fact his opposite -- Ranulf was a magnate who sought independence from royal authority whereas Mandeville sought royal service and royal offices. 
In view of the royal ministries held by Mandeville's father and paternal grandfather, and by his sons, Geoffrey and William de Mandeville, 'curiales' of Henry II, Mandeville, as Prestwich sees him, fits into place. He was clearly self-seeking, and Prestwich is convincing in viewing him as striving for the recovery and advancement of his fortunes and those of his family through service to the king. Significantly he married Rohese de Vere, daughter of another ambitious royal servant, Henry I's great 'curialis' Aubrey de Vere, master chamberlain of England. Mandeville fought in the royal cause at the siege of Winchester in September 1141. At King Stephen's command he drove a band of rebels from the Isle of Ely early in 1142. The author of the 'Gesta Stephani' described him at that time as: 'remarkable for the ability of his shrewd mind and to be admired for the firmness of his unbending courage in adversity and his excellence in the art of war. In the extent of his wealth and the splendour of his position he surpassed all the chief men of the kingdom... Everywhere in the kingdom he took the king's place and in all transactions was listened to more eagerly than the king and received more obedience when he gave orders. ('Gesta Stephani', 161)' His high status aroused the jealousy of other royal councillors, who persuaded the king to arrest him at the royal court at St Albans in September 1143. Stephen, who may not have forgiven him for seizing Constance of France in 1141, was sympathetic to his enemies at court. Mandeville responded to their accusations of treason with mocking contempt, but the king suddenly had him arrested and forced him to relinquish all his castles and lands. He was then released, 'to the ruin of the realm', said the author of the 'Gesta Stephani'. 
Mandeville would have regarded himself as being betrayed by Stephen, for the customs of the time prohibited a lord from arresting a 'fidelis' in attendance at his court. (Stephen had similarly betrayed Roger of Salisbury and his kinsmen four years earlier in precisely the same way, and he arrested Ranulf, earl of Chester, at his court in 1146.) Earl Geoffrey hurled himself away from the royal court 'like a vicious and riderless horse, kicking and biting'. Gathering his knights and other followers around him he took up arms against the king. He 'raged everywhere with fire and sword; he devoted himself with insatiable greed to the plundering of flocks and herds' ('Gesta Stephani', 165). He sacked Cambridge, looting its churches, and pillaged the Isle of Ely. He sacked Ramsey Abbey and made it his headquarters. With the help of his brother-in-law William de Say, and eventually of Hugh Bigod, earl of Norfolk (died 1176/7), he dominated the fenland and terrorized East Anglia. 
In August 1144 Mandeville was fatally wounded while attacking the royal stronghold of Burwell, and he died on 26 September at Mildenhall in Suffolk. Having been excommunicated for the desecration and plundering of church property, he remained unburied for nearly twenty years until, at the instigation of his son Geoffrey, Pope Alexander III absolved him in 1163 and he was interred at the New Temple in London. 
Although he died in rebellion, Geoffrey de Mandeville was by no means the incorrigibly turbulent baron that he was so long thought to be. He was clearly determined to make good his father's losses and advance his family's interests, but almost to the end he sought to do so in the service of the monarchy. His changes in allegiance during the anarchy were prompted in whole or in part by Stephen's capture at the battle of Lincoln, after which he was no more disloyal to the king than Stephen's own brother, Henry of Winchester. 
Geoffrey left three known sons. The eldest, Ernulf, was illegitimate. With his wife, Rohese de Vere, he had Geoffrey (died 1166) and William de Mandeville (d. 1189), who were successively earls of Essex and important 'curiales' of Henry II. In restoring the earldom of Essex to the younger Geoffrey de Mandeville in 1156 Henry II granted him, among other things, perpetual hereditary right to Walden, Sawbridgeworth, and Great Waltham: 'And the lien that my grandfather King Henry had on the aforesaid three manors is quitclaimed forever' (Round, 235-6, 241). 


@@@@@


doc= 17928


Mandeville, Sir John (supp. fl. c.1357), supposed writer, was assumed to have written the 'Voyages de Jehan de Mandeville chevalier', which appeared anonymously in France 'c'.1357; the name of the work's author is unknown. The book is a vernacular account of the known world, loosely based upon the alleged travels of its narrator, and was immediately and immensely popular. Alongside the French version and its recensions there were translations (often more than one) into German, English, Italian, Dutch, Spanish, Irish, Danish, and Czech. Altogether over 250 manuscripts survive in twenty-two versions. In England alone there were four Latin and four English translations and a rhymed version. In the book the narrator declares that he is Sir John Mandeville, born and bred in St Albans, who left England in 1322 and travelled the world for many years, serving the sultan of Cairo and visiting the Great Khan, and finally in 1357 in age and illness setting down his account of the world. This account is essentially in two parts, a description of the Holy Land and the routes thither and a description of Asia and other 'partes infidelium'. There is no historical corroboration of the author's claims. On the contrary, nine-tenths of the substance of the 'Voyages' can be precisely traced to written sources, which range from Pliny to Vincent of Beauvais and include many itineraries of genuine travellers like William of Boldensele and Odoric of Pordenone, and the remaining tenth almost certainly derives from sources yet to be traced. The intention of the author to produce a popular account of the world in French was possibly part of the fashion for such exotica that flourished in and about Paris 'c'.1350. Though the framework of the narration by Sir John Mandeville is fictitious, the substance is not. There can be no doubt whatsoever that the author reported in good faith what his authorities recorded and that his book was seriously intended. 
The fiction of the author as a genuine English knight-adventurer easily imposed itself on the middle ages. Even the Benedictine Thomas Walsingham lists Mandeville in his 'Annales' among the worthies of St Albans; long resident at St Albans Abbey and in the best possible position to investigate the identity of the author, he was as a professional historian content to take the book at its face value. Consequently it is no surprise to find posthumous grafts on the story. At St Albans an effigy of Mandeville in armour was erected and later replaced with a plaque with verses, and various 'relics' of the traveller were on display. At the Benedictine cathedral priory at Canterbury a forged letter from Sir John Mandeville of 'c'.1450 appeared to authenticate a piece of 'lignum aloes' which the traveller allegedly brought back from a river flowing out of the earthly paradise, and this and other associated 'relics' including an apple miraculously preserved in a crystal orb were shown to the faithful and reported by John Leland. Such inventions helped to sustain the myth of a historical Sir John Mandeville which, despite the disclosure of his sources and his literary context, commands credence in some quarters. 
One variation of this myth developed in Liege and ran an extraordinary course. Shortly after the death in 1372 of Jean de Bourgogne, a physician and author of a plague tract, there appeared in Liege a recension of the French version which claimed that Mandeville wrote his book at Liege at the request of Jean de Bourgogne. A Latin translation of this French recension developed this claim 'c'.1375, describing a meeting between author and physician in Cairo when both were in the service of the sultan. Behind both claims lies the imagination of Jean d'Outremeuse (died 1400), a Liege chronicler and notary much given to literary fantasies. He extended his fictions even further by writing in his 'Myreur des histors' ('c'.1388) that on his deathbed Jean de Bourgogne revealed that he was Sir John Mandeville, 'count of Montfort', who had lived in retirement at Liege since 1343 (thus somewhat curtailing the length of his alleged travels). Even later, in his 'Tresorier de philosophie' ('c'.1390), d'Outremeuse cited Mandeville as one of the authorities of his lapidary and claimed that he possessed the gems that were given to Mandeville during his stay in Alexandria. One manuscript of the Liege recension (Musee Conde, Chantilly MS 699) contains four short tracts (a cosmography, a cosmology, a herbal, and a lapidary) allegedly written by Mandeville. 
One consequence of these stories was that an epitaph to Sir John Mandeville, with an engraved device resembling the coat of arms of the Montforts, was erected in the Guillelmin church at Liege where Jean de Bourgogne was buried. Another consequence was that a house in Liege which in 1388 had been described as formerly the lodging of Master Jean a la Barbe was in 1459 described as formerly the lodging of Sir John Mandeville. The chronology of the successive accretions of the d'Outremeuse version of the Mandeville myth is plainly obvious, but his fictions still have their champions. 
Those who seek a scholarly investigation of authorship must, in the absence of other evidence, search the original French version of the book and its bibliographical context and disregard the embroideries of various redactors, editors, translators, and romancers. Detailed analysis of this primary record reveals that the author had no knowledge of St Albans but was a fluent French-speaker; that he composed his work 'c'.1357 in a large, almost certainly ecclesiastical, library; that he was an ecclesiastic, with a cleric's knowledge of the 'Bible', and probably a member of a regular order; that he was a fluent reader of Latin but lacked any knowledge of Greek or Arabic; that he was an informed and intelligent reader of books describing the Holy Land and other foreign parts; that he had mastered the theories of Sacrobosco and his commentators, possibly at the University of Paris, on the rotundity of the world and was aware of the possibility of circumnavigation; that he had never travelled to the lands he describes; that he was aware of current French accounts of foreign lands and was in a position to launch his own work into the mainstream of the Parisian book-trade. 
This coherent picture of an anonymous religious, perhaps the librarian of his house, is strengthened by certain parallels between his work and one of his major sources, the translations of Haiton, Odoric, William of Boldensele, and others made by Jean le Long (died 1388), the librarian of the Benedictine abbey church of St Bertin at St Omer, then within the English pale and on the main route between Calais and Paris. Genuine pilgrims and travellers to the Mediterranean and the Near East habitually used this road and stayed at the abbey. Its library contained all the works used by Mandeville in the compilation of the 'Voyages', including the comparatively scarce French translation of the 'Directorium ad faciendum passagium transmarinum' made by the hospitaller Jean de Vignay ('c'.1340). In such a context a Benedictine authorship is entirely possible and the nationality of the author an open question. English monks lived in French houses, especially within the pale, and there are some pointers towards an English presence in the book, though these are probably artful details to support the larger fiction. Whatever his identity, his work is more certainly part of English than of continental literature. 


@@@@@


doc= 17929


Mandeville, William de, third earl of Essex (d. 1189), magnate and courtier, was the second son of Geoffrey de Mandeville, first earl of Essex (d. 1144), and Rohese de Vere. William inherited the earldom of Essex in 1166, after the death of his brother Geoffrey. Little is known of Mandeville's early years and training, but the Walden chronicler relates that he spent most of his youth at the court of the counts of Flanders, and received the belt of knighthood from the hands of Count Philip, Henry II's first cousin. Philip's warm recommendation of Mandeville was partly responsible for Henry's speedy transfer of the earldom to him. The Mandeville lands, from which the earldom had been created in 1141, formed one of the wealthiest honours in England ($740) at the time of 'Domesday Book', and by 1166 contained 110 knights' fees. The family's hereditary custodianship of the Tower of London and two valuable manors, however, were withheld from Mandeville. If he harboured any grievances over this reduction of his inheritance, they never came to the surface; and he was more than compensated for their loss by his friendship with the king. 
Earl William became a regular member of Henry II's entourage shortly after his investiture. His rise at court was due as much to his own considerable military and diplomatic skills as to the deaths of the king's earlier baronial advisers. And the bond of friendship that existed between the earl and king from the first never diminished. Throughout the 1170s and 1180s the earl was either at Henry's side, or engaged in royal business elsewhere. It is possible to trace his movements back and forth from England and the continent in the pipe rolls. Between 1173 and 1187 no fewer than nineteen channel crossings are recorded, some of them relating to embassies led by Mandeville to the courts of Flanders, France, and Germany. The high respect with which Mandeville was regarded by the Angevin court is illustrated by a passage from the 'Histoire de Guillaume le Marechal' (1.271-5). When in 1188 Philip Augustus of France suggested that he and Henry II should settle their differences through a trial by combat, William Marshal volunteered that the English champions should be himself and William de Mandeville. 
There were many rewards for royal service. Over a twenty-two-year period, the minuscule sum of $174 was levied by the English exchequer against Mandeville in the form of scutages, aids, forest pleas, murder fines, and communal taxes. Of this amount, the sum of $3 was all that was ever paid into the exchequer, the remainder being pardoned. In contrast, Mandeville took more than $1600 from the exchequer in 'terrae datae', outright gifts, and the third penny of Essex. An even more valuable reward came to him through his marriage in 1180, arranged by Henry II, to Hawisa (d. 1213/14), heir to the Anglo-Norman lands and fees of the counts of Aumale. Richard of Devizes characterizes the countess of Aumale as 'a woman who was almost a man, lacking nothing virile except virile organs' ('Chronicon Richardi Divisensis', 10). Whatever the facts of the matter, the countess was a rich prize, bringing Mandeville the baronies of Holderness and Skipton in England and the county and castle of Aumale in Normandy. 
Mandeville's possession of the county of Aumale established him as one of the great border barons along the sensitive eastern Norman frontier, and Henry meant to rely on the earl as the defender of that frontier. This design is revealed in two contemporary sources. The Walden chronicler, after discussing the earl's marriage, goes on to say that he 'was a brave man, mighty in arms and held in esteem by all; and therefore he abode little in England among his own people, but guarded the castles and fortifications in Normandy handed over to him by King Henry, which were stronger than the rest and situated along the frontier' (Dugdale, 'Monasticon', 4.144). A fragment from the Norman pipe roll of 1184 discloses that the castles in question were Gisors, Neaufle, Dangu, Neufchateau, and Vaudreuil in the region of the Vexin and the Seine River above Rouen. Henry II's trust was never betrayed and Earl William proved a valued ally in the ageing king's confrontations with his troublesome cousin Philip, count of Flanders. 
From 1180 until his death in 1189 Henry II was involved in the tasks of maintaining the integrity of his vast dominions, finding a workable solution to the succession problem brought about by the unfortunate deaths of his elder sons, and preventing a dispute between Philip of Flanders and Philip of France from erupting into a large-scale war which might have upset the tenuous balance of power in western France. In this last endeavour he sought to utilize Earl William's long-standing friendship with the count to help manage the Franco-Flemish conflict. As late as 1177-8 the two boyhood companions had spent a full year in one another's company on crusade in the Holy Land. Indeed, the seals of Earl William and Count Philip from this period exhibit so many similarities that it is likely that the earl's was a close copy of the count's, perhaps even a gift. This friendship, without doubt, is why Henry chose the city of Aumale on at least two occasions for the site of peace talks he arranged between the warring parties, and it also explains why Mandeville was named receiver for Philip's English landed revenues while the count was in disfavour. 
Earl William's final meeting with the king he had served so faithfully came a month before Henry's death in July 1189. At this meeting the earl was made to swear with William Fitzralph that if ill befell Henry, they would hand over the castles in their charge to no one except Prince John. John's lack of loyalty to his father in these final weeks released the earl from his oath. As it happened, Richard inherited the Angevin dominion intact, and like his father sought to use the earl's talents in their governance and defence. Mandeville carried the crown at Richard I's coronation on 3 September 1189, and a few days later, at the Council of Pipewell, Northamptonshire, the king named him chief justiciar jointly with Bishop Hugh of Durham. In November 1189 Richard I sent Mandeville on an embassy to the court of Philip of France. The earl never returned to England. Departing from Paris, he fell ill at Gisors and died shortly afterwards at Vaudreuil, five months after the passing of his benefactor and friend, Henry II. Although the earl had once expressed a wish to be buried in the Mandeville family priory of Walden, his men deemed a winter crossing of the channel too dangerous and he was laid to rest at the Cistercian abbey of Mortemer near Aumale -- a fitting burial place for one so closely connected with the Angevin royal house, since the abbey had been richly endowed by the Empress Matilda and Henry II, who were responsible for many of its buildings. 
William was the last of the Mandevilles. The Countess Hawisa married in succession William de Forz (died 1195) and Baldwin de Bethune (died 1212), taking with her on each occasion the Aumale ancestral lands. The descent of the Mandeville honour and Essex earldom was much more complicated. William de Mandeville's aunt, Beatrice de Say, sister of Earl Geoffrey, stood to inherit. But by 1189 Beatrice was too old -- almost eighty -- to administer the earldom effectively. Her heirs were the daughters of her eldest son, William, who had died in 1177, and her youngest son, Geoffrey de Say. William clearly intended his cousin Geoffrey de Say to succeed him in the event of his dying, as happened, without children. However, the legality of the representative heir inheriting before the younger cadet, a dilemma similar to that faced by the Angevin house itself in the 1190s, eventually prevailed when Beatrice's son-in-law, the practised courtier Geoffrey fitz Peter, manipulated his way into possession of the earldom. Geoffrey, who later became justiciar of England, completed the takeover by having his children adopt the Mandeville surname, thus keeping alive, if only in name, the family's illustrious history of service to the Norman and Angevin rulers. 


@@@@@


doc= 17930


Mangan, (James) Clarence (1803-1849), poet, was born James Mangan on 1 May 1803 at 3 Fishamble Street, Dublin, the second son of the grocers James Mangan (1765-1843), a native of Shanagolden, co. Limerick, and his wife, Catherine Smith (1771-1846), of Fishamble Street, daughter of John Smith of Kiltale, Meath. His father had been a hedge-school teacher before taking over the business of his wife's aunt Mary Farrell in Dublin, but after some years he found himself bankrupt through ill-advised speculations in property. There are many myths surrounding Mangan's early life, mostly created by himself in his unfinished 'Autobiography' (written in 1848, published in 1960). However, it seems that the family not only endured extreme poverty, but also suffered from James Mangan's ill temper and frustrations. The young James Mangan sought refuge in books and became a loner. He was educated at a Jesuit school in Saul's Court, Dublin, where he learned the rudiments of Latin, Spanish, French, and Italian. He then attended three different schools until the age of fifteen, when he was obliged to obtain employment in order to support his parents, two younger brothers and a sister (the oldest son died in infancy). 
For seven years Mangan worked as a scrivener in the Kenrick office at 6 York Street, Dublin. He was skilled at copying documents, but detested the harsh working conditions. At the same time he continued educating himself, reading widely and writing poetry. The poet James Tighe was his friend in the office, and together with Laurence Bligh they wrote riddles and rebus and puzzle poems for William Jones's two Dublin almanacs, 'Grants' and the 'New Ladies'', calling themselves the 'diarians'. The first of Mangan's ephemeral poems was published in 1818. In 1826 his first nationalist poem was published in the 'New Ladies' Almanac' as an enigma; it was later renamed 'To my Native Land'. 
Mangan was not the friendless person he later claimed to have been, but his severe mood swings made him feel constantly alienated from other people. He also suffered from hypochondria and the fear that he would become insane. It is possible that he started to drink heavily and became addicted to alcohol and opium or laudanum early in life. 
Nine months after his apprenticeship ended, in winter 1825-6, he found employment in a solicitor's office, Matthew Frank, at 28 Merrion Square North, Dublin, where his fellow clerks ridiculed him because of his eccentric behaviour. He became increasingly unhappy, withdrawing from his old friends and feeling suicidal. 
Mangan never married, but he was infatuated or in love with a number of women including Catherine Hayes, whom he taught German. He was also madly in love with an auburn-haired woman called Frances, who did not reciprocate. In winter 1829-30, he suffered again from unrequited love: the object of his desire has never been identified although Yeats speculated erroneously that it was Margaret Stackpole. The affair threw him into a long period of deep depression, and Mangan's early biographers believed that he was so disappointed that he never loved again. But his addictions and isolation seem to be more likely reasons why he never married: he did propose to Margaret Stackpole in 1834 but she declined. They remained friends. Nevertheless he was so ill in 1829-30 that his brother John replaced him in the office. He found employment in the office of a solicitor, Thomas Leland, at 6 Fitzwilliam Square West, where he may have worked from 1830 to 1838. It seems that he was not unhappy there. 
Mangan's first political involvement with the Irish nationalist movement dated from a repeal meeting of the law clerks of Dublin in 1830. In 1830-31 he became a member of the Comet Club, an anti-tithe organization, originally composed of twelve liberal protestant and Catholic men of fashion, and from 1832-3 he contributed humorous verse to their journal, 'The Comet', generally over the signature of 'Clarence', which he had previously adopted as his middle name. Mangan's biographers debate whether this name refers to the duke of Clarence in Shakespeare's 'Richard III', to Clarence Harvey in Maria Edgeworth's 'Belinda', or to both. From then on he was always known as (James) Clarence Mangan. 
In 1830 Mangan published his first German translations in 'The Friend'. He had mastered German in order to read German philosophy, and also worked as a tutor of German. His German was excellent, and he may have visited Germany in 1828-9. If he did, this was the only time in his life when he left Dublin (although he is also rumoured once to have visited Liverpool). In 1834 his first contribution to the 'Dublin University Magazine' appeared, and hundreds of poems and prose pieces followed in the same periodical, the majority being translations of German poetry. However, these were often 'transformations' rather than literal translations. Mangan departed radically from the original, changing the poem into what he believed it was meant to be. Some of the 'translations' were far superior to the original, and a considerable number of them were his own poetry and had no German original at all. After 1836 he mainly published in the 'Dublin University Magazine'. He also wrote for the 'Dublin Monthly Magazine', the 'Dublin Penny Journal' (1832-4), and the 'Dublin Satirist' (1833-6); the latter published some of his more serious poetry. 
Mangan's poetry is characterized by inventive word play, challenging rhyme, schemes, an emphasis on the ridiculous and grotesque, and Gothic and Romantic imagery. However, Dublin born and bred, Mangan was at the same time a true urban poet, using hardly any images from nature. One of his favourite figures was the lonely spectre, a lost soul, cursed to wander without hope as a punishment for his sins. He was also interested in masks and dubious identities. Because he experimented with verse techniques, was fascinated by extreme psychological distress, and was able to give frighteningly accurate descriptions of states of anxiety, he has sometimes been compared to his American contemporary Edgar Allan Poe. 
In 1836 Mangan became acquainted with Charles Gavan Duffy. When he started editing the 'Belfast Vindicator' in 1839 Mangan published some characteristically humorous pieces in it, using the signature of the 'Man in the Cloak'. A year later he began work on Middle Eastern poetry (Turkish, Persian, and Arabic), the 'literae orientales', in the 'Dublin University Magazine'. However, he worked from other people's translations, since he was ignorant of those languages. In the same year John O'Donovan employed Mangan to make the printer's copy of the English translation of the 'Annals of the Kingdom of Ireland by the Four Masters'. He had become a full-time employee of the Ordnance Survey in the summer of 1838, serving as a copyist under George Petrie, John O'Donovan, and Eugene O'Curry. All three had been involved in copying Irish manuscripts, and this acquaintance encouraged Mangan to investigate Irish documents and translate Irish poetry. However, since his Irish was not fluent enough, he relied on prose translations made for him by O'Curry, O'Donovan, and John O'Daly, which he then put into poetry. His first translation from the Irish appeared in George Petrie's 'Irish Penny Journal' in 1840. Mangan worked at the Ordnance Survey until 1841, but his work was interrupted by fits of heavy drinking. At that time he was described as physically worn out and prematurely aged, wearing a huge pair of green spectacles for his weak eyes. 
In 1842, on the request of Petrie, Dr James Henthorn Todd, fellow of Trinity College and librarian, employed Mangan as a library clerk for the work on the new library catalogue. He worked there full-time from 1842 to 1844, and then part-time until the end of 1846. John Mitchel remembered the first time he saw Mangan there in 1845: 'an acquaintance pointed out to me a man perched on the top of a ladder, with the whispered information that the figure was Clarence Mangan. It was an unearthly and ghostly figure in a brown garment; the same garment (to all appearance) which lasted till the day of his death. The blanched hair was totally unkempt; the corpse-like features still as marble; a large book was in his arms, and all his soul was in the book. (Mitchel, introduction to 'Poems', xxxv)' When 'The Nation' was started in 1842, with Duffy as editor, Mangan wrote the poem 'The Nation's First Number'. Duffy gave him for a time a fixed salary, but already in November 1842, tensions between the two men arose over the authorship of the poem 'Fag an Bealach'. Deeply hurt, Mangan withdrew from the paper, and only after 1845 wrote more regularly for it, contributing patriotic verse and translations from German, Irish, French, and Spanish poetry in a column entitled 'Echoes of Foreign Song'. Mangan adopted various signatures in 'The Nation' -- 'Terrae Filius', 'Vacuus', 'a Yankee', 'Monos', 'Mark Anthony', 'Hi-Hum', 'the Mourne-r', 'Lageniensis', and 'J. C. M.' -- making it hard to attribute all his poems to him. He also supplemented his scanty income by working on a translation by his friend Owen Connellan, 'Annals of the Kingdom of Ireland by the Four Masters', for six months in 1844-5. In 1845 Duffy financed Mangan's 'Anthologia Germanica', a collection of previously published translations of German poetry. This was the only collection of his poetry published in his lifetime. From summer 1845-6 Mangan started writing for the staunch unionist 'Irish Monthly Magazine'. This stood in contrast to his nationalist views, but he needed money desperately. He was no longer in full employment, and after the death of his father in 1843 he was the sole carer of his ailing mother, and also had to support his unemployed younger brother William. 
Mangan is often seen as a rather unpolitical writer. However, he had a deep love for Ireland, and in 1846, disgusted by the famine, he fully committed himself to the nationalist cause, writing forceful patriotic poetry in 'The Nation', such as 'Dark Rosaleen (Roisin Dubh)', 'A Vision of Connaught in the Thirteenth Century', and 'A Warning Voice'. These poems gave him the recognition in Ireland he had not had before. By 1847 he was so poor that his friends collected money for him. His health declined further as his drinking grew worse. He started writing for the publisher James Duffy's 'Irish Catholic Magazine' (1847), but the money he made from his poetry was not enough to feed him and his brother. When Duffy turned down his application for membership to the council of the Irish Confederation in February 1847, because he was not respectable enough, he was deeply hurt and again ceased writing for 'The Nation' for some months. 
When differences arose between Duffy and Mitchel, over Young Ireland policy, and Mitchel left 'The Nation', Mangan followed him and wrote for his radical revolutionary paper the 'United Irishman' in 1848: Mangan's political views were closer to Mitchel's revolutionary Romanticism than Duffy's pragmatism. In a letter to Mitchel in 1848 he stated: 'Insignificant an individual as I am... I thoroughly sympathise with your sentiments, that I identify my views of public affairs with yours, and that I am prepared to go all lengths with you... Yours, in life and death' (Mitchel, introduction to 'Poems', ed. O'Donoghue, xxxvii). Mitchel, unlike Duffy, was very understanding of Mangan's depression and addictions. But he recognized the 'two Mangans': 'one well known to the Muses, the other to the police; one soared through the empyrean and sought the stars -- the other lay too often in gutters of Peter Street and Bride Street' (ibid., xxxv). After Mitchel's transportation Mangan wrote for the 'Irish Tribune' (1848), edited by Richard Dalton Williams and Kevin Izod O'Doherty, and for 'The Irishman' (1849), edited by Joseph Brenan, both radical papers which were quickly prohibited. 
In May 1848 poverty and alcoholism led to Mangan's admission to St Vincent's Hospital. After he discharged himself prematurely in June 1848, he fell into the freshly sunk foundation of a house while drunk at night, and was taken to Richmond Surgical Hospital badly injured. Early in 1849 'The Pilot' carried an appeal by 'Honestus', describing Mangan's destitution and asking for donations. By that stage he either lived in shabby lodgings, or was homeless, and wrote his poetry, on a regular basis, in 'low public-houses', where he got pens and ink for free. He caught cholera in the epidemic that raged in Dublin in 1849, and in May spent some time in the cholera sheds of Kilmainham. Again, he discharged himself too early, and when his condition worsened he was taken to Meath Hospital, Long Lane, Dublin, where he died on 20 June 1849. It seems that the primary cause of his death was long-term malnutrition. He was buried on 23 June 1849 in the family plot at Glasnevin cemetery, Dublin. Because of the cholera epidemic in Dublin and the imprisonment of many of his friends, only five people attended the funeral. Allegedly, a volume of German poetry, which he had been translating, was found in his pocket, and loose papers were found in his hat. However, it seemed that some of the papers he wrote in hospital were burnt by an over-efficient nurse. A portrait of the dead Mangan was executed by F. W. Burton, and is in the National Gallery, Dublin. 
James Clarence Mangan played a major part in establishing a distinctively Irish literature in English in the nineteenth century, but his input has often been overlooked for various reasons. A great number of Mangan's writings were published anonymously or under pseudonyms in obscure and short-lived magazines, and were very hard to trace. He also fell victim to his reputation as a poor and pathetic poet, which prevented his poems from being taken seriously. Often the focus was on his well-known patriotic songs, such as 'Dark Rosaleen', and his works were analysed primarily under a nationalist aspect. Furthermore, he has sometimes been seen simply as a translator and not as an original poet. 
A collection of Mangan's poems, edited by John Mitchel, was published in 1859 with a biographical preface. A centenary edition of Mangan's poems and prose was issued by D. J. O'Donoghue in 1903-4, anticipating a renewed interest in him. Yeats called him 'our one poet raised to the first rank by intensity' ('Uncollected Prose of W. B. Yeats', ed. J. P. Frayne, 1, 1970), and for Joyce he was 'the failed standard-bearer of a failed nation', but 'one of the world's most inspired poets' ('James Joyce: the Critical Writings', ed. E. Mason and R. Ellmann, 1964). But despite Yeats's and Joyce's interest a proper reassessment of Mangan has not taken place. 'The Collected Works of James Clarence Mangan' edited by Jacques Chuto, Rudolf Patrick Holzapfel, and Ellen Shannon-Mangan (4 vols., 1997) is the first systematic collection of Mangan's works. 


@@@@@


doc= 17931


Mangey, Thomas (1683/4-1755), Church of England clergyman and classical scholar, was born in Leeds, Yorkshire, the son of Arthur Mangey, a goldsmith of Leeds. He was educated at the Leeds Free School, then entered St John's College, Cambridge, as a sizar in 1704, graduating BA in 1708 and MA in 1711. In 1715 he was granted a fellowship at St John's, which he resigned in 1718. He proceeded LLD in 1719, and in 1725 he was one of the seven who received a doctorate at the hands of Dr Bentley, when the latter delivered the famous oration subsequently prefixed to his edition of Terence. 
Mangey received deacon's orders on 5 March 1710 and was ordained to the priesthood in November 1711. He held the rectory of Stanfield, Norfolk, in 1711-12, and that of St Nicholas's, Guildford, from 1717 to 1720. Subsequently he was presented with the vicarage of Ealing, Middlesex, which he resigned in 1754, and the rectory of St Mildred's, Bread Street, London, which he retained until his death. He became chaplain to the bishop of London, John Robinson, no later than 1719. When Robinson, at the request of Bishop Crew, consecrated Sunderland church, on 4 September 1719, Mangey preached the sermon 'The holiness of Christian churches', for which he may have been rewarded with a promotion to the fifth stall in Durham Cathedral in 1721, whence he moved to the first stall in January 1722. When treasurer of the chapter at Durham, he greatly advanced the fines upon the tenants, and improved the rents of his prebendal lands by nearly $100 a year. He married Dorothy (died 1780), one of the daughters of John Sharp, archbishop of York, and they had a son, John, who was to enter the church too and be collated to the vicarage of Dunmow, Essex, by Bishop Secker. Thomas Mangey died at Durham on 6 March 1755, and was buried five days later in the east transept of the cathedral, where a monument stands to his memory. His epitaph was composed by John Sharp, his nephew by marriage, then official to the archdeaconry of Northumberland, who was to become a fully-fledged archdeacon, and a prebendary of Durham in his turn. 
Mangey was an erudite philologist and a prolific writer. His great work was his bilingual edition, in Latin and Greek, of 'Philonis Judaei opera', with a copious critical footnote apparatus and a long preface in Latin (2 vols., 1742), which Edward Harwood considered as 'magnificent' even though he detected 'a very considerable number of inaccuracies' (Harwood, 76). The voluminous manuscript materials collected by Mangey for this edition, together with his collations of the different readings of scriptural and classical texts and his commonplace book, mostly written in Latin and Greek, bear witness to his meticulous scholarship. 
Mangey's other printed works included polemical anti-deistic pamphlets. His 'Remarks upon Nazarenus' (1718; 2nd edn, 1719) called forth John Toland's reply in the latter's 'Tetradymus' (1720). Similarly, Mangey's anti-Socinian sermon 'The Eternal Existence of our Lord Jesus Christ' (1719) was challenged by an opponent writing under the pseudonym of Phileleutherus Cantabrigiensis, who was promptly identified as Thomas Herne. Mangey's other published sermons, many of which were preached to prestigious audiences at Whitehall, before the House of Commons, or at the anniversary meetings of famous charities, either pursued an explicitly apologetic aim or dealt with the commonplace theme of benevolence and philanthropy. 


@@@@@


doc= 17932


Mangin, Edward (1772-1852), writer and translator, was born in Dublin on 15 July 1772, the eldest son of Samuel Henry Mangin (died 1798) of the 5th Royal Irish Dragoons, afterwards lieutenant-colonel of the 14th, and finally of the 12th (Prince of Wales's) light dragoons, and his wife, Susanna Corneille (died 1824). Both of his parents' families were Huguenot in origin; the Mangins had emigrated to Ireland to escape persecution during the reign of Louis XIV. 
Mangin was a contemporary of Southey at Balliol College Oxford, graduating BA in 1793 and MA in 1795. He was then ordained in the Irish church, and on 2 March 1798 was collated to the prebendal stall of Dysart in Killaloe Cathedral, where he served until 15 January 1800. That year he married Emily Holmes (died 1801), and was collated to the prebend of Rathmichael in St Patrick's, Dublin. A year later his wife died, leaving him with their baby daughter, Emily. 
Mangin remained in Dublin until December 1803, when he became prebendary of Rath in Killaloe, a position he held until his death. Shortly after his move, his first translation, from the French, was published as 'The Life of C. G. Lamoignon Malesherbes' (1804). It was followed the next year by 'The Deserted City', a poem on Bath in summer which parodied Goldsmith. At yearly intervals thereafter came 'Light Reading at Leisure Hours' (1805), 'Oddities and Outlines' (1806), and a three-decker novel, 'George the Third' (1807). His 'Essay on the Sources of the Pleasures Received from Literary Compositions' (1808) was reprinted in 1813. 
Between 1810 and 1814 came a number of more significant works. Mangin's translation, 'Hector, a Tragedy in Five Acts' was published in 1810; the nineteen-volume 'Works of Samuel Richardson, with a Sketch of his Life and Writings' followed in 1811. 'Utopia Found: an Apology for Irish Absentees' did not appear until 1813, but was followed by one of Mangin's best-known works, 'A View of the Pleasures Arising from a Love of Books' (1814). 
Meanwhile, Mangin was navy chaplain on the 'Gloucester', a 74-gun ship, from April to August 1812. He lived in Toulouse for some time, and was in Paris when it was occupied by the allied armies; but for nearly the whole of his working life he lived at 10 Johnstone Street, Bath, 'associating with all the intelligent in that intelligent city' (Forster, 'Goldsmith'). On 1 July 1816 at Queen Square Chapel, Bath, he married his second wife, Mary (died 1845), daughter of Lieutenant-Colonel Nangreave of the East Indian army. They had a daughter, Mary Henrietta, and two sons who later became clergymen, Edward Nangreave Mangin, and Samuel W. Mangin. 
Having a substantial income, Mangin was able to study full-time. He continued to publish, though often anonymously, a variety of original and translated works. 'An Intercepted Epistle from a Person in Bath to his Friend in London' (1815) went into three editions within the year. His contributions to the 'Bath Herald' during this period were later collected as 'The Parlour Window, or, Anecdotes, Original Remarks on Books' (1841). He also gave articles to the 'Bath and Bristol Magazine', and issued a short-lived periodical called 'The Inspector' (October-November 1825). At the same time, he produced a variety of letters, translations, short stories, and other works. Most renowned among these was 'Piozziana, or, Recollections of the Late Mrs Piozzi, by a Friend' (1833), of which, together with his edition of Richardson, the 'Gentleman's Magazine' (1853) commented: 'Upon neither of these works did he bestow a very large amount of labour or research'. On the other hand, his contemporary biographers felt that his abilities were not fully realized in his works. 
Mangin died in his sleep on the morning of 17 October 1852, at his house in Johnstone Street, Bath, having been for some time experiencing pain and swelling in his throat. He was buried in the old burial-ground of Bathwick. 


@@@@@


doc= 17933


Mangles, James (1786-1867), naval officer and traveller, entered the navy in March 1800, on the frigate 'Maidstone' with Captain Ross Donnelly, whom in 1801 he followed to the 'Narcissus'. After active service on the coast of France, at the capture of the Cape of Good Hope, and in the Rio de la Plata, he was, on 24 September 1806, promoted lieutenant of the 'Penelope' (36 guns), in which, in February 1809, he was at the capture of Martinique. In 1811 he was appointed to the 'Boyne' (98 guns) and in 1812 to the 'Ville de Paris' (110 guns), flagships in the channel of Sir Harry Burrard Neale. In 1814 he was first lieutenant of the 'Duncan', flagship of Sir John Poo Beresford in his voyage to Rio de Janeiro. He was sent home in acting command of the sloop 'Racoon' (rank confirmed, 13 June 1815). This was his last service afloat. 
In 1816 Mangles left England, with his old messmate in the 'Narcissus', Captain Charles Leonard Irby, on a tour on the continent, extended to Egypt, Syria, and Asia Minor. Their descriptive letters were privately printed in 1823, and published in Murray's 'Home and Colonial Library' in 1844. Mangles was elected FRS in 1825, and in 1830 was one of the first fellows and members of council of the Royal Geographical Society. He published 'The Floral Calendar' (1839), on window and town gardening; 'Synopsis of a complete dictionary... of the illustrated geography and hydrography of England and Wales, Scotland and Ireland' (1848); 'Papers and Despatches Relating to the Arctic Searching Expeditions of 1850-1-2' (1852); and 'The Thames Estuary: a Guide to the Navigation of the Thames Mouth' (1853). He became a captain on half pay in February 1853. He died at his home, Fairfield, Topsham Road, Exeter, on 18 November 1867, aged eighty-one. 


@@@@@


doc= 17934


Mangles, Ross Donnelly (1801-1877), East India Company servant and politician, son of James Mangles MP (died 1838), of Woodbridge, Guildford, and his wife, Mary, youngest daughter of John Hughes of Guildford, was born on 10 September 1801. He was educated at Eton College and at the East India College, Haileybury. He arrived at Calcutta in 1820 and in 1821 was appointed assistant secretary to the board of revenue in the Ceded and Conquered Provinces. Over the next four years he filled a variety of subordinate revenue posts and in July 1825 briefly officiated as secretary to the board of revenue in the Lower Provinces. In August 1825, during the First Anglo-Burmese War, he became secretary to the commissioner of Pegu and Ava. In April 1826 he was appointed deputy secretary in the judicial and territorial departments. 
Mangles took furlough from January 1828 until November 1831. On 16 February 1830 he married Harriet, third daughter of George Newcome of Upper Wimpole Street, London, with whom he had at least two daughters and a son. Upon his return to India he again was engaged primarily in revenue work, and was appointed in March 1835 secretary to the Bengal government in the judicial and revenue departments, a post which he held until his retirement from the service in 1839. In mid-1837 the governor-general, Lord Auckland, embarked on a lengthy tour up-country and Mangles, in Auckland's absence, effectively became the chief administrator of Bengal. 
In 1839 Mangles returned to London and launched into politics. A life-long whig, he was returned at the general election of 1841 as the member for Guildford, a borough which his father had represented from 1831 to 1837. He retained this seat until 1858. In parliament he established himself as an authority on Indian matters, and in particular blunted the attacks of John Crawfurd of the British India Society who accused the government of India of causing famine and depopulation through its land revenue system. Mangles was a staunch utilitarian and defended the high assessments, then pressing particularly hard on the North-Western Provinces, in the pure terms of the doctrine of rent as expounded by Malthus, Ricardo and James Mill. His article in the 'Edinburgh Review' of January 1840, 'The revenue system of British India', was explicitly designed to head off a parliamentary assault by tory paternalists on the whig ministry's supposed over-taxation of the Indian peasantry. In July 1840, before the full horror of Auckland's Afghanistan adventure was known, he published a second, more general article in the 'Edinburgh Review', 'Present state and prospects of British India', defending Auckland, whom he admired as both a friend and fellow whig. 
Mangles was an evangelical Anglican and regarded education and evangelization as mutually supportive pillars of society's moral regeneration. In India he was a member of both the Church Missionary Society and the general committee of public instruction. He believed that India's moral improvement could be effected only through Christianization, and in 1834, unhappy with the slow progress of evangelization, he proposed the establishment of an elite seminary in Calcutta to train Indian clergymen for the uphill task ahead. In England, too, he campaigned for a more publicly active church and published in 1840 'Christian Reasons of a Member of the Church of England for being a Reformer'. Writing to Macvey Napier, editor of the 'Edinburgh Review', in 1842, he complained that the Anglican laity were denied any meaningful role in the church, an evil compounded in his opinion by the wholesale association of the clergy with the tory party, to the 'necessary disgust and alienation of a very large number of their respective flocks'. 
In 1847 Mangles became a director of the East India Company and in 1857 was elected chairman. In 1858 he retired from parliament on his appointment to the new Council of India, a position he held until his retirement in 1866. In this venue too, confronted by the cautious paternalism of the post-1857 administration, Mangles vociferously defended the utilitarian vision of the 1830s which had so coloured his years in India. He died in London at his home, 23 Montagu Street, Montagu Square, on 16 August 1877. His son, Ross, received the Victoria Cross for gallant conduct near Arrah during the uprising of 1857. 


@@@@@


doc= 17935


Mangnall, Richmal (1769-1820), schoolmistress, the third daughter of James Mangnall of Hollinhurst, Lancashire, and London, and Richmal, daughter of John Kay of Manchester, was born on 7 March 1769, probably in London. She was the fourth of seven children to survive infancy; of her two brothers, the elder, James, became a London solicitor; the younger, Kay, died in the East Indies in 1801. On the death of her parents about 1781 she was adopted by her uncle, John Kay, solicitor, of Manchester, and was educated at Mrs Wilson's school at Crofton Hall, near Wakefield, Yorkshire. She remained there as a teacher, eventually taking over the school herself and running it successfully until her death there on 1 May 1820. She was able to support two unmarried sisters from her school and publishing earnings, and to provide for them after her death. She was buried in Crofton churchyard. 
Crofton Hall was a flourishing school with over seventy pupils. A system of questions and answers allowed teachers or senior pupils to conduct large classes, and Richmal Mangnall's 'Historical and Miscellaneous Questions for the Use of Young People' was first published anonymously in 1798 to serve her own school. Longmans bought the copyright for 100 guineas; their 1800 edition, still anonymous, is dedicated to John Kay. Successive editions appeared almost annually, with the author's corrections and additions incorporating recent events, including a new section on astronomy in the edition of 1806, dedicated to the astronomer royal, Nevil Maskelyne. Richmal Mangnall also published 'Half an Hour's Lounge, or, Poems' (1805), which she described as 'trifles'; they treated such themes as nature, the sorrow of parting, Laura and Petrarch, Mrs Opie, and, in a poem entitled 'To the Memory of an Officer in the Honorable East-India Company's Service, 1801', the death of her brother. A 'Compendium of Geography for the Use of Schools' (1815) had more limited success than her 'Questions'. 
In 1888 a satirical writer wondered how people had learned before the 'immortal textbook', and placed it between the 'Lyrical Ballads' of 1798 and 'Minstrelsy of the Scottish Border' in 1802 as ushering in a new era. Certainly, the catechism-type textbook dominated Victorian school-publishing, and Mangnall's 'Questions' continued to appear until late in the century, albeit revised, corrected, updated, and supplemented by such editors as William Pinnock in mid-century and G. N. Wright in 1875. Richmal Mangnall's declared purpose (Preface, 1806) was that the 'Questions' should serve to 'awaken a spirit of laudible ['sic'] curiosity', but it is doubtful whether the formulation of the questions (strictly from a teacher's rather than a learner's perspective) and the finality of the answers achieved this purpose. It is to Mangnall, no doubt, that the contemporary 'Blair's Universal Preceptor and Questions' refers in contrasting its 'intellectual or thinking system' with 'popular mechanical systems'; despite these criticisms, the predominant textbook format remained interrogative, and the more mechanical or catechetical systems, incorporating Mangnall, were highly valued where the knowledge of the teacher, whether governess or school monitor, was itself limited. 


@@@@@


doc= 17936


Maning, Frederick Edward (1811/12-1883), writer and judge in New Zealand, was born on 5 July 1811 or 1812 in Dublin, the eldest of the three sons of Frederick Maning of Johnville, co. Dublin, and his wife, Mary Barrett. Both his parents were from Anglo-Irish protestant families of moderate wealth. In 1824 the family emigrated to Van Diemen's Land, where they farmed for several years before moving to Hobart. However, Maning had no liking for town life, and in 1833 he left Van Diemen's Land to seek adventure and profit among the Maori of Hokianga harbour, an area rich in valuable kauri forest on the north-west coast of New Zealand. It was here that he was to spend most of the rest of his life. 
At Hokianga Maning fitted easily into the frontier environment of scattered European establishments surrounded by and dependent on the patronage of powerful Maori tribes. He soon learned Maori and adapted readily to Maori ways necessary for economic survival. At first he ran a small trading establishment at Kohukohu, where he lived a rough, simple, often rather riotous life. According to a local missionary baptism register, he fathered a child to a woman called Harakoi while living there. Nothing else is known of the woman or child. 
In 1839 Maning bought a block of land called Onoke at the mouth of the Whirinaki River. This was the territory of the Hikutu hapu (sub-tribe) and Maning soon became an important figure in that community, as the local trader, through his marriage in 1839 to Moengaroa and the birth of four children. He gained some notoriety shortly after moving to Onoke, when the new governor, William Hobson, attacked him in print for attempting to dissuade Hokianga Maori from signing the 1840 treaty of Waitangi. 
As colonization increased Maning slowly abandoned his bicultural lifestyle. The northern war of 1844-5 against Hone Heke made him feel less secure about his safety in a potentially hostile Maori world, and after Moengaroa's death in 1847 he began to distance himself from his Hikutu kin. In 1848 he expanded his trading activities, and, although these were initially successful, his eventual retirement from business in the early 1860s was accompanied by financial problems, stemming partly from the reluctance of Maori employees to work off debts. 
It was the publication of his two books that brought Maning national attention. Both were initially published under the 'nom de plume' the Pakeha-Maori (a name then applied to Europeans living with Maori tribes). 'A History of the War in the North' (1862) was written from the supposed point of view of a Maori chief fighting against Hone Heke, and drew on Maning's extensive knowledge of the war and its Maori participants. It was well reviewed, and Maning was persuaded to complete quickly the more ambitious 'Old New Zealand'. That was published in 1863, to considerable local and British acclaim. Using some of the literary devices of Laurence Sterne, Maning produced a racy, often very funny 'tour de force' of autobiography, description, and discussion of Maori history and customs. Both books were published at the height of the New Zealand wars, and have an underlying theme warning fellow colonists that Maori would never willingly accept European domination. In 1865 Maning gained an appointment as one of the judges on the new Maori land court, set up to begin the task of individualizing title to all remaining Maori land. Until his retirement in 1876 most of his time was spent travelling around the Maori centres of the far north, although he was also brought south at times to help adjudicate several large and controversial land cases. 
As he grew older Maning's alienation from all things Maori continued to grow. He resented Maori questioning of his court decisions and was contemptuous of the leaders of the new Maori protest movements emerging in the 1870s. In 1880 he had what seems to have been a nervous breakdown. Imagining among other things that his children and their Hikutu relatives were plotting to kill him, he fled Onoke to Auckland, where the comfort of private lodgings and the novelty of town life brought some contentment. In 1882 he sought treatment for cancer in London, and he died there on 25 July 1883. He was later buried in New Zealand, at the Symonds Street cemetery, Auckland. 
For almost fifty years Maning was caught up in the turmoil of New Zealand race relations. However, it is on his brief career as an author that his fame now largely rests. 'Old New Zealand' in particular has been frequently reprinted or anthologized and has become a classic of New Zealand literature. 


@@@@@


doc= 17937


Manini, Antony (c.1750-1786), musician, was possibly born in Rome. Manini's early life has been the subject of a great deal of conjecture. Suggestions that he belonged to the Norfolk family of Mann and Italianized his name appear unreliable. It is perhaps more likely, as Sainsbury suggested, that he was related to the Italian composer named Manini who was living in Rome in 1733. This would sit more comfortably with Christopher Hogwood's assertion that he was a pupil of Tartini. It is also possible that the 'Signora Manini, a new and obscure singer' (Burney, 681), who was performing in England in 1712, was connected in some way. 
Manini first came to notice in 1770, performing solos by Felice Giardini and Charles Chabran for his own benefit at the New Hall in Great Yarmouth, Norfolk. He led the band in the same year at the opening of Christian's new concert room in Norwich, and also performed nearby in Beccles. He also established himself as a teacher in Great Yarmouth during the early 1770s, instructing ladies on the guitar and gentlemen on the violin. 
In 1777 Manini appeared for the first time in Cambridge, as leading violinist at Miss Marshall's concert at St John's College, the programme containing music by Paradies (or Paradisi), Boccherini, and Abel. His 'Six Divertimentos for Two Violins', perhaps his only works to survive, were published in London around this time. One of Manini's violin pupils was Charles Hague. Manini and Hague enjoyed a fruitful musical partnership in later years. In 1779 and the following year Manini played first violin at Scarborough's annual concert at St Ives, Huntingdonshire, and in 1780 he had two benefit concerts at Trinity Hall, Cambridge. A similar concert was given in 1781 in Emmanuel College, close to where he was living at the time. In 1782 he appeared as leading violinist at Peterborough, Huntingdon, and Stamford, and received another benefit at Trinity. In 1783 he was principal violinist at Mrs Pratt's benefit concert in Caius College; in Trinity once again for his own benefit, on which occasion a member of the Cramer family (probably Johann Baptist) performed; and at Peterhouse for the benefit of Joseph Reinagle. In 1784 he held three subscription concerts on three successive days (1-3 July) in the halls of King's and St John's; played first violin at Huntingdon, Hague appearing in the vocal part; and later played there again for Michael Leoni's benefit. He also gave Leoni a benefit concert at King's, with Leoni and Hague singing and Hague and Manini playing the violin. As well as in Cambridge, Manini and Hague appeared all around East Anglia during the period 1783-4. In 1785, the year in which Gertrud Elisabeth Mara caused a stir in London and Oxford by refusing to stand for the 'Hallelujah' chorus when performing Handel's 'Messiah', she also sang for Manini's benefit at Trinity. In November of that year a benefit concert was given at King's for the highly precocious William Crotch, then aged ten and later a violin pupil of Hague. On this occasion, the two future professors of music at Oxford and Cambridge respectively, Crotch and Hague, sang, and Hague and Manini played. Manini also performed at musical entertainments staged by John Montagu, fourth earl of Sandwich, at Hinchingbrooke; he died soon after one of them at Huntingdon on 6 January 1786. He was buried in the parish of St Andrew's the Great in Cambridge. Manini was highly esteemed during his lifetime, both personally and as a musician. 


@@@@@


doc= 17938


Manisty, Sir Henry (1808-1890), judge, was born at Vicarage House, Edlingham, Northumberland, on 13 December 1808, the second son of James Manisty BD, vicar of Edlingham, and his wife, Eleanor, 'nee' Foster, of whom little is known. He was educated at Durham Cathedral grammar school, and was later articled in the offices of Thorpe and Dickson, attorneys, of Alnwick, Northumberland. 
Manisty became a solicitor in 1830, and practised for twelve years as a member of the firm of Meggison, Pringle, and Manisty of 3 King's (afterwards Theobald's) Road, London. In August 1831 he married Constantia Dickson, the fifth daughter of Patrick Dickson, a solicitor from Berwick upon Tweed. She died on 9 August 1836 and he remarried in May 1838. He and his second wife, Mary Anne Stevenson, the third daughter of Robert Stevenson, a surgeon from Berwick, had four sons and three daughters. 
On 20 April 1842 Manisty became a student of Gray's Inn, and was called to the bar on 23 April 1845. He was appointed a bencher of Gray's Inn in 1859, and treasurer in 1861. He joined the northern circuit, and soon built up a considerable practice. He was made a queen's counsel on 7 July 1857, and appeared principally in mercantile and circuit cases. 
Eventually, in November 1876, when Lord Blackburn quitted the High Court, Manisty was made a judge, and was knighted (28 November 1876). Among his most important decisions were his judgments in 'R. v. Bishop of Oxford' (1879), 'Belt v. Lawes' (1884), 'Adams v. Coleridge' (1884), and 'O'Brien v. Lord Salisbury' (1889). He had a stroke in court on 24 January 1890 and died on 31 January at his home, 24A Bryanston Square, London. He was buried on 5 February at Kensal Green cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 17939


Manley, Delarivier (c.1670-1724), writer, was born in Jersey or possibly at sea between Jersey and Guernsey, the third of the six children of Sir Roger Manley (d. 1687), royalist army officer and historian, and his wife from the Spanish Netherlands, probably named Mary Catherine (died 1675). Sir Roger Manley was the second son of Cornelius Manley of Erbistock; one brother, Sir Francis Manley, was also a royalist but another, John Manley, was a major in the parliamentary army and supporter of the Commonwealth. Manley's father was appointed lieutenant-governor and commander of his majesty's castles, forts, and forces on Jersey in 1667 under Sir Thomas Morgan; Delarivier appears to have been named after the latter's wife, Delariviere Cholmondoley Morgan. 
In November 1672 Sir Roger left Jersey to serve as a captain of the Royal regiment of foot guards at Windsor. The family, after sojourns at Tower Hamlets, Brussels, and Portsmouth, moved to Landguard Fort in Suffolk where Sir Roger, now widowed, was made governor in February 1680. The principal source for Delarivier's biography is her own account in the 1714 'Adventures of Rivella' (reissued by the publisher Edmund Curll as 'Memoirs of the Life of Mrs. Manley' in 1714 and 1717, and as 'Mrs. Manley's History of her Own Life and Times' in 1725); a brief account is also provided by Manley in her most successful work of scandal fiction, the 'New Atalantis' (1709), in the first-person narrative of Delia given in the second volume. Manley's autobiographical writings are, however, self-justifying and not always reliable as sources of fact about her life. Manley tells us she was educated at home, apart from a short stay with her brother at the French home of a Huguenot minister, where she was sent to recover from her youthful passion for a young actor and playwright turned soldier named James Carlisle whose regiment visited Landguard Fort in 1685. She claims to have acquired fluent French here, which was to stand her in good stead in her inveterate plundering of French sources for her works. She also claims to have missed the opportunity of a promise to take up a vacancy as maid of honour to the queen with Mary of Modena's precipitate flight from England in December 1687. 
Manley's father died in March 1687 and left Delarivier $200, and a share of the residue of his estate. One of her two surviving brothers, Edward, died in 1688, as did William Eyton, Sir Roger's successor at Landguard Fort and one of the two executors of Sir Roger's will (the other, Edward Lloyd, died the year previously). Delarivier's eldest sister, Mary Elizabeth, was recently married to Captain Francis Braithewaite, whom Delarivier disliked. Her brother Francis was at sea, where he died in June 1693. She and Cornelia, on the death of the lady Delarivier Manley describes as 'an old out-of-fashion aunt' (Manley, 'New Atalantis', 223), fell to the sole care of John Manley, son to the puritan uncle John. 
John Manley (1654-1713) was a tory lawyer who later became a successful MP. He had married a Cornish orphaned heiress, Anne Grosse, at Westminster Abbey on 19 January 1679, but succeeded in persuading Delarivier (whether she knew the liaison was bigamous or not) to marry him; they had at least one son, John, born on 24 June 1691 and baptized on 13 July 1691 in the parish of St Martin-in-the-Fields, Westminster, as the child of 'John and Dela Manley'. In January 1694, under the protection of Barbara Villiers, duchess of Cleveland and long-term mistress to Charles II, Delarivier either left or was left by her bigamous husband, but only six months later was expelled from the duchess's house in Arlington Street on the grounds of a flirtation with the duchess's son. 
Manley appears to have had a winning personality, although she and others admitted that she was not a remarkable beauty. In his 'Journal to Stella' on 28 January 1712 Jonathan Swift described her as having 'very generous principles for one of her sort; and a great deal of sense and invention; she is about forty, very homely, and very fat' (Swift, 2.474). Manley herself endorsed this impression, describing herself as 'from her youth... inclined to fat' and complaining that her appearance had been spoilt by smallpox, but 'considering her disadvantage, she has the most easy air that one can have; her hair is of a pale ash-colour, fine, and in a large quantity' and moreover 'none that became acquainted with her, could refrain from loving her' (Manley, 'Rivella', 47). 
From 1694 to 1696 Manley travelled around the south-west of England; a series of eight letters composed during these travels to one 'J.H.' (possibly James Hargreaves or John Manley) was published without her permission as 'Letters by Mrs Manley' in 1696. It is possible that Manley was travelling with her 'husband', John Manley, who was inspecting Pendennis Castle to determine rents due to its owner in summer 1694; Delarivier's biographer Dolores Diane Clark Duff speculates that a son, Francis, baptized on 9 August 1694 at the church of St Mary, Truro, as the child of Anne and John Manley, and buried in December 1694, may have been Dela's also, given the fourteen-year gap between this and the birth of his last child by his first wife (Clark Duff, 47). 
Manley had the letters withdrawn from publication and they were not reissued until after her death in 1725, when Edmund Curll produced them under the title 'A Stagecoach Journey to Exeter'. The letters reveal an early debt to the works of Marie Catherine de la Motte, Baronne d'Aulnoy, the scandalous travel and letter writer, now better known for her fairy tales. Later in her career Manley published another series of letters related to contemporary scandals in two parts as 'The lady's pacquet of letters taken from her by a French privateer in her passage to Holland, or, The lady's pacquet broke open' bound with d'Aulnoy's 'Memoirs of the Court of England' (January 1707) and 'Memoirs of the Earl of Warwick' (November 1707). This collection of letters was republished in 1711 under the title 'Court intrigues in a collection of original letters from the island of the new Atalantis &c.', which Manley disclaimed as a pirated edition in a number of 'The Examiner' on 14 June 1711. 

'Letters by Mrs Manley' had been published to coincide with the production of Manley's first play, a comedy called 'The Lost Lover, or, The Jealous Husband' (1696). The cast included the young Colley Cibber, but the play was not a success and its author claims in 'Rivella' that her reputation was further damaged by unfounded rumours of an affair with the company's ageing part-owner Sir Thomas Skipwith (Manley, 'Rivella', 73-4). However, an oriental tragedy entitled 'The Royal Mischief' performed at Lincoln's Inn Fields in April of the same year met with better success, largely thanks to the powerful portrayal of a self-seeking and sexually assertive princess named Homais. 
Manley's fame was considerable enough to win her the dubious honour of a satirical representation as Marsilia, a vain female playwright, in an anonymous play of 1696 called 'The Female Wits'. Other women writers attacked in the play, Mary Pix and Catherine Trotter, contributed to a small volume of poems by women poets Manley produced to the memory of John Dryden called 'The Nine Muses' (1700). 
Manley's acquaintance with Catherine Trotter led to a retreat from literary production for some years. In December 1696 Trotter asked her to assist in securing the freedom of John Tilly, governor of the prison at the Fleet, who was under investigation for corruption and taking bribes by a committee of the House of Commons of which Delarivier's 'husband', John Manley, was a member; this introduction resulted in a six-year affair between Manley and Tilly. The couple became involved in another lawsuit, a dispute over the fortune of Christopher Monck, second duke of Albemarle, between the earl of Bath and Ralph, earl of Montagu, in which John Manley was also entangled. In hopes of turning a profit, Delarivier and Tilly undertook the management of one of the claimants to the Albemarle fortune, another Christopher Monck, who had been released from debtors' prison at the Fleet into Tilly's custody. Manley gives considerable space in her 'Rivella' to an account of their ultimately fruitless activities. When Tilly's first wife died in December 1702, Delarivier recounts in 'Rivella' that she nobly sacrificed her love to allow him to marry a widowed heiress, Margaret Smith ('nee' Reresby), and repair his fortunes. Letter 33 of 'The lady's pacquet broke open' narrates the same sacrifice. 
Over this period Manley made the acquaintance of Richard Steele when he was a young soldier. She assisted him in procuring a midwife for the delivery of his illegitimate daughter and in dabbling in alchemical ventures. Letters 12 to 24 and 34 to 37 of 'The lady's pacquet' give their correspondence and volume one of the 'New Atalantis' provides a narrative account of their friendship between 1696 and 1702 (Manley, 'New Atalantis', 100-04). The friendship was abruptly severed, however, when Steele refused to assist Manley with money to enable her to travel to the country after Tilly's marriage. Manley and Steele were to be inveterate and public enemies with numerous exchanges in print, particularly in 'The Tatler', 'The Examiner', and 'The Guardian' (for a summary of these see Morgan, 115-16). The rift, exacerbated by their political differences, lasted until 1717. The preface to Manley's last performed play, 'Lucius, the First Christian King of Britain', details the reconciliation, sweetened by Steele's payment of $600 for the play's production by his Drury Lane Company. 
Despite Steele's refusal, Manley evidently managed to find some means of support since according to letter 33 of 'The lady's pacquet' she made two visits to the country to repair her spirits, the second to Bristol where an intrigue with an unidentified man she calls 'Mr Worthy' aided her recovery, but also ended in separation. Manley spent spring 1704 in London before making a visit to her friend the poet Sarah Fyge in Buckingham. Their correspondence is given in letters 5-9 of 'The lady's pacquet'. This friendship too ended bitterly when Sarah Fyge gave evidence in the Doctors' Commons in 1705 against Manley, Mrs Mary Thompson, and a forger, Edmund Smith, in their attempt to gain compensation for Thompson from the estate of her common-law husband, a Mr Pheasant of Upwood, Huntingdonshire (Wylie, 392-3; Manley, 'Lady's pacquet', letter 33). Manley had hoped to win $100 a year from her involvement in this lawsuit and here too she attacked a false friend in print presenting Sarah Fyge as a violent wife and poor poet in the first volume of her 'New Atalantis'. By 1705 it became necessary for Delarivier Manley to resume her writing career to secure her living and she embarked on her most successful venture as a writer: the production of anti-whig satire veiled as romance. 
Manley's 'Secret History of Queen Zarah and the Zarazians' (1705) drew on French sources for both its preface, a close translation from an essay of 1703 by Abbe de Morvan de Bellegarde (advocating the advantages and pleasures of the short fiction over the romance), and its narrative, derived from a 1680 French satire about Charles II and Barbara Villiers, entitled 'Hattige'. It was, however, also typical of the prose fiction in which she was to become adept, providing an accurate if scandalous account of whig political machination. In all her fiction, but especially in this first work, John and Sarah Churchill are major targets, their dominance over Queen Anne a source of anxiety and rancour for the tory ideals and ambitions of Manley. A second part, exploiting the popularity of the first, appeared in the same year. A second tragedy, 'Almyna, or, The Arabian Vow', was performed in December 1706 at the new Haymarket Theatre -- an early example of her tendency to cryptic self-referentiality in the anagrammatical use of her own name for its powerful heroine derived from Scheherezade in the popular 'Arabian Nights Entertainment'. 
In July 1709 Manley may have turned her hand to the periodical, appearing as Phoebe Crackenthorpe, editor of the 'Female Tatler', although her claim to the title has been disputed. The fact that Mrs Crackenthorpe handed over the editorship to a Society of Ladies in October 1709 at just the moment that Delarivier Manley found herself taken up for seditious libel suggests some support for the conviction of Paul Bunyan Anderson and of Fidelis Morgan that she was (at least one of) its original author(s). Manley was taken into custody nine days after the publication of the second volume of 'Secret memoirs and manners of several persons of quality of both sexes, from the new Atalantis, an island in the Mediterranean' on 29 October 1709. She apparently surrendered herself after a secretary of state's warrant had been issued against her, and her publishers John Morphew and John Woodward and printer John Barber had been detained. Four days later the latter were discharged but Manley remained in custody until 5 November when she was released on bail. After several continuations of the case, she was tried and discharged on 13 February 1710. A note in the Public Record Office (State Papers 34, 11, fol. 69) recently uncovered by Ruth Herman recording that a warrant had been issued for the arrest of Morphew and Woodward on 11 November 1709, a full two weeks after Manley was taken into custody, suggests that Manley did not in fact surrender herself for the sake of her colleagues as the only remaining account of the trial, her own in 'Rivella', claims. In this same account, Manley describes her defence of the book on grounds that her information came by 'inspiration' and her rebuke of her judges for bringing 'a woman to her trial for writing a few amorous trifles' (Manley, 'Rivella', 110-11). The two volumes of 'Secret memoirs' (the first volume had appeared in May 1709) were 'romans-a-clef' with separately printed keys, which offered a succession of narratives of seduction and betrayal by notorious whig grandees told to Astrea, an allegorical figure of justice. The narratives were mainly told by female characters including an allegorical figure of Intelligence and a midwife. In 'Rivella' Manley claims that her trial led her to conclude that 'politics is not the business of a woman' (ibid., 112), and that thereafter she turned exclusively to stories of love. 
In fact her next work, the two-volume 'Memoirs of Europe, towards the close of the eighth century, written by Eginardus, secretary and favourite to Charlemagne', of May and November 1710 continued the work of propaganda for the tory party and went on to be published as the third and fourth volumes of the 'New Atalantis'. These volumes used male narrative voices more extensively. The first volume was addressed to Lord Peterborough and on the strength of this Delarivier Manley sought, with Swift's support, a pension from Peterborough in July 1711 (Swift, 2.306). The second volume was more concerned with stories of love than with politics but the satirical purpose of exposing whig corruption through analogy with sexual depravity remained evident. The author also sought assistance on several occasions from Robert Harley, sending him a copy of the first volume of 'Memoirs of Europe' on 12 May 1710. As a result of her patient solicitations she received $50 from Harley, acknowledged in her letter of thanks dated 14 June 1714 ('Portland MSS', 5.458). This is the only remuneration she is known to have received for her partisan services. 
From 1711 to 1713 Manley concentrated on political journalism, editing Jonathan Swift's 'Examiner' for number 7 (14 September 1710) and numbers 46 to 52 (14 June to 26 July 1711). These contained a series of direct attacks on whig propaganda, but are without the female narrative frames or striking female protagonists that are her trade mark in prose fiction and drama. She produced a number of pamphlets addressing contemporary controversies and intervening in political debate in this period: 'A True Narrative of what Pass'd at the Examination of the Marquis of Guiscard' (1711); 'A Learned Comment on Dr. Hare's Sermon' (1711); and 'The Honour and Prerogative of the Queen's Majesty Vindicated' (1713). 
Manley's liaison with the Jacobite printer and alderman of the City of London John Barber (bap. 1675, d. 1741) may have begun as early as 1705 when he published her 'Queen Zarah'. In any case, by spring 1714 she and her sister Cornelia were living at his residence and printing house on the corner of Old Fish Street and Lambeth Hill in London, although Delarivier retained a country residence for the summer months in Oxfordshire (her will cites the house as in Berkley, taken to be Beckley). With Queen Anne's death in 1714 and the decline of tory hopes, Manley seems to have turned away from partisan publication without losing her relish for scandal. Her third-person (auto)biography, 'The Adventures of Rivella', is a tongue-in-cheek riposte to Edmund Curll who had threatened her with the publication of a scandalous account of her life by Charles Gildon. Manley's narrative frame is that of two men discussing Rivella, although she herself is not present. Here, as in other works, Manley complains about the double standard: 'if she had been a man, she had been without fault' (Manley, 'Rivella', 47) but also acknowledges how successfully she had exploited the display of her sex as an author: 'it would have been a 'fault in her, not to have been faulty'' (ibid., 114). 
Manley's last performed play, 'Lucius, the First Christian King of Britain' (Drury Lane, 1717), a work of fervent nationalism, puts centre stage (like her other plays) a powerful woman, Rosalind, Queen of Britain. 'The Power of Love in Seven Novels' (1720) reworked five tales from William Painter's 1566 versions of Italian and French novels entitled 'The Palace of Pleasure', and drew on a contemporary scandal for one and, probably, invention for the last. In this underrated work Manley thoroughly transforms her sources to make them relevant to contemporary contexts and debates, delivers racy plotting, and panders to her readers' voyeurism. 
According to Edmund Curll, Barber's tyrannous behaviour towards her and his infidelity with the maid he had engaged for her, one Sarah Dovekin or Dufkin, impeded Manley's completion of a second volume of novels, presumably also from Painter, before her death (Curll, 'Impartial History', 47). In a letter to the government, Curll also reported his sighting of a letter from Delarivier Manley stating that 'a fifth volume of the Atalantis had been for some time printed off, and lies ready for publication' ('N&Q', 2nd ser., 2/49, 6 Dec 1856, 441-3). Delarivier Manley died at Barber's house on 11 July 1724 of a 'cholic' (Curll, 'Impartial History', 44) and was buried as her will requested at the church of St Benet Paul's Wharf, under a white marble stone (later excavated in building work). In her will (dated 6 October 1723) she mentions two plays now lost, a tragedy called the 'Duke of Somerset' and a comedy called the 'Double Mistress', which might turn a profit on publication, but asks for all her other manuscripts to be destroyed so that 'none Ghost-like may walk after my decease' (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/599, 194-5); the same instructions held for any correspondence. 'The Life and Character of John Barber' (1741) refers to 'a Miscellany, not yet collected, of valuable pieces in verse and prose' (p. 10) which never appeared. She had little else to leave except $352 capital and $352 annuity from $500 worth of South Sea stock bought in 1721, and complex instructions for her executors, Cornelia Markendale (her sister) and Henrietta Essex Manley, a child's coat maker and presumably relation, to endeavour through the offices of Swift, to procure from his executor half of the $50 annual patent owed to her by the bookseller Benjamin Tooke. The remaining half, owed to her by her printer John Barber, was waived in acknowledgement of 'so many favours' already received. 
Manley's plays and prose works were highly successful and popular in her own time, though they failed to secure her the financial and political patronage she craved. The remarkably accurate scandalous and political references in her prose works may now be obscure, but her energetic style and plotting made her an important contributor to the development of the modern novel as a vehicle for entertainment. Her clear-sighted exposure of sexual double standards, if leavened with sexual voyeurism and a taste for the scandalous and perverse, reveals her to be an early exponent of Enlightenment feminism. 


@@@@@


doc= 17940


Manley, Sir Roger (d. 1687), army officer and historian, was the second of three sons of Cornelius Manley (died 1623) of Erbistock in Denbighshire, and his wife, Mary, daughter of Francis Lloyd of Hardwick in Shropshire. All three sons were minors at their father's death. Roger's brothers took divergent paths in the civil war: the elder, Francis, later chief justice of the Carmarthen circuit, served the royalist party in north Wales, and compounded for delinquency in arms in 1647, while the younger, John, a vigorous nonconformist and son-in-law of Isaac Dorislaus, fought for parliament and held the postal franchise under the Commonwealth. Roger served as a royalist officer in Lord Byron's regiment, and was present at the capture of Powis Castle in October 1644, being taken prisoner but making a daring solitary escape. After Byron's defeat and the capture of Chester in 1646 he left England for the continent. 
Manley spent the next fourteen years mostly in the Netherlands, serving in the army of the states general at Maastricht in 1653-4, accompanying an embassy to Sweden in 1655, and commanding a company in the Dutch expedition to Danzig in 1656-7. All this time he sent reports, under various pseudonyms, to his brother-in-law, Isaac Dorislaus the younger, and others in England; these survive among the Thurloe state papers. It seems that by 1659 he had also compiled the account of the war of 1657-8 between Sweden and Denmark that was later published as the first part of his 'History of the Late Warrs in Denmark' (1670), because orders issued in March 1659 cite it as an authority for protocol in dealing with the Swedish fleet. With regard to the published version, the close similarities between his account and the one by Sir Philip Meadows printed in 1675 suggest that they derive from the same original (possibly an earlier version of Meadows's text), and that Manley's book cannot be treated as a primary source. Of clearer antecedents is his 'True Description of the Mighty Kingdom of Japan and Siam', translated from the account by Francois Caron and dedicated to Manley's brother Francis (1663; reprinted 1671). 
At the Restoration Manley held an ensign's commission in the regiment of Robert Sidney, second earl of Leicester, an English unit in Dutch service, and was among the officers who refused to swear allegiance to the states general in 1665, which led to their dismissal and recommissioning in English service as the Holland regiment (later to become the Buffs). He also worked as an agent for Sir George Downing, collecting intelligence on Dutch naval preparations for the war that broke out that year. This led to his brief arrest by the pensionary Johan de Witt. Despite these adventures Manley was dissatisfied with the progress of his career and petitioned Arlington, the secretary of state, for better employment, citing his twenty years' experience, particularly in fortification. This experience had doubtless been gained, in part, during earlier service as ensign to a military engineer cousin, John Manley, whose brother Arthur left two houses at Kew, in Surrey, one of which Roger acquired in 1674. 
Promoted captain in September 1665 Manley accompanied his regiment to Portsmouth and thence, in December, to Jersey. He was now married, his wife being Maria Catherina, whose parents were Francophone denizens of the Spanish Netherlands; she died on 1 November 1675 aged thirty-two and was buried in Portsmouth. They had at least six children, of whom five survived their father, two sons dying shortly after him, the three daughters (including Delarivier Manley) living into the next century. He apparently also played some part in the upbringing of his younger brother's son, John, who later seduced and then abandoned Delarivier. 
From 1667 Manley acted as lieutenant-governor of Jersey, being sworn in as such in November that year. Details of his duties and his trips home on leave survive in his letters to his cousin Robert Francis, a clerk in Arlington's office, preserved in the state papers (and wrongly calendared as being from Robert Manley). His knowledge of languages, acquired in exile, was occasionally put to use translating letters for Francis. In 1671 he was allowed an allowance of six soldiers' pay to offset expenses incurred in Jersey, chiefly in repairing the island's fortifications. 
In or soon after 1673 Manley left Jersey, still a captain but having transferred in 1672 to the 1st regiment of foot guards (later the Grenadiers), and in 1674 his account of the saga of Boris Godunov and the false Dmitry, 'The Russian Impostor', was published. This book drew on material not then available in English and remains very readable. By June 1675 Manley had been appointed deputy governor of Portsmouth, being knighted there by the king on 3 July. From January 1678 he was on the commission for repairing the fortifications of the port, and was commended for his diligence by Sir Bernard de Gomme, engineer-general. 
In February 1680 Manley petitioned the crown for the office of receiver-general of the duchy of Cornwall, but was unsuccessful. The same month, however, he was posted to Landguard Fort in Suffolk as governor, his appointment being renewed (like his captaincy in the guards) on the accession of James II in 1685. By now, however, he seems to have been somewhat weary, and in a letter of March 1684 he refers to his 'forty-three years' colonelling' (TNA: PRO, SP 29/437/30), presumably a conscious echo of 'Hudibras'. His last book, a military history of the civil war, 'De rebellione Anglicana' (1686), was well written in reasonably correct Latin, but is no more informative about the theatre in which the author had himself served than about the others described. It was republished after his death in 1691 in English as 'The History of the Rebellions of England, Scotland and Ireland', with a continuation covering Monmouth's rebellion. 
On 26 February 1687 Manley, by then living in Westminster, wrote his will. He was dead by 19 March following and on 21 March he was buried in St Margaret's Church there. His successor at Landguard Fort had been appointed two days earlier, although it was not until May 1688 that one of his daughters was admitted heir to the house at Kew, and June 1688 that his will was proved. Described by his daughter Delarivier as 'brave, full of honour and a very fine gentleman' (D. Manley, 'Adventures', 14), he was obviously a man of some charm and ability, not least in telling a good story. This served him well in his literary efforts, though it sometimes seems out of place in his dispatches, and certainly overran the mark on one occasion in 1669 when, journeying home on leave, he had a fellow traveller arrested as a highwayman's decoy, only to recant afterwards and drop all charges. The affair, probably obscure enough at the time, remains a mystery. 


@@@@@


doc= 17941


Manley, Thomas (c.1628-1676), legal and political writer, was the son of Thomas Manley (died 1656) of Westminster, clerk of the kitchen in the household of Charles I, and his wife, Cassandra Button (died 1633), daughter of Henry Lyde, and can probably be identified with the author of certain juvenilia published about 1650, in which case he was born about 1628. He may have been the Thomas Manley baptized at St Margaret's, Westminster, on 8 November 1627. Thomas Manley senior was at Oxford with the court and may have been responsible for an account of the king's travels called 'Iter Carolinum', published in 1660. He was fined $250 for his delinquency, but paid less than half the sum and placed the rest of his estate in trust for his daughter. Thomas junior, who had displeased his father by marrying without his permission, received only a small monetary bequest. By 1656 he and his wife, Anne, had a son and a daughter. 
Manley was admitted a student of the Middle Temple on 6 February 1655, and on 25 May following was appointed librarian of the society. So unsatisfactory was he in the post, however, that the library doors were padlocked against him and he was eventually dismissed in June 1658. Despite this he was called to the bar at the Middle Temple on 24 January 1673 without having to perform the usual formalities and ceremonies, in accordance with letters from the king dated 18 September 1672. This has been misinterpreted as an appointment as king's counsel (and Manley accordingly appears as such in library catalogues), but there is no evidence that he ever took silk. 
Manley's first legal work was 'The Sollicitor' (2nd edn, 1663), a handbook stated in the title to be based on the experience of twelve years' practice. In 1670 he brought out an abridgement of Coke's reports, volumes 12 and 13, as a supplement to the work of Edward Trotman who had abridged the earlier volumes. Then in 1672 he produced both an annotated book of forms entitled 'The Clerk's Guide', and a revised and updated edition of John Cowell's well-known law dictionary, the 'Interpreter of Words and Terms' of 1607. His additions were not numerous or substantial, largely consisting of a few lines at the end of the longer entries. Cowell's controversial essays on titles such as 'king' and 'royal prerogative' were cut down, while other, more technical entries were criticized by Thomas Blount in 'World of Errors' (1673). A second 'corrected' edition appeared after Manley's death in 1684. His name remains, with his preface, in the 1701 revision by White Kennet, but disappears in later editions of Cowell although all continue to include his material. In 1676 Manley produced an appendix to the seventh edition of Thomas Wentworth's 'Office and Duty of Executors'; this reappeared with later editions of the same work. 
Contemporaneously with these legal works, Manley published several books of a political character. The first was a translation of Grotius's 'De rebus Belgicis', published as 'Annals and History of the Low-Country-Warrs' in 1665, with a subtitle claiming that the book illustrates the extent of the Dutch debt to English valour. In two later pamphlets ('Usury at Six per cent', 1669, directed against Sir Thomas Culpepper, and 'A Discourse Shewing that the Export of Wooll is Destructive', 1676) he aired isolationist views of economics that were clearly political and social in inspiration. Less certainly his is an earlier work, 'A Short View of the Lives of... Henry, Duke of Gloucester, and Mary Princess of Orange' (1660); the author is identified only as T. M., esq. 
Manley apparently died soon after writing his appendix to Wentworth, for Middle Temple records disclose the payment of $5 to the widow of T. Manley on 24 November 1676. This means that the book usually identified as his last work, 'The Present State of Europe Briefly Examined and Found Languishing', published in 1689, must have been seen through the press by someone other than the author. A note prefaced to this polemical tract, which advocates immediate war against France to save Europe from the despotic designs of Louis XIV, states that it was written in 1671, on the occasion of a parliamentary vote of $800,000 to equip a fleet. 
It seems likely, though it cannot be proved, that the legal and political writer described above was the Thomas Manley junior responsible for three rather earlier and rather different works. The first, 'Temporis angustiae: Stollen Houres Recreations', a collection of almost unreadable adolescent 'pensees', is dated 1649, the author being in his twenty-first year at the time of writing. In 1651 there appeared the same author's 'Affliction and Deliverance of the Saints', a verse paraphrase of the book of 'Job', the preface of which is dated at Westminster. A manuscript of this work survives in Cambridge University Library. The following year saw his translation of Payne Fisher's 'Veni, vidi, vici', a Latin poem in honour of Cromwell, with in addition an elegy by himself on Ireton, the regicide, and verses in Manley's own honour by Samuel Sheppard. By this time Manley's father was attempting to make amends with the Commonwealth authorities, so his son's encomiastic offerings would not be unexpected; certainly no more so than the verses by Sheppard, himself chiefly known for royalist sympathies. 


@@@@@


doc= 17942


Manlove, Edward (bap. 1615, d. 1671), lawyer and poet, was baptized on 6 April 1615 at Tettenhall, Staffordshire, the second son of Rowland Manlove, gentleman, of Wanfield in the parish of Kynaston, Staffordshire, and his wife, Magdalen, the daughter of William Wyke of Shifnal, Shropshire. He entered the Middle Temple in May 1635 and was called to the bar in June 1642. He settled at Ashbourne in Derbyshire. A parliamentary supporter during the civil war, Manlove served on a number of local committees during the Commonwealth and was made a JP for Derbyshire in 1648. He proved an energetic magistrate suppressing profaneness and irreligion. He was included in a list of Derbyshire gentlemen and 'how they stand affected', drawn up in the autumn of 1662, when he was described as a Presbyterian (Newton, 8). 
Manlove was actively engaged in lead mining, owning a number of rakes (veins), and serving as steward of the barmote court of the wapentake of Wirksworth. In 1653 he published the 'Liberties and Customes of the Lead-Mines within the Wapentake of Wirksworth', which, drawing on exchequer rolls and inquisitions, provided a description of the laws and customs of the court with comprehensive references to the legal evidence in the margin. The work was a remarkable achievement for it provided an accurate digest of the voluminous detail of mining customs cast into 300 lines of verse to assist the illiterate miner in memorizing them. By the eighteenth century the rhyming verses were being cited as evidence of custom. A further edition, though inaccurate, was published at Wirksworth in 1809, and a modern edition with an introduction and glossary by Thomas Tapping in 1851. 
Manlove also published a volume of poems, 'Divine contentment, or, A medicine for a discontented man: A confession of faith, and other poems' (1667). The poems were on such subjects as effectual calling, justification, saving grace, keeping the sabbath, and 'the Misery of Man, not Reconciled to God in Christ' (p. 45), which although revealing of Manlove's godliness have little poetic value. A final section consists of 'Poems Against Popery', involving a conventional protestant attack on the supposed tenets of Catholicism, and also poetic epitaphs for two local worthies, Anne Cockaine (died 1664) and William Waine, vicar of Ashbourne. It has been suggested that Manlove is the 'Philanthropus' (that is, Man Love), friend of Mark Hildesley, the compiler of a manuscript volume of 'Essayes and contemplations, divine, morall, and miscellaneous, in prose and meter' (Harley MS 4726), but the ascription is dated 1694, twenty years after Manlove's death. 
Manlove married first Catherine, daughter of Paul Hull of Ashbourne, and second Timothee, daughter of John Pearce of Lewes, Sussex. Both predeceased him. There were four sons and three daughters from each marriage. Manlove's published writings and activity on the bench indicate that he was a godly gentleman convinced of the existence of an elect and who believed in a national church and a preaching ministry. In his will he committed his soul to God 'trustinge to bee saved by the meritte of Jesus Christ' and gave instructions for his children to be brought up 'in the feare of god' (will). He had divinity as well as law books in his study. There is however no evidence that he supported nonconformity. He is not recorded in the 1669 Conventicle returns as hosting a meeting, but his son Timothy Manlove was one of the second generation of Presbyterian ministers. Edward Manlove died in late 1671. 


@@@@@


doc= 17943


Manlove, Timothy (1663-1699), Presbyterian minister and author, was born on 18 November 1663 at Ashbourne, Derbyshire, the youngest son of Edward Manlove (bap. 1615, d. 1671), gentleman and minor poet, and his second wife, Timothee, daughter of John Pearce of Lewes, Sussex. He began a career as a physician, in which 'he had attained to a great skill... and practised it with Ease' (Gilpin), before deciding on the ministry. He was educated at John Woodhouse's academy at Sheriffhales, Shropshire, and received Presbyterian ordination at Attercliffe on 11 September 1688. He then served as a private chaplain to the family of Sir Philip Gell of Hopton Hall, Derbyshire, who regarded him with more than ordinary kindness. His marriage to Sarah Slater (died 1715) on 18 July 1688 was probably the cause of his seeking a congregation. 
Shortly after qualifying himself as a nonconformist preacher at the quarter sessions at Bakewell on 7 July 1689 under the recently passed 'Toleration Act', Manlove became minister at Durham. He was described there in 1690 as 'formerly a preacher in Derbyshire: a young man of great hopes, and usefullness, [with] an encouraging auditory' (Gordon, 36) though he had thereby gained little financial reward. At Durham he engaged in a debate with the dean, Dr Thomas Comber, who tried hard to persuade him on the terms of conformity. It was later said that his 'principals & practices were so large at Durham that he got him respect with the church men & were rather an offence to them of his own communion' (R. Stretton to R. Thoresby, 13 March 1697, Yorkshire Archaeological Society, MS 16). In June 1693 he accepted an invitation from the congregation at Pontefract, Yorkshire, to settle with them, but following the death of Thomas Sharpe, minister of the Presbyterian congregation at Mill Hill, Leeds, in September 1693, he was invited to become their minister. The congregation at Pontefract strongly resisted his leaving, and Manlove at first declined; but, after further application from Leeds and much irresolution on his part, he was finally persuaded in February 1694 by Richard Gilpin, the minister at Newcastle upon Tyne, to accept, on the basis of being more generally serviceable at Leeds. He was admitted an extra licentiate of the Royal College of Physicians in June 1694. 
While at Leeds Manlove published 'Immortality of the Soul Asserted' (1697), with a commendatory preface by John Howe and Matthew Sylvester, in answer to Henry Layton's pamphlet published five years earlier. Layton issued a reply in 1703. The following year Manlove published his 'Praeparatio evangelica' based on sermons preached at Leeds. Both works were much admired. William Tong believed that 'Mr Baxter will never be quite dead while Dr Manlove, who inherits so much his clear weighty way of writing, lives' (Hunter, ed., 'Letters', 1.356). His ministry, however, though able was not easy. Initially on friendly terms with Ralph Thoresby, the antiquary, who had played an active part in his choice, Manlove quarrelled with Thoresby's wish to continue hearing sermons by the local Anglican clergy. Manlove's censure encouraged Thoresby eventually to leave Mill Hill. Manlove was also in dispute over the size of his stipend. At Leeds his salary was $60 a year and he was said to have earned as much again by practising physic. He was offered $80 a year at Newcastle with less duty, and though strongly urged to stay at Leeds he refused, becoming in 1699 Gilpin's assistant in the place of William Pell who had died. 
Manlove's stay at Newcastle was very brief. He caught a fever shortly after his arrival and died on 3 August 1699 at the age of thirty-five. In recording the event, Thoresby remarked, he 'enjoyed his quadruple salary but a little time' ('Diary', 1.330). Manlove was buried at the parish church of St Nicholas, Newcastle, on 6 August; his funeral sermon was preached and published by Gilpin, with a memoir by John Turnbull. The congregation showed such 'bounty and liberality' to his widow 'as was never shewn upon any such occasion before (at least not in this place)' (J. Cay to Thoresby, 22 Aug 1699, Yorkshire Archaeological Society, MS 7). He was full of promise but often rash in his decisions -- Manlove's moves were considered by John Howe 'to have been twice too hasty' (J. Howe to J. Boyse, 3 Jan 1700, BL, Add. MS 4275, fol. 329). He was one of those younger ministers specially commended by Calamy for their learning, of whom neither Oxford nor Cambridge need 'have been asham'd' (Calamy, xxxi-ii). 


@@@@@


doc= 17944


Mann, Gother (1747-1830), army officer and military engineer, was born on 21 December 1747 at Plumstead, Kent, the second son of Cornelius Mann and his wife, Elizabeth, 'nee' Gother. His father, a first cousin of Sir Horace Mann (1701-1786), went to the West Indies in 1760 and died at St Kitts on 9 December 1776. Gother was left in the care of his uncle, Mr Wilks of Faversham, Kent, and after passing through the Royal Military Academy, Woolwich, was commissioned practitioner engineer and ensign on 27 February 1763. He was employed on the Sheerness and Medway defences until 1775, and promoted sub-engineer and lieutenant on 1 April 1771. On 1 March 1768, at St Nicholas's, Rochester, Kent, he married Ann, second daughter of Peter Wade of Rushford Manor, Eythorne, Kent, rector of Cooling, vicar of Boughton Monchelsea, and minor canon of Rochester Cathedral. They had five sons and three daughters. 
In late 1775 Mann was sent to Dominica, West Indies. He was promoted engineer-extraordinary and captain-lieutenant on 2 March 1777. He commanded a militia detachment when the island was invaded by the French in September 1778. The little garrison resisted but were outnumbered, and surrendered on honourable terms. Mann was a prisoner of war for a few months, and on 19 August 1779 he was appointed to the engineer staff of Great Britain. He then reported on the east coast defences. In 1781 he accompanied Colonel Braham, the chief engineer, on an inspection of the north-east coast of England to assess coastal defences, as seven corporations had petitioned on the subject. 
In 1785 Mann went to Quebec as commanding royal engineer in Canada. Promoted captain on 16 September, he was employed throughout the country on civil and military duties, planning against American invasion, erecting fortifications, improving ports, and laying out townships including Toronto and Sorel. In 1788 he reported to the governor, Guy Carleton, first Baron Dorchester, on military posts, harbours, and navigable river routes, showing the posts' faults and decline. 
Mann returned to Britain in 1791, and in June 1793 he joined the duke of York's army in the United Provinces. He was present at the sieges of Valenciennes (which capitulated on 28 July) and Dunkirk (from 24 August to 9 September), and at the battle of Hondschoote or Menin (12-15 September). He was promoted lieutenant-colonel on 5 December 1793. On his return to England in April 1794 he was briefly employed under the master-general of the ordnance in London, and then was again commanding royal engineer in Canada until 1804. Described by the colonial secretary, Lord Hobart, as 'an officer of so much merit and experience' (Kendall, 485), Mann reported on the St Lawrence canals and, understanding their commercial and military importance, proposed repairs and alterations. He also reported on the necessity of an adequate permanent defence system at Quebec, advocating more fortifications there, some of which were later constructed. From August 1801 until he left in 1804 he was the second most senior officer in Canada, and successfully requested brigadier's pay because of his additional duties. After his return to England he continued to be concerned with Canadian defence. His services in Canada were rewarded by a grant, on 22 July 1805, of 22,859 acres of land in the township of Acton in Lower Canada. Mann became colonel in the army on 26 January 1797, colonel in the Royal Engineers on 18 August 1797, and major-general on 25 September 1803. From 1805 until 1811 he was employed on particular services in Ireland and on various committees in London. On 13 July 1805 he was made a colonel-commandant of the corps of Royal Engineers; on 25 July 1810 he became lieutenant-general, and on 19 July 1821 general. From 23 July 1811 until his death he was inspector-general of fortifications. In February 1815, on behalf of officers of the Royal Engineers, he protested to the earl of Mulgrave, master-general of the ordnance, at the paucity of honours awarded to them at the end of the war, alleging it cast a stigma on the honour and reputation of the corps. To the inspector-general's responsibilities were added in 1822, at Wellington's instigation, the construction and maintenance of barracks in the United Kingdom. Mann was offered a baronetcy, but declined it as he lacked the financial resources to support it. He was appointed president of the committee to examine cadets for commissions on 19 May 1828. He died on 27 March 1830 at Lewisham, Kent, and was buried in the churchyard at Plumstead, Kent. 
Of Mann's sons, Gother served in the artillery, Cornelius in the engineers, John in the 28th regiment, and Frederick William in the marines and later in the staff corps. Cornelius's son William Mann (1817-1873) was an astronomer. Plans by Gother Mann are in the British Library and Canadian archives. 


@@@@@


doc= 17945


Mann, Sir Horatio, first baronet (bap. 1706, d. 1786), diplomatist, was baptized on 25 August 1706, the second son of Robert Mann (1678-1751), a successful London merchant, and his wife, Eleanor (1680-1752), the daughter and heir of Christopher Guise of Abbot's Court, Gloucestershire. He had an elder brother, Edward Louisa Mann (1702-1775), a younger twin brother, Galfridus (1706-1756), and two younger brothers, James (died 1764) and Robert (1708-1755). He also had four sisters, of whom the eldest, Eleanor (died 1789), married Sir John Torriano; Mary married Benjamin Hatley Foote and Catherine (died 1776) married Foote's brother the Revd Francis Hender Foote. 
Mann studied at Eton College in 1718 and about 1720 moved briefly to Clare College, Cambridge. Ill health may have forced him to leave before he took a degree. Although he was never strong, later in life he took solace in hypochondria. His early years were spent in Chelsea, though little is known of his interests. His father purchased an estate in Linton, Kent, where he built a house about 1730 and established himself as 'a fully qualified country squire' ('DNB'). Seeking a climate which would better suit his health, Mann travelled to Italy, and took the extreme precaution of transporting a coffin with him. He is first recorded in March 1732 in Naples, where he stayed for at least a year. There he purchased marble tables, presumably for Linton, and other 'sundry things' (Ingamells, 42). He travelled north with Lady Grisell Baillie and was in Rome by April 1733, in Padua in June, and in Venice a month later. His companion may have taken him to Florence for the first time in April 1733. 
In 1737 Mann visited The Hague, but by 3 February the following year he had become 'well known and esteemed by the ministers' in his capacity as assistant to Charles Fane, the British resident in Florence (TNA: PRO, SP 98/40, fol. 239). On Fane's return to England in April 1740 Mann took over his duties. He owed his rapid promotion to Sir Robert Walpole, to whom he was distantly related (their great-great-grandmothers had been sisters), and through his influence, and later the support of his son Horace, he steadily gained professional and social advancement. He remained the British representative in Florence until his death, and was appointed envoy on 13 December 1765 and envoy-extraordinary and minister-plenipotentiary on 29 January 1782. He was rewarded with a baronetcy on 3 March 1755 and was invested a knight in the Order of the Bath with much ceremony in 1768. 
As Britain had no diplomatic representation in the Papal States, it was Mann's responsibility to report on the whereabouts of the Stuarts. Consequently his official duties were more onerous during the early part of his career. There was a certain amount of rivalry with other British informants, who included Baron Stosch, alias John Walton, Cardinal Alessandro Albani, and Burrington Goldsworthy, the consul at Leghorn. During the War of the Austrian Succession in the early 1740s Mann was asked to advise on the movement of the British fleet in the Mediterranean. Charles Edward Stuart escaped Italy to lead the Jacobite rising in Scotland in 1745, at which time Mann's dispatches became excitable and his concern for detail tiresome. A lack of proportion ultimately prevented him from becoming a diplomat of distinction. Geniality was his real gift and, as Edward Gibbon wrote, his 'most serious business was that of entertaining the English at his hospitable table' (E. Gibbon, 'Memoirs of my Life', ed. G. A. Bonnard, 1966, 134). 
Mann kept open house for all British visitors, and they continually report his kindness. As one writer put it, 'his physiognomy speaks his goodness & politeness which is sometimes carried to excess' (Ingamells, 635). He accommodated guests in Casa Ambrogi and, when there was no performance at the theatre on a Saturday night, he held 'conversazione' at his residence, the Palazzo Manetti. According to Alexander Drummond: 'all the apartments on the ground-floor... were lighted up, and the garden was a little epitome of Vauxhall. These little conversazione resemble our card-assemblies; and this one was remarkably brilliant, for all the married ladies of fashion in Florence were there. (Drummond, 40-41)' Mann's kindness was universally acknowledged, perhaps most admiringly by John Boyle, fifth earl of Cork and Orrery, who wrote: 'he does honour to our nation. He lives elegantly and generously. He never fails in any point of civility and kindness to his countrymen. The politeness of his manners, and the prudence of his conduct, are shining examples both to the Britons and Italians. He is the only person I have ever known, whom all Englishmen agree in praising. He has the art of conquering our prejudices, and taming our fierceness. (J. Boyle, 'Letters from Italy in the Years 1754 and 1755', 1773, 107-8)' The importance of Mann for the historian is the letters -- almost 1800 of them -- to and from Sir Horace Walpole. Walpole met Mann when he first visited Florence in December 1739, and their friendship blossomed, even though, as Mann never left Florence, they never met again after April 1741. Perhaps Walpole's hold over Mann was sexual, and the correspondence was fed by Mann's toadying and Walpole's desire to have a sympathetic, and resilient, ear. The character of the British resident is best presented by William, second Earl Fitzwilliam, who wrote that: 'Sir Horace is the most finical man in the world: if you speak a little loud, he can't bear it, it hurts his nerves, he dies -- and he v-m-ts if you eat your petite patee before your soup; take him as he is, without the least notice, he is perfect character for the stage. He has been so long out of England, that he had lost the manliness of an Englishman, and has borrowed the effeminacy of Italy. But with all his little airs, he is a good kind of man, and is very civil. (Fitzwilliam MSS)' His close friendships with the homosexual painter Thomas Patch and the effete John, second Earl Tylney, adds weight to this description. None the less, after his death in Florence, on 16 November 1786, the 'conversazione' were missed. One visitor, George Baillie, wrote, 'Florence is a dull Town no Society for Eng: since the death of Sir H. Mann' (Ingamells, 636). 
To supplement his considerable entertaining expenses Mann dealt to a limited extent in paintings and antiquities, but, unlike some of his contemporaries, he lacked a concerted interest in science or music. In his later years his post was coveted by George, third Earl Cowper, who, with privileged access to the grand duke, had a clear diplomatic advantage over Mann. However, higher authorities ignored Cowper's offer to replace Mann, and after his death the residency was filled by John Augustus Hervey. 
Mann was buried on his estate at Linton, Kent, which he had inherited from his elder brother, Edward, in 1755. The baronetcy devolved on his nephew Horatio Mann (1744-1814), politician, the son of his twin brother, Galfridus, and the title became extinct at his death on 2 April 1814. The property passed to the Right Revd James Cornwallis, bishop of Lichfield and fourth Earl Cornwallis, who had married Mann's youngest niece, Catherine (1742-1811), the daughter of Galfridus Mann and the sister of the younger Horatio Mann. 


@@@@@


doc= 17946


Mann, Nicholas (bap. 1680?, d. 1753), theological writer, was born in Tewkesbury and was probably the son of John and Margaret Mann who was baptized in Tewkesbury on 2 January 1680. He was admitted a king's scholar at Eton College in April 1695, aged about fourteen, and proceeded to King's College, Cambridge, where he matriculated in 1700. He was elected fellow, at a very young age, in 1702 and graduated BA in 1704 and MA in 1707. At Cambridge he was a companion of the first marquess of Blandford, which led Francis, second earl of Godolphin, to appoint him private tutor to his son William Godolphin, Viscount Railton, later marquess of Blandford and heir to the Marlborough estates. He later became an assistant master at Eton and then one of the clerks in the secretary's office under Lord Townshend. He travelled in France and Italy; by 1722 he was in Florence with his former pupil Richard Rawlinson and William Bromley, and he remained abroad for several years. On his return he was appointed king's waiter at the custom house and keeper of the standing wardrobe at Windsor. 
Through the influence of Lord Godolphin, Mann was elected master of the Charterhouse, London, on 19 August 1737, against the opposition of Dr Conyers Middleton. At his institution he is said to have shocked the archbishop of Canterbury, Thomas Newton, by professing himself an Arian. This is certainly borne out by the views on Christ's divinity expressed in his 'Critical notes on some passages of scripture comparing them with the most ancient versions, and restoring them to their original reading, or true sense', published anonymously in 1747, in which he criticizes the Athanasian creed in contrast to the apostles' creed. His treatise drew an immediate response in 'The Scripture Testimonies of the Divinity of Jesus Christ Compared' (1747), whose author described Mann as one of 'the modern Socinians' and accused him of peddling 'learned mischief'. Mann's other work was 'Of the True Years of the Birth and of the Death of Christ: Two Chronological Dissertations' (1733; Latin version, with additions, 1742 and 1752), which he was prompted to write because of the criticisms of Newton's 'Chronology'. He was also an antiquary and made copious annotations on his copy of Roger Gale's 'Antonini iter', which found its way into Richard Gough's possession. 
Mann, who does not appear to have been greatly liked at the Charterhouse, did not leave his mark on either the hospital or the school beyond his own epitaph, which was affixed over the chapel door -- perhaps prudently -- several years before his death at Bath on 24 November 1753. He was buried in the piazza at the Charterhouse and, apparently unmarried, left his property to his sisters, Mary and Margaret Mann, both of whom were still living in Tewkesbury. He bequeathed several items, including a portrait of the late earl of Wilmington, a governor of the hospital, to the Charterhouse, and to Eton College he left his manuscripts, except those of his own works, and his printed books. 


@@@@@


doc= 17947


Mann, Robert James (1817-1886), medical practitioner and writer on science, was born in Norwich on 5 January 1817, the second of four children and only son of James Mann ('c'.1787-1820/21), watchmaker and jeweller, and his wife, Elizabeth Hilling of Horstead, Norfolk. He was four when his father died, leaving his mother in straitened circumstances. As a result he was brought up by an aunt and uncle in London until about 1830, thereafter in Norfolk. Apart from a little education at a school in London, mostly from the Latin master, the only competent teacher, he was self-taught. He had a craving for books and became especially interested in botany, geology, and the physical sciences. At seventeen Mann was apprenticed to the surgeon of the Norwich Dispensary. Then, in September 1837, he enrolled at University College, London, where he studied anatomy, physiology, medicine, surgery, midwifery, obstetrics, botany, and medical jurisprudence and, for part of 1840, dressed for the professor of clinical surgery, Robert Liston. He became a licentiate of the Society of Apothecaries on 16 April 1840 and a member of the Royal College of Surgeons on 26 June 1840. That same year the first of his many publications appeared, a list of central Norfolk's flowering plants, published in the 'Natural History Magazine'. 
From 1840 to 1853 Mann made his living in Norfolk as a general practitioner and surgeon, first in Norwich (from the autumn of 1840 for about a year), then in the village of Buxton (until 1849), and finally in Aylsham, where, on 1 October 1850, he married Charlotte Elizabeth ('b'. 1822/3), daughter of the Revd John Neville White of Tivetshall, Norfolk. In the autumn of 1853 he turned to writing as his principal means of livelihood but continued his medical profession on a casual basis. To help alleviate his wife's chest ailments, he chose to spend the next few winters and springs at Ventnor, Isle of Wight, the summers and autumns in Norfolk. He qualified as a physician by gaining, on 27 March 1854, his MD from the University of St Andrews. 
At Buxton Mann developed an interest in astronomy. He published 'The Planetary and Stellar Universe' (his first book) in 1845 and soon afterwards built his own observatory. His second book, on elementary chemistry, appeared in 1848 and 'The Book of Health', a volume in 'Gleig's School Series', followed in 1850. While at Aylsham he published further works on astronomy and, in 1851, the first of his many articles for 'Chambers's Edinburgh Journal'. At Ventnor he became friendly with the poet laureate, Alfred Tennyson, who sanctioned and approved a sketch he published in 1856, 'Tennyson's 'Maud' Vindicated: an Explanatory Essay'. Also at Ventnor he wrote the first of his many articles for the 'Edinburgh Review'. 
In October 1857, at the invitation of Dr John Colenso, bishop of Natal, Mann became lay head of Colenso's missionary station near Pietermaritzburg and a teacher of medical and scientific subjects. He found the work frustrating and was greatly relieved when, in July 1859, the lieutenant-governor of Natal appointed him the colony's superintendent of education. When he returned to England on secondment in March 1866, he left a system of public education which proved effective and enduring, a legacy of his diligence and zeal and his ability to manage limited means carefully. While in Natal he had taken up photography, pursued his interest in astronomy, served as a director of the Natal Bank for several years, organized the Natal court at the London Exhibition of 1862, and had written many books and articles, some of them about Natal, others educational. Encouraged by Sir John Herschel he had taken up meteorology. He observed the weather methodically from early 1858 to early 1866, returned his records to the meteorological department of the Board of Trade, and published a number of works on the climate of Natal. 
Back in England Mann served as emigration agent for Natal until 1869, when the colony's legislative council closed his office. He thereupon resigned as superintendent of education, remained in London, and devoted the rest of his life to scientific and literary pursuits. He organized scientific exhibitions and published many articles of a popular nature, the majority intended for young people. He belonged to the Photographic Society from 1866 to 1878 and served on its council for several years. He joined the Meteorological Society in 1867 and served it as president from 1873 to 1875. He served the Society of Arts as secretary of its African (later foreign and colonial) section from 1874 to 1886. He was elected a fellow of the Royal Astronomical Society in 1855, the Royal Geographical Society in 1866, and the Royal College of Surgeons in 1878. 
Mann's enthusiasm for Natal never waned and he was, indeed, immediately before his death, busy preparing the catalogue of the Natal court for the Colonial and Indian Exhibition held in London in 1886. He suffered a seizure on 2 August 1886 and died two days later at his home, 5 Kingsdown Villas, Bolingbroke Grove, Wandsworth, London, where he had lived since 1870. Thus passed a man who was kindly, honest, unselfish, and modest. He was buried in Kensal Green cemetery on 9 August and his estate passed entirely to his widow, there being no offspring of the marriage. 


@@@@@


doc= 17948


Mann, Theodore Augustine (1735-1809), natural philosopher and historian, was born in Yorkshire on 22 June 1735, the son of a land surveyor. He was educated at a local school and instructed in scientific principles by his father. In 1753 he was sent to London to be educated in the law, but he ran away to Paris in the following year. Since the age of fifteen he had been of deist opinions, but in Paris his reading and re-reading of Bossuet's 'Discours sur l'histoire universelle' brought him to the Roman Catholic faith. He was received into the Catholic church on 4 May 1756 by the archbishop of Paris. 
At the outbreak of hostilities with France, Mann travelled to Spain. He joined a regiment in Spanish service and after some months obtained leave to spend a year at the military academy in Barcelona, where he resolved to seek a life more conducive to study. In 1758 he accordingly entered the English Charterhouse in Nieuwpoort, on the Flemish coast, where he was professed on 13 October 1759 and ordained priest on 20 September 1760. Until elected prior in 1764 Mann could dedicate himself to study for thirteen hours each day, and later described these years as the happiest of his life. He made extensive notes on his reading of the 'Bible' and patristic literature, and translated devotional and apologetical works, including St Eucherius's 'De contemptu mundi' and Caraccioli's 'L'univers enigmatique'. He also wrote an English treatise on phonetics and a French tract explaining Newton's theory of gravitation. After 1764 his responsibilities as prior allowed him less time for study. 
Mann was increasingly absent from February 1774, when he was elected to the Imperial and Royal Academy in Brussels, of which his friend John Turberville Needham was director. In July 1775 he submitted a petition for exclaustration so that he could take up more permanent residence in Brussels. In 1776 the British government sought to have him appointed co-adjutor bishop of Quebec, and in Brussels the chancellor of Brabant (M. de Crumpipen), the chief-president of the privy council (count de Neny), and the minister-plenipotentiary (Prince Starhemberg) sought Maria Theresa's influence to expedite his secularization and retain him in the Netherlands. He was released from his monastic vows on 10 May 1777 and settled in Brussels as a secular priest on 5 June. On 28 July he was made a canon of the church of Our Lady in Kortrijk, with dispensation from residence. 
Mann was one of the most active members of the academy and contributed numerous treatises on such subjects as meteorology, fire prevention, fluid dynamics, natural history, agriculture and fisheries, population, political economy, antiquities, universal history, and moral philosophy. Many were published individually or in 'Memoires de l'Academie de Bruxelles' (5 vols., 1777-88). At the academy's request he compiled 'Tables des monnaies, poids et mesures anciennes et modernes de diverses nations' (1788). 
Three aspects of Mann's academic labours deserve further notice. Firstly he provided the earliest reliable series of meteorological observations from the Austrian Netherlands. Secondly some have seen an early, populationist, formulation of the 'Malthusian law' in Mann's considerations of the best ways to stimulate demographic growth within the constraints of agricultural productivity (Harsin, 155-9). Thirdly his work on fluid dynamics led to practical proposals for drainage and an official survey of the canals of the Austrian Netherlands. 
From 1777 to 1783 Mann was heavily involved in government studies on canalization, agriculture, fisheries, and education. For proposed educational reforms he not only drafted reports and recommendations but was also commissioned to write schoolbooks. His textbooks on the natural sciences went through several editions. Preparatory to Joseph II's ecclesiastical reforms, Starhemberg commissioned a revision of Mann's 'Reflexions sur la religion' (1778), a statement of the principles of the Cisalpine position. Such involvement in government projects came to an abrupt end with the resignations of Starhemberg and de Neny in 1783. In 1784 Mann embarked on a year-long scientific tour of France, Switzerland, and Germany in the company of the papal nuncio. 
Besides writing academic treatises, government reports, and schoolbooks Mann was a contributor to the 'Gentleman's Magazine', the 'Journal des Scavans', and 'L'Esprit des Journaux', and edited numerous works for the general public, including a children's encyclopaedia, a geographical dictionary, a horticultural dictionary, histories of the reign of Maria Theresa and of the voyages of discovery (with particular emphasis on those of Cook), and a civil, ecclesiastical, and natural history of Brussels. A treatise against theatre-going, 'Le pour et contre les spectacles' (1782), has sometimes been attributed to him. 
In April 1787 Mann was called to the deathbed of Anthony Joseph Browne, seventh Viscount Montagu, then resident in Brussels, to reconcile him to the Catholic church and 'to make his dying sentiments known to the world' -- which he did, in the 'Gentleman's Magazine', leading to a heated correspondence in that journal. In June he became perpetual secretary of the Brussels academy, responsible for its archives and correspondence. In the following years he achieved election to the Royal Society, long his dearest wish, and to the learned societies of Mannheim, Milan, Rotterdam, Middelburg, and Richmond, Virginia, and to the Society of Antiquaries and the board of agriculture. 
During the Brabant revolution of 1789-90 Mann remained in the Netherlands, ensuring that the academy survived the change of regime and, with greater difficulty, the first Austrian restoration of 1790. In 1791 he was again brought into projects for educational reform, and was appointed to the Commission for Studies, the board of education of the Austrian Netherlands, as one of two commissioners whose role was more than advisory. 
At the French invasion of November 1792 Mann was evacuated by Lord Elgin. Given refuge in Downing Street he composed treatises to provide the ministry with general intelligence on the Austrian Netherlands. He returned to Brussels in April 1793, at the second restoration, and resumed his work for the academy and the Commission for Studies, but was forced to flee a final time in June 1794, at the second French invasion. Moving on in turn from Roermond, Paderborn, Bamberg, Regensburg, and Linz before the advancing revolutionary armies, he reached Prague late in 1797. He sought permission to return to England in the following year but was refused leave to depart from Austrian territory. Being at that time entirely dependent on an imperial pension he was obliged to remain in Prague, where he resumed his literary activities. He wrote a treatise on the agriculture of the Austrian Netherlands and compiled a 'Table chronologique de l'histoire universelle' for the years 1700-1803. His life's work, 'Principes metaphysiques des etres et des connoissances', was printed at Vienna in 1807. He had sent the English manuscript to the British Museum in 1801, when he feared his death was imminent (BL, Add. MS 5794). He died at Prague on 23 February 1809. 
Mann was known and respected in learned circles throughout Europe for his broad erudition, while in the Austrian Netherlands his reputation and influence were out of all proportion to his achievements. The main concerns of his own investigations were moral philosophy, metaphysics, and fluid dynamics. More importantly his writings increased knowledge of Newton's physics, Cook's voyages, and Cisalpine ecclesiology at every level of French-speaking society. 


@@@@@


doc= 17949


Mann, William (1817-1873), astronomer, was born on 25 October 1817 at Lewisham, Kent, the third son of Major-General Cornelius Mann RE. He was educated privately and in 1830 went with his family to Gibraltar, where his father had been appointed commander of the Royal Engineers. Regulations prevented him from following an elder brother into the engineers' college, as he had wished, and he obtained the post of second assistant at the Royal Observatory, Cape of Good Hope, under Thomas Maclear, where he arrived, after preliminary training, on 22 October 1839. Maclear intended to remeasure the meridian arc surveyed by the French astronomer Lacaille in 1751-3, as its accuracy was now in doubt; Mann took out some of the apparatus necessary for this task, which required a base-line to be measured with great precision, from where a series of distant points were to be triangulated along a north-south meridian, its ends astronomically surveyed for latitude. Mann was engaged on this task for six years, often working in remote areas without proper provisions or shelter. 
In 1846 Mann was promoted to first assistant in place of Charles Piazzi Smyth, who was appointed astronomer at the Royal Observatory, Edinburgh. A few months later he fell from his horse, suffering head injuries which plagued him for the remainder of his life. After a few months' leave in England to recuperate, he returned to take up the duties of an astronomer. In October 1852 he again travelled to London, where he learned the mechanical details of a new transit circle being constructed by Troughton and Simms and supervised its packing for the journey to the Cape. He arrived back in December 1853. The cases containing the new circle reached the Cape early in 1854, and Mann directed its erection and adjustment. Mann's dedication and efficiency had by this time so impressed Maclear that in 1854 he was permitted to marry Caroline, the Maclears' second daughter. 
In 1863 Mann declined the post of government astronomer at Sydney, perhaps hoping that the astronomer royal, George Biddell Airy, would support Maclear's wish that Mann should succeed him at the Cape. But Airy was unwilling to concede what he saw as nepotism, and when Maclear finally resigned, in 1870, Mann was considered too old, and perhaps too unwell, to embark on the long-desired major project, a catalogue of southern stars. He had sought relief from a chest infection in Natal in 1866 and in England in 1867. In 1870 an epidemic of scarlet fever struck the observatory families; two of Mann's children succumbed and Mann himself was grievously ill. He was belatedly elected to the Royal Astronomical Society in March 1871. He retired in 1872 and died at Claremont, near Cape Town, on 30 April 1873. A small civil-list pension, which had been granted shortly before his death, was paid to his widow for three years. 
Mann was perhaps unfortunate in not having the opportunity for advancement. Maclear's opinion of him had been voiced during his absence in 1846: 'His powerful intellect, unflinching integrity, and his industry enable me to trust him with confidence on all occasions and in every department, whether at the observatory or on the triangulation, being certain that whatever is practicable he will accomplish, and that what he does will be sure to be well done. (Warner, 62)' 



@@@@@


doc= 17950


Manners, Charles, fourth duke of Rutland (1754-1787), politician, was born on 15 March 1754, the second but first surviving son of John Manners, marquess of Granby (1721-1770), an army officer, and his wife, Lady Frances Seymour (1728-1761), the daughter of Charles Seymour, sixth duke of Somerset. He was styled Lord Roos from 1760, and marquess of Granby after his father's death, during the lifetime of his grandfather John, the third duke. 
Like his father, Manners was educated at Eton College (1762-71) and Trinity College, Cambridge, where he was credited with pamphlets on the mortality of the soul and in defence of modern adultery. He obtained a nobleman's MA in 1774. That year, hastening back from France, and not yet of age, he was returned to parliament unopposed as member for his university. His family had electoral interests in Cambridge, town and county, as well as in Leicestershire, Nottingham, and Scarborough. While maintaining these, Manners began collecting books, furniture, porcelain, and pictures by old masters, including Rubens, Van Dyck, and Dou, as well as Poussin's 'Sacraments', to embellish Belvoir Castle. In this Sir Joshua Reynolds, from whom he commissioned family portraits, was also one of his agents; others were stationed in Rome and Brussels. Credited with honouring a pledge to redeem his father's substantial debts, he was snagged by his habitual gambling. His extravagance was not tempered by his marriage on 26 December 1775 to a celebrated beauty, Lady Mary Isabella Somerset (1756-1831) ['see 'Manners, Mary Isabella], the daughter of Charles Noel Somerset, fourth duke of Beaufort ['see under 'Somerset, Henry, second duke of Beaufort], which had been arranged by her mother, Elizabeth Berkeley; it produced four sons and two daughters. Having previously seduced the daughter of one Smith, an Eton shopkeeper, he later indulged, according to Sir Nathaniel Wraxall, in an expensive fling with the singer Mrs Elizabeth Billington, nee Weichsel (1765-1818). 
Before he entered parliament, Granby had already committed himself to the opposition to Lord North's ministry, adhering at first to the Rockingham whigs. On 5 April 1775, having acted only as an observer until he came of age, he spoke and voted against legislative restrictions on the trade of the southern American colonies. This maiden speech sparkled with defiance, particularly when Richard Rigby provoked him into arguing that rebellion was acceptable when justice was at stake; his speech praised Lord Chatham, who wrote to thank him. It also earned the admiration of Chatham's son William Pitt, whom he befriended, and who visited him at his then abode at Cheveley, near Newmarket. Horace Walpole maintained that Granby's parliamentary debut was 'a great disappointment' to the court. Lord Mansfield, whose wife was sister to the duchess of Somerset, Lord Granby's grandmother, had flattered himself he should govern Lord Granby, and 'had even answered for him to the Court' ('Last Journals', 1.455). Granby could not overcome his diffidence when invited by Lord Rockingham to move the amendment to the address in November 1775. His refusal was probably reinforced by a wish not to commit himself exclusively to Rockingham. 
Granby nevertheless seconded the amendment on 18 November 1776 and moved it on 18 November 1777 in a speech that echoed Chatham's in the Lords and urged reconciliation with America. His motion was lost by 243 votes to 86. He was subsequently regarded by North and others as a suitable intermediary for ministerial overtures to the concerted opposition, but George III discouraged any such negotiation. Granby and his squad again displayed opposition on the question of Admiral Keppel's conduct on 3 March 1779, but did not follow this through; his brother Lord Robert Manners (1758-1782), a naval officer, was later killed in action. No further speeches at Westminster are recorded, even after Granby succeeded to the dukedom on 29 May 1779. Having offered to raise a regiment for home defence against the French, he had become colonel of the Leicestershire militia, and on 9 July 1779 he was made lord lieutenant of Leicestershire at North's suggestion. The king thought it best to bestow this on him in person. Failing to procure William Pitt's succession to his university constituency, Rutland at once obtained another seat for him pro tem, promising to return him for one of his own boroughs in future, with complete freedom of action. Meanwhile he attended the Yorkshire reform meeting of 30 December 1779 and supported reform at a Cambridge election meeting in 1780, when he returned six members to parliament. Later that year he guaranteed financial security for Pitt. 
The replacement of North's ministry, first by Rockingham's, then by Shelburne's ministry, brightened Rutland's political prospects. He was made a knight of the Garter on 30 October 1782 and was rumoured to be the intended viceroy of Ireland. Instead he became lord steward of the household and was sworn of the privy council on 17 February 1783, Shelburne thereby gratifying his wish for a cabinet seat. This appointment aroused the king's displeasure and was an unprecedented concession to a lord steward. It precipitated the duke of Grafton's resignation from the ministry, which soon collapsed. Rutland's real attachment was by now to Pitt, with whose young friends he consorted. After resigning in April 1783 with Shelburne, whose elevation to a marquessate he was to promote a year later, he opposed the Fox-North coalition ministry. When Pitt became premier in December 1783 he at once appointed Rutland, upon Grafton's refusal, lord privy seal, in the cabinet, which at first met at his town house. Then on 11 February 1784 Pitt made him viceroy of Ireland, an appointment worth a basic $20,000, which had been declined by Lord Cornwallis. 
Rutland's acceptance of this post, while still under thirty, was perhaps a 'faux pas', but his admiration for Pitt's superior abilities, no less than Pitt's confidence in him, swamped any scruples. After making his will on 15 February, he took office in Dublin on the 24th. His correspondence with the premier reveals his initial enthusiasm for Pitt's Irish policy, which, he saw, logically entailed Anglo-Irish union within twenty years, but also his growing doubts about its implementation. Soon after his arrival his staff became embroiled in an affray with dissidents in Dublin, which he successfully suppressed, though he was threatened with tarring and feathering, as a contemporary caricature illustrates. He foresaw problems from Irish Foxite whigs with English connections, one of whom, Leinster, the only Irish duke, tended towards opposition, while another, Lord Bristol, bishop of Derry, advocated Catholic enfranchisement. Pitt's reformist views, Rutland feared, would panic the Irish establishment, and the Irish administration would exercise its borough patronage network to retain control of a Dublin parliament which had enjoyed a degree of independence since 1782. When Pitt proposed giving precedence to reform at Westminster, where Rutland had secured two additional nominees in 1784, Rutland was relieved, perhaps more so when reform was checked there in 1785. 
As Rutland was recovering from a dangerous fever late in 1784, Pitt was advancing ambitious plans for a commercial entente with Ireland, involving significant concessions to Irish trade in exchange for a guaranteed contribution to the defence of the realm. The leaders of the Irish parliamentary opposition, Henry Grattan and Henry Flood, could not be reconciled to this guarantee unless it was conditional on the amount of the annual Irish revenue surplus from the crown's hereditary Irish funds; with this proviso conceded, the Irish parliament assented in February 1785. In England, however, the commercial opposition to concessions to Irish trade was taken up by the Foxite opposition in parliament, and the proposals were so much amended that Grattan secured their rejection in the Dublin parliament in August. Later Pitt's intentions were better appreciated in Ireland, and Rutland did not face such trying opposition again, or unrest, except for the desultory disturbances of the Whiteboys in Munster, which he countered with a tour of southern Ireland late in 1785. It had, however, demoralized his chief secretary, Thomas Orde, who had to be cajoled into staying put, and whose subsequent ill health was to dash hopes of legislation improving educational provision in Ireland. 
Rutland's increasing popularity as viceroy was bought at a price, and not only in terms of the Irish and English patronage requirements which henceforward dominated his correspondence with Pitt, for evidence of his lavish conviviality abounds. Sir Jonah Barrington recalled 'The utmost magnificence signalled the entertainments of the viceregal court, and the duke and duchess were reckoned the handsomest couple in Ireland' (Barrington, 'Historic Memoirs of Ireland', 2 vols., 1833, 2.225). He was to be credited with a record for dining out unequalled by his viceregal successors. His last recorded scruple, of which he informed Pitt regretfully on 10 April 1787, was his inability, because of a pledge made in 1782, to rally his parliamentary henchmen to the ministry's problematic bid to settle the prince of Wales's debts. In the summer of 1787 he embarked on a strenuous tour of the midlands and north of Ireland. He left a brief journal of this, though he was allegedly seldom sober during it: his claret consumption was well established, and he was reported to have consumed six or seven turkey eggs at breakfast every day. These excesses were generally regarded as having hastened his death, of incurable liver disease, after a violent fever, at Phoenix Park Lodge, Dublin, on 24 October 1787. He was embalmed, and buried at Bottesford, Leicestershire, on 25 November. George Crabbe, his domestic chaplain at Belvoir since 1782, and his praise singer in verse, pronounced a funeral oration (also published), and his former Cambridge tutor Bishop Richard Watson eulogized him in the Lords on 27 November 1787. Pitt, to whom he left $3000, was one of his trustees and the guardian of his children. Some of his acquisitions were lost in a fire at Belvoir in 1815. 


@@@@@


doc= 17951


Manners, Charles Cecil John, sixth duke of Rutland (1815-1888), politician, born in Lower Grosvenor Street, London, on 16 May 1815, was the third but eldest surviving son of John Henry, fifth duke of Rutland (1778-1857), and his wife, Lady Elizabeth Howard (1780-1825), daughter of the fifth earl of Carlisle. He was styled marquess of Granby from birth until his father's death in 1857. He was educated at Eton College (1829-32) and as a nobleman at Trinity College, Cambridge, matriculating in 1832 and being made MA in 1835. He was elected as a tory as one of the members for Stamford in 1837 (he and his fellow tory candidate received 200 and 201 votes respectively, their Liberal opponent 1) and held the seat unopposed until his last election, in 1847, when he still won comfortably though there was a Liberal revival. In 1852 he moved to North Leicestershire, where he was unopposed. 
Granby was a pronounced and voluble protectionist. He lacked the interest and ability of his brother, Lord John Manners (later seventh duke of Rutland, died 1906), but moved on the fringe of the Young England group of which his brother was a leader. His present wealth and future dukedom meant that his tory colleagues had to bear with him; 'it is idle to pretend', wrote Robert Blake, that he 'was other than a stick' (Blake, 262). He was a lord of the bedchamber to Prince Albert in 1843-6, his only political office. His opportunity for power came in 1848, when Lord George Bentinck resigned as leader of the protectionists. Granby was elected on 10 February, but gave up on 4 March, 'conscious of his own inadequacy' (Blake, 262), and no successor could be found; for a time the tory party had no leader in the Commons. Granby then formed part of a trio of leadership with Disraeli (then unpopular with his colleagues) and J. C. Herries, an arrangement concocted by Stanley to allow Disraeli, when Granby inherited the dukedom, to become leader. Disraeli had considerable contempt for Granby and the arrangement was always at best uneasy. Granby resigned from the trio early in 1852. Despite the low opinion held of him by many of his colleagues, and his tendency to break down in debate, Granby was included in the various plans for office. However, when Lord Derby (as Stanley had become) formed a minority tory government in February 1852, Granby declined to join it, but became lord lieutenant of Lincolnshire, Charles Greville remarking that the appointment 'will probably have the effect of stopping his mouth, if it does not remove his discontent' (GEC, 'Peerage', 11.272). 
Granby's significance in the leadership of his party rapidly declined from this point. He replaced Lincolnshire with Leicestershire as his lord lieutenancy in 1857, the year in which he succeeded his father as duke of Rutland, and was made KG in 1867. His father had forbidden him to marry Lady Forester, for whom he 'nourished a hopeless passion' (Vincent, 348). He was known as 'a splendid rider to hounds' ('DNB') and never lost the conviction that protection, and especially agricultural protection, was the answer to all ills. Disabled by gout in his later years, he died, unmarried, at his seat, Belvoir Castle, on 4 March 1888, and was buried in the mausoleum there. 


@@@@@


doc= 17952


Manners, Edward, third earl of Rutland (1549-1587), magnate, was born on 12 July 1549, the eldest son of Henry Manners, second earl of Rutland (1526-1563), and Margaret Neville (died 1559). His education befitted a nobleman. His father's death from the plague in 1563 made him the queen's ward, and his education was continued by William Cecil, to whom he said he was greatly beholden. In his teenage years he accompanied Queen Elizabeth on her visit to Cambridge in 1564 where he was lodged in St John's College. At Oxford in October 1566 a committee was established to award him an honorary MA on account of his 'singular benevolence', although it is unclear whether the degree was conferred. 
As a nobleman with extensive northern estates, Rutland was sent with his tenants to assist Sussex against the 1569 northern insurgents, and served as lieutenant-general of footmen. He was called 'into council whenever they treat of any matter' and praised for his courage and forwardness. On his return Sadler said to Cecil: 'God has given him good parts and you have instructed him in honesty, it were a pity they should sleep in him for lack of employment' ('CSP dom.', 'addenda', '1566-79', 163). He travelled in France between January and October 1571, sending Burghley his impressions. On his return he decided to marry Isabel Holcroft (1552-1605). Her mother wrote in January 1572 'she says that you will marry her whether I give anything or no' ('Rutland MSS', 1.96). A later rumour spoke of $4000 and 200 marks a year passing with a 'maid of the court'. The marriage took place in mid-1573. 
Rutland held no major office in a life shortened by illnesses which included gout. He was a member of the council of the north by 1574 but 'not bound to continued attendance unless required by the president' ('CSP dom.', 'addenda', '1566-79', 463). On 17 June 1577 he was appointed to the ecclesiastical commission for the north. The queen apparently thought highly of him, but he rarely went to court unless summoned, despite her expressed hopes of his service -- and the possibility that she had designated him as Sir Thomas Bromley's successor as lord chancellor in 1587. Made a knight of the Garter on 23 April 1584, he soon returned home despite letters telling him Elizabeth expected him at court. In 1585 his excuses were rejected and he had to attend the parliament. 
Rutland preferred life as a great magnate in his own country, occupied with the local defence of the realm, dividing his time between Belvoir and Newark, and serving as lord lieutenant (of Nottinghamshire by 1574 and of Lincolnshire by 1581) and commissioner for subsidies and musters. In 1571 he was feodary of the duchy of Lancaster for Nottingham and Derby, and he held the traditional family offices of constable of Nottingham Castle and warden of Sherwood Forest. Holles described him as 'That magnificent earl who kept an house like a Prince's Court' (Holles, 215). He kept great state and open hospitality at Belvoir, although his father's remarriage had severely diminished his resources; his stepmother, who lived until 1601, held much of the Rutland inheritance. He had to sell some manors, and was only starting to buy lands again just before his death. Much of his time was absorbed by estate management which included his interest in lead mining and cloth working. Despite his standing, he became embroiled in local feuds with Thomas Markham, John Foster, and the Talbots. He used his patronage for his many clients and 'his' towns and maintained local harmony as far as possible, occasionally arbitrating suits involving other nobles. His uncle, Roger Manners, served as his main link to the court and his brother John managed the northern estates, rebuilding Helmsley Castle and breeding great horses. 
Rutland was acutely sensitive to his honour. Contemporaries spoke of him as wise, learned, godly, and honourable. He was also a scholar, interested in legal matters rather than physical sports and pastimes, although in 1580 he acquitted himself well at the Westminster tilts. He was selected in 1586 as the 'man of honor' for the treaty with the Scots at Berwick. He was reluctant to go, and even more reluctant to stay when the Scots started raising difficulties, thinking his honour adversely affected. He stayed until 6 July when the treaty of Berwick was signed and then unwillingly went to court. The Babington plot had just broken, and on 21 September 1586 he was instructed to be at Westminster on the 27th and then to go to Fotheringhay to hear the queen of Scots's case. 
By early April 1587 Rutland was ill at Greenwich, and he died on the 14th of that month. James VI was said to be sorely grieved at his death. His funeral, at Bottesford, Leicestershire, on 15 May, was costly, and his death aggravated the family's financial problems. His only daughter, Elizabeth, inherited the barony of Ros, married Sir William Cecil, and died in 1591. Her son William, born in May or June 1590, was confirmed in the barony of Ros in 1616 and died in 1618. Rutland's brother John became fourth earl. The property division was complicated by the legacies which Edward had made to his wife. His executors were John himself, Roger, and Thomas Manners and Sir George Chaworth; but on John's own death on 24 February 1588 the others withdrew as executors, leaving Elizabeth, John's widow, the problems of both wills. In 1590 Garret Johnson was paid $200 for two tombs including four great pictures erected at Bottesford, Leicestershire, for Edward and John. 


@@@@@


doc= 17953


Manners, Francis, sixth earl of Rutland (1578-1632), nobleman, was the second son of John Manners, fourth earl of Rutland (died 1588), and Elizabeth (died 1595), daughter of Francis Charlton of Apley Castle, Shropshire; his elder brother was Roger Manners, fifth earl of Rutland (1576-1612). He was admitted to Christ's College, Cambridge, in 1595 and later travelled in France, Italy, and the empire before returning in 1600. With his elder brother he took part in the earl of Essex's plot in early 1601 and was imprisoned and fined 1000 marks. Following his release and the cancellation of his fine, he admitted to his uncle, John Manners of Haddon, that he was foolish, 'neither knowing that I went aboute nor the danger when I was in it' ('Rutland MSS', 1.374). He was admitted to the Inner Temple in November 1601. On 6 May 1602 he married Frances (died 1605), daughter of Henry Knyvet of Charlton, Wiltshire, and widow of Sir William Bevill. She gave birth to their only child, Katherine (1605-1649), in 1605 but later that year, probably in September, died of smallpox; their daughter later became Katherine MacDonnell. On 6 January 1605 Manners was created a knight of the Bath, in the same ceremony as Prince Charles. On 26 October 1608 he married Cecily (died 1653), daughter of John Tufton of Hothfield, Kent; as she was the wealthy widow of Sir Edward Hungerford, her nuptial agreement was negotiated by the lord chamberlain and approved by Manners's brother, the fifth earl. Subsequently, possibly under the influence of Cecily, a recusant, Francis Manners, his daughter, Katherine, and his sister, Frances (who married Lord Willoughby of Parham), were all to become Catholics. 
When Manners succeeded his brother as sixth earl of Rutland on 26 June 1612 he was already active in masques and tilts at court but he now turned to the improvement of his large inheritance. His lands were in Lincolnshire, where he was lord lieutenant until 23 January 1629, in Nottinghamshire, where he was constable of Nottingham Castle and warden of Sherwood Forest until April 1620, and in Leicestershire, where his favourite seat, Belvoir Castle, was visited by James I on six occasions. There were profitable ironworks on his estate at Rievaulx and other properties produced a surplus that enabled him to buy or lease new lands. He avoided costly new buildings on his estates but improved the facade of Belvoir Castle. When he lost a claim to the barony of Ros in a law suit, he was granted a hereditary title as Lord Ros of Hamlake in July 1616 and was installed as a knight of the Garter on 7 July. 
After his appointment as privy councillor on 6 April 1617, Rutland attended the king on his journey to Scotland. His career at court became linked to that of the royal favourite, Buckingham, after his marriage to Rutland's daughter, Katherine; there were initial obstacles, in her Catholicism and in the exorbitant financial settlement that the groom demanded, but when Katherine agreed 'for his sake and his mothers to be converted and to receive the communion this Easter' ('Letters of John Chamberlain', 2.301), and a less onerous financial arrangement was accepted, they were married on 16 May 1620. At the opening of parliament on 30 January 1621 Rutland bore the cap of maintenance and at his son-in-law's request he was later, in April 1623, appointed admiral of the fleet to carry Prince Charles and the infanta to England. However this 'Spanish match' had failed, much to Rutland's dismay, prior to the fleet's departure in September, so that he brought back an embittered entourage. When the House of Lords was in session in March 1624 he cast the only dissenting vote when the declaration of the Commons annulling the treaties with Spain was put to the question. Later, on 20 May, in the petition of the Commons to the king denouncing the Catholics 'charged with places of trust' in the shires, Rutland and his wife were first on the list as 'suspected popish recusants', for he was lord lieutenant of Lincolnshire, commissioner of peace, and 'custos rotulorum' in Northamptonshire ('JHL', 3, 1767, 394-5). 
At Charles's coronation Rutland bore the rod with the dove but he was absent from the parliament of 1625, sending his proxy to Buckingham. At the parliament of 1626 he took the oath of allegiance for the first time and held the proxies of three absent Catholic peers. Again the Commons sent a petition to the king, in which Rutland headed their list as commissioner of peace and of oyer and terminer in Yorkshire -- a 'popish recusant' who 'affronted' the commissioners of the North Riding by licensing convicted recusants as an alehouse keeper and as schoolmaster in his manor of Helmsley (Rushworth, 1.392). At this session the Commons also questioned Buckingham: 'Whether recusants be not borne and increased by reason of the duke's mother and father-in-law being known papists' ('Diary of Walter Yonge', 91). Early in 1627 Rutland toured Lincolnshire widely, collecting the unpopular forced loan by threats and promises to reach a required amount. At the parliament of 1628 he carried the sword of state and then took the oath of allegiance and received the proxies of two absent Catholic peers. In taking the oath twice he was apparently in the role of a 'church papist', for he was still judged to be a leading recusant in Yorkshire. Sir Thomas Hoby tried to have him convicted in 1631 at the Helmsley quarter sessions, but failed 'since he did not stay over four successive Sundays at Helmsley Castle' by which he could be legally indicted as a resident (Aveling, 284); later the dowager countess was pardoned for recusancy by Charles I. Rutland died on 17 December 1632 at an inn in Bishop's Stortford, Hertfordshire, after giving final advice to his wife and brother George, who was to inherit his title. His personal goods when inventoried were worth $20,206 and his personal debts were paid off by one year's revenue from his estates, with his funeral at 'the phenomenal sum of over $3500' (Stone, 200); he was buried at Bottesford church, Leicestershire, on 20 February 1633. As sixth earl of Rutland he was an astute manager of extensive properties for two decades but his career at Charles's court was not as successful for personal reasons. He was very close to the Spanish ambassador Gondomar, as seen in his opposition to the war that Charles was anxious to begin in 1624, and he was widely considered to be a recusant although he adroitly escaped the penalties. 


@@@@@


doc= 17954


Manners, George (1778-1853), journal editor and diplomatist, was the fourth son of Robert Manners of Kentish Town, London. Of his mother and his early education nothing is known. He entered Lincoln's Inn on 7 March 1793, but evidently discovered activities more congenial to him than study for the bar. In 1806 he published a five-act play in verse, 'Edgar, or, Caledonian Feuds', and in October 1807 he started a paper, 'The Satirist, or, Monthly Meteor', which was, by his own subsequent description, 'devoted to the purposes of exposing and castigating every species of literary and moral turpitude' (G. Manners, 'Vindiciae satiricae', 1809, 5). The journal was strongly tory in its politics, and sought to promulgate this line through satirical articles, stories, and verses: the coloured cartoons that featured in early editions were soon dropped. William Cobbett, Francis Burdett, and Samuel Whitbread were notable targets of its often scurrilous attacks on reformers, while the less prominent William Hallett, the radical candidate for Berkshire at the election of 1812, was the object of a sustained campaign of invective. 
The tone, if not the politics, of 'The Satirist' was clearly unpalatable to the establishment. On 12 June 1812 Manners was required by the bar, which had declined to hear his final exercise, to explain 'numerous instances of libellous and unjustifiable attacks on private character, evidently inserted [in the paper] with a view to profit'. It was noted that he had been prosecuted and imprisoned for three months for one libel; that his conduct in another case of February 1809 had been 'highly disrespectable', and that a further action was pending. Manners justified his libels on 'public grounds' and cited the plaudits he had received from Sir James Mansfield, the trial judge in the 1809 case. Evidently his persuasive powers were strong, and he was duly, if belatedly, called to the bar ('Black Books'). Very shortly afterwards he sold 'The Satirist', and its premises at 267 Strand, to the journalist William Jerdan, who toned down its content, a move that did not have the desired effect upon its profitability. The paper ceased publication in 1814 (it is not to be confused with the similar title founded in 1831 by Barnard Gregory). 
Thereafter Manners appears to have practised law in London: he is listed as a special pleader in 1815 and 1817 at addresses in Gray's Inn and at 22 St James's Place, Westminster. In 1819 he became British consul at Boston, an appointment which he held until 1839. In 1825 he published (in Boston) 'The Conflagration: a Poem', which was written to aid victims of Canadian fires. Jerdan, who had not benefited from his business dealings with Manners, none the less described him as 'a gentleman in every sense, full of fancy and talent, acute and well informed' (Jerdan, 1.108). The sixth Baron Monson remembered him as 'a remarkably tall distinguished looking man', and recalled his appearance at a masquerade breakfast at the height of his journalistic infamy, dressed as an itinerant preacher 'standing inside of a tub, which hid his own legs, [with] short false ones attached before him'. He kept up an ironic tirade against 'luxury and gluttony', in which he occasionally paused 'for the purpose of stretching his hand behind him to the refreshments, and helping himself to wine and dainties' ('N&Q', 2nd ser., 1, 1856, 361). Manners died at Coburg, Upper Canada, on 18 February 1853. 


@@@@@


doc= 17955


Manners, Henry, second earl of Rutland (1526-1563), courtier and soldier, was born on 23 September 1526 and baptized after 24 December at Elsinges Manor, Enfield, Middlesex, the eldest son of five sons and six daughters of Thomas Manners, first earl of Rutland (c.1497-1543), and his second wife, Eleanor (died 1551), daughter of Sir William Paston (1479?-1554) and Bridget Heydon. During his father's lifetime he was styled Lord Ros. At a triple wedding on 3 July 1536, when the other bridegrooms were the heirs of the earls of Oxford and Westmorland, he married Lady Margaret Neville ('c'.1525-1559), daughter of Ralph Neville, fourth earl of Westmorland (1498-1549), and Lady Catherine Stafford. Given their youth, the couple are unlikely to have lived together for some years. Details of Ros's education are unknown; he does not seem to have attended Oxford or Cambridge universities. By summer 1540 he was in residence at Croxton Abbey, Leicestershire. The elder of his two sons with Margaret, Edward Manners, was not born until July 1549; the couple also had a daughter. 
Following the death of his father on 20 September 1543, he succeeded as second earl of Rutland, and with his uncle Sir Richard Manners, the family leader until he came of age, he was involved in the invasion of France in 1544. He was knighted by Henry VIII at the surrender of Boulogne on 30 September, and in 1546 accompanied the town's governor, John Dudley, Viscount Lisle, and the lord admiral, Sir Thomas Seymour, on an embassy to France. Rutland bore the spurs at the coronation of Edward VI on 20 February 1547. That year he became constable of Nottingham Castle and warden and chief justice in eyre of Sherwood Forest, and began to emerge as the leading magnate in Nottinghamshire. At about this time much of his debt to the crown was forgiven. 
After the arrest of the lord admiral in January 1549, Rutland testified that Lord Seymour had actively sought his support in intrigues against his brother the lord protector, Edward Seymour, duke of Somerset. On 1 May Rutland was appointed warden of the east and middle marches on the Scottish borders in succession to Lord Grey of Wilton. In view of his youth and inexperience Sir Thomas Holcroft and others were deputed to advise him, but he 'emerged from his baptism of fire with high credit' (Merriman, 373). Having marched in June to Stichill, near Hume, he drove the French from Jedburgh, recaptured Ferniehirst Tower, and engaged in targeted devastation. In command during the evacuation of Haddington in September, he then accumulated plans of all the key strongholds still in English hands; these survive and constitute important evidence of English activity there from 1547. He went with William Parr, marquess of Northampton, on his mission to France in May 1551. He became joint lord lieutenant of Lincolnshire and Nottinghamshire with Lord Admiral Clinton in April that year, but sole lord lieutenant of Nottinghamshire only in May 1552. 
Rutland associated with extreme reformers. He attended a debate about transubstantiation at Sir Richard Morison's house. In February 1551 he testified against Sir Richard Whalley, who was involved in a bizarre attempt to return Somerset to power. In April Rutland joined a group of thirteen noblemen, each entrusted with a band of men-at-arms. John Dudley, now earl of Warwick, experimented with this virtual standing army financed by the crown and manned by trusted noblemen, who recruited their servants. In December Rutland sat on the commission which tried the earl of Somerset. He strongly supported Dudley, now duke of Northumberland, during the Lady Jane Grey affair. By 29 July 1553 he was in the custody of a knight marshal and on 31 July he was sent to the Fleet prison, apparently still adhering 'to Northumberland with the utmost obstinacy' (R. Wingfield, 'Vita Maria Anglicanae regina', ed. D. MacCulloch, 'Camden Miscellany', 28, CS, 4th ser., 29, 1984, 270). 
However, Rutland came to terms with Mary's regime. Released to house arrest on 8 September, he was then pardoned. In 1554 he was one of sixteen members of the elite entrusted with a band of men-at-arms. In 1557 he was appointed captain-general of horsemen, and then lieutenant- and captain-general of the ill-fated army and navy that set out to retain Calais in January 1558. During Mary's reign he finished his father's work of rebuilding the family seat, Belvoir Castle. 
Rutland gained immediate favour under Elizabeth. He was commissioned to investigate the affairs of the late Cardinal Reginald Pole and was installed as a knight of the Garter on 3 June 1559. That year he was appointed lord lieutenant in Nottinghamshire and Rutland, where he mustered troops against the threat of a French invasion. On 13 October his wife died at Holywell, Shoreditch, London; she was buried on 21 October at the parish church of St Leonard. Early the following year Rutland married Bridget (1525/6-1601), widow of the diplomat Sir Richard Morison ('c'.1510-1556) and daughter of John Hussey, Lord Hussey (1465/6-1537), and Lady Anne Grey. On 20 January 1561 he became president of the council of the north. He travelled north in February and immediately began a refurbishment of the king's manor house at York, which became the council's meeting place. Having been commissioned to inquire into offences against the 'Acts of Uniformity and Supremacy in the province of York', he noted as early as 25 February in a letter to William Cecil that 'I do not finde the country so forward in religion as I wish it to be' (TNA: PRO, SP 59/4, no. 1026). Although he was able to muster troops for the French campaign of 1562-3, the brevity of his tenure of office curtailed his achievements. He died on 17 September 1563 in time of plague (though it is unclear whether he was a direct victim) and was buried in the parish church at Bottesford, Leicestershire, where a fine alabaster monument to him and his first wife was erected. Owing to a dispute over ancestral lands, his will dated 5 July 1560 was never proved. A crown survey lists his per annum income at $2485, though his debts had been accumulating; early death kept him from reaping substantial profits under Elizabeth. He was succeeded as third earl of Rutland by his son Edward. His widow, Countess Bridget, married about June 1566 Francis Russell, second earl of Bedford; she died on 12 January 1601. 


@@@@@


doc= 17956


Manners, John, eighth earl of Rutland (1604-1679), politician, born at Aylestone, Leicestershire, on 10 June 1604, was the eldest son of Sir George Manners (died 1623) of Nether Haddon, Derbyshire, and Grace, daughter of Sir Henry Pierrepoint of Holme Pierrepont, Nottinghamshire. A great-grandson of Thomas Manners, first earl of Rutland and thirteenth Baron Ros (d. 1543), at the time of his birth there was little apparent likelihood of his succeeding to the earldom. He was admitted a fellow-commoner at Queens' College, Cambridge, in 1618, graduated MA in 1621, and entered the Inner Temple in November of that year. In October 1622 Manners obtained a licence to travel abroad for three years. He succeeded to the Haddon estate on the death of his father in 1623 and in 1628 married Frances ('bap'. 1613, died 1671), the daughter of Edward Montagu, Baron Montagu of Boughton, and Frances, daughter of Thomas Cotton of Conington, Huntingdonshire. He represented Derbyshire in the parliament of 1626 and in the Short Parliament of 1640, having also served as sheriff of the county in 1632-3. Manners succeeded to the earldom of Rutland on 29 March 1641 on the death of his cousin George, the seventh earl. 
In March 1642 Rutland was made lord lieutenant of Derbyshire by parliamentary ordinance and was among those peers who remained at Westminster when parliament was summoned to Oxford by the king in January 1643. He was a moderate, or more accurately lukewarm, parliamentarian; Sir Griffin Markham wrote in 1644 'I doubt not but Rutland will do anything to keep himself afoot, his nature goeth more that way than the right way' ('CSP dom.', '1644', 47). He was appointed a commissioner for parliament to Scotland on 13 July 1643 and nominated as a commissioner for the great seal, but excused himself from both charges on the grounds of ill health. Belvoir Castle was taken by the royalists early in 1643 and retaken by parliamentarian forces in 1646. In that year Rutland was again appointed commissioner to Scotland for parliament and the following year chief justice in eyre north of the Trent. He and his growing family had occupied Exeter House on the Strand since 1642 and its chapel became one of the principal centres for the celebration of ceremonial religion until the Restoration. In April 1645 it was reported that the bishop of Durham 'had sprinkled Rutland's child, signing her with the sign of the cross' (Nichols, 53). In 1647 Rutland returned to his Derbyshire estate to find it occupied by local lead miners claiming the historic right of free mining. The Manners family had long opposed the claims of the miners and Rutland responded by leading an armed attack against them. A protracted dispute ensued. The miners, with encouragement from the Levellers, sought to assert their right through the local duchy court; Rutland enlisted the support of the common law and Westminster courts, the parliament, the county gentry, the council of state, and the army in securing his hold over his estate. Not surprisingly he triumphed and a series of legal rulings in 1648-9 declared against the miners' claim. 
In May 1649 the council of state, much to Rutland's dismay, ordered that Belvoir Castle should be demolished to prevent any danger of its becoming a royalist base. He subsequently received $1500 compensation. He played little part in the administration of the 1650s, although he retained his position as chief justice in eyre until 1661 when his petition to remain in the office was unsuccessful. The 1660s were dominated by the rebuilding of Belvoir Castle, completed in 1668, and the marital troubles of his son and heir John Manners, first duke of Rutland (1638-1711). Rutland's political rehabilitation was marked by his appointment as lord lieutenant of Leicestershire in 1667, a position he held for a decade before giving way to his son. His wife, Frances, died in May 1671 and all but one of their four sons died in childhood, but six of their seven daughters lived to adulthood and married. Rutland died at Nether Haddon on 29 September 1679 and was buried on 24 October at Bottesford, Leicestershire, the traditional resting place of the earls of Rutland. 


@@@@@


doc= 17957


Manners, John, first duke of Rutland (1638-1711), nobleman, was born on 29 May 1638 at Boughton, Northamptonshire, the third and only surviving son of Sir John Manners (1604-1679) of Haddon Hall, Derbyshire, and Frances (1613-1671), daughter of Edward, first Baron Montagu of Boughton, and sister of William Montagu (1618/19-1706). Manners's father became eighth earl of Rutland and inherited Belvoir Castle, Leicestershire, in 1641, following the failure of the senior Manners line. Manners's childhood was disrupted by the civil war. His father was a 'lukewarm Parliamentarian' (Stone, 'Family', 200) but Belvoir was first a royalist then a parliamentary garrison. The old castle was demolished in 1649 and rebuilt 1654-68. 
Manners (known as Lord Roos) married three times: first, on 13 July 1658, Lady Anne Pierrepoint ('bap'. 1631, died 1697), daughter and coheir of Henry, first marquess of Dorchester. The total failure of this marriage had legal and potentially dynastic implications. There was at this time no legal divorce, and Manners's quarrel with his first wife initiated a legal process of separation and remarriage for the few who could afford it. Manners was granted judicial separation from bed and board in the ecclesiastical court in 1663 because of Anne's adultery. To protect the succession to his estates, Manners then obtained private acts, that of 8 February 1667 bastardizing Anne's children born since 1659 and that of 11 April 1670 granting him permission to remarry. The ensuing parliamentary debates attracted disproportionate attention because of revelations about Anne's sexual promiscuity, the challenge to beliefs about the indissolubility of marriage, and suggestions that the process could be adopted by Charles II to divorce his barren wife, Catherine of Braganza. Manners married second, on 10 November 1671, Lady Diana Bruce, daughter of Robert, first earl of Ailesbury, and widow of Sir Seymour Shirley; she died in childbirth on 15 July 1672. Manners's third marriage, on 8 January 1674, to Catherine (1657-1733), sixteen-year-old daughter of Baptist Noel, third Viscount Campden, was successful. Two sons and two daughters were born to this marriage. 
Manners was a rather inactive MP for Leicestershire from 1661 until 1679, when he entered the House of Lords. He supported the whigs in the exclusion crisis and in the revolution of 1688-9. He never visited London after the coronation of William and Mary in 1689, pleading ill health and leaving his wife and two sons to represent him at court while he indulged his preference for country life and local politics. From 1668 to 1701 he lived at Belvoir or Haddon, and after 1701 solely at Belvoir. Manners replaced his father as lord lieutenant of Leicestershire and recorder of Grantham in 1677, and enjoyed his aristocratic role exercising local social and political power on behalf of the crown. He was generally effective, but suffered a few failures in this local authority. He influenced local elections, maintained order, and sought out illegal arms. He upset the local gentry in 1679 by inviting a second aristocrat to stand with him in the parliamentary election, contrary to the tradition of one aristocratic and one gentry candidate. Manners's election was disallowed by the Commons: he was created Baron Manners of Haddon with a seat in the House of Lords four months before his father died, when he succeeded as ninth earl. He retained the lord lieutenancy in 1681, despite supporting the whigs in the exclusion crisis, but was replaced in 1687 when James II filled offices with his supporters. He was reappointed in 1689 after the revolution, but resigned in 1702 after failing to secure his son's re-election to the Commons, and in protest at government interference in Leicestershire promoting tory interests. He was reappointed lord lieutenant from 1706 to 1711. 
Rutland's heir, John, married on 17 August 1693 Katherine, second daughter of William, Lord Russell, the whig magnate beheaded in 1683 for participating in the Rye House plot. On 29 March 1703, partly as a result of Russell influence, the earl was created duke of Rutland and marquess of Granby, in recognition of lifetime support for whig government. Rutland died on 10 January 1711 at Belvoir Castle, and was buried on 23 February at Bottesford church, near Belvoir. 


@@@@@


doc= 17958


Manners, John, marquess of Granby (1721-1770), army officer and politician, was born at Kelham, Nottinghamshire, on 2 January 1721, the eldest son of John Manners, third duke of Rutland (1696-1779), and his wife, Bridget (1699-1734), the younger daughter and heir of Robert Sutton, second Baron Lexington. He entered Eton College in 1732, and on 2 July 1738 matriculated from Trinity College, Cambridge. Although he did not take a degree, he was awarded an LLD in 1769. From Cambridge he completed the continental grand tour in company with his tutor John Ewer, later bishop of Bangor. While he was still abroad his father's political interest saw Granby returned to parliament for the borough of Grantham (June 1741). 
On 4 October 1745, during the Jacobite rising, the duke of Rutland, having raised in support of the Hanoverian dynasty the Leicester blues, one of fifteen 'noble' regiments, inaugurated Granby's military career by making him its colonel. His regiment never saw action, seeing out the rebellion as part of the garrison of Newcastle upon Tyne. Granby could have interpreted his colonelcy as a post taken up out of aristocratic duty at a time of national crisis, but instead he sought to be taken seriously as a soldier. He volunteered to serve on the duke of Cumberland's staff in Scotland, and in March 1746 is reported to have been present during operations at Strathbogie, a prelude to Culloden. Upon the disbandment of his regiment Granby retained his rank and seniority as a colonel in the army and in 1747 campaigned in the Low Countries. At about this time he had a mistress who became the mother of his illegitimate children George ('c'.1746-1772), MP for Scarborough from 1768 until his death, and Anne, who married her cousin John Manners-Sutton (1752-1826), MP for Newark from 1783 to 1796. 
As a young man Granby made his mark not as a soldier or parliamentarian but as an enthusiastic huntsman, a racegoer, and a gambler; on 1 September 1750 Horace Walpole wrote, 'He is in debt $10,000' (Walpole, 'Corr.', 20.183). On 3 September 1750 he married Frances (1728-1761), the eldest daughter of Charles Seymour, sixth duke of Somerset, and his second wife, Lady Charlotte Finch; among their children were Charles Manners, later fourth duke of Rutland (1754-1787), and Lord Robert Manners (1758-1782). Granby's new bride also had a reputation as a spendthrift, and Walpole joked that the couple were well matched not only in their lineage but in their lack of ready funds. 
In 1752, as a means of securing the support of the Rutland family's parliamentary interest, the Pelham ministry urged George II to appoint Granby colonel of the Royal Horse Guards (the Blues), one of the army's most prestigious regiments. The king at first refused, denouncing Granby as 'a sot, a bully, that does nothing but drink and quarrel' (BL, Add. MS 32729, fol. 4). However, Granby's credit with the king gradually increased. He was elected MP for Cambridgeshire in 1754, and although he expressed a genuine loathing of party divisions he allied himself with the government whig Philip Yorke (later second earl of Hardwicke). Once elected, he defended the duke of Newcastle's administration in speeches in the Commons. In 1755 he was promoted major-general, and in May 1758 he gained the colonelcy requested in 1752. 
Three months later, Granby was sent to Germany in command of a brigade of cavalry in the British expeditionary force. When the force commander, Charles Spencer, third duke of Marlborough, died in October 1758, Granby succeeded Lord George Sackville as second in command, and in February 1759 he was promoted lieutenant-general. At the battle of Minden in August 1759 Granby led the second line of cavalry and was praised in orders by Prince Ferdinand of Brunswick, overall commander of the allied army. Prince Ferdinand did this, however, as a means of indirectly criticizing Granby's superior, Sackville, who Ferdinand felt had disobeyed orders by failing to bring forward the cavalry in time to exploit victory. Sackville resigned in protest, and on 14 August Granby became commander-in-chief of the British contingent in his place. At Sackville's subsequent court martial Granby, without rancour, stated his belief that the cavalry had indeed been led forward too slowly. He was uncomfortable at testifying against his former superior officer and endeavoured to suggest that Sackville had not been negligent, but at best could only give the impression that Sackville had been confused rather than disobedient. If Granby had sought to prevent a verdict of guilty, he failed. Sackville later 'always wrote with contempt [of Granby], referring to promises extracted from him 'in the midst of riot and dissipation'' (Mackesy, 247). 
At the battle of Warburg on 31 July 1760 Granby took the opportunity to show the capability of the cavalry when under his personal command. Three times his impetuosity scattered the French troops opposing him; and the loss of his hat when leading the charge gave rise to the expression 'To go at it bald-headed' (Granby, who by his twenties had lost most of his hair, famously disdained to wear a wig). At Vellinghausen on 15-16 July 1761 he showed himself a general as well as a fighter when, on successive days, his able dispositions repulsed the assaults of the French. He then launched a counter-attack and secured victory. His beaten opponent, the duc de Broglie, so admired Granby that he commissioned a portrait of him by Sir Joshua Reynolds. At the battle of Wilhelmstahl on 25 June 1762 Granby secured another triumph, the troops under his command cutting off the French rearguard and compelling the surrender of some of their finest regiments. 'Il a manoeuvre comme un ange... no man ever acted with more courage or more like a commanding officer', commented an enraptured Lord Ligonier (Whitworth, 369). Finally, at Bruckermuhl on 21 September 1762, Granby raised himself from his sickbed to bring two brigades to the relief of the Brunswicker, General Zastrow. 
Although a successful battlefield commander, Granby did not possess all the attributes of a general. He was no administrator -- a serious failing in someone who was responsible for the welfare of no fewer than 25,000 British troops -- and he cheerfully admitted that he hated writing. During the winter campaign of 1760-61, when the commissariat was under his direct control, payments were late and supplies became scarce. Not only did military operations suffer but costs increased and monthly expenditure by the commissariat rose from a budgeted $150,000 to $340,000. Fraud by contractors was rife. As discipline in a hungry army came under strain, officers schooled under the harsher regime of the duke of Cumberland became critical of Granby's leniency towards deserters and marauders. Lord Frederick Cavendish, while acknowledging Granby to be 'indefatigable and diligent' at the head of an advance guard, believed that his inability to maintain discipline made him an unfit commander (Devonshire MSS, Chatsworth, Derbyshire, MS 397.111). Amid such circles the expression 'German discipline' took on ironic connotations. 
To the wider public, however, this mattered less than Granby's battlefield successes; and at the end of the Seven Years' War his reputation stood at its height. Much of his popularity derived from his well-publicized solicitude for his men. Edward Penny's painting 'The Marquess of Granby Relieving a Sick Soldier', exhibited in 1765, overturned conventional expectations of the history painting by showing Granby acting heroically in an act of private charity and not on the field of war. The engraving outsold even that of Benjamin West's 'Death of General Wolfe'. The large number of public houses called the Marquess of Granby is testimony to the lasting gratitude felt towards him by the disabled non-commissioned officers whom he is believed to have set up as publicans. Horace Walpole might have sneered that he was the 'mob's hero' (Walpole, 'Corr.', 21.315), but this simply provided another reason why, even before his return home from Germany, Granby was being assiduously courted by politicians. Most importantly, the political world speculated whether he would lead the Rutland parliamentary vote in support of the terms of peace negotiated by the Bute government. That in the end he did vote for the treaty of Paris, notwithstanding his personal regard for the duke of Newcastle -- who now led the opposition -- was a reflection of the fact that he thought the measure right and he knew that the new monarch, George III, wished it. Granby felt an instinctive aversion towards party politics; at most he would work with individuals whom he believed public-spirited. But this was not an easy path to pursue amid the turbulent politics of the 1760s. Initially he gravitated towards George Grenville, whom he trusted even if he disliked his political associates, and on 1 July 1763 he accepted from Grenville's new ministry the master-generalship of the ordnance. He supported the government over Wilkes and general warrants, but on 10 January 1765 he spoke against the dismissal of army officers from their employments on the basis of their votes in parliament. In May 1765, when the London silk weavers rioted, Grenville's colleague George Montagu Dunk, second earl of Halifax, tried to persuade the king to appoint Granby commander-in-chief of the army: 'Lord Granby is a very popular man and might save the lives of these deluded wretches which may be exposed and sacrificed by another commander' ('Correspondence of George III', 1.105). Although the king, having promised the reversion to the duke of Cumberland, refused, when the Grenville administration fell a month later Granby remained master-general of the ordnance at George III's request. Granby nevertheless declined to act with the new Rockingham ministry and voted against it over the repeal of the 'Stamp Act'. 
With the formation of the ministry of William Pitt, earl of Chatham, the following year, Granby was finally appointed commander-in-chief of the army (13 August 1766). He accepted reluctantly, knowing that his predecessor, the octogenarian John, Earl Ligonier, resented being forcibly retired. It was then rumoured that he would leave parliament, but during the general election of April 1768 Granby campaigned more vigorously than ever and increased the Rutland group's parliamentary representation to seven -- adding to his debts in the process. By now his personal loyalty was directed towards Chatham. But when ill health prompted Chatham's resignation from office in October 1768, Granby was cut adrift; he remained in a cabinet headed by Augustus Fitzroy, third duke of Grafton, without finding political consistency easy to come by. His biggest test came with the controversy aroused by the return in the general election of John Wilkes to parliament by the electors of Middlesex. Granby had been against moves in government to have him expelled, but his distaste for Wilkes's character and demagoguery eventually overcame his principles, and when, on 3 February 1769, the motion for expulsion was put to the Commons, he voted in favour. Upon Wilkes being returned again by the electors of Middlesex, Granby voted for the seating of Henry Luttrell in his place. The timing of his volte-face was unfortunate. On 21 January 1769 the first letter of the controversialist Junius had appeared in the 'Public Advertiser'. Amid an attack on the Grafton administration as a whole, Junius accused Granby of nepotism, brokering the sale of commissions, and servility towards the court. Ordinarily, Granby's continuing popularity would have been proof against the assault, and besides, as Junius later admitted, he had no particular quarrel with him; but when Granby's school contemporary Sir William Draper, the conqueror of Manila, published a defence of his old friend, Junius felt compelled to justify his allegations. His task was made easier by the ineptitude of Draper's reply, which in effect admitted that the convivial (and famously hard-drinking) Granby was liable to be imposed upon by unscrupulous associates. Junius pounced gleefully: 'It is you, Sir William Draper, who have taken pains to represent your friend in the character of a drunken landlord, who deals out his promises as liberally as his liquor' ('Letters of Junius', 41). Further ammunition against Granby's reputation was provided by the vote in parliament just four days before on the Middlesex election: 'Does he not at this moment give up all character and dignity as a gentleman in receding from his own repeated declarations in favour of Mr Wilkes?' (ibid., 40). The knife was then given a final twist with a well-informed attack on Granby for the deplorably undermanned condition of the army overseas -- in the West Indies, the Mediterranean, and North America -- and closer to home in Ireland, lending credence to the argument that Junius was the 'nom de plume' of Philip Francis, a senior clerk in the war office. 
So counter-productive were Draper's interventions over the following weeks against Junius on Granby's behalf that it was believed he was asked to desist by his friend. Thereafter Junius took notice of Granby only when addressing a public appeal to him (6 May 1769) to cease his continued votes for the seating of Luttrell. That Granby eventually changed his mind on the issue once again had less to do with Junius's strictures, however, than the return to the political arena of Lord Chatham ['see 'Chathamites]. Strongly opposed to the government, and especially over the Middlesex election, Chatham used John Calcraft, the influential army agent, as his intermediary in persuading Granby to break with the Grafton ministry. As late as November 1769 Granby was reluctant to throw up office, telling Calcraft that it must 'look like skulking to Junius, or that he saw himself as unfit for the command of the army' ('Correspondence of William Pitt', 3.363). But at the opening of parliament on 9 January 1770 he announced that his opinion on the Middlesex election had changed, and he voted against the government on the address. His resignation as commander-in-chief of the army and as master-general of the ordnance followed eight days later. 
Out of office Granby found that his creditors, of whom there were many, became anxious, and he was increasingly dunned for repayment. By resigning as master-general of the ordnance he had given up a salary of $1500 per annum. Moreover, his resignation forfeited him the reversion of the colonelcy of the 1st foot guards, worth $3000 per annum, which on the death of Lord Ligonier went instead to William, duke of Gloucester, brother of George III. In the summer he went to Scarborough to support his candidate, George Cockburne, comptroller of the navy, in a parliamentary by-election. His man was defeated, but Granby remained to recuperate from illness. He died in Scarborough on 18 October 1770 from a seizure brought on by an attack of gout in the stomach. He was buried in Bottesford church, Belvoir, Leicestershire, on 28 October; his remains were reinterred in the mausoleum at Belvoir Castle in 1829. 
Granby left debts estimated at $60,000 and assets of just $23,000. Since he died intestate, his affairs were administered by the army agent John Calcraft, who, as was his wont, had secured Granby's debts to him through life insurance. Horace Walpole for one claimed that Calcraft, with his financial hold on Granby, had been able to wield an excessive influence over him. In his entry on Granby for the 'History of Parliament', Sir Lewis Namier suspected that Granby was probably indulgent towards Calcraft's contractor friends. 
Granby was an instinctive soldier. He achieved rank through his family and political connections without serving an apprenticeship as a regimental officer. Yet on the battlefield his tactical judgement was unerring. When a more considered approach or a measure of application were necessary, whether in military administration or in politics, he was found wanting; but the public could identify with the gifted amateur, especially when he appeared to embody so many of the unsophisticated virtues of the English country gentleman. Even Walpole, one of Granby's severest critics, could on this basis pen a generous obituary: 'His large and open countenance... his robust and commanding person, and a proportion of florid beauty so great, that the baldness of his head, which he carried totally bare, was rather an addition to its comely roundness than a defect... all distinguished him without any extrinsic ornament, and pointed out his rank when he walked without attendance... Intrepidity, sincerity, humanity, and generosity, were not only innate in his breast, but was never corrupted there... His modesty was incapable of ostentation.' But to Walpole's mind, at least, Granby's merits were as often as not vitiated by his lack of understanding: 'Of money he seemed to conceive no use but in giving it away: but that profusion was so indiscriminate, that compassion or solicitation, and consequently imposture, were equally the master of his purse... No man meant to feel more patriotism, or to be more warmly attached to the constitution of the country; yet his unsuspicious nature suffered him to be easily made the tool of its enemies... In a rude age he would probably have been a successful general from his own valour, and the enthusiasm... which his soldiers felt for him; but in times wherein military knowledge is so much improved it was perhaps fortunate for his country that the sole command was never entrusted to him in any capital emergency. (Walpole, 'Memoirs', 2.117-19)' 



@@@@@


doc= 17959


Manners, Sir Robert (d. 1354), administrator and landowner, was the son of Sir Robert de Manners, whose family had owned Etal in north Northumberland since at least 1232. He was appointed among the commissioners of truce between England and Scotland in January 1328, probably to represent the interest of the bishop of Durham as lord of Norhamshire and Islandshire, outliers of the regalian liberty of Durham. After the renewal of hostilities he was appointed in 1334 as sheriff of Selkirk and keeper of Selkirk Forest, ceded to Edward III by Edward Balliol as king of Scots. In 1335 and again in 1344 he was appointed commissioner of array in the Glendale ward of north Northumberland. In 1340 he was MP for Northumberland, in which year he aided Thomas Grey of Heaton and others in stopping a raid of the earl of Sutherland. In 1341 he was allowed to crenellate Etal. In the following year he was appointed as a commissioner of truce and peace with Scotland, and when the Scots invaded England, in alliance with the French, in 1346, he took part in the battle of Nevilles Cross. For his services he received lands in Berrington and Buckton in Northumberland, and two parts of Paxton in Berwickshire. He also acquired lands in Goswick and Kyloe. In 1345 he endowed a chantry in Etal chapel. He died on 28 September 1354, and was buried at Ford church, Northumberland. His inquisition 'post mortem' (November 1354) notes that he held Etal as a manor for a half knight's fee, and that its assets included a corn mill, a fulling mill, lime kilns, and mines of coal. He married first Ada (died 1344/5), and second Ellen (died 1362). His heir was his son John, born in 1354. 
The second 


@@@@@


doc= 17960


Sir Robert Manners (1408-1461) was probably the great-nephew of Sir John Manners and great-great-grandson of the earlier Sir Robert. His father was Sir John Manners of Etal and his mother was Margery, widow of Edward Ilderton. He was a justice of the peace for Norhamshire in 1438, when he succeeded to the family property, was sheriff of Northumberland in 1454, and MP for Northumberland in 1459. He died in 1461. His wife, Joan (died 1488), was sister of Robert, first Baron Ogle (died 1469). There were four sons, including Gilbert, John, and Sir Robert Manners, one of the few substantial supporters of the Yorkist cause in Northumberland, who served as sheriff of that county in 1463 and undersheriff to the earl of Northumberland in 1485. He married Eleanor, daughter of Lord Ros, thereby bringing that title into the Manners family. One of Robert and Eleanor's grandsons was Thomas Manners, created earl of Rutland in 1525. 


@@@@@


doc= 17961


Manners, Lord Robert (1758-1782), naval officer, was born on 6 February 1758, the third son of John Manners, marquess of Granby (1721-1770), army officer, and Lady Frances Seymour (1728-1761), daughter of the sixth duke of Somerset and his second wife. Robert Manners, whose paternal grandfather was John, third duke of Rutland, was educated at Eton College (1763-71) before entering the navy. An ambitious young man from one of England's most prominent families, he expected his promotion in the navy to be inevitable and swift. This posed problems for the lord of the Admiralty, Lord Sandwich, who was criticized for resisting Manners's promotion to lieutenant until he had served the regulation six years. Manners was finally promoted to this rank on 13 May 1778 in the 'Ocean' in which he was present in the action off Ushant on 27 July. On 17 September he was moved to the 'Victory', flagship of Admiral Augustus Keppel, and on 15 July 1779 into the 'Alcide', one of the ships that went out to Gibraltar with Admiral George Rodney and defeated the Spanish squadron off Cape St Vincent. 
Soon after his promotion to lieutenant Manners made clear his desire for further advancement. Sandwich again resisted, and was reminded by his colleague Lord Mansfield how 'He [Manners] & the whole family will feel it as a personal injury' if these ambitions were not realized. Sandwich was aware that the issue could bring renewed attacks on him and on Lord North's government. On 8 December 1779 he wrote to Admiral Rodney concerning Manners: 'There is another young man of fashion now in your squadron concerning whom I am tormented to death. I cannot do anything for him at home; therefore, if you could contrive while he remains with you, by some means or other, to give him rank, you will infinitely oblige me. (Mundy, 1.207)' Rodney, who had fewer qualms about promoting Manners, took the first opportunity (17 January 1780) to advance him to captain of the 'Resolution', under Sir Challoner Ogle, whom he constituted a commodore. The 'Resolution' returned to England with Rear-Admiral Robert Digby, and was shortly afterwards sent out to North America with Rear-Admiral Thomas Graves. When Rodney returned to the West Indies after his visit to the coast of North America in the summer of 1780 he took the 'Resolution' with him, shortly after which Ogle, having been promoted rear-admiral, went home, leaving Manners in command of the ship. In March of that year he had also been elected in his absence MP for Cambridgeshire; he was never to take up the seat. 
In 1781 the 'Resolution' went north with Sir Samuel Hood, and took part in the action off Cape Henry on 5 September. She was afterwards with Hood at St Kitts in January 1782, and in the battle of the Saints (12 April 1782), was in the centre of the line, the third ship astern of the 'Formidable'. In the action Manners received several severe wounds, in addition to having one leg shot off. From the strength of his constitution hopes were entertained of his recovery. He was put on board the frigate 'Andromache' for a passage to England, but some days later tetanus set in, from which he died, probably at sea in the Caribbean, on 23 April. Although his early career had been marked by ambition galvanized by social status Manners was by all accounts a brave, talented, and well-respected young officer at his death. 


@@@@@


doc= 17962


Manners, Roger, fifth earl of Rutland (1576-1612), nobleman, was born on 6 October 1576 at Kirk Deighton, Yorkshire, where he was baptized on 19 November. He was the eldest surviving son of John Manners, fourth earl of Rutland (died 1588), and his wife, Elizabeth (died 1595), fourth daughter of Francis Charleton of Apley Castle, Shropshire, and nephew of Edward Manners, third earl of Rutland. Roger was one of a large family and his mother was again pregnant at the time of her husband's death on 24 February 1588. Manners was only eleven when he became fifth earl of Rutland. The short time which had elapsed since the death of the third earl meant that his inheritance was encumbered by the conflicting and burdensome demands of two wills and jointures for two dowager countesses. Rutland's wardship was promised to the earl of Leicester, but the latter's sudden death in September 1588 meant that, like his cousin Elizabeth Manners, daughter of the third earl and heir to his barony of Ros, Rutland became a ward of Lord Burghley. The marriage of Lady Ros to Burghley's grandson in 1589 cemented ties between the Manners and Cecil families, but also created long-lasting tensions over property and the Ros barony. Rutland was educated at Cambridge, arriving at Queens' College to study with the vice-president, John Jegon, in late 1587. He followed Jegon to Corpus Christi College in 1590. He was created MA in February 1595, as part of a grand spectacle at Cambridge which was stage-managed by Robert Devereux, second earl of Essex, the queen's favourite and the late Leicester's stepson. Rutland soon became an adherent of Essex. 
Although he had received approval from the queen to travel on the continent in December 1594, Rutland's plans were disrupted by the death of his mother in April 1595 and he did not leave until October 1595. Essex summoned his own cousin, Robert Vernon, from Oxford to accompany Rutland on the initial stages of his journey. Essex also wrote Rutland at least three private letters of travel advice, of which only the third (dated 16 October 1595) is known to survive. These provided the inspiration for a quite separate document which was framed as a letter of travel advice from Essex to Rutland but intended for public circulation, and which may have been written by Essex's secretariat or by Francis Bacon. It was designed as political propaganda to demonstrate Essex's statesmanlike qualities and proved remarkably successful. Rutland toured through the Low Countries, Germany, and Switzerland. He matriculated at Padua University in 1596, but fell dangerously ill there in July. The writer Robert Dallington was among his servants by this time. Rutland travelled in France during 1597, before rushing back to Plymouth to join Essex's Azores expedition in July. He returned from that unhappy voyage in November, and was admitted to Gray's Inn on 2 February 1598. He married Essex's stepdaughter, Elizabeth Sidney (1585?-1612), the only child of Sir Philip Sidney, in early 1599. Shortly afterwards he went to join Essex's expedition in Ireland, even though the queen had repeatedly denied him permission to go. Rutland served as an infantry officer but received a peremptory summons from Elizabeth to return to England. Before his return he was knighted by Essex at Cahir Castle on 30 May. Claiming ill health and aided by the intercession of friends such as Sir Robert Cecil, he narrowly avoided imprisonment for his defiance of the queen. 
In July 1600 Rutland again went abroad in search of military action, spending several months in the Low Countries before returning to London in October. He was soon caught up in the paranoia of Essex and his few remaining followers. Although he was not involved in the planning for an Essexian coup Rutland probably knew more about the plans of the earl and his partisans than he later admitted. On 8 February 1601, allegedly in the belief that Essex was about to be murdered, he joined the earl's disastrous attempt to secure armed support in London. Two of his younger brothers, Francis Manners (1578-1632) and Sir George Manners, also participated. Rutland was arrested and imprisoned in the Tower. He was spared indictment but fined $30,000, which was reduced to $20,000 on 10 June. Released from the Tower on 8 August, he was subsequently confined to the house of his great-uncle Roger Manners at Uffington, Lincolnshire, until January 1602. By the time of Elizabeth's death in March 1603, Rutland was on the point of full rehabilitation, but the accession of James I further boosted his fortunes. A highly successful visit by James to the earl's seat, Belvoir Castle, on 22-23 April secured Rutland the new king's favour. His fine (still largely unpaid) was remitted and in June-August 1603 he travelled to Denmark to bestow the Garter upon Christian IV and attend the baptism of the latter's son on James's behalf. Soon after his return he was made lord lieutenant of Lincolnshire and steward of Queen Anne's manor of Grantham. These posts complemented various other local offices (especially in Nottinghamshire) which Rutland had already received from Elizabeth and James and reinforced his status as a magnate in the east midlands. 
Although he participated in the entertainments for the visiting Christian IV in 1606 and the creation of Henry as prince of Wales in 1610, Rutland spent an increasing amount of his time on his country estates. His health may have been weak and he may also have been sensitive to comment about his infertility (the result of disease contracted during his continental tour, according to Ben Jonson; Herford and Simpson, 1.138). Rutland's marriage was also increasingly strained. Jonson observed that the countess lived as 'a widow'd wife', stirring an intense but apparently unrequited passion in Sir Thomas Overbury (ibid., 8.224-5; 11.88). In an elegy written upon her death, Francis Beaumont claimed that 'the chief blessing of women, marriage, was to thee nought but a sacrament of misery' (Dyce, 11.508). Rutland failed to attend parliament in 1610 and was so sick by May 1612 that he moved to Cambridge for specialist treatment. After suffering what seems to have been one or more strokes during May and June, he died in Cambridge on 26 June 1612. He was buried beside previous earls of Rutland at Bottesford, Leicestershire, on 22 July. He was succeeded as earl of Rutland by his brother Sir Francis Manners. Rutland's widow died within a fortnight of her husband's funeral, occasioning wild rumours that she had been poisoned by medicine supplied by Sir Walter Ralegh. Pointedly, she chose to be buried privately at St Paul's near her father rather than accept burial with her husband at Bottesford. 


@@@@@


doc= 17963


Manners, Thomas, first earl of Rutland (c.1497-1543), courtier and soldier, was the eldest son of Sir George Manners ('b'. in or before 1470, died 1513) of Belvoir, Leicestershire, and his wife, Anne (1476-1526), daughter of Sir Thomas St Leger and Anne, sister of Edward IV. Sir George inherited the barony of Ros following the deaths of his maternal uncle Edmund Roos, tenth Baron Ros (died 1508), and his maternal aunt Isabel, Lady Lovell (died 1508/9) (both children of Thomas Ros, ninth Baron Ros of Helmsley). Owing to Edmund Roos's incapacity, since 1486 the barony's estates had been administered by Isabel's husband, Sir Thomas Lovell ('c'.1449-1524), and he was still in control in 1513 when Sir George died on 27 October or 4 November, either in France or, more probably, having just arrived back in England. Thomas Manners, who succeeded as twelfth baron, was almost certainly under seventeen years old when his father made his will on 26 October, while the inquisition post mortem of 4 April 1514 put his age at sixteen or more. His wardship, and that of his siblings, was granted to Lovell. He had already married (the settlement was dated 21 February 1513) Lovell's niece Elizabeth, daughter of Sir Robert Lovell. 
Like his father, Ros went on the French expedition of 1513. He was summoned to the parliament that first met on 5 February 1515, though on the evidence above he should have been too young. His Plantagenet blood, Ros inheritance, and connection with Lovell, who held among other offices the treasurership of the royal household, advanced his career greatly. From early in Henry VIII's reign he was part of the king's household; a jouster, he formed long-standing friendships with Henry and his intimates, including Charles Brandon, later duke of Suffolk. Between about 1514 and 1518 Ros and his brothers were in attendance at various times on Mary Tudor, the French queen. On 7 July 1519 Lovell and Ros were jointly granted the offices of constable of Nottingham Castle and keeper of Sherwood Forest. Ros was at the Field of Cloth of Gold in June 1520 and at Henry VIII's meeting with Emperor Charles V in July. He was on the panel of peers in four out of six treason trials in the House of Lords, including that of the duke of Buckingham. In December 1521 he was the king's cup-bearer and in May 1522 he was deputed to meet Charles V at Dover. At an unknown date his first wife died; some time in the early 1520s he married Eleanor (died 1551), daughter of Sir William Paston (1479?-1554), an occasional attender at court and executor for Lovell following the latter's death on 25 May 1524. On 16 July that year Ros had livery of the rump of the Ros estates which had remained in Lovell's hands. 
By this time, although his most significant landed interest lay in Leicestershire, Ros's ancestral properties in Northumberland and Yorkshire had brought him office in the north. In 1522 he was made steward of Pickering in north Yorkshire. Early that year he was given a commission of array and in April was appointed warden of the east and middle marches on the Scottish border, but his lack of personal knowledge of the area proved a handicap, and in October the local gentry's reluctance to participate in the expedition against the Scots led him to seek release from the wardenship. This was granted in October, and did his career no lasting damage. From 1524 to 1526 he was on twelve commissions of the peace, including those for Leicestershire, Nottinghamshire, Rutland, and all three ridings of Yorkshire. After initial election on 24 April, he was installed as a knight of the Garter on 25 June 1525, having been created a week earlier earl of Rutland; the king acknowledged his Plantagenet descent in the arms granted with the title. By 1528 he had begun rebuilding Belvoir Castle; in the meantime he resided at Elsinges Manor, Enfield, Middlesex, or, when in London, at Holywell, Shoreditch, or at court. 
Although he initially appeared hesitant, Rutland supported Henry VIII's religious policies. In 1533 he was verbally attacked by Thomas Boleyn, earl of Wiltshire, for suggesting that the king's marriage to his daughter Anne was a spiritual matter and could not be settled in parliament. However, Rutland was at Anne's coronation as her carver. In 1535 he was involved on behalf of the crown in the notorious trial of the Charterhouse monks. In the rebellions of 1536 he was charged with the defence of Nottingham Castle. Given a joint command with the earls of Huntingdon and Shrewsbury, he marched promptly to Nottingham and then to Newark, Southwell, and Doncaster. His stewardship of many monasteries, and his ancestral claims to the foundation of certain houses, combined with his proven loyalty to work to his advantage in the wake of the dissolution. By a grant of March 1539, in return for selling to the king land including Elsinges, he received at least fourteen manors (mostly in Leicestershire) and several abbeys, including Rievaulx and Beverley, Yorkshire, and Belvoir Priory and Croxton, Leicestershire. Croxton soon became his main provincial residence. 
In July 1536 Rutland cemented his ties to other noble families with a triple wedding at Holywell, in which his eldest son Henry Manners (1526-1563) and daughter Lady Anne (died in or after 1549) married Lady Margaret Neville and Henry Neville, Lord Neville (1524/5-1564), children of Ralph Neville, fourth earl of Westmorland, and Lady Dorothy Neville married John de Vere, heir of the earl of Oxford. Rutland was lord chamberlain to Jane Seymour, and, though illness kept him from court for a significant period in spring 1537, he was in attendance when she died in October. He was also chamberlain to Anne of Cleves and Katherine Howard. Lady Rutland served in the privy chambers of the first two queens and possibly of the third. Her position and perceived good nature made her a valuable contact at court for those outside it, such as the governor of Calais, Arthur Plantagenet, Viscount Lisle, and his wife, Honor, whose daughters she supervised and assisted. In 1540 Lady Rutland testified against Queen Anne that the royal marriage had not been consummated. In response to the latter's naive assertion that the king's bedchamber performances were proof of her loss of virginity, the countess responded, 'Madam, there must be more than this, or it will be long or we have a duke of York, which al this realm most desireth' (Strype). Following the subsequent fall of Thomas Cromwell, Rutland acquired his former offices of warden of the forests beyond the Trent and steward of Halifax manor, Yorkshire. 
Having refused reappointment to the east and middle marches in 1537, five years later Rutland became constable of Nottingham Castle and then returned to the borders on 9 August 1542 as warden of all three marches. He was soon reassigned to lead the rearguard of an army prepared to invade Scotland in October. Difficulty in finding a replacement led to his reappointment as warden-general on 2 November, but he was quickly recalled owing to illness. He had made his will on 16 August, but lingered well into the following year, dying at Belvoir Castle on 20 September 1543. He was buried in Bottesford church, Leicestershire, where a dignified alabaster tomb was erected. His widow, who died at Holywell in 1551, was buried at St Leonard, Shoreditch. Rutland died a rich man, owning about 100 manors and with an annual income of $2399, according to 1542 receivers' accounts. He brought the Manners family to new heights, ensuring for the dynasty a national presence for centuries to come. 


@@@@@


doc= 17964


Sutton, Charles Manners- (1755-1828), archbishop of Canterbury, was born Charles Manners on 14 February 1755, the fourth son of Lord George Manners (1723-1783) and his wife, Diana (died 1767), daughter of Thomas Chaplin of Blankney, Lincolnshire; he was grandson of John, third duke of Rutland. In 1762 his father assumed the additional surname Sutton on inheriting the estates of his maternal grandfather, Robert Sutton, second Baron Lexington. Educated at Charterhouse School, he then matriculated as a pensioner at Emmanuel College, Cambridge, on 1 March 1773; he graduated BA as fifteenth wrangler in 1777, his younger brother, Thomas Manners-Sutton, being at the same time fifth wrangler. He proceeded MA in 1780 and DD in 1792. In 1785 he was presented to the rectory of Averham with Kelham, Nottinghamshire, and also to Whitwell, Derbyshire. Manners-Sutton married in 1778 Mary (died 1832), daughter of Thomas Thoroton of Screveton, Nottinghamshire. They had two sons and ten daughters. 
Preferment was rapid. Manners-Sutton became dean of Peterborough in 1791, in 1792 bishop of Norwich, and -- because Norwich had a small income and was a large and expensive diocese -- influence at court secured him the deaneries of Windsor and Wolverhampton in 1794, to be held 'in commendam'. He and his wife became great favourites with George III and the royal family. In 1794 he was offered the archbishopric of Armagh, but he declined the appointment. At Norwich, Manners-Sutton was a conscientious and well-liked diocesan bishop. He was the first bishop of Norwich consistently to undertake all his ordinations in Norwich. He was hospitable and generous to charities. He dined with his clergy after his visitations and treated them with wine, 'a bottle between two' ('Diary of a Country Parson', 3.367). He separated confirmations from visitations. After a confirmation James Woodforde, rector of Weston Longueville, noted that his niece, 'Miss Woodforde [was] much pleased... with the Bishop's very agreeable and affable, as well as polite and sensible behaviour' (ibid., 4.141). In his visitations he demonstrated a keen interest in matters of contemporary concern to the church -- the employment of curates; the administration of baptism, schools, and almshouses; and disputes over tithe payments -- and he asked for 'any other Matters relating to your Parish of which it may be proper to give me Information, Or any proposal to make whereby the Glory of God and the Good of his Church may be promoted, and this Diocese better ordered, and ourselves mutually aiding and assisting each other in the Discharge of our respective Duties. (Visitation inquiries, 1801, Norwich RO, NDR VIS 39/17)' During the threat of French invasion in 1803 Manners-Sutton urged the clergy to warn the poor of the risks a French occupation might have for them, but he advised the clergy against joining militias or defensive corps. At Norwich, Manners-Sutton seems to have got into financial difficulties, despite the additional revenues of the deanery of Windsor, and he was criticized for extravagance. 
On the death of Archbishop Moore in 1805 George III intervened personally with William Pitt to secure Manners-Sutton's translation to Canterbury, although Pitt wished to appoint his former tutor, Bishop Pretyman-Tomline of Lincoln. As archbishop Manners-Sutton played an active part in the policies of the traditional high-church party then ascendant in the church. He was himself a high-churchman: it was noted that at his primary visitation in Canterbury Cathedral in 1806 that he preached on the significance of confession and its history. Manners-Sutton played a central role in the series of initiatives and reforms to promote the church's mission in the period of dramatic social change brought about by population growth, urbanization, and industrialization. From at least 1809 he worked to secure government funds to build new churches to meet the needs of the rapidly expanding population. In the House of Lords he took an active part in the attempt to secure satisfactory legislation to provide adequate stipends for curates. With lay members of the Hackney Phalanx, notably Joshua Watson, and with the co-operation of the prime minister, the earl of Liverpool, he worked to secure the 'Additional Churches Act' of 1818, which gave the Church of England $1 million to build new churches, although he was defeated by ministers in his wish that clergy should be in the majority on the subsequent commission for building new churches. He was one of the most regular attenders at the commission's committee meetings. 
Manners-Sutton was also active with the Hackney Phalanx in reinvigorating existing voluntary bodies to promote the church's mission and in creating new bodies. The Society for the Promotion of Christian Knowledge was overhauled and Manners-Sutton played a significant part in the foundation of the National Society for Promoting the Education of the Poor in the Principles of the Established Church in 1811; he nearly always chaired the fortnightly meetings of the society's committee and he persuaded the prince regent to become patron of the society. The society provided a model for the church to act in a corporate capacity in the absence of the convocations, including all of the bishops as its vice-presidents, along with leading laymen. He was closely involved in the foundation of the Incorporated Church Building Society, of which he chaired the majority of meetings, to raise funds to provide grants for building and repairing churches to provide more seats in churches for the increasing population. 
Manners-Sutton worked closely with the Hackney Phalanx to revive the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel and he was active in the campaign that secured the establishment of a bishop for India, being closely involved in recruiting Thomas Middleton, archdeacon of Huntingdon, and an associate of the phalanx, as first bishop of Calcutta. Manners-Sutton was also concerned with the extension of higher education. He contributed $1000 towards the endowment of King's College, London, and was instrumental in persuading George IV to give his name to the college; he also contributed towards the establishment of both St David's College, Lampeter, by Bishop Burgess of St David's and of King's College in Halifax, Nova Scotia. In 1814 he was appointed to preside over the German Relief Fund to administer a parliamentary grant of $100,000 for the relief of Germany during the winter of the final Napoleonic campaign, which -- because of opposition to the grant in the light of needs for charity relief at home -- needed to be a model of accurate accounting. Joshua Watson acted as administrator of the funds. In 1816 Manners-Sutton and Bishop Howley of London unsuccessfully attempted to revive the Association for the Relief of the Manufacturing and Labouring Poor, established in 1812, and in 1817 he briefly flirted with Robert Owen's plan to put the poor into 'Villages of Co-operation' where, after an initial capital grant from taxes, they would pay their own way while becoming useful, industrious, self-disciplined, and temperate. 
Manners-Sutton may have been the initiator of a meritocratic revolution that reinvigorated the Church of England in the early nineteenth century. Although his own preferment was due to aristocratic patronage and royal favour, he, along with Bishop Howley of London, worked with Joshua Watson and his associates in the Hackney Phalanx to test the potential of able young graduates from middle-class backgrounds, making discriminate use of the extensive patronage available to archbishops of Canterbury and promoting the most promising candidates. His own chaplains provided able leaders for the next generation of high-churchmen: Christopher Wordsworth, subsequently master of Trinity College, Cambridge; George Cambridge, subsequently archdeacon of Middlesex; John Lonsdale, subsequently bishop of Lichfield; Charles Lloyd subsequently bishop of Oxford; Richard Mant, subsequently bishop of Down and Connor, and Hugh James Rose, subsequently principal of King's College, London. Manners-Sutton was however, bitterly attacked by radical pamphleteers for alleged nepotism in his use of patronage. Manners-Sutton was regularly consulted by Lord Liverpool about the appointment of bishops. He was a key figure in the queen's council appointed to review George III's health and in the complex relations between the queen and the doctors caring for the king, whom the queen distrusted. He attracted public hostility for supporting the bill for George IV's divorce on the grounds that divorces 'were expressly declared by our Saviour himself' (Varley, 97). He was also involved in the negotiations over the modifications to the liturgy for George IV's coronation. At the end of his life Manners-Sutton opposed Roman Catholic emancipation, but favoured the repeal of the 'Test and Corporation Acts'. At Canterbury he was reckoned to be generous in his charity and his hospitality, but he paid meticulous attention to the administration of the archiepiscopal estates, which included major developments at Dover and Deal. In 1808 he purchased Addington Place as a country seat for archbishops in succession to the palace at Croydon, which had been sold in 1780. He published two sermons in 1794 and 1797; 'An Address to the Clergy of the Diocese of Norwich', in 1803; and he contributed 'A description of five British species of orabanch' to the 'Transactions' of the Linnean Society (vol. 4, 1797, 173). Archbishop Manners-Sutton died on 21 July 1828 at Lambeth Palace and was buried on 29 July at Addington parish church. His eldest son, Charles Manners-Sutton, became speaker of the House of Commons and subsequently first Viscount Canterbury, and his second son was a colonel in the army. 


@@@@@


doc= 17965


Sutton, Charles Manners-, first Viscount Canterbury (1780-1845), speaker of the House of Commons, was born at Screveton, Nottinghamshire, on 29 January 1780, the eldest son of Charles Manners-Sutton (1755-1828), later archbishop of Canterbury, and his wife, Mary (died 1832), daughter of Thomas Thoroton of Screveton. He was educated at Eton College (1793-6) and Trinity College, Cambridge (1798-1802), where he took a BA degree as fourth junior optime in 1802 and an MA in 1805. Admitted to Lincoln's Inn on 19 May 1802, he was called to the bar in May 1806 and practised on the western circuit for several years. 
Manners-Sutton's father, a grandson of the third duke of Rutland, who had been the royal choice as primate in 1805, provided him with a post worth over $600 a year, and in the general election of 1806 the Rutland electoral interest secured his return for Scarborough, a constituency he continued to represent until 1832. In London he joined the Alfred Club, then a cradle of rising young tory politicians like Palmerston, Robinson, and Peel. He made his first parliamentary speech in June 1808 on the 'Curates Residence Bill'. On general issues he supported the Portland and Perceval administrations. His gentlemanly appearance and good voice impressed his contemporaries, and in October 1809 he was invited by Perceval, with royal approval, to take the office of judge-advocate-general. 
Over the next eight years Manners-Sutton's interventions in debate were largely confined to his official business, including the periodic defence of flogging in the army against whig-Liberal criticism. He also spoke against parliamentary reform and concessions to Roman Catholics, and in April 1817 introduced a consolidating measure (57 Geo. III c. 99) on clerical residence and payment of curates. In June 1817 he was the ministerial candidate for the vacant speakership of the House of Commons, defeating his whig opponent, C. W. W. Wynn, by 312 votes to 150. While comparatively young for the office, he was older than two recent speakers, W. W. Grenville and Addington, at the time of their election. The chief criticism of his selection was his lack of knowledge of the forms and procedures of the house. However, he seems to have taken advice from his immediate predecessor, Charles Abbot, and his courteous and obliging manners soon established his authority in the House of Commons. 
On 8 July 1811 Manners-Sutton married Lucy Maria Charlotte, eldest daughter of John Denison of Ossington, Nottinghamshire, with whom he had two sons, Charles John and John Henry Thomas Manners-Sutton, and a daughter, Charlotte Matilda. His wife died on 7 December 1815 and he remained a widower until 6 December 1828, when he married Ellen (1791?-1845), widow of John Home-Purves and daughter of Edmund Power of Curragheen, co. Waterford, a hearty, lively Irishwoman (according to Thomas Moore) who contributed further to the popularity of his official entertainments (Dasent, 306). He retained his strong political views, and in 1827 refused Canning's offer of the Home Office because of their disagreement on the Catholic question. In May 1832, when attempts were being made, following Grey's resignation, to construct a tory reform ministry, he declined to enter a cabinet under Wellington. His resolution wavered, however, when his own name, as one of the rare Conservative politicians uncommitted on the parliamentary reform issue, was put forward for the premiership. At a meeting of senior tories at Apsley House on Sunday 13 May, he treated his future colleagues to an insufferably long and tedious exposition of his views and asked for more time to consider. Next day he wrote to Wellington to accept if no other arrangement seemed possible. His performance at the meeting, however, had disgusted everybody -- the coarse and impatient Lyndhurst swore that he would have nothing to do with such 'a damned tiresome old bitch' ('Greville Memoirs', 17 May 1832, 2.298) -- and in any case events in the House of Commons that evening put a stop to any further talk of a tory ministry. 
In July 1832, at the conclusion of the protracted and exhausting Reform Bill debates, Manners-Sutton expressed his wish to retire from the speaker's chair and was granted a life pension of $4000, with one of $3000 for his heir male. At the ensuing general election he was returned for the University of Cambridge; the whig ministry, unsure of its ability to control the remodelled House of Commons, at the end of December 1832 asked him in flattering terms to continue as speaker. He was accordingly re-elected in January 1833 as governmental candidate with a majority of 210 over E. J. Littleton, who had been put forward by disgruntled radicals. In August 1833, as a special mark of the cabinet's gratitude, he was given the GCB. 
During Peel's Hundred Days (1834-5) in office, Manners-Sutton was again embroiled in the formation of a tory administration. After the destruction by fire of the old House of Commons (including his own official residence) in October 1834, he had been in communication with the king over the latter's embarrassing offer of temporary accommodation for the Commons in the grounds of Buckingham Palace. He also attended a few formal privy council meetings subsequent to the change of ministry. This led to partisan charges in the whig press of collusion with William IV in the dismissal in November of Melbourne's government. In the contested election for the speakership in the new parliament in February 1835 he was defeated by 316 votes to 306 by the whig candidate, James Abercromby, in an unprecedented mobilization of party strength, designed to test the stability of the new Conservative administration. He was able, however, to demonstrate that he had not been involved in the king's decision to change his ministers, nor advised a dissolution, nor assisted in the formation of Peel's ministry. In March 1835, on Peel's initiative, he was created Viscount Canterbury, a higher rank than was normally conferred on a retiring speaker. But he seldom spoke in the House of Lords, and after appointment to the high commission for Canadian claims in March 1835 he soon resigned on grounds of his wife's health. 
Manners-Sutton was a tall, urbane man with a dignified bearing, though devoid of any great talents. He was short-sighted and, as speaker, occasionally affected, it was alleged, not to be able to recognize the faces or recall the names of whig members (Dasent, 309). Nevertheless, he earned a reputation for both equanimity and impartiality. The 'Annual Register' summed up his outward qualities when it wrote in its obituary of his 'commanding presence, sonorous voice, and imperturbable temper' ('Annual Register', 1845, 291). In handling the inexperienced and boisterous 1833 House of Commons he preferred, in his own metaphor, the snaffle rather than the curb, despite a certain laxity of discipline which resulted ('Greville Memoirs', 5 Sept 1833; cf. Dasent, 305). He established a record as the only speaker to have been elected seven times, though his actual tenure of the chair was exceeded in length by Onslow and Shaw-Lefevre. He became a bencher of Lincoln's Inn in 1817, was given the degree of LLD by Cambridge University in 1824, and held the office of registrar of the court of faculties of the archbishop of Canterbury from 1827 to 1834. 
On the night of 18 July 1845, while travelling by train between Slough and Paddington, Manners-Sutton suffered a stroke and died three days later, on 21 July 1845, at his younger son's house in Southwick Crescent, Paddington. His burial took place in the family vault at Addington, Surrey, on 28 July 1845. His wife, with whom he had a daughter, Frances Diana, survived him by only a few months, dying in November 1845. The title passed to his elder son, who died unmarried in 1869, and then to his younger son. 


@@@@@


doc= 17966


Sutton, John Henry Thomas Manners-, third Viscount Canterbury (1814-1877), politician and colonial governor, the younger son of Charles Manners-Sutton, first Viscount Canterbury (1780-1845), politician, and his first wife, Lucy Maria Charlotte (died 1815), eldest daughter of John Denison of Ossington, Nottinghamshire, was born in Downing Street, London, on 27 May 1814. He was educated at Eton College and Trinity College, Cambridge, where he graduated MA in 1835. He gained a blue for cricket in 1836. He was admitted a student of Lincoln's Inn on 18 September 1835, but was never called to the bar, and took his name off the books of the society on 25 November 1853. He was registrar of the court of faculties from 1834 until his death. Standing as a Conservative, in September 1839 he defeated Thomas Milner-Gibson at a by-election for the borough of Cambridge, but was subsequently unseated for bribery ('JHC', 45.293-4). At the general election in June 1841 he was again returned for Cambridge, and from September 1841 until June 1846 he was Peel's under-secretary for the Home Office, but took little part in debates. In 1847, he first withdrew as a candidate for Cambridge in the face of protectionist opposition, then stood, and was defeated by the Liberal candidate. He stood for Harwich unsuccessfully in 1848, and with this his career in the Commons -- where he did not make the most of his opportunities -- ended. 
In 1851 Manners-Sutton published the 'Lexington Papers', which had been discovered at Kelham, Nottinghamshire, in the library of his cousin, John Henry Manners-Sutton, MP for Newark. On 1 July 1854 he was appointed lieutenant-governor of New Brunswick, a post which he retained until October 1861, when he was succeeded by Sir A. H. Gordon. He became governor of Trinidad on 24 June 1864, and on 19 May 1866 was promoted to the post of governor of Victoria, Australia. He was created KCB on 23 June, and assumed the office of governor on 15 August 1866. On the death of his elder brother, Charles John Manners-Sutton, in November 1869, he succeeded as third Viscount Canterbury. He resigned his post of governor of Victoria, where he had been very popular, in March 1873, and returned to England to his seat, Brooke House, Brooke, Norfolk. He played no significant role in the business of the House of Lords except to make occasional speeches on colonial affairs. He was created GCMG on 25 June 1873. 
Manners-Sutton married, on 5 July 1838, Georgiana (died 14 Sept 1899), youngest daughter of Charles Tompson of Witchingham Hall, Norfolk, and his wife, Juliana, 'nee' Kett. They had five sons -- the eldest of whom, Henry Charles, succeeded to the title -- and two daughters. Manners-Sutton died at his London home, 12 Queensberry Place, on 23 June 1877. 


@@@@@


doc= 17967


Sutton, Thomas Manners-, first Baron Manners of Foston (1756-1842), judge, was born Thomas Manners on 24 February 1756, the fifth son of Lord George Manners (1723-1783) and his first wife, Diana (died 1767), daughter of Thomas Chaplin of Blankney, Lincolnshire. His paternal grandfather was John Manners, third duke of Rutland. In 1772 his father took the additional surname of Sutton on inheriting the estates of his maternal grandfather, Robert Sutton, second Baron Lexington, from his elder brother Lord Robert Manners-Sutton. He was at Charterhouse School from 1769 and matriculated at Emmanuel College, Cambridge, on 1 March 1773. His elder brother Charles Manners-Sutton, later archbishop of Canterbury, matriculated at Emmanuel on the same day. Thomas worked hard at Cambridge, graduating as fifth wrangler in 1777. While still an undergraduate he had entered Lincoln's Inn on 16 November 1775. He was called to the bar in November 1780, his years of 'diligence and application' as a law student having left him 'well qualified to practise his profession' (O'Flanagan, 338). 
Despite his strong academic record and his family connections Manners-Sutton's progress at the bar was slow. Over the years however he built up a considerable chancery practice and obtained a number of minor judicial preferments. He was at various times a commissioner of bankrupts (1783-97), recorder of Grantham, temporal chancellor of the palatinate of Durham, and chief justice of Anglesey (from July 1797 until 1802), covering the north Wales circuit. 
Manners-Sutton also ventured into politics, succeeding his brother John in the family seat of Newark in 1796, where he supported William Pitt the younger. His political career, rarely high-profile, was never permitted to interfere with his legal practice. He took silk on 2 July 1800 and was appointed a bencher of Lincoln's Inn on 16 July. At the same time Pitt appointed him solicitor-general to George, prince of Wales. In this latter capacity he addressed the Commons on 17 February 1802, asserting the prince's claims to those revenues from the duchy of Cornwall that had been collected during his minority. His subsequent motion for a committee to investigate the question was defeated but he had won the support of a large minority from both sides of the house and both Pitt and Charles James Fox praised his performance. In May 1802 he was appointed solicitor-general in Henry Addington's administration, although he made a point of obtaining Prince George's consent before accepting, and he was knighted on 19 May. He remained a confidant of the prince and continued to support him when matters affecting him were debated in the Commons. 
Manners-Sutton's appointment to the solicitor-generalship did not increase his parliamentary profile but it did lead to his involvement in some cases of note. In February 1803 he took part in the prosecution for high treason of Colonel Edward Despard, who had attempted to seize the Tower of London and the Bank of England the previous November. Manners-Sutton displayed 'great legal astuteness' (O'Flanagan, 338) and much 'temperance and ability' (Foss, 'Judges', 372) in the prosecution and, though he was a chancery lawyer by training, his handling of the witnesses and his knowledge of crown law were extremely good. Also in February 1803 he played a small role in the prosecution of Jean-Gabriel Peltier for libelling Napoleon Bonaparte in his poem 'Le 18 Brumaire an VIII'. On 4 November 1803 at Bentley Priory, Stanmore, he married Anne, daughter of Sir Joseph Copley, bt. She died suddenly on 5 August 1814 at Thomas's Hotel, Berkeley Square; they had no children. 
On the retirement of Beaumont Hotham, Manners-Sutton was raised to the bench on 4 February 1805 as a baron of the exchequer, having resigned his Commons seat. He served in this role for two unremarkable years until, in April 1807, Spencer Perceval appointed him lord chancellor of Ireland. On 20 April 1807 he was elevated to the peerage as Baron Manners of Foston, Lincolnshire, and was sworn of the British and Irish privy councils on 22 April and 12 May respectively. 
Lord Manners served as lord chancellor of Ireland for an unbroken period of twenty years, the second longest tenure of that office. As the senior Irish equity judge Manners performed quite adequately, although he was clearly not of the calibre of Eldon or Redesdale. Foss says that his decisions were held 'in high estimation' (Foss, 'Judges', 372) but he is probably best described as a workmanlike judge; he disposed swiftly of his cases, seeking always to do justice, 'not, indeed, deeply read, but evincing ability to understand and judgment to decide' (O'Flanagan, 339). One of his most important judicial decisions was that on 'Commissioners of Donations v. Walsh' (1823), where he upheld as a valid charitable trust a bequest for masses in the will of Mrs Judith Rush. The decision has been regarded as the root of modern Irish case law in this area and also indicated that Manners did not necessarily pursue his political opposition to Catholicism inside the courts. 
Several nineteenth-century commentators politically opposed to Manners depicted him as a privileged oaf, unsuited to judicial office and owing his position solely to family connections. He certainly made some mistakes and was on occasion candidly aware of his limitations; in 1824, for instance, he confessed to having 'very little confidence' in his construction of a bequest by Viscount Powerscourt, and expressed the hope that the case might proceed to the House of Lords for further consideration (J. Comyn, 'Irish at Law', 1981, 80). Nevertheless he remained on the Irish woolsack for two decades, spanning a number of administrations, and, according to Oliver Burke, of his 4469 decisions only fourteen were reversed and seven modified. Many of Manners's judgments were published in the Irish law reports of the period, mostly in Ball and Beatty's chancery reports. 
Manners's execution of his legal duties was fairly unremarkable, though by no means inadequate, but his presence as a politician and administrator was more keenly felt. His critics alleged that he 'entertained violent ascendancy principles' and 'cordially detested' both the Irish Roman Catholics and those protestants who supported Catholic emancipation (O'Flanagan, 352, 354-5). He reduced Catholic spheres of influence in so far as he could, dismissing numerous Catholics from the magistracy and refusing to appoint them to those few posts (such as commissioner of bankrupts) which, prior to emancipation, were open to them. It has been noted that 'emancipationists, be they Protestant or Catholic, were the objects of the Chancellor's pious detestation, and they were accordingly subjected to countless annoyances' (Burke, 197). It is questionable however whether Manners was quite so small-minded in this regard as his critics have claimed. One frequently recounted story concerns his refusal to recommend the grant of the honour of earls' children to the siblings of the young Joseph Leeson, fourth earl of Milltown. The story has it that Manners refused to assist because the children's mother had married Valentine Lawless, second Baron Cloncurry, a Catholic peer and ardent emancipationist. Manners strenuously denied such pettiness, and the fact that the grant was made to the Milltown children in 1817, as they approached maturity, when Earl Talbot replaced Lord Whitworth as viceroy, goes some way to supporting that denial. 
Manners was assisted in both his legal and political roles by William Saurin, his attorney-general from 1807 to 1822 and himself an ardent anti-emancipationist. A contemporary writer observed: 'daily the business of the government of Ireland was done by the two legal functionaries of kindred spirits, as they regularly walked down every morning from Stephen's Green to the Four Courts... with arms linked and solemn steps, and bended brows, settling affairs of state. (O'Flanagan, 354)' Neither would countenance the appointment of a Catholic to any position of influence and both insisted that only protestants of unquestionable ability would enjoy their patronage.Manners also participated in the House of Lords, including the so-called trial of Queen Caroline in 1820. He raised a number of evidential points during the debates and on 4 November delivered a speech in which he opined that the queen's adultery had been fully established and that the divorce should be granted so as to make an example of her for the moral good of the country. In 1829 he argued strenuously against Catholic emancipation in the form of the 'Roman Catholic Relief Bill', although he subsequently confessed that he might have been wrong in voting against it, and hoped that it might calm the Irish situation and strengthen the government. In April of the same year however he spoke in support of the 'Qualification of Freeholders (Ireland) Bill', which disenfranchised the 40's'. freeholders, many of whom were Catholic. These final assaults on Irish Catholicism marked the end of his participation in the Lords. 
Manners finally retired from the Irish woolsack in November 1827. He would have retired earlier but stayed on at the request of George IV, who wanted him to remain until a 'proper Protestant successor' could be found (Kenny, 137). He returned to England immediately and spent most of his time at his country residence, Fornham Hall, near Bury St Edmunds. After his participation in the disenfranchisement and emancipation debates he retired from public life, living out a long retirement with his second wife, Jane (died 1846), daughter of James Butler, ninth Baron Cahir, whom he had married at Baronscourt, near Newtownstewart, in co. Tyrone, on 28 October 1815. 
Aside from his strong views on Catholic emancipation Manners was an attractive personality. On the bench he was 'attentive, decorous, gentlemanlike, [and] distinguished for his urbanity' (O'Flanagan, 339), although he disliked being challenged by counsel when he had made up his mind on a point. Even political adversaries had to admit that in private Manners was 'a perfect gentleman' (Curran, 10); he was 'dignified, courteous, just and generous' (ibid., 9), with strong moral instincts and a very perceptible charm, and despite the strength of his political views he invariably did not let them stand in the way of his friendships. 
While he was lord chancellor Manners lived in considerable style in the mansion at 51 Stephen's Green East, Dublin (now the Office of Public Works). On Sundays he and Lady Manners would walk to St Peter's Church, preceded by their ten servants, walking two by two. Away from law and politics Manners was an enthusiastic shot and was often seen at Carton, seat of the duke of Leinster, or at Baronscourt, seat of the marquess of Abercorn, in his sporting attire -- his chancellor's hat, which resembled a bishop's mitre, a green jacket, a scarlet waistcoat, silk breeches, and long black gaiters. 
Manners died on 31 May 1842 at his London house in Brook Street and was buried at Kelham in Nottinghamshire. Manners and his second wife had one surviving child, John Thomas Manners-Sutton, second Baron Manners of Foston (1818-1864). Manners was very fond of his son and heir and occasionally brought him to court to sit with his father on the bench. His grandson John Thomas Manners, third Baron Manners of Foston (1852-1927), is remarkable for having ridden his own horses to victory in the 1882 Grand National and the 1882 Grand Military Gold Cup -- the only two races that he ever rode in. 


@@@@@


doc= 17968


Mannin, James (d. 1779), painter and decorative artist, is said to have been a Frenchman but his name is also found in Italy, in Venice and in Genoa. He was engaged on a salary in 1756 by the Dublin Society Schools to teach the art of design, and remained there until shortly before his death. He had earlier been teaching in the schools on the basis of payment for each student he taught, and he had a considerable private practice. Strickland recorded that he was in Dublin during the 1740s (Strickland, 2.100). No painting by him is known, although he exhibited flower pieces, designs for interior decoration, and landscapes at the Society of Artists in Ireland between 1765 and 1777. In 1768 he lived in Dublin at King's Street, Stephen's Green, and following his marriage on 18 October 1769 to Mary Maguire in St Andrew's Church, Dublin, he lived at Lazar's Hill, until 1775 when he moved to King Street. The president's chair at the Royal Dublin Society was designed by Mannin in 1767 and carved by Richard Cranfield, and is in a very Italianate manner. He probably taught landscape painting. His pupils included George Barret, Thomas Roberts, and J. J. Barralet, who took over his post in the Dublin Society Schools when ill health forced him to retire shortly before his death in Dublin in 1779. 


@@@@@


doc= 17969


Manning, Anne (1807-1879), writer, was born in London on 17 February 1807, the daughter of William Oke Manning (1778-1859), an insurance broker of Lloyd's, London, and his wife, Joan Whatmore, daughter of Frederick Gibson, principal surveyor of the London docks. Manning's family included two notable legal writers: her first cousin Sir William Montague Manning (1811-1895), attorney-general and judge of the supreme court of New South Wales, was co-author of 'Reports in Court of Queen's Bench' (1834), and her brother William Oke Manning (1809-1878) was the author of the 1839 treatise on international law 'Commentaries on the Law of Nations'. James Manning (1781-1866), serjeant-at-law, was her uncle. 
Manning spent her first eight years in Brunswick Square until the family moved to Old Chelsea, where they lived in the former home of Scottish author John Galt (1779-1839). Manning was educated by her mother, an accomplished scholar, and her schooling was thorough. She showed interest in the sciences and she was awarded a gold medal from the Royal Academy for a copy of 'Flower Girl' originally by Spanish painter Bartolome Esteban Murillo (1617-1682). She received sound tuition in English literature and knew several languages, including Latin and Old French ([Manning], 'Introduction' to 'Thomas More', xxv). 
At the age of nineteen Manning published 'A Sister's Gift: Conversations on Sacred Subjects' (1826). That book of essays was succeeded by another, more historically based prose work, 'Stories from the History of Italy' (1831). The latter was the only book ever published under her own name. During her lifetime she wrote numerous other essays and articles, a book on the elements of logic ('The Hill Side', 1854), some verse, and autobiographical sketches. She is best remembered, however, as a prolific writer of historical fiction, mostly set in the sixteenth century. 
Of particular note among Manning's many fictional works is 'The Maiden and Married Life of Mary Powell, Afterwards Mistress Milton' (1849). The novel purports to be the diary of Mary Powell and, using its own contrived version of sixteenth-century words and spellings, shows a most careful attention to and knowledge of the works of Milton, as well as of the other major poets of that time. This work was extremely popular, went through eight printings in the nineteenth century, and enjoyed French and German translations. After its publication, Manning published as 'the author of 'Mary Powell''. In what was largely an attempt to capitalize on the success of the original 'Mary Powell', the novel was amended in 1859 to include 'Deborah's Diary', the fictional diary of Milton's daughter. Manning's final novel on Milton was 'The Masque at Ludlow and other Romanesques' (1866), which she described as an attempt to 'outline [Milton] at an earlier age, full of promises that were to be richly fulfilled' (Manning, viii). 
Another significant success for Manning's fiction was 'The Household of Sir Thomas More' (1851). Like 'Mary Powell', 'Thomas More' combines pseudo-archaic language, considerable familiarity with historical facts, and female observation (this time in the epistolary mode) to create a reverential story that encompasses both public greatness and everyday private domesticity. 'The Household of Sir Thomas More' also achieved great popularity, two language translations, and multiple reprintings. Other notable examples of Manning's historical fiction are 'Cherry and Violet: a Tale of the Great Plague' (1853) and 'A Noble Purpose Nobly Won' (1862), about Jeanne d'Arc. 
Manning's bold inventiveness in portraying important historical moments and renowned figures did not go unnoticed or unchallenged. In 1855 a review of her works (including 'Mary Powell' and 'Thomas More') lambasted the author for writing books 'which are little else than a tissue of sentimental unrealities and falsehoods' ('Spurious antiques', 106). While her works were never intended to be taken for literal truth, this hostile review highlights the issues that arise in the creation of historically based works of fiction. As a result of such difficulties, some of Manning's later works include disclaimers such as the one which precedes 'The Masque at Ludlow': 'These letters have no pedigree, unless forged by the Cheat'em Society, of which, in an innocent way, I am a member' (Manning, vii). The decidedly 'old-fashioned' tenor of Manning's works (Miller, 109) poses a greater problem for the modern reader, but a novel such as 'Mary Powell' can be usefully read today both 'because of and in spite of its sentimentality, its piety, and its didacticism' (Swaim and Culley, 88). 
According to her niece, Manning desired that no particulars about herself be published while she lived (Drake, 16). She kept in close retirement, avoided public notice through literary anonymity, and never married. She is remembered by her contemporaries as a 'tall, thin lady with black hair, an aquiline nose, and a bright colour' (Hutton, 'Introduction' to 'Mary Powell', xi). Although an extremely private person, Manning was greatly valued for her willingness to encourage other aspiring authors (Batty, 65). She is also depicted as a 'stout English Churchwoman', restrainedly but sincerely devout (Hutton, 'Introduction' to 'Mary Powell', xii). According to a written memorial, she was 'a chronic invalid' whose final years were racked by increasingly confining discomfort and whose gradual paralysis ended her career as an author in 1876 (Batty, 64, 66). A year before her death, illness forced her removal from Reigate Hill (which had been her home since 1850) to her sisters' home at Tunbridge Wells. She died there on 14 September 1879. She is buried near her parents in Mickleham churchyard, near Dorking. 


@@@@@


doc= 17970


Manning, Henry Edward (1808-1892), Roman Catholic convert and cardinal-archbishop of Westminster, was born at Copped Hall, Totteridge, Hertfordshire, on 15 July 1808, the eighth and youngest child of William Manning (1763-1835), West Indies merchant and tory MP, and his second wife, Mary Hunter (1771-1847), who had influential City connections, her brother becoming lord mayor of London in 1811. William Manning had made his fortune from the West Indian sugar trade and his family grew up in circumstances of considerable affluence, as he gained successive offices of prestige within the City, culminating in his appointment as governor of the Bank of England in 1812-14. Henry Edward was baptized by the bishop of Bath and Wells, and one of his godfathers was a former prime minister, Henry Addington, Viscount Sidmouth. In 1815 the family moved to Coombe Bank at Sundridge, near Sevenoaks, where the young Manning soon made friends with Christopher and Charles Wordsworth, the sons of the rector of Sundridge, the brother of William Wordsworth. 
Until the age of eight, Manning was educated at home; he then proceeded to a private school at Streatham, from which he was speedily removed because his father feared the lingering influence within the school of a boy who had been removed for immoral practices. He returned to Totteridge where the local curate was taking in private pupils. At the age of fourteen he was sent to Harrow School, where he distinguished himself more in games than at study, playing for two successive years (1825-6) in the Harrow cricket eleven. At this stage of his life he exhibited few indications of subsequent eminence. Being somewhat aloof and fastidious, he was nicknamed the General; he was certainly not particularly pious. His mother had instilled in him a not altogether healthy fear of the inevitability of the day of judgment, but the somewhat high-church religious ambience at Sundridge appears to have left him relatively unmoved. It was not until he left Harrow in 1826 that a major transformation occurred, induced by grief at the death in that year of his favourite sister, Harriet, and by the close association he then formed with his brothers-in-law, John Anderdon, his first real mentor. This was less of a religious conversion than a realization that success in life depended upon industry and disciplined will-power. He therefore subjected himself to a rigorous regime of study under the direction of Canon William Fisher at his coaching establishment at Poulshot in Wiltshire. In April 1827 he entered Balliol College, Oxford. For the next three years, although his health was poor -- he was a chronic asthmatic all his life -- he worked assiduously, owing much to his tutor, Herman Merivale, and forging stronger links of friendship with Charles Wordsworth at Christ Church and his contemporary at the same college, W. E. Gladstone. He also discovered a talent for public speaking as well as an arena in which to display it -- the newly founded Oxford Union, where he enjoyed meteoric success, being cast by his auditors as the rising young statesman of his generation. In December 1830 his industry was rewarded with a first class in Greats. 
There followed a combination of circumstances which altered the whole direction of Manning's life. His hopes of a distinguished political career were dashed when his father's fortunes collapsed, ominously precipitated by a slump in sugar prices in 1829. In 1831 Manning had the harrowing experience of accompanying his father to the Guildhall to hand in his seals of office, the symbolic last possessions of a bankrupt. For a short period he was grudgingly grateful to obtain a junior clerkship in the Colonial Office, during which unhappy period he came under the influence of the second, if only temporary, mentor of his life -- an exceedingly pious evangelical lady, Favell Bevan, the sister of one of his Harrow contemporaries. The extent of Miss Bevan's influence in drawing Manning into a state of evangelical 'seriousness' has been open to some question (O'Gorman), but their association undoubtedly coincided with Manning's decision to abandon his political aspirations for a career in the church. He returned to Oxford and, in April 1832, was elected fellow of Merton, taking deacon's orders in December of that year. In Manning's subsequent quest for a curacy, his friend Henry Wilberforce arranged for him a temporary engagement -- until he was ready to take up the post himself -- as curate to John Sargent, the evangelical rector of Lavington and Graffham in Sussex, little realizing what the consequences would be. Manning went to Lavington in January 1833 and fell in love with one of John Sargent's daughters, Caroline, to whom he became engaged after a courtship of three months. In May of the same year John Sargent died, and Manning was presented to the living by Caroline's grandmother, having taken priest's orders immediately after John Sargent's death. He and Caroline were married in November 1833. 
Thus came about the forging of the closest of bonds between Manning and the Wilberforce and Sargent families. Samuel Wilberforce (later bishop of Oxford and of Winchester) had married Caroline's elder sister, Emily, in 1828; his brother Henry, not at all put out by the chain of events, married yet another Sargent daughter (Mary) in July 1834. In the same month, the fourth Sargent daughter, Sophia, married George Dudley Ryder. Tragically, three of the brothers-in-law were to undergo the agonies of early bereavement, through the successive deaths of Caroline Manning (25 July 1837), Emily Wilberforce (1841), and Sophia Ryder (1850). 
Manning suffered first, and the loss of Caroline (there were no children) was a lifelong sorrow. He kept all her letters, which were stolen -- to his great grief -- from a travelling bag when he was 'en route' for Rome in 1851; on his deathbed, he entrusted to Herbert Vaughan, his successor at Westminster, a book of Caroline's prayers, from which he had prayed and meditated every day since her death. Thereby he also paid final testimony to his enduring attachment to the Church of England. 
Manning's advance into full sympathy with Newman's stance at Oxford, while never amounting to adulation and always maintaining a measure of independence, progressed in stages: first, an acceptance of the doctrine of baptismal regeneration (at the time of his ordination) and (by 1834) an understanding of the nature of the real presence, gained from a study of Richard Hooker. In 1835, when he preached his first published sermon ('The English Church, its Succession and Witness for Christ') at a visitation in Chichester Cathedral, he gave eloquent expression to his conviction of the exalted nature of the priestly office; he reverted to this theme in his second visitation sermon, in 1838 ('The Rule of Faith', published in the same year), by which time he had arrived at the conclusion that the credentials of the Church of England must be seen to lie in its authoritative role as the teacher and interpreter of Christian doctrine (the church as 'ecclesia docens'). Although he had shared Samuel Wilberforce's reservations about the severe tone of Newman's first volume of sermons, Manning fully endorsed the concept of the Anglican church as the 'via media' between the corruptions of Rome and the heresies of continental protestantism, and he therefore undertook to become a distributor of the 'Tracts for the Times' in his locality. In 1836, in collaboration with Charles Marriott, he contributed a tract himself -- 'Tract 78', a 'catena patrum' on the subject of Catholic tradition. In 1837 he pinned his colours to the Tractarian mast by registering his vote at Oxford in protest against the appointment of the allegedly heterodox R. D. Hampden as regius professor of divinity. 
Although during these years Manning's strongest bond of affection was with his senior brother-in-law, Samuel Wilberforce, another close -- and probably more formative -- friendship had developed with Samuel Francis Wood (younger brother of Charles Wood, later first Viscount Halifax), a brilliant young lawyer, greatly attached to Newman, and himself a keen student of theology. They became firm friends in the course of their joint work on behalf of the National Society for Promoting the Education of the Poor, and recent research has unearthed a highly significant correspondence, as early as the winter of 1835, between Wood (the instigator), Newman, and Manning on the church's role in the development of Christian doctrine, which was later to prove such a decisive issue in Newman's conversion to Rome (Pereiro, 218-53). Manning was himself engaged in patristic studies during these years (offering a contribution to Pusey's 'Library of the Fathers' on Justin Martyr), and his scholarship was clearly demonstrated in his most substantial book, written as an Anglican, 'The Unity of the Church' (1842). There is no doubt, however, that he deeply respected Wood's judgement on all theological questions. After Wood's untimely death in 1843, Manning found a second mentor on theological matters in yet another of the Wilberforce family -- Robert Wilberforce, archdeacon of the East Riding, brother of Samuel and Henry, and also a future convert to Rome. 
Within the diocese of Chichester, and indeed beyond, Manning was making his mark in other ways, as well as by acquiring influential friends. In 1837 he became rural dean of Midhurst, and rapidly established a reputation as the most active and efficient among his diocesan colleagues. He was appointed to the corresponding committee of the National Society and -- in the company of S. F. Wood and Thomas Acland -- was the leading force in the founding of the theological college at Chichester, securing his friend Charles Marriott as its first principal. The establishment of the ecclesiastical commission on a permanent basis in 1836, with extensive powers to tackle the anomalies and abuses within the Church of England, provoked Manning to follow the lead of Pusey in publishing an intemperate protest against what he conceived to be an unwarranted encroachment by the state upon the independent authority of the church ('Principles of the Ecclesiastical Commission Examined', 1838), which brought about a renewal of friendship and the beginning of regular correspondence with Gladstone. He was overworking himself, partly as a reaction to the feeling of crushing emptiness after Caroline's death, and William Otter, his bishop, persuaded him to take a complete break abroad. So, in the winter of 1838, Manning decided to join Gladstone who was spending Christmas in Rome. This was to be the first of twenty-two visits that Manning made to the 'eternal city' in the course of his life. 
Shortly after his return from Rome, Manning received his reward for his industry and influence. In December 1840 he was appointed archdeacon of Chichester in succession to the senile Charles Webber, who had been prevailed upon to retire. It was a preferment hardly to be expected from the new evangelical bishop, William Shuttleworth, who had swallowed his antipathy to Tractarians in response to pressure from Julius Hare, archdeacon of Lewes, and the dean of Chichester, G. Chandler, and also because Webber candidly admitted that Manning had been effectively acting as archdeacon since he became rural dean. 
As archdeacon, Manning soon became a national figure. A speech that he delivered in Willis's Rooms in London in April 1841, on the subject of the need for more colonial bishops, was so powerful that Gladstone recalled its eloquence fifty years later, and George Selwyn, who was also in the audience, described it as the turning point of his life. His archidiaconal charges were read nationwide, their main significance today lying in the remarkable similarity between the declared priorities in these charges and those which he was later to define in his pastorals as archbishop of Westminster: urgent attention to the plight of the poor and the outcasts of society; sympathy for the lot of the labouring classes and condemnation of exploitation by greedy landowners and employers; and the crucial need for the education of the poor and for the preservation of its denominational character. A theme of several of his Anglican sermons -- the church's obligation to undertake the proper training of ordinands -- would reappear in time, once he became archbishop of Westminster, as would his emphasis on the awesome nature of a priest's responsibilities and duties (to be prepared 'to be crucified with Christ', as he put it in an Oxford University sermon in 1843). This would be repeated in his work 'The Eternal Priesthood' (1883), a tough challenge for seminarians, since it reads like a counsel of unattainable perfection. A further enduring theme (which would change only in name when he became a Catholic) was the independence of the church from secular interference: the need to combat Erastianism as applied to the Church of England, labouring under unacceptable manifestations of the royal supremacy. 
Nevertheless, bold as Manning was in his own championship of the Catholic traditions within the Anglican church, he began studiously to distance himself from the Romeward trend of Newman in 1841 and thereafter. He sincerely believed that Newman's notorious 'Tract 90' was misconceived; and when called upon to preach the sermon on 5 November at Oxford in 1843 -- a delicate mission in the circumstances -- Manning took the opportunity to inveigh against 'the secular domination of the Roman pontiff' and to declare his own total devotion to 'our highly-favoured Church' ('Sermons Preached before the University of Oxford', 1844, 81). From the sensitive and sympathetic correspondence that continued between Manning and Newman up to the point of Newman's reception into the Roman Catholic church in October 1845, however, there is no suggestion of personal estrangement on either side. 
Difficult years lay ahead for Manning. Samuel Wilberforce became bishop of Oxford in the same month as Newman's reception, and Manning felt less able to share his private anxieties with him. Pressure was being put upon him to apply his own moderating influence and reputation for statesmanship to rally the shaken ranks of those whom Newman had abandoned. Gladstone begged him, in the winter of 1845, to produce a weighty challenge to the arguments of Newman's 'Essay on Development'. Manning was well aware that his friends were looking to the day when he would follow his brother-in-law into the ranks of the episcopate, and a new -- rather improbable -- friendship with the crusty old doyen of the high-church party, Henry Phillpotts, bishop of Exeter, made such an expectation even surer. Yet, when the obvious opening occurred in December 1845 -- the offer of the post of sub-almoner to the archbishop of York, generally regarded as a springboard to episcopal office -- Manning declined it, to the surprise and consternation of his friends. 
The truth is that Manning embarked upon the task that Gladstone had set him only to discover that he found Newman's arguments unanswerable. Only to a very few people could he safely communicate his growing fears that he might be ministering within a schismatical church: Henry Wilberforce and Mary, his wife; his own curate, Charles Laprimaudaye, who had become his spiritual director; and Robert Wilberforce, the man whom he hoped would be most able to allay his doubts. In February 1847 he fell seriously ill. He spent ten months of his convalescence abroad, determined to learn for himself as much as he could about continental Catholicism and Catholic theology. Much of the time was spent in Rome, where he had an audience with Pope Pius IX on 11 May 1848. He returned to England still undecided. Three years of spiritual anguish followed, during which -- according to the unsympathetic account given by E. S. Purcell, his first major biographer -- he spoke with 'a double voice', stoutly defending the Church of England while privately doubting its claims to be a church at all. It should be observed that from this point in Purcell's two-volume biography, published in 1896, indications of strong personal animus appear, amounting to distortion and calumny in the construction that he places on Manning's motives and ruthlessness during the course of his Catholic career. Unfortunately for Manning's reputation in the eyes of posterity, these imputations of unscrupulous personal ambition were to be popularized in 1918 by Lytton Strachey in the first of his essays in 'Eminent Victorians'. Purcell's motive and methods have been rightly questioned more recently (see Gilley, 166-98). 
A fairer way of representing Manning's dilemma in the years between 1848 and 1851 is to recognize that he could not contemplate injury to the church whose preferments he had accepted, and the sorrow caused to those near to him, until his doubts had become certainties. This eventually came about through an escalating series of considerations and events: his conviction that the Church of England lacked the strength of the penitential system that he had seen at work abroad, as he testified to Henry Wilberforce and T. W. Allies on his return to England in 1848; and the emotional blow of the secession of Henry and Mary Wilberforce in June 1850. On his own admission, however, it was the proof of the inherent Erastianism of the Church of England that forced him to take the decisive step. The church had been impotent in 1847 when Lord John Russell had ignored the howls of protest against his appointment of R. D. Hampden to the bishopric of Hereford. Even more serious, the judicial committee of the privy council (a largely secular tribunal) had presumed to make the final and irrevocable judgment in the Gorham case of 1850, thereby overruling the decision of the court of arches to support the bishop of Exeter's refusal to institute to a living in his diocese a Calvinist who denied the doctrine of baptismal regeneration. Here was proof positive that the Church of England must resign all claims to be an 'ecclesia docens', if the state had the right to dictate on matters of doctrine. Manning's protest, his last publication within the Church of England ('The Appellate Jurisdiction of the Crown in Matters Spiritual', 1850), went unheeded. When, later that same year, Pius IX proclaimed the restoration of the Roman Catholic hierarchy in England, thereby precipitating outraged protestant accusations of 'papal aggression', Manning was required as archdeacon to convene his clergy to register their repudiation of the papal effrontery. In duty bound, he summoned the meeting; but in conscience bound he vacated the chair and announced his intention to resign. On 6 April 1851, in the company of his friend James Hope, he was received into the Roman Catholic communion by Father Brownbill SJ at the Jesuit church in Farm Street. 
'After this I shall sink to the bottom and disappear', Manning observed to Robert Wilberforce. Did he sincerely believe this, and did it seriously worry him if he did? Loss of friends deeply distressed him; so too did loss of influence in high places. As for personal advancement, when a member of the cabinet told him in 1854 that, if he had remained an Anglican, he would have gained the bishopric of Salisbury (instead of W. K. Hamilton), his reply was, 'What an escape my poor soul did have' (Gray, 153). In fact, he had underestimated the percipience of Nicholas Wiseman, now installed as cardinal-archbishop of Westminster. He was fully aware of the depth of Manning's spirituality and the many gifts and talents that he could bring to the service of the church. Against Manning's own wishes he ordained him priest on 14 June 1851, within ten weeks of his reception. In the autumn of 1851 Manning left for Rome to study at the Accademia Ecclesiastica, where he remained, returning for occasional breaks in England, until the late summer of 1854. Here again he made an immediate impression, both on Pius IX, with whom he was to have frequent audiences, and on his recently appointed papal chamberlain, acting as Wiseman's personal representative in Rome, the Hon. George Talbot, who had been Manning's travelling companion 'en route' for Rome. He was awarded a papal doctorate at the conclusion of his studies and the pope tried, unsuccessfully, to persuade him to remain at Rome as a papal chamberlain with prelatial rank. 
But Manning's place, at his own wish, was in England. An immediate service which he could offer, on the outbreak of the Crimean War, was to use his influence with former friends in the government (and his diplomatic skills with wary members of the Catholic hierarchy) to supply Florence Nightingale with nuns to act as nurses in the Crimea. A more permanent challenge was to respond to Wiseman's invitation to him to found a community of mission priests to work in the poorest quarters of London. This was the origin of the congregation of the Oblates of St Charles Borromeo, for the headquarters of which Manning secured a partially built church in Bayswater (St Mary of the Angels). Having drawn up a rule, Manning was appointed superior, and the congregation began its active life in 1857. For the next eight years -- the happiest years of his life, as he later recalled -- Bayswater remained his residence; during that time he converted the area around him into a virtual Catholic stronghold, building three new churches and four convents, and setting up eight schools, a choir school, and a reformatory. 
These successes, and the favours lavished upon him, did not endear Manning to many of the old English Catholics. He seemed to be in too much of a hurry, a 'forward piece' as William Hogarth, bishop of Hexham, described him. He was accused of being over-zealous in his determination to gain converts. By 1865 his tally amounted to 346; as some of them came from the ranks of the aristocracy, he was -- very unfairly -- taunted with the title the 'Apostle of the Genteels'. Wiseman's affection for him did not pass unnoticed. Within a year of his reception Wiseman had invited him, with Newman, to preach one of the two sermons at the first synod of Oscott in July 1852; Pius IX then caused a stir of unrest, amounting almost to a mutiny within the chapter of Westminster, by personally appointing Manning provost of Westminster in 1857. 
Understandably, the most resentful were those who had been closest to Wiseman's inner councils before Manning appeared to usurp their place. But the most implacable opponent was Wiseman's own coadjutor, with right of succession to the Westminster see, George Errington, archbishop of Trebizond. Errington was an able canon lawyer who was totally unsympathetic to the religious temper and Italianate usages of the so-called 'new ultramontanism', which coincided with Wiseman's arrival in England and the restoration of the hierarchy. Many of the recent converts rejoiced to see such a day, but it was a wind of change uncongenial to the majority of old English Catholics who responded to it with insular indifference. Errington's many attempts to thwart Manning's influence eventually centred on what he conceived to be a virtual take-over of the seminary at St Edmund's, near Ware, by the Oblates, and the consequent introduction there of Roman usages, both in dress and devotions. The climax of this clash of personalities was fought out in Rome, when Errington's opposition turned into open disloyalty to Wiseman himself. This, then, became Wiseman's battle, and Manning prudently played no direct part in it. But it was to lead to a fateful conclusion. Errington, at the pope's command, was deprived of his coadjutorship and his right of succession to the see. 
Already something of a division into parties was becoming discernible among English Catholics, tending to centre on the personalities and priorities of the two most distinguished converts, Newman and Manning. This was almost inevitable, granted their different temperaments and the conflicting interests dearest to their hearts. Newman was anxious to elevate the intellectual standing (and standards) of the Catholic laity; both the tone of his writings and the refreshingly independent spirit displayed within them appealed especially to the Catholic intelligentsia. He became involved, somewhat reluctantly, with Lord Acton and the newly founded organ of liberal Catholicism, 'The Rambler', which was inclined in the subject matter of its articles to trespass on the sacred preserves of the hierarchy and official theologians. Newman's wish to establish a branch of the Oratory in Oxford raised fears that his return to his old stamping ground would encourage the laity to defy the inhibition against Catholics attending the university, imposed for fear of their encountering influences damaging to their faith. Both Wiseman and Manning were uneasy about Newman's influence, Manning going so far (after he became archbishop) as to express his views in a private letter to Mgr Talbot that Newman was attempting to reproduce in the church 'the old Anglican, patristic, literary Oxford tone', unfairly branding such an attitude as 'worldly' or 'diluted' Catholicism (Newsome, 'Convert Cardinals', 257-8). Manning agreed with Newman in putting Catholic education as a top priority, but his main concern was the education of the poor, the founding of Catholic elementary schools, and the provision of seminaries for the training of the secular clergy. 
The divergence became a rift, however, over the vexed question of the pope's 'temporal power'. To Newman the retention of papal sovereignty within his traditional patrimony was a thing indifferent. To Manning it was the essential safeguard of the pope's independence from secular control, and he was prepared to fight this issue with almost apocalyptic fervour. It was understandable that he should do so. His visit to Rome in 1847 and 1848 had coincided with the flight of Pius IX to Gaeta and the setting up of the Mazzinian Roman Republic. He saw, more clearly than many of his contemporaries, the hypocrisy that underlay Cavour's facile slogan 'A free church in a free state', which was purely a cover to wrest education out of the hands of the church, to spoliate ecclesiastical endowments, and ultimately to silence its effective voice. Furthermore, Manning had abandoned the Church of England because of its inability to resist Erastianism. On the wider stage of the worldwide Catholic communion, secular pretensions to gain control of the church were what he was wont to describe as 'Caesarism', representing it as the greatest menace of modern times. He had not left the Anglican church in order to see the vicar of Christ become as impotent as the archbishop of Canterbury. For such a fate to overcome Pius IX, to whom Manning felt an intense personal loyalty, was unthinkable. The subject of Caesarism evoked from his pen, for the remainder of his life, some of his most powerful invective, directed against Piedmont, the Paris commune, and, finally, the 'Kulturkampf' of Bismarck (for example, in 'Caesarism and Ultramontanism', 1873, repr. in 'Miscellanies', vol. 2). 
Wiseman died on 15 February 1865, and Manning delivered his funeral oration in accordance with the cardinal's expressed wish. He had no serious expectations that the mantle of Elijah would fall on his own shoulders. But the Westminster chapter caused great offence to the pope by placing the name of Errington, with the names of two other bishops who declined to stand, in the terna (the three nominations for the succession to the Westminster see). Pius IX therefore took the matter into his own hands, defying the advice of the Congregatio de Propaganda Fide and relying on the guidance of private prayer. So it came about that within fourteen years of his conversion Manning found himself appointed the second archbishop of Westminster. He was consecrated on 8 June 1865 at the pro-cathedral at Moorfields. 
The expected opposition to the appointment never came, and for a while there was a closing of the ranks behind the new archbishop. Manning immediately worked for reconciliation. He offered a bishopric 'in partibus' to Newman, which he declined. Thereafter, despite his private feelings expressed sometimes intemperately to Mgr Talbot, he offered a series of olive branches to the man who had once been his friend and whose support he was so anxious to obtain. He was not prepared to relent, however, on the inhibition on Catholics attending Oxford and Cambridge. In 1875 Manning persuaded 'propaganda fide' not to censure Newman for certain ill-received comments in his 'Letter to the Duke of Norfolk'. Putting aside his own personal feelings, Manning agreed to support the petition to Pope Leo XIII in 1879 for the bestowal of a cardinalate on Newman, unfortunately gaining discredit for what was meant to be a kindly act by his misunderstanding of Newman's reply, Manning interpreting certain ambiguous phrases as a courteous refusal of the official offer. Following Newman's death on 11 August 1890, Manning delivered his funeral oration at the Brompton Oratory nine days later, acknowledging his services to the church in a eulogy of great eloquence. 
Manning was archbishop of Westminster for nearly twenty-seven years. He was elevated to the cardinalate himself on 29 March 1875 (cardinal-priest attached to the church of St Andrew and St Gregory on the Coelian Hill). On the death of his beloved Pius IX on 7 February 1878, Manning's name was put forward at the ensuing conclave as a possible successor, but he refused to be considered on the grounds that the political situation demanded the election of an Italian. The first years of his archiepiscopate were marked by his determination to set in motion a crisis fund to provide school accommodation for Catholic children, and he insisted that this pressing need must take priority over the building of Westminster Cathedral, as Wiseman's memorial. By the time of his death schooling had been provided for 70,000 children. With a determination reminiscent of his Anglican days, he fought a constant battle to undo the damage to denominational teaching in the Forster 'Education Act' of 1870. He even took the unprecedented step in 1885 of publishing in every Catholic newspaper instructions to Catholic voters on the eve of a general election, in order to thwart the proposals of Joseph Chamberlain (and therefore the Liberal Party) to put an end to voluntary schools. Lord Salisbury duly appointed him in 1886 as a member of the Cross commission on elementary education. 
Not all Manning's educational endeavours were successful, however. He appreciated that if he were to have any hope of countering the pressure on Catholics to defy the official inhibition against entry to Oxford and Cambridge, he must at least take the initial steps to establish a Catholic university as an acceptable alternative. In January 1875 the Catholic University College of Kensington began its precarious life. The Jesuits, however, failed to support it; the first rector consistently created more problems than he solved; and within seven years its effective life was over. Another of Manning's grand educational designs -- a project to set up a network of diocesan seminaries, on the Tridentine pattern, in order to guarantee a supply of disciplined and professionally trained priests -- was also short-lived. The expense proved too great, and the supply of ordinands too few. 
Manning's devotion to the interests of the secular priesthood, on which the major burden of the pastoral office lay, led him to resent the independence of the regular clergy from episcopal control (he could not easily forgive the Society of Jesus for their refusal to support his university plans). In 1881 he, with the support of Herbert Vaughan and Bishop Clifford of Clifton, succeeded in obtaining from Leo XIII the bull 'Romanos pontifices', which laid down that in future no religious house, college, or school could be established without the prior consent of the diocesan bishop. 
To Manning, however, this was a minor triumph compared to the issue of the definition of papal infallibility at the Vatican Council of 1869-70, within which he was to play a prominent and a highly controversial role. Against the so-called inopportunists, who feared that a time of political crisis, exacerbated by the designs of Piedmont on the remaining Papal States, was unpropitious for the raising of so sensitive an issue, Manning held precisely the opposite view (again finding himself at odds with Newman). He was determined to secure conciliar confirmation of what was practically universally accepted by Catholics, seeing such a bold assertion of ultramontanism as the most fitting riposte to the revolutionary forces threatening the church on all sides. In three successive pastorals, published as a volume entitled 'Petri privilegium' in 1871, he called upon the church to unite against the evil of Caesarism. Once in Rome, where he was in his element (he spoke Italian perfectly), he took upon himself the role of chief whip of the infallibilist party, allowing fervour at times to degenerate into ruthlessness in his contriving to ensure that no member of the opposition should be allowed a place on the committee set up to draft the conciliar decree. He employed all his statesmanship, through the intermediary of Odo Russell (England's unaccredited agent in Rome), to persuade the British government and other hostile European powers not to intervene to close the proceedings of the council. On 25 May 1870 he delivered at the council one of the most powerful speeches of his life in support of the definition, lasting one hour and fifty minutes, which even his opponents conceded was a masterly performance. The final definition, in the decree 'Pastor aeternus', was actually more moderate than Manning had hoped to achieve, but he had no reservations in his defence of the definition or of the proceedings of the council when he came to respond to Gladstone's published 'expostulations' of 1874-5 against a seeming reversion to medievalism. His answer to Gladstone's attacks came in two books: 'The Vatican Decrees and their Bearing on Civil Allegiance' (1875) and 'The True Story of the Vatican Council' (1877). 
Manning had an enduring affection and respect for Gladstone, harking back to their close friendship in the 1840s. Gladstone, on the other hand, never quite forgave his friend for abandoning the Church of England, and was constantly perplexed by Manning's change of stance from statesmanlike moderation, as an Anglican, to the extremism and inflexibility of his Catholic years. Nevertheless, intermittent and reasonably cordial relations with Gladstone had been resumed after Manning's elevation to Westminster and again, if slightly less cordial, in the years following the council, chiefly because of their common concern over the plight of Ireland. The first necessity was to secure the disestablishment of the Irish church, the established church being an intolerable affront to a largely Catholic nation. In 1868 Manning published his 'Letter to Earl Grey' (repr. in 'Miscellanies', vol. 1), forcefully expounding his case, as well as identifying other iniquitous abuses -- the grossly inequitable land laws most of all. Gladstone had already come round to the need to tackle the issue of disestablishment without Manning's prompting, but the arguments of Manning's pamphlet were used extensively in the parliamentary debates which eventually saw disestablishment achieved in 1869. The removal of the worst abuses of the land laws, for which Manning tirelessly campaigned, was a slower process, but legislation in 1870 and 1881 gained most of what he sought. Manning felt a genuine sympathy for the Fenian cause, but never condoned the use of violence. He maintained friendly relations with both Parnell and Michael Davitt, doing his utmost to counter pressure upon the Holy See from the British government to issue a papal condemnation of the Irish Land League. Towards the end of his life he came to the reluctant conclusion that some form of home rule was inevitable. 
Manning's sympathy for the oppressed and disadvantaged in society, already witnessed in his Anglican days, became more and more marked as he grew older. During his retreat with the Passionists at Highgate on the eve of his consecration, he pledged himself to devote all his energies on behalf of the wretched and the so-called 'worthless' in society. He also recognized the church's obligation to protect honest labouring people against exploitation by employers. His strongest proclamation on this theme came in an address given in Leeds in 1874, published under the title 'The Dignity and Rights of Labour' (repr. in 'Miscellanies', vol. 2). He had already publicly supported Joseph Arch's National Agricultural Labourers' Union, insisting that labour had a right to protect itself against exploitation and to campaign for fair wages and reasonable hours of work. He was later to declare his support for the even more radical union movement in America, the Knights of Labour. In this respect he stood virtually alone within the church in England as a pioneer of social Catholicism, although he had allies among the Catholic hierarchy abroad in men like Cardinal Gibbons, archbishop of Baltimore, and Cardinal Moran in Australia. Manning's concern was not merely Christian compassion; he vehemently believed that the rising labour movement throughout the Western world was waiting for leadership and guidance. If that genuinely sympathetic guidance was not offered by the church, then more dangerous forces, and communism in particular, would not be slow in seizing the initiative. 
As early as 1864 Manning had warned his generation that the old order was dying ('The visit of Garibaldi in England' in 'Miscellanies', vol. 1). The church's place was no longer in alliance with princes, but with the common people. The role of the church in modern society was to be 'the Mother, Friend and Protectress of the People. As our Divine Saviour lived among persons of the people, so lives His Church' (Fitzsimon, 142). There is no doubt that Leo XIII's social encyclicals, and notably the great declaration on workers' rights in 'Rerum novarum' (1891) owed much to Manning's influence. As early as 1884 his concern for social problems had been recognized at home by his appointment as a member of the royal commission on the housing of the working classes. His greatest triumph in the field of labour relations, however, was his personal intervention in the crippling London Dock strike of 1889, through his friendship with one of the dockers' leaders, Ben Tillett, and his readiness to confront the strike committee to negotiate an acceptable compromise. He was successful in breaking the deadlock, and earned for himself the enduring gratitude of the London dockers and the labour force nationwide. 
Many of Manning's co-religionists found his radical sympathies difficult to understand. He faced fierce opposition and ridicule in his campaign to curb the evils of intemperance, believing the demon drink to be the greatest single cause of degradation and misery among the poor. He gave active support to the United Kingdom Alliance, a largely nonconformist pressure group working for legislation to control the drink trade; in 1872 he founded the League of the Cross -- an organization unashamedly imitating the successful techniques of the Salvation Army -- committed to proselytize on behalf of total abstinence. He would cheerfully share a platform with Bramwell Booth, who -- in return -- came to reverence him almost as a saint. 
It is not surprising that Londoners grew to love Manning. He was always in their midst; and the doors of Archbishop House, an ugly barrack-like building on the corner of Carlisle Place and Francis Street, where the cardinal lived in an atmosphere of bleak austerity, were open to all comers, who rarely went away unsatisfied, because Manning was prodigal in his charity. To the end of his life, he preached two or three times every Sunday, usually choosing churches in the poorest parts of his diocese. He never took a holiday. His occasional relaxations consisted of a visit to the Athenaeum to read the papers or to take part in the rarified discussions of the Metaphysical Society, happy to hold his own against T. H. Huxley demonstrating the spurious credentials of the Christian revelation. Sometimes, during the evening, he would relax in the company of a young Anglican friend, J. E. C. Bodley, to whom he could talk more freely than to members of his own communion. 
Wherein lay the secret of the exceptional impact that Manning made on everyone who met him? Great personal charm, certainly, but also a remarkable physical presence. Every artist who met him wanted to sketch his portrait; everyone who encountered him tried to find the words to describe the impression, usually recalling the massive forehead, the piercing look of his eyes, and the hollow cheeks, which gave the cardinal a cadaverous look in his old age. But always, despite the frailty induced by years of austerity and self-denial, the dignity and authority were the lasting impression. As G. W. E. Russell recalled, the sight of Manning as he passed through the anteroom to his throne room to hold an audience was such that 'the most Protestant knee instinctively bent' (Russell, 41). 
Manning died at Archbishop House, Carlisle Place, London, on 14 January 1892, following a serious attack of bronchitis. The scenes at his funeral on 21 January and the crowds that thronged the streets for the 4 miles between the Brompton Oratory and Kensal Green cemetery (where he was buried) had no precedent, it was observed, since the death of the first duke of Wellington. Manning's body was later reinterred at Westminster Cathedral. 
Forty years earlier, a cardinal seen in the streets of London would have been pelted with mud. The temperature of No Popery agitation within the nation at large had cooled by the closing decades of the century. To what extent this was due to Manning's personal reputation is difficult to quantify, though it was undoubtedly one among other reasons for the easing of the tension. Perhaps his vision of the role of the Catholic church in modern society has been imperfectly appreciated by his immediate posterity. He was neither Liberal nor Conservative, his political stance being most aptly expressed when he described himself as 'a Mosaic Radical': radical in his indignation over the exploitation of the weaker members of society; authoritative and ultramontane in his conviction that the people ask of the church strong guidance and a voice of certainty. One of his greatest services to his church also has an element of paradox in it. Unflinchingly dogmatic and a Roman of the Romans, he also gave his generation the initiative to practical ecumenism by his readiness to recognize the workings of the Holy Spirit in churches other than the 'one true fold'. This was an argument advanced as early as 1864 in his 'The Workings of the Holy Spirit in the Church of England', though Anglicans at the time were affronted by the fact that he allowed the Church of England no higher accreditation than he accorded to dissenting churches. He believed passionately that Christians of different communions could and should learn from one another, and should be prepared to work together in endeavours of 'practical Christianity', as he himself demonstrated in his co-operation with nonconformists and the Salvation Army to save men's bodies as well as their souls. Finally, in the course of his archiepiscopate he taught his fellow Catholics that the time had come for them to emerge from the twilight and to show themselves as a powerful pressure group, whose interests and concerns could not be ignored. If they doubted their ability to do so, they had only to witness the example of his own life. 


@@@@@


doc= 17971


Manning, James (1781-1866), barrister and serjeant-at-law, was the son of James Manning, Unitarian minister in Exeter, and his wife, Lydia, daughter of John Edge of Bristol. He acquired an early familiarity with history, antiquities, and European languages. He was called to the bar at Lincoln's Inn on 23 June 1817 and went on the western circuit, of which he was for many years the leader. On 7 September 1820 he married Clarissa, daughter of William Palmer of Kimbolton, Herefordshire. Their children included (Elizabeth) Adelaide Manning, Froebelian and promoter of Indian education. 
Manning's reputation rested mainly upon his learning. He was no orator, and his powers of advocacy were slight, but as a junior he obtained much business. On the basis of his knowledge of copyhold law he secured a perpetual retainer from the lord of the manor of Taunton Dean, Somerset, whose rights were the subject of continual litigation. He enjoyed the friendship of lords Brougham, and Denman, and assisted them in the defence of Queen Caroline. He was appointed recorder of Sudbury in 1835, and recorder of Oxford and Banbury in November 1837, three offices which he held until his death. He was made a serjeant-at-law on 19 February 1840, received a patent of precedence in April 1845, and was made queen's ancient serjeant in 1846. This dignity, revived at his own suggestion after long being dormant, entitled him to a seat in the House of Lords, 'ex officio', but gave him no right of speaking, unless consulted, or of voting. In March 1847 he became judge of the Whitechapel county court, from which he retired in February 1863 on a pension of $700. His first wife died in 1847, and on 3 December 1857 he married again. His second wife, Charlotte Manning (1803-1871) ['see under 'Manning, (Elizabeth) Adelaide], widow of William Speir, was sister of the Unitarian social reformer Henry Solly, and the first mistress of the College, Hitchin, later Girton College. Manning died at 44 Phillimore Gardens, Kensington, London, on 29 August 1866. He was survived by his second wife. 
Manning's publications included 'Serviens ad legem: a report of proceedings... in relation to a warrant for the suppression of the antient privileges of the serjeants-at-law' (1840); 'Cases in the Court of Common Pleas' (1841, with T. C. Granger), texts on marriage reform and parliamentary reform, and an inquiry concerning possessive augment in English and in cognate dialects. He also published volumes concerned with law reports and court practice. 


@@@@@


doc= 17972


Manning, Marie (1821-1849), murderer, was born in Geneva, Switzerland, and went into domestic service in England. Among her employers were Lady Palk of Haldon House, Devon, and Lady Blantyre at Stafford House, London. When travelling to Boulogne to join her mistress in 1846, Marie met Patrick O'Connor, a well-off, retired gauger in the London docks and moneylender. On 27 May 1847 she married at St James's Church, Piccadilly, a former railway guard named Frederick George (sometimes given as George Frederick) Manning (died 1849), who had left the railway service when suspected of involvement in a bullion robbery and who kept the White Hart inn in Taunton. They shortly moved back to London, where Marie continued her close friendship with O'Connor. On 9 August 1849 O'Connor dined with the Mannings at their house, 3 Miniver Place, Bermondsey, where, in accordance with a premeditated plan, the couple murdered him, she with a pistol and he with a crowbar. They buried the body in quicklime in a grave they had prepared under the flagstones of the kitchen. The next day Marie Manning visited O'Connor's lodgings in Greenwood Street, Mile End Road, and stole the certificates of his railway shares (worth about $4000) and $300 in cash, thus realizing the objects of the murder. The body was discovered on 17 August 1849, and soon afterwards the Mannings were arrested. By then she was in Edinburgh (using the name of Smith), where she had gone to make enquiries with a stockbroker about selling the shares. Manning had gone to Jersey where he was very indiscreet, giving his real name and mentioning a former lodger, Massey, a medical student, from whom he had asked for information about various topics related to the projected murder. 
The Mannings were tried for the murder at the Old Bailey on 25 and 26 October 1849, where Manning tried to put all the blame on his wife, saying that she had first shot O'Connor before he used the crowbar to finish him off. She made a plea that as a foreigner she was not subject to the jurisdiction of an English court; this was dismissed because of her marriage to a British subject. They pleaded not guilty, Marie appearing in court in a gaudy shawl, mainly blue, and primrose gloves, with a white lace veil on her head. A great deal of evidence was brought forward, including a medical report of bloodstains on her dress. They were both found guilty and Marie became hysterical about her husband's accusations. The Mannings were, however, reputed to have kissed and made up half an hour before their execution by William Calcraft, which took place on the roof of Horsemonger Lane gaol on 13 November. A vast and unruly mob gathered to witness the scene. Charles Dickens, who based the character of Hortense, Lady Dedlock's waiting woman in 'Bleak House', on Mrs Manning, wrote a letter to 'The Times' on the wickedness of permitting such a mob. Mrs Manning wore a black satin dress for the occasion, rendering that material unpopular for many years thereafter. 


@@@@@


doc= 17973


Manning, Owen (1721-1801), county historian and Old English scholar, was the younger son of Joseph Manning (1688?-1773?) and Mary Manning of Orlingbury, Northamptonshire. He is said to have been born at Orlingbury on 11 August 1721 and was baptized there on 5 September. He was educated at Huntingdon grammar school and at Queens' College, Cambridge, where he was admitted pensioner on 29 March 1737 and graduated BA in 1741; he proceeded MA in 1744 and BD in 1753. While an undergraduate Manning suffered two near-death experiences, the first when he was supposed to have died of smallpox and was laid out for burial, and the second when he fell into the River Cam after suffering an epileptic fit, and was thought to have drowned. From 1742 to 1755 he was a fellow of Queens', but he resigned his fellowship in 1755 to marry Catherine, daughter of Reade Peacock of Huntingdon, 'a reputable and substantial Tradesman... who was bred a Quaker' (Cole MSS, BL, Add. MS 5808, fol. 229'v'). They had three sons and six daughters. 
Manning was ordained deacon at Lincoln on 25 September 1743 and priest at York on 21 September 1746; he held the Queens' living of St Botolph's, Cambridge, from 1749 to 1760. He was prebendary of Lincoln from 1757 to 1801. Dr John Thomas, bishop of Lincoln, to whom he was chaplain, collated him to the prebends of South Scarle (5 August 1757; installed 13 August) and Milton Ecclesia (15 March 1760; installed 5 April). Disappointed in his attempt to be elected president of Queens' in 1760, Manning was appointed that year rector of Chiddingfold in Surrey, which he held until 1768, and in 1763 was presented by Dr Green, dean of Salisbury, to the vicarage of Godalming in Surrey, where he lived until his death. In 1769 he was presented to the rectory of Peper Harow, an adjoining parish, by Viscount Midleton. Like many Queens' men of his time, Manning held strong views in support of civil and religious liberty. This is apparent from his published sermons and pamphlets, including his 'Discourses on Election and Justification' (1790) and his 'Discretion in Matters Pertaining to Religion' (1788). It is clear from anecdotal evidence that he was most conscientious in the execution of his pastoral duties in Godalming. 
However, it was his scholarly contributions in two different but connected fields, Old English studies and county history, that made Owen Manning a significant figure in the history of the study of early English language and history. He is best-known for his 'History of Surrey', completed and published posthumously in three volumes by his collaborator William Bray from 1804 to 1814. It is regarded as one of the best of the older county histories. The first volume in particular, which is largely Manning's work, is distinguished by his careful attention to all available documents, including medieval ones, which he had sought out over nearly forty years, and by its 'terse and workmanlike language' (Simmons, 1.vii). Manning was one of the first historians to make use of the 'Domesday' records for the history of a county and he had prepared a facsimile of them for his 'History' as early as 1773. 
Manning's earlier work was in Old English studies, and it too is of a high standard. His first achievement was to augment, improve, and publish the Old English and Gothic dictionary of his friend Edward Lye, who died in 1767 with the dictionary unfinished. Manning devoted more than four years to preparing the 'Dictionarium Saxonico et Gothico-Latinum' for the press, and, when it was published in 1772, it contained a good deal of original research by Manning himself. A full assessment of the importance of Manning's lexicographical work is yet to be made, but the Manning-Lye dictionary served as the model for the 1838 Old English dictionary of Joseph Bosworth. 
Manning was the first to publish the Old English text, with literal and free translations and notes, of the will of King Alfred from the 'Liber Vitae' of the New Minster and Hyde Abbey, Winchester (BL, Stowe MS 944), which had come into the possession of Thomas Astle, who commissioned Manning to prepare an edition of the document. The will was published in 1788, edited by Sir Herbert Croft and with a preface by Astle. On the advice of Richard Gough, Manning also acted as a consultant to Daines Barrington on the text of the 'Alfredian Orosius' which Barrington published in 1773. At various times he worked on material for an edition of the Caedmon manuscript of Old English poetry, as had Lye, although neither of them ever published it. Manning was elected a fellow of the Royal Society on 10 December 1767 and fellow of the Society of Antiquaries in 1770. 
In his final years Manning lost his sight, and he died at the vicarage in Godalming on 9 September 1801 after a short attack of pleurisy. He was buried in the churchyard of St Peter and St Paul, Godalming, on 14 September. According to his will, he wanted no memorial but his parishioners held him in such high esteem that 'some of the principal ones amongst them placed a handsome marble tablet to his memory in the Church; and some private friends put an Inscription on a head-stone in the Church yard' (Bray, 1.vii); the memorial is now in the north chapel of Godalming church. He was survived by his wife and all their children, except their eldest son and one daughter. 


@@@@@


doc= 17974


Manning, Robert (1655-1731), Roman Catholic priest, was born in Amsterdam of an English father and Dutch mother, and entered the English College at Douai in 1668, where he was for some time professor of humanities and philosophy. He spent a short time at St Gregory's, Paris, in 1688-9, but returned to Douai and was ordained priest in 1690, and was for two years chaplain to the canonesses of St Augustine at Louvain. He was then sent to the English mission in October 1692. For most of his missionary career he was chaplain to Lord Petre at Ingatestone Hall, Essex, to whose family, as he remarked, he was indebted for all he possessed. In 1719 he spent a year as chaplain to the Poor Clares at Rouen, but soon returned to Ingatestone. Manning composed various controversial treatises, which, says Dodd, were 'much esteemed by the learned on account of their easy flowing style' (Dodd, 3.488), and was with Hawarden and later Challoner one of the leading Catholic polemicists of the age. His 'England's Conversion and Reformation Compared', printed secretly in London in 1725, was seized by the authorities as 'seditious and impious'. The proceeds from his 'Moral Entertainments', published after his death in 1742, he generously donated to the London Secular Clergy Fund. Manning died at Ingatestone Hall on 4 March 1731. 


@@@@@


doc= 17975


Samuel Manning the younger (1814/15-1866), who was also a sculptor. He was baptized on 18 July 1819 at St Pancras Old Church, Pancras Road. It seems likely that the younger Manning trained in his father's workshop. He married Honoria, daughter of Captain James Williams, of Stoke Demerel, Devon, at Marylebone on 13 August 1846. His most successful work, 'Prometheus Chained', won a Society of Arts gold medal in 1834, was shown at the Great Exhibition in 1851, and was engraved for the 'Art Union'. Manning exhibited at the Royal Academy between 1831 and 1858, showing mainly portrait busts, including one of John Bacon in 1846. He executed a statue of Wesley (1849) for the Theological Institute at Richmond, Surrey, and various monuments, in much the same style as his father's, such as those to William Lee Warner, at East Deerham, Norfolk (1852), and to the 53rd Shropshire regiment, at St Chad's, Shrewsbury (1860). Manning died on 29 November 1866 at Victoria Road, Surbiton, Kingston, Surrey, when his age was recorded as fifty-one. 


@@@@@


doc= 17976


Manning, Samuel, the elder (1786-1842), sculptor, was born in 1786, and baptized on 28 August at St Leonard, Shoreditch, London, the son of the sculptor Charles Manning (died 1812) and his wife, Sarah Parsons. Charles Manning was the partner of John Bacon the younger (1777-1859) from 1808 until his death. Detailed legal papers relating to this partnership, which came to light in 1954, show that Charles Manning was responsible for the greater part of Bacon's business, mainly in neo-classical memorials (Cox-Johnson). Within six years of his father's death, Samuel Manning the elder took his place in the partnership. No documents relating to his role in the firm have been found so it is not known whether the terms of this partnership were the same as those for his father. Bacon retired soon after, leaving the business under Manning's control. Manning exhibited a number of portrait busts at the Royal Academy between 1806 and 1843 including in 1819, 'Colonel Adenbrooke'; in 1820 'Princess Charlotte'; in 1825 'John Wesley'; in 1838 the 'Revd Isaac Saunders'; in 1839 'Miss Hunter'; and in 1843 the 'Revd Charles Manning'. Monuments signed by Manning or Bacon and Manning are to be found in many English churches. Mostly in the neo-classical style, they are described by Gunnis as 'dull and uninspired' and 'only too prevalent in England' (Gunnis, 252). They include memorials to John Bones (died 1813) at Fen Ditton, Cambridgeshire; Charles Grant in St George's, Bloomsbury (1823); Bishop Charles Warburton (died 1826) and his wife at Cloyne Cathedral, co. Cork; John Wilson (died 1835) at Southborough, Kent, and Lancelot Haslope (died 1838) in the Wesley Chapel, City Road, London. Manning died on 7 December 1842 at his home, 17 Newman Street, London. With his wife, Eliza, Manning had four daughters, Eliza, Ann, Abigal, and Christiana Mary, and a son, 


@@@@@


doc= 17977


Manning, Samuel (1821-1881), Particular Baptist minister and journal editor, was born on 26 November 1821 in Leicester. His family were well known there: his father, John Manning, was several times elected mayor, and before his conversion to Baptist principles was a churchwarden at St Martin's, Leicester. Samuel grew up in 'the bracing spiritual atmosphere' ('Baptist Hand-Book', 308) provided by the ministry of the Revd James Philippo Mursell, a political radical and founder of the Leicester and Leicestershire Political Union. Although little is known of his early education, it seems Manning was destined not for the ministry but for commerce, and aged eighteen he was sent to work for a Liverpool business house. While in Liverpool he worshipped with a Baptist congregation at Pembroke Chapel, and was baptized by the Revd C. M. Birrell on 27 November 1842, the day after his twenty-first birthday. About six months later Manning expressed a desire to enter the ministry, and with the support of Birrell and the church he went to study at Bristol Baptist college in the autumn of 1843. Before completing the course at Bristol, Manning, on his tutors' advice, studied for a time at Glasgow University. At the end of 1847 Samuel Manning was invited to preach (initially on a trial basis) at the church at Sheppard's Barton, Frome, Somerset; he accepted its call and was ordained on 21 April 1848. During his fifteen-year pastorate the chapel was rebuilt and large schoolrooms added. 
In 1850 Manning's first serious publication, a collection of essays defending the historical truth of the 'New Testament' reprinted from 'The Church', appeared as 'Infidelity Tested by Fact'. While at Frome, Manning wrote some tracts for the Religious Tract Society and articles for the 'Eclectic Review', the 'Christian Spectator', and 'The Freeman'. His literary output earned him the editorship of the 'Baptist Magazine', which he held from 1857 to 1861. His next project, 'Selections from the Prose Writings of John Milton', was published in 1862 for the 'Bunyan Library' series. At Frome he was a popular lecturer on politics (he was a Liberal) as well as on literary and religious subjects. Manning was well liked and was regarded by contemporaries as an entertaining storyteller and a witty conversationalist. He married the daughter of a Mr Hope of Liverpool, and they had three sons and three daughters. 
In 1863 the Religious Tract Society appointed Manning its book editor, and he resigned his Sheppard's Barton pastorate. In keeping with the society's goal of producing 'Christian literature' in its widest sense, Manning began what would become a series of travelogues, beginning with 'Swiss Pictures: Drawn with Pen and Pencil' (1866). These travel books, attractively produced, proved popular Christmas sellers, and offered not only a physical description of a country (they were lavishly illustrated) but an assessment of the social, moral, and religious life of the people. 'Swiss Pictures' was followed by books on Spain (1870), Italy (1872), Egypt and Sinai ('Land of the Pharaohs', 1875), America (1876), England (1877), and the Holy Land (a compilation of 'These Holy Fields', 'Land of the Pharaohs', and 'Pictures from Bible Lands', 1879); the last two books were produced jointly with his friend Samuel Gosnell Green. He accepted an honorary LLD from the University of Chicago in 1869 and in 1876 was appointed a secretary of the Religious Tract Society, where he supported (along with S. G. Green and Sir Charles Reed) the candidature of G. A. Hutchinson for the editorship of the 'Boy's Own Paper'. Manning was a member of the committee of the Baptist Missionary Society and served as a deacon to the church at Cornwall Road, Notting Hill. His health began to fail, but he continued to work at the society's offices in Paternoster Row until about three months before his death. He died at his home, 35 Ladbroke Grove, Notting Hill, London, on 13 September 1881, and on 16 September was buried in Kensal Green cemetery, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 17978


Manning, Thomas (1772-1840), traveller and writer on China, born at Broome, Norfolk, on 8 November 1772, was the second son of the Revd William Manning, successively rector of Broome and Diss, who died at Diss on 29 November 1810, aged seventy-seven, and his wife, Elizabeth, the only child of the Revd William Adams, rector of Rollesby, Norfolk, who died at Diss on 28 January 1782, aged thirty-four. Because of ill health, Thomas was educated at home as a boy, and in 1790 matriculated as a scholar at Caius College, Cambridge, where he spent the following five years studying mathematics. However, having adopted the plain dress of the Quakers, and sharing their antipathy to oaths and tests, he did not take a degree. He stayed for some years at Cambridge, studying medicine, teaching mathematics privately, and publishing his 'Introduction to Arithmetic and Algebra' (2 vols., 1796-8) and other works on mathematics. He also met Charles Lamb there in 1799. Lamb described Manning as his friend 'M., who with great painstaking got me to think I understood the first proposition in Euclid, but gave me over in despair at the second' ('The old and new schoolmaster', 'Elia: Essays'). 
While at Cambridge, Manning became interested in the language and people of China, and in 1802 he went to Paris to study Chinese under Dr Hagar at the Biblotheque Nationale. There he became friendly with several scientists, and especially the elder Carnot, with whom he corresponded regularly on the subject of algebra. When war broke out between France and England in 1803 Carnot and Talleyrand are said to have persuaded Napoleon to allow Manning to return to England, which he did in 1805. 
Manning decided to go to Canton (Guangzhou) to perfect his Chinese, and in May 1806 obtained permission from the court of directors of the East India Company to travel there and live in the English factory as a doctor, having spent the previous six months gaining practical medical experience, mainly at Westminster Hospital, to complement his theoretical knowledge of the subject. In May 1806 he left England, and later that year arrived at Parijong. He made several unsuccessful attempts to penetrate the interior of China and, with the exception of a visit to Cochin China in February 1808, stayed at Canton until 1810. Early that year he went to Calcutta, where for a few months, with his flowing beard, eccentric dress and manner, and witty conversation, he was the centre of society. Then, without government permission, with one Chinese servant, he set off to Rangpur heading for Lhasa. He entered Bhutan by the Lakhi Duar in September 1811 and reached Parijong on the frontier of Tibet on 20 October. There he found a Chinese general, some of whose troops he cured of illness, and in their company he travelled as a doctor to Lhasa, where he arrived in December 1811, the first and for many years the only British traveller to reach the holy city. Ignoring the fact that he had been refused permission, he rode up to the 'potala' (the Dalai Lama's palace), heavily but ineffectually disguised. Surprisingly he was permitted to stay for five months and was even granted an audience with the Dalai Lama, then a boy of seven. Manning was far from overawed by Lhasa. 'If the palace exceeded my expectations, the town as far fell short of them', he wrote. 'There is nothing striking, nothing pleasing in its appearance. The habitations are begrimed with smut and dirt. The avenues are full of dogs... growling and gnawing bits of hide which lie about in profusion and emit a charnel-house smell. (Hanbury-Tenison, 1995, 49)' Under peremptory orders from Peking, Manning was sent back to India; he left Lhasa on 19 April 1812 and arrived at Calcutta the following summer. His original narrative of the journey was lost, and he refused to give any details to officials at Calcutta, so nothing more was known of this remarkable visit to one of the most politically sensitive and tantalizing areas of the world until his journal was edited by Clements Markham and published in 1879 as 'Narrative of the mission of George Bogle to Tibet and of the journey of Thomas Manning to Lhasa', with an introductory memoir. 
Manning returned to Canton to live in the factory. In 1816 he accompanied Lord Amherst's embassy to Peking as junior secretary and interpreter, despite Amherst's initial objection to his flowing beard as 'incongruous' in a British embassy. When the embassy was over, he set off for home in the 'Alceste', but the ship was wrecked near Sunda on 17 February 1817. Continuing homeward in the 'Caesar', in July 1817 he reached St Helena, where he met Napoleon. He returned to England, left again in 1827 to live in Italy until 1829, and thereafter lived in strict retirement, first at Bexley, Kent, and afterwards at a cottage called Orange Grove, near Dartford. The house was never furnished and Manning lived in a library of Chinese books said to be the most extensive in Europe at the time, and which he later bequeathed to the Royal Asiatic Society. He had a stream of visitors attracted by his scholarship and conversation. In 1838 a stroke disabled his right hand, and to secure better medical attention he moved to Bath, but before leaving his cottage he is said to have plucked out the whole of his beard by the roots, although this and other of his eccentricities may be simply the product of his habitually humorous tone, especially in his letters to Lamb. He died at Bath of apoplexy on 2 May 1840 and was buried in the abbey church there on 8 May. 
Manning's scientific and mathematical work is now judged of little importance. For many years he was best remembered for his friendship with Lamb. Manning's were the only letters which Lamb did not destroy, and both they and Lamb's letters to Manning were published. The letters show the two men to have been good friends, but Manning's are remarkably uninformative about the places he visited. His journey to Lhasa has recently been the focus of more interest, although he himself regarded it simply as a necessary stage on his route into China. 


@@@@@


doc= 17979


Manning, William (1630x33-1711), clergyman and ejected minister, was born at Cockfield, Suffolk, the son of William Manning. He was educated at Stowmarket School before being admitted on 25 October 1649 as a sizar of Christ's College, Cambridge, where the Platonist Henry More was his tutor. (There is a discrepancy as to his date of birth based on his recorded age at admission, sixteen, and that derived from his reported age at death of eighty-one.) Manning graduated BA in 1653 and proceeded MA in 1660. Like his brothers John (died 1694), vicar of Sibton-with-Peasenhall and pastor to Independent congregations at successively Walpole and Sibton, and Samuel, rector of Cookley-with-Walpole, William became a clergyman in Suffolk. In 1652 he married Priscilla (1629/30-1710). In 1654 he was chaplain at Landguard fort. By 1658 he was rector of Middleton, where on 29 December he baptized his son, also William. All three Manning brothers were ejected at the Restoration; William's signature appears for the last time in the Middleton parish register in April 1661, the month in which his daughter Elizabeth was baptized there. Manning settled at Peasenhall, and in 1672 he took out a licence under the declaration of indulgence as 'a congregational teacher in his own house', as did his brother John who continued to live in the same parish after his ejection. In 1674 William was fined $20 for keeping a conventicle. 
In 1686 Manning published a small volume of sermons entitled 'Catholic Religion... Discovered in some Discourses upon Act X', in which he exhibited a tolerant and truly Christian spirit. He preached occasionally at Lowestoft, Suffolk, and there became acquainted with Thomas Emlyn, who in 1689 was chaplain at Rose Hall to Sir Robert Rich, a member of the presbyterian congregation at Lowestoft. The two friends read William Sherlock's 'Vindication of the Trinity' (1690), but found it too much like a form of tritheism. Both men were led in consequence to doubt the doctrine and Manning became convinced of the Socinian attitude towards Christ, namely a denial of the essential deity and a full acceptance of the humanity of Christ. In letters to Emlyn, who in 1691 moved to Dublin, Manning argued strongly for this position up to the time of his death. Indeed he tried hard to convert others to this view, but not always successfully. His chief opponent was Nathaniel Parkhurst, a vicar of Yoxford, Suffolk. Increasing deafness led Manning to give up preaching (before 1704), but he retained an active mind and took great interest in current developments of theological opinion. Among the ejected he appears to have been the sole example of a Socinian preacher, and Edmund Calamy, while recognizing that Manning was 'a man of great abilities and learning', curtly noted, 'But he fell into the Socinian Principles' ('Calamy rev.', 337). Manning died on 13 February 1711 and was buried at Peasenhall on 15 February. In his will he left money for the poor of Peasenhall and also 'for the schooling of their children' (ibid.). 


@@@@@


doc= 17980


Manning, William Oke (1809-1878), legal writer, was the son of William Oke Manning, a London merchant, and nephew of James Manning, serjeant-at-law. He was the brother of Anne Manning, author of historical fiction. He was educated at Bristol under Dr Lant Carpenter, who had been the colleague of his grandfather, James Manning, in the Unitarian ministry at Exeter. 
After leaving school Manning entered his father's counting-house. In 1839 he published 'Commentaries on the Law of Nations'. He claimed in the preface to be the first English writer to produce a systematic treatise on international law. A closely reasoned work, it was noticeable for its historical method and its appreciation of the combination of the ethical and customary elements in international law. At first it attracted little attention, but it was gradually found useful by teachers, and was cited as an authority in the courts. Manning died, after a long illness, on 15 November 1878, at his home, 8 Gloucester Terrace, Regent's Park. He was survived by his wife, Frances Augusta, and son, Herbert Lane Manning. 


@@@@@


doc= 17981


Manningham, John (c.1575-1622), lawyer and diarist, was the son of Robert Manningham (died 1588) of Fen Drayton, Cambridgeshire, and his wife, Joan, daughter of John Fisher of Bedlow, Buckinghamshire. After his father's death Manningham was formally adopted and made the heir of Richard Manningham, a prosperous, childless London mercer and the younger brother of the diarist's grandfather. John Manningham entered Magdalene College, Cambridge, in 1592 and graduated BA in 1596. On 16 March 1598 he began to study law at the Middle Temple, and on 7 June 1605 he was called to the degree of utter barrister. About one month later, on 16 July 1605, he married Anne (died 'c'.1656), the sister of his Middle Temple chambermate Edward Curle. They had eight children. 
Through inheritance and family connections Manningham led a successful and comfortable life. He practised law and had a position at the court of wards and liveries, probably obtained through his wife's father William Curle, who was auditor in that office. From Richard Manningham, John inherited the manor house of Bradbourne in East Malling, Kent, and throughout his life he kept his chambers at the Middle Temple. There he was apparently on the verge of rising to the office of reader at the time of his death in 1622. 
From January 1602, his third year at the Middle Temple, until April 1603 Manningham regularly wrote down material of various sorts in a duodecimo copybook: anecdotes, poems, epitaphs, gossip, Inner Temple customs, jokes and witticisms, recipes, inscriptions, reactions to important public events, legal lore, brief accounts of his family, as well as many summaries (some very long) of sermons. By itself this pot-pourri gives only the cloudiest picture of life at the Middle Temple and London; a social historian requires such documents as Chamberlain's letters, the autobiography of Simonds D'Ewes, and James Whitelocke's recollections to give Manningham's entries sharper focus. But, as such material is pitifully scanty, readers are grateful for his record of wit combats among his fellow students, his account of the professional wisdom he gained from the eminent lawyers with whom he dined and studied at the Temple, and for mention of important historical events. Every Sunday Manningham heard one, often two, sermons at locations all over London, and he devoted at least one-third of the copybook to detailed summaries of them, recording them in an unquestioning, meticulous manner. Manningham rarely expressed his personal views on this, as on most other topics; he was primarily a reporter who apparently found everything interesting. 
Unquestionably the most valuable of the entries are those concerning Shakespeare. Manningham records that on 2 February 1602, at the Middle Temple Candlemas day feast, 'wee had a play called 'Twelve Night, or what you will''. Few of Shakespeare's plays can be so precisely placed and dated. What is equally enlightening are Manningham's next words: 'much like the commedy of errores, or 'Menechmi' in Plautus, but most like and neere to that in Italian called 'Inganni''. Manningham, hardly an aesthete or even a regular theatregoer, instantly recalled an earlier play by Shakespeare, recognized the source in Plautus, and the similarity to a relatively recent Italian play. Moreover he was appreciative of the playwright's 'good practise' ('Diary', ed. Sorlien, 48) in concocting the plot against Malvolio. It is apparent from that brief paragraph that Shakespeare could rely on at least a portion of his oft-maligned audience to be appreciative of his best efforts. 
Manningham's other mention of Shakespeare is in the fabliau-like story he heard from an older Templar, William Towse. It seems that the actor Richard Burbage, while playing Richard III, was overheard by Shakespeare making an assignation with a lady. Shakespeare usurped his place and was 'at his game' when Burbage announced his arrival with the agreed 'Richard III'. To him Shakespeare sent the triumphant message 'William the Conquerour was before Richard the 3' ('Diary', ed. Sorlien, 75). At a time when Shakespeare's sexual orientation is much discussed, it is worth noting that the only contemporary gossip on the subject makes him out to be an amiable woman-chaser. Unlike most such allusions this one is precisely contemporary and the source, William Towse, was not a town gossip but a prominent and active bencher deemed responsible enough to be chosen treasurer, the highest office at the Inner Temple, in 1608 and a serjeant-at-law in 1614. (E. K. Chambers, 'William Shakespeare', 2.212, following W. W. Greg, reads the name of Manningham's informant as 'Curle', but R. P. Sorlien argues forcefully that the manuscript reads 'Touse'.) 
There are silly and boring passages in Manningham's diaries, but he was also capable of Elizabethan eloquence, as in his description of the death of the queen that he heard from eyewitnesses: 'This morning about 3 at clocke hir Majestie departed this lyfe, mildly like a lambe, easily like a ripe apple from the tree' ('Diary', ed. Sorlien, 208). Similarly, Manningham captures the relief that was universally felt at the peaceful succession of King James: 'Noe tumult, noe contradiction, noe disorder in the city; every man went about his busines, as readylie, as peaceably, as securely, as though there had bin noe change, nor any newes ever heard of competitors. God be thanked, our king hath his right. (ibid., 209)' Manningham was no Pepys, but he left invaluable documentation of an ordinary life in the legendary London of Donne, Bacon, and Shakespeare. Manningham died at Bradbourne Manor on 22 November 1622, and was buried at East Malling church. 


@@@@@


doc= 17982


Manningham, Sir Richard (bap. 1685, d. 1759), man-midwife, second son of Thomas Manningham (d. 1722), later bishop of Chichester, and his wife, Elizabeth (1656/7-1714), was baptized at East Tisted, Hampshire, on 2 March 1685. Like his elder brother he was intended for the church; however, having been admitted as a fellow-commoner to Magdalene College, Cambridge, on 27 September 1717, he proceeded LLB in the same year, before gaining the MD, by mandate, in 1725. Nothing is known of his further education in medicine. 
On 10 March 1719 Manningham was elected FRS and on 30 September he became a licentiate of the Royal College of Physicians; on 18 February 1722 he was knighted by George I. He obviously made rapid progress in his career, and was looked on as a leading man-midwife of his day. He was commanded by the king to investigate the case of Mary Toft of Godalming, who claimed to have given birth to several rabbits. Through contacts at court John Howard, the local Surrey man-midwife, had Mary Toft transferred to Lacy's bagnio in London, there to be exhibited. However, she finally confessed to her fraud, largely because a porter at Lacy's was discovered with a rabbit in his pocket. Manningham, along with others, seems to have been duped by Toft, and attempted to exculpate himself by publishing, in 1726, 'An exact diary of what was observ'd during a close attendance upon Mary Toft, the pretended rabbet-breeder of Godalming in Surrey, from Monday, Nov. 28, to Dec. 7, following, together with an account of her confession of the fraud'. 
Manningham taught midwifery, for a course fee of 20 guineas, using, as did many of his contemporaries, some kind of model of a pelvis and uterus. His main published work, of 1739 and 1740, was 'Artis obstetricariae compendium', which was translated into English in 1744; the original version was written in inelegant and incorrect Latin. It was expanded, as 'Aphorisma medica', in 1756. Manningham followed the teachings of the Dutchman Hendrik van Deventer (1651-1724) in regard to conservative midwifery and in his descriptions of the shapes of the bony pelvis and the obliquity of the uterus, with their effects on labour. When there was disproportion between the size of the foetal head and the pelvis Manningham advocated internal version, in which, with a hand in the uterus, the foetus is turned so that either the head or the breech is made to present. If the breech then the baby may be born by traction on the feet and legs. Manningham may have favoured turning to the head presentation when others mainly used podalic version. He would not, in difficult labours, resort to the recently introduced obstetric forceps, first depicted by Edmund Chapman in 1735 and afterwards employed by many other man-midwives of the time. Manningham claimed that caesarean section should be performed only after death of the mother, a generally held view at the time. Correctly, he taught that the placenta is usually inserted in the fundus of the uterus. He knew of convulsions in pregnancy (eclampsia) and treated those afflicted with fits by venesection, then a commonplace remedy. He had seen a fallopian tube, at post-mortem, closed by infection; this tended to be common after manual removal of the placenta, making it clear, in Manningham's view, how dangerous it was to employ unskilled individuals in midwifery. He thought that children born seven months into the term of a pregnancy rarely survive whereas those born at eight months do, if well nursed. Manningham's major contribution to midwifery was that of establishing, in 1739, for the first time in this country, lying-in beds for mothers; these were in a house next to his own, in Jermyn Street, not in the local parochial infirmary, as was once believed. The idea of lying-in beds was current among some of Manningham's contemporaries in London but he was the first to put it into practice; one of his objectives was to teach midwives. His 'Abstract of Midwifery for Use in the Lying-in Infirmary' appeared in 1744; the institution closed a little later. The third edition of his treatise, 'The Symptoms, Nature, Causes and Cure of the Febricula or Little Fever', came out in 1755 but was of little significance; others of his works were on fevers and plague. 
Evidence has been adduced that Manningham was politically a whig, with court connections, and that whig man-midwives were conservative in their practices whereas those who used forceps were in the tory tradition. The significance of this is hard to evaluate but suggests that there were separate coteries of man-midwives with differing ideas on the practice of midwifery allied with political affiliations. Thomas Denman, an eminent man-midwife, commented that Manningham was 'successful in practice and very humane in the exercise of his art'. 
Manningham lived in Chancery Lane, London, then successively in Haymarket and in Woodstock Street before finally settling in Jermyn Street in 1745, where he remained until his death there on 11 March 1759. His second son, Thomas, graduated MD at St Andrews University on 24 May 1765 and became LRCP on 25 June of the same year. He lived in his father's house in Jermyn Street until 1780, when he went to Bath, where he died on 3 February 1794. 


@@@@@


doc= 17983


Manningham, Thomas (d. 1722), bishop of Chichester, was born in St George's, Southwark, the son of Richard Manningham (died 1682), rector of Michelmersh, Hampshire, and Bridget Blackwell. He was admitted a scholar of Winchester College in 1661. He was elected a probationer fellow of New College, Oxford, matriculating on 12 August 1669, graduated BA in 1673, and proceeded MA in 1677; he was a fellow of New College from 1671 to 1681. He received a Lambeth DD on 21 December 1691. 
On ordination Manningham became, according to Anthony Wood, 'a high flown preacher' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 4.555). In 1681 he was presented to the comfortable living of East Tisted in Hampshire, 'Where being settled, he was passionately desirous to collect himself, to be known to few, and to be envied by none' (ibid.). It was there that his two eldest sons were baptized, in 1683 and 1685. Nothing is known of his wife, Elizabeth (1656/7-1714) apart from the high-flown phrases on her monument in Chichester Cathedral: 'Comely in person, meek in her temper, most humble in her behaviour, prudent in all her actions, and pious through her whole life' (Nichols, 'Lit. anecdotes', 1.208). 
The king admired Manningham's preaching and in 1684 promised him the prebend at Winchester vacated by the promotion of Thomas Ken to the bishopric of Bath and Wells, but it was found to be in the gift of the lord keeper. Manningham succeeded Gilbert Burnet as preacher at the Rolls Chapel after the latter was dismissed because of his controversial sermon on 5 November 1684, in which he was supposed to have made a disloyal allusion to the lion and the unicorn. Manningham became a lecturer at the Temple and on 8 September 1691 rector of St Andrew's, Holborn, where, E. G. Rupp says, 'high churchmen and Non-Jurors were thick upon the ground' (Rupp, 69). He retained the living until April 1713, leaving so that Henry Sacheverell, the anti-whig preacher and pamphleteer, might receive a rich reward from Queen Anne after the three-year moratorium imposed upon him after his trial in Westminster Hall. Manningham was an early supporter of the Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge, founded in 1699, further evidence of his high-church sympathies. 
Appointed by Sir John Trevor as speaker's chaplain in 1690, four addresses were made by the House of Commons to the king on Manningham's behalf. The second, uniquely, specifically asked that 'the next prebend of Windsor or Westminster that should fall vacant' be conferred on him ('JHC', 1688-93, 10.736). This came about on 28 January 1693 when he was installed as a canon of Windsor. In 1708 Manningham became rector of Great Haseley, Oxfordshire, and in 1709 dean of Windsor. 
Manningham served as a chaplain to William and Mary and had praised the queen's enthusiasm for ensuring the printing of court sermons, believing that the multitude of plain, useful, and practical sermons she caused to be printed were 'her gift to the publick' (Claydon, 97-8). Royal favour continued, Queen Anne valuing his ministrations. On one occasion, when she was confined to her chamber by illness, it was suggested that Manningham should pray in an adjoining room, but he refused saying, 'he did not chuse to whistle the prayers of the Church through a key hole' (Nichols, 'Lit. anecdotes', 1.208). A Hanoverian tory, a high-church supporter of the succession laid down by the 'Act of Settlement' rather than to the Jacobite cause, he became bishop of Chichester on 10 November 1709, an appointment which pleased the queen. At Chichester he found a chapter of whig sympathies and consequently quarrels ensued. He reported to Archbishop Wake his concern about the danger to the church from the strength of dissenters in his diocese and opposed the repeal of the 'Test Act'. 
Manningham was one of the bishops who signed a declaration in 1715 deploring the Jacobite rebellion of that year. He died at his house in Greville Street, Holborn, on 25 August 1722, and was buried in St Andrew's, Holborn. Many of his sermons were published in his lifetime. His will mentions ten children, of whom the names of six can be established: four sons (Thomas, Richard, Charles, and Simon) and two daughters (Mary and Dorothea). Thomas Manningham ('bap'. 1683, died 1750) became, like his father, chaplain to the speaker (1718-23); Richard Manningham, the only one of the sons not to become a clergyman, became a leading man-midwife. 


@@@@@


doc= 17984


Mannock, John (1681-1764), Benedictine monk and author, was born at Giffords Hall, Suffolk, the third son of Sir William Mannock, third baronet (died 1714), and his wife, Ursula, daughter of Henry Neville of Holt, Leicestershire. His family were faithful to the Roman Catholic religion and many in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries joined religious orders on the continent. He was educated at Douai in Flanders by the English Benedictines. While playing with a cannon ball at a first-floor window he accidentally let it slip, and it killed his brother Thomas who was standing below. He was so overwhelmed with distress at this accident that he determined to devote the rest of his life to religion. He joined the community at Douai and made his profession on 7 March 1700. After his ordination to the priesthood he was sent to England, and for fifty years served as chaplain to the Canning family at Foxcote in Warwickshire (1709-59). He was then moved to Kelvedon Hall in Essex, the seat of the Wright family, where he remained until his death. 
Mannock held several positions of responsibility in the English Benedictine congregation. He was secretary to the provincial chapter in 1721, and procurator of the province and praepositus of Worcestershire (1725-37). He was elected praedicator generalis in 1733, and definitor of the province in 1755. His final office was as cathedral prior of Worcester and definitor of the regimen from 1757. 
Besides his pastoral work Mannock devoted his life to the pursuit of sacred literature, and the surviving manuscripts (more than twenty volumes) preserved in the archives at Downside Abbey bear witness to his studious habits and indefatigable perseverance. Joseph Gillow wrote of him that, 'Among the old controversial writers there are few who have taken higher ground or maintained it more durably than Fr. Mannock'. 
Although only two of Mannock's works were published in his lifetime (with a third appearing posthumously), they proved to be popular with monks on the mission in Britain. 'The Poor Man's Catechism' (1752) provided helpful practical directions, such as listing the manual works forbidden on a Sunday, as well as the 'impedimenta' involved in marriage cases. 'It served a need precisely at the time when many expanding congregations were moving away from a household chaplaincy and patrons' control' (Scott, 140). 
A more complicated work, 'The Poor Man's Controversy', was published posthumously in 1769. Although written in a plain style, 'it tried to reconcile Protestantism to English Catholicism by explaining controversial Catholic doctrines, adopting a minimalist view of the papacy and admitting Catholic excesses' (Scott, 141). The book probably reflected the liberal values of what has been called the Catholic Enlightenment. Both of these works were helped to the press by the secular priest George Bishop of Brailes. Mannock died at Kelvedon Hall, Essex, on 30 November 1764. 


@@@@@


doc= 17985


Mauny, Sir Walter (c.1310-1372), soldier and founder of the London Charterhouse, was the fourth of five sons of Jean le Borgne, lord of Masny in the imperial county of Hainault, and Jeanne de Jenlain. The brothers probably passed their youth in the household of Jean de Beaumont, brother of William I, count of Hainault. In December 1327 Mauny came to England as a page in the household of the count's daughter, Philippa of Hainault, the new queen of England, and settled there for the rest of his life. 
Mauny enjoyed a rapid rise at court. Starting as the queen's trencherman, he became the keeper of her greyhounds. In 1331 he was knighted on the king's command, and retained at a large annual fee as a member of the king's household. Mauny's chance to prove himself as a soldier came in August 1332, when he joined the small private army which invaded Scotland with Edward Balliol and Henry Beaumont, and took part in the remarkable victory over the much larger army of the Scots at the battle of Dupplin Moor. Shortly afterwards, in a skirmish at Roxburgh Bridge, he captured John Crab, the celebrated Flemish seaman and military engineer in Scottish service, whom he later sold to Edward III for 1000 marks. Mauny returned to Scotland in the following year with the English army, and took part in the siege of Berwick. He followed Edward III on the winter campaign of 1334-5 and the equally fruitless march to Perth in July and August 1335. Between June and September 1336 Mauny accompanied the king on his spectacular raid into north-eastern Scotland, which resulted in the destruction of Aberdeen. For part of this campaign he served as Edward's standard-bearer. Almost nothing is known about Mauny's personal contribution to these campaigns, but Jean le Bel says (1.110) that he distinguished himself by his extravagant gestures and reckless disregard of his own safety, both qualities which were much admired by Edward III. 
The king's admiration for Mauny is borne out by the evidence of his growing wealth and influence. Edward appointed him keeper of Harlech Castle and sheriff of Merioneth for life in December 1332, and over the following years he acquired almost viceregal powers in this part of north Wales. Among other favours he received a large part of the Buckinghamshire and Norfolk estates of David Strathbogie, earl of Atholl, in 1335, after the latter's defection to the Scots. He also received valuable patronage from the king's uncle, Thomas of Brotherton, earl of Norfolk, who gave him a pension and appointed him marshal of the king's Marshalsea court. 
On the outbreak of the war with France, in August 1337, Mauny became admiral of the north. The office, which he held for a year, gave him jurisdiction over all the east-coast ports of England from the Thames to Berwick. Edward III appointed him to command the advance guard of the great army that he intended to dispatch to the Low Countries, and to escort to Holland the cargoes of wool that it was proposed to sell there in order to finance the invasion of France. Mauny sailed from Sandwich at the beginning of November 1337 with a fleet of 85 ships carrying some 1450 troops, 2200 seamen, some prominent wool merchants, and a small group of royal councillors. The operation was conducted with the utmost recklessness. On the way to Holland, Mauny launched a surprise attack on the Flemish port of Sluys, which was repulsed. Then, on 9 November 1337, he landed his men on the nearby island of Cadzand at the entrance to the Hondt, and spent several days in killing and plundering the inhabitants. When the Flemings from the mainland tried to intervene, they were defeated with great slaughter and their commander, Guy, half-brother of the count of Flanders, was captured. Mauny personally made $8000 in ransoms out of this enterprise, but lost many of his men and achieved nothing of any military value. He landed his army and his cargoes at Dordrecht at the end of November 1337, and returned shortly afterwards to England. 
As admiral of the north Mauny had the main responsibility for assembling the fleet that carried Edward III to Brabant in July 1338. He himself joined the expedition with a company of 10 knights, 33 squires, and 50 archers, one of the larger personal retinues in the army. In addition he was joined by two of his brothers with their own retinues from Hainault. When, after long delays, the invasion of France eventually began in September 1338, Mauny was determined to be the first in action. As Edward III marched from Valenciennes to Cambrai, he separated himself from the main army and led fifty men on a raid against the undefended town of Mortagne which he plundered and partly burned before withdrawing. On 20 September 1339, as Edward III laid siege to Cambrai, Mauny captured the nearby fortress of Thun-l'Eveque on the Scheldt by bribing the commander. During the next two months he accompanied the king's army in its destructive raid through the Cambresis and the Thierache. Characteristically, on the night of 22 October 1339, the last of the campaign, it was Mauny who led small companies of scouts and men-at-arms past the French lines at Buironfosse, killing sentries and attacking isolated groups of soldiers a few hours before Edward's army retreated northward and dispersed. 
Mauny accompanied Edward III's second invasion of the Low Countries in 1340, and fought at the naval battle of Sluys on 24 June. The patriotic poet Laurence Minot sang of him: '
Sir Walter the Mawnay, God gif him mede! 

Was bold of body in batayl to bede... 
('Poems', 38)' The main operation of the campaign was the long, costly, and unsuccessful siege of Tournai, which lasted from 26 July to 25 September 1340. Mauny's contribution to the siege was to lead a succession of lucrative and destructive raids against the towns of the Tournaisis and neighbouring areas of France. When the siege was abandoned, for want of money, he was one of the intimates who shared Edward III's humiliating captivity at the hands of his creditors in Ghent. Mauny lent the king some $4000 in his extremity. He was with Edward when he escaped from the Low Countries in a small boat, and was present at the famous scene in the Tower of London on 30 November 1340, when the king arrived unannounced by the Watergate to confront his ministers in the middle of the night. 
In October 1341 Mauny was appointed, jointly with Robert d'Artois, to command the expeditionary force that Edward III intended to send to Brittany to intervene in the war of succession there on the side of John de Montfort against the forces of his French-backed rival, Charles de Blois. This plan was replaced in February 1342 by a more ambitious one, involving the dispatch of no less than three successive English armies to Brittany in the next four months. Mauny was given the sole command of the first of these armies, whose objects were to secure a landing place for the others and to keep the Montfortist cause alive until they could arrive. His mission was not a success. As a result of the delay in requisitioning ships, he arrived at Brest about early May, six weeks later than he had intended, and with only 34 men-at-arms and 200 mounted archers, less than half the force that had been planned. By this time Charles de Blois had already overrun much of Montfortist Brittany. The chronicler Jean le Bel (1.301-5, 315-22) gives a dramatic account, borrowed and embellished by Froissart, of Mauny's deeds. But it is largely fictional. Mauny's only notable exploit was a raid into Finistere to capture Herve de Leon, the principal Breton lieutenant of Charles de Blois, and other valuable prisoners. At about the end of June he made a truce with Charles's representatives and sailed back to England. Edward promptly repudiated the truce and, although Mauny remained in high favour at court, he was never again given an independent military command. 
In October 1342 Mauny returned to Brittany with Edward III and the main body of the English army. He was given the dangerous task of reconnoitring the defences of Vannes. He took part in the siege of the city which ended in failure in January 1343. In August 1345 Henry, duke of Lancaster, landed with an English army in Gascony and attacked French positions in the valleys of the Dordogne and the Garonne. Mauny served in this campaign as one of Lancaster's principal subordinate commanders. He took part in the victories at Bergerac and Auberoche and in the capture of La Reole, events that turned the tide in favour of the English in the south-west for the next three decades. While he was at La Reole, Mauny discovered the grave of his father, who had been murdered there twenty years before on his return from a pilgrimage to Santiago de Compostela, and had his body disinterred for reburial in the Franciscan convent of Valenciennes. In 1346 he served as one of the captains of Aiguillon during the four-month siege of the place by the army of Jean, duke of Normandy. Mauny led the most dangerous sorties of the siege, and when the duke eventually withdrew, on 20 August 1346, he was the first to invade the abandoned encampment of the French army and plunder what they had left there. 
Mauny left the south-west with twenty companions at the end of August 1346 and travelled overland to join the army of Edward III in northern France. This rash enterprise was made possible by a safe conduct from the duke of Normandy which he had bought by remitting the ransom of one of Jean's friends. Even so, Mauny was captured near St Jean-d'Angely. He escaped from his prison but was arrested again at Orleans and taken under guard to Paris, where he was briefly imprisoned in the Louvre. Several months after his departure he found his way to Edward III's siege works outside Calais. 
Mauny played a prominent part in the long siege of Calais. In July 1347, when the English strength reached its peak, he had 326 men serving under him, including 19 knights and 91 squires. Only the king, the prince of Wales, and the earls of Lancaster and Warwick had larger retinues. Mauny was one of the commissioners who represented the king of England in the brief negotiations with the leaders of the French army at the end of July 1347. And, when the negotiations failed and the French left Calais to its fate, it was with Mauny that the garrison asked to speak to negotiate the surrender of the town. He understood the shared values and bonds of mutual self-interest that united men of rank on either side and articulated it as clearly as any of his contemporaries. 'By Our Lady,' he is said to have told the king, who was contemplating putting them to death: 'I tell you that we shall not go so willingly on your service if you kill these men, for they will surely do the same to us on some other occasion when we are doing no more than our duty. ('Chronique de Jean le Bel', 2.162)' 

After 1347 Mauny was increasingly drawn into the administrative and diplomatic business of Edward III's government. He served on judicial commissions of oyer and terminer. He sat regularly in the royal council. He was summoned to every parliament between January 1348 and his death, and was regularly appointed to the committees which heard petitions. He was an influential adviser on relations with the Low Countries, where he retained many connections. He was one of Edward III's ambassadors at the diplomatic conferences with the representatives of France and Flanders at Calais and Dunkirk in November and December 1348 and returned to represent the king at the next conference with the French ministers, at Guines in March 1349. In 1351 Edward sent him to his native Hainault to try to reconcile the dowager empress, Margaret of Hainault, with her son. 
Mauny was by now a rich man. In Hainault he had inherited the lordship of Jenlain, south of Valenciennes, from his mother. In 1340 he had obtained a grant of Wasnes from the count of Hainault while both men were engaged in the siege of Tournai. At some time after the death of his elder brothers at the battle of Stavoren in 1345, he succeeded to his family's principal domains at Masny and acquired several castles in the southern part of the county. He continued to receive largess from the king, including property at Calais and in Gascony. In late 1353 or early 1354 he married Edward III's cousin Margaret Marshal ['see 'Brotherton, Margaret], the daughter of his old patron Thomas of Brotherton and widow of John Seagrave, thereby temporarily incurring the displeasure of the king, whose licence had not been sought. Margaret, one of the two coheiresses of the earldom of Norfolk, was among the richest women in England. Mauny devoted much effort to the litigious business of getting her considerable domains into his possession. 
Mauny's military career was less busy and less well recorded after 1347. Froissart (4.74, 77, 89) says that he fought with Edward III in the battle beneath the walls of Calais on 2 January 1350 and in the naval battle off Winchelsea on 29 August 1350, but there is no reliable evidence on either point. He certainly took part in the raids across Picardy and the Boulonnais mounted from Calais in the summer of 1351 by the English. But for the remainder of the 1350s he took the field only when the king was in command and his status at court demanded it. In 1355 he fought with Edward in Artois and Picardy. On his return, in November, he acted as the king's spokesman at the opening of parliament, reporting on the diplomatic and military affairs of the past eighteen months. At the beginning of the following year Mauny commanded the advance guard of the army which went north to recapture Berwick from the Scots. He organized a brief and vigorous siege of the town and succeeded in forcing the Scots to surrender within a few days of his arrival. But he took no part in the great campaigns in France in 1356. He was in council with the king when the news arrived of the capture of the king of France by the prince of Wales at the battle of Poitiers. 
In the spring of 1359, after the failure of Edward III's attempts to negotiate a treaty with the captive king of France, Mauny was sent to the Low Countries to recruit troops in preparation for the great campaign by which Edward III hoped to force the issue. He recruited a force reckoned at 1500 men in Hainault and the neighbouring principalities of the empire, and led them to Calais in the autumn, where they rioted and did a great deal of damage to the town while waiting for the rest of the army to arrive from England. On the eve of the campaign Mauny became a knight of the Garter. He then accompanied Edward III during the unsuccessful siege of Rheims in December and January, and in the 'chevauchee' east and south of Paris that followed. In April 1360 he led the attack on the suburbs of the French capital in person. 
Mauny's facility for maintaining amicable relations with the enemy no doubt accounted for his inclusion among the delegation chosen to negotiate the treaty of Bretigny, which brought this campaign to a close in May 1360. Five months later he was present when the treaty was confirmed at Calais, and when, on 1 November 1360, the king of France was finally released from captivity, he was one of the four knights of Edward III's household on whom Jean II bestowed lavish grants as he left. 
For most of the 1360s England and France were at peace, and there is little trace of Mauny's activity. In 1361 he made a pilgrimage to Santiago de Compostela, and he spent some time in Hainault in 1364. But he remained an active member of the council, close to the king and, increasingly, to the king's ambitious younger son, John of Gaunt, duke of Lancaster. When the war with France broke out again in 1369 Mauny, now some sixty years of age, served as one of the military advisers who accompanied Gaunt's destructive raid through Picardy. 
Mauny's principal enterprise in the last two years of his life was the foundation of the London Charterhouse. This was an old project renewed. The site, beyond the city wall north of Smithfield, had been leased by Mauny from St Bartholomew's Hospital in 1349. He set it aside as a burial-ground for victims of the black death and built a small chapel on it. More ambitious plans were made for a college of priests but never executed. It was Michael Northburgh, bishop of London and former keeper of Edward III's privy seal, who suggested to Mauny the foundation of a charterhouse and asked to be associated with it. When Northburgh died in 1361 he left a contribution of $2000 towards the endowment. After prolonged negotiations with Northburgh's executors and with the general chapter of the Carthusian order in England, Mauny finally bought the site from St Bartholomew's in November 1370. His charter of foundation is dated 28 March 1371. The existing chapel became the church of the new house. The foundations of the conventual buildings were begun almost at once. 
Mauny died at his wife's manor at Great Chesterford in Essex on 14 or 15 January 1372, before the new buildings had risen from the ground. By his will, which was made on 30 November 1371, he left a large bequest to the Charterhouse and directed that he should be buried in its chapel in a tomb of alabaster carved with his arms and bearing his effigy dressed as a knight. Although Mauny wished his funeral to be without pomp, it was a great occasion, attended by the king, all his sons who were in England, and a great concourse of prelates and noblemen, as well as by poor men who were entitled under his will to receive a penny each from his executor. John of Gaunt had 500 masses said for the repose of his soul. 
Mauny was in some ways the model soldier of his age. He was gallant and courageous. He observed the chivalrous conventions of his class. He was one of the few prominent figures in the early part of the Hundred Years' War to receive unqualified admiration from both sides. But the truth was that he was a poor commander with little strategic grasp, whose military achievements were more spectacular than useful. He was among the first to make a large personal fortune out of loot and ransoms, but he perfectly illustrated Geoffrey de Charney's observation that an excessive interest in ransoms made a poor soldier. He owed his fame in large measure to Jean Froissart who, like Mauny, came from Hainault and to whom Mauny supplied generous gifts and tall stories during the chronicler's visit to England in the early 1360s. 'My book is decorated with his deeds', said Froissart (8.287). 
Mauny was survived by his wife and by a daughter, Anne, aged sixteen at the time of his death, who had married John Hastings, earl of Pembroke. 


@@@@@


doc= 17986


Mannyng, Robert (d. in or after 1338), poet and historian, was the author of two works, 'Handlyng Synne' and 'The Story of England' (this is his own title for the latter work, though it is often now referred to as 'The Chronicle'), which are translations, adaptations, and expansions of Anglo-Norman moral and historical works respectively, put into English for those who knew no French. 'The Medytacyuns of the Soper of Oure Lorde Jhesu', a translation of Bonaventure sometimes attributed to Mannyng, is probably not by him. 
The 'Brunne' (that is, 'brook') of Mannyng's name is usually taken to be modern Bourne, in Lincolnshire, a likelihood strengthened by the manuscript (LPL, MS 131) which names him (albeit in a later hand) as 'Robert de Brunne iuxta Depynge', presumably a reference to Deeping Fen or Market Deeping, only a few miles from Bourne. However, a minority opinion sees him as a Yorkshireman, originally from Nunburnham (recorded as Brunne in 1280), near York. The northern dialect of the Yale manuscript of 'Handlyng Synne' is very close to that of the Petyt manuscript of 'The Story of England'. The many allusions in his writings to Gilbertine masters and priories suggest that Mannyng himself was most probably a Gilbertine canon, perhaps a master of novices, though no record confirms this connection. References in his two works provide further evidence for his movements, and for the stages of his career. 
Thus in 'The Story of England' Mannyng says that he attended the 'commencement', or degree feast in Cambridge, in honour of Alexander Bruce, with Alexander's brothers Thomas and Robert (the latter being the future king of Scots) also in attendance; perhaps Mannyng was studying in Cambridge, possibly in the period 1298-1302, although there is no record of his being a student there. Then in his prologue to 'Handlyng Synne' Mannyng greets all Christians 'under sun', the good people of Brunne, and especially the Gilbertine community of Sempringham in Lincolnshire. He there records that he began 'Handlyng Synne' in 1303, when Dan Felyp (Philip Burton) was master of the Gilbertines, at which time he was himself exactly 6 miles from Sempringham, usually taken to refer to his supposed birthplace, Bourne, in Lincolnshire ('Brunnewake' in the Dulwich manuscript; a minority opinion suggests that the Folger manuscript reading, 'Bringwake', might be a corruption of 'Brig Dike', or Bridge End (Holland Bridge), about 6 miles north-east of Sempringham, where there was a Gilbertine priory, St Saviour's, essentially a cell of Sempringham.) He relates that he was fifteen years (perhaps 1302-1317) with Dan John of Camelton (Hamilton) and Dan John of Clinton (Glinton). Finally, Mannyng places himself at the Gilbertine priory at Sixhills, Lincolnshire, at the time when he finishes 'The Story of England', on 15 May 1338. There are no later references to him or by him. 

'Handlyng Synne' is Mannyng's reaction to the call for yearly confessions for all Christians made by the Fourth Lateran Council of 1215, and has been described as representing 'a development in the whole technique of confession and the parish priest's role therein' (Bennett, 460). The work has a strong homiletic tone to it throughout. Simultaneously a translation, adaptation, and expansion of the Anglo-Norman 'Manuel des peches', 'Handlyng Synne' is Mannyng's masterpiece, characterized by charming retellings of old 'exempla' from French and Latin moral treatises, and by its author's often traditional moral commentaries on the theological topics examined, commentaries that are leavened by his own amusing and amused, occasionally pedantic, consideration of the human predicament. The work is a guide to confession, an encouragement to 'shewe' sin (MS H, line 5), but is also, and just as importantly, a guide to help one avoid, or 'eschewe', sin (MS D, line 5), once the individual (a varied audience is frequently addressed directly) understands sin's true nature. Frightening and sobering descriptions, in the stories and in their visions of hell, of the eternal and terrible suffering of those who commit the major sins, must have had their intended effect on at least some of the medieval readers of, or listeners to, this work. Mannyng's collection of tales, with their overriding moral concern, provided a model for such later collections as Chaucer's 'Canterbury Tales' and Gower's 'Confessio amantis'. It has been suggested that the early audiences of the 'Confessio' would have recognized it immediately, from its form as a collection of 'exempla' sharing the same verse metre, as a parody of 'Handlyng Synne'. 

'Handlyng Synne', a free verse translation and adaptation from the Anglo-Norman 'Manuel', consists of over 12,630 lines of octosyllabic rhyming couplets, with occasional shorter lines. It contains an additional thirteen tales of Mannyng's own. A short prologue is followed by anecdotes, illustrative 'exempla' and social and moral commentary, designed for a popular regional audience, organized according to the ten commandments, the seven deadly sins (about half of the poem), sacrilege, the seven sacraments, the twelve points of shrift, and the twelve graces of shrift; Mannyng omits book 1 of the 'Manuel', containing the articles of the faith, and translates only about half of the 8500 lines in the sections of the 'Manuel' that he does include. Like the 'Manuel', he makes particular use of the 'Bible', Bede, Gregory the Great's 'Dialogues', and the lives of the fathers. His best-known tales include that of the dancers of Colbeck; the witch and her cow-sucking bag (the bag would not work for the bishop because he did not believe in it); and the story of the hermit and his bear, the latter being slain by followers of the hermit Euticius, out of envy of his fellow hermit Florens, who had been enjoying miraculous comfort, companionship, and sheep-herding, all provided by the polite and accommodating bear. 
There are twelve extant manuscripts of 'Handlyng Synne', none of them complete or entirely satisfactory. Among the most important are the four earlier versions, some of them in later manuscripts: Yale University, Beinecke Library, MS Osborn a.2, once complete but now lacking more than 3000 lines; CUL, MS Ii.4.9, an excerpt of about 2800 lines, containing the ten commandments only; London, Dulwich College, MS XXIV, a fragment of 2894 lines, which has the prologue and most of the ten commandments, stopping with a catchword; and the Vernon manuscript, Bodl. Oxf., MS Eng.poet. a.1, which has only 919 lines, 'Of the sacrament of the altar'. Also very important are the three almost complete manuscripts (two of them base manuscripts of editions) of about 12,638 lines, which represent a later (even though dated earlier in some cases) 'revised' version of the work: Bodl. Oxf., MS Bodley 415; BL, Harley MS 1701; and Washington, Folger Shakespeare Library, MS Folger V.b.236. 
Mannyng's only other known work, his metrical 'Story of England', is one of the best-known Middle English chronicles. It has two parts: the first, 16,638 four-stress lines in rhyming couplets, consists of a prologue, the story of Noah's flood, a summary of the Troy legend, and the history of Britain from its founding by Brutus to the death of the last British king, Cadwalader, in 689, followed by the arrival of the Saxons and their conquest of Britain, with substantial Arthurian material. The second part, 8387 lines of six-stress lines of rhyming couplets, with some internal rhyme, continues from 689 to 1307 and the death of Edward I. It also contains references to Havelok the Dane, and to Gwenllian daughter of Llywelyn, who lived with the Gilbertines for her last fifty-four years. Mannyng's primary sources for 'The Story of England', which, he explains, avoids fancy poetic forms, so that he will be plain and understandable, are the Anglo-Norman 'Roman de Brut' of Wace, and the chronicle of Peter Langtoft, but he adds material from other sources. He is writing to delight and instruct 'symple men', so that they can learn which kings were wise and which were foolish. The final product, among the best-known chronicles in Middle English, shows his careful scholarly tendencies and interests, and a willingness to conduct a wide-ranging search for his material. He would gladly copy more of his 'Story', he says at the end, if there were more to copy. 
Robert Mannyng of Brunne communicated his moral, religious, and historical concerns to fellow Christians of all conditions through his extraordinarily vigorous, fast-paced, often dramatic narrative skills, even as he avoided the ironies and complexities which are now valued in narrative, so that the moral points of his 'exempla' would be clear. These narrative skills, and the energy and intelligence that he brought to his large tasks, provided important new models in English for later fourteenth-century writers who are now more admired and better known -- at the moral level, tactful instruction intended to move the reader or hearer to change for the better; at the narrative level, masterful story-telling; and at the structural level, moral instruction and tales within a larger framework, all three levels handled with consummate skill. 


@@@@@


doc= 17987


Mansel, Charles Grenville (1806-1886), administrator in India, was appointed a writer in the East India Company in 1826, following a distinguished career at the East India College, Haileybury. He was made assistant to the secretary of the western board of revenue in Bengal on 19 January 1827. He subsequently held several appointments in Agra, becoming magistrate and collector in 1835. In 1837 he became temporary secretary to Lord Auckland, the governor-general. From December 1838 to April 1841 he acted as 'sadr' settlement officer in Agra, and in 1841 published the important 'Report on the Settlement of the District of Agra'. In 1841 he became deputy accountant-general in Calcutta and in 1843 one of the civil auditors under Lord Ellenborough. From 1844 to 1849 he was on leave, and on his return to India was appointed a member of the board of administration of the Punjab, under the presidency of Sir Henry Montgomery Lawrence. Because in principle he opposed Lord Dalhousie's annexation policy, in November 1850 he was gazetted as resident at Nagpur, where he remained until 1855, when he retired. He is chiefly remembered for his discomfort as the junior member of the board responsible for the administration and reorganization of the Punjab after its annexation. He was caught between the strong-minded Lawrence brothers, who constantly disagreed over the disposition of the important landowners. He died at his home, 7 Mills Terrace, Hove, Sussex, on 19 November 1886, leaving an unmarried daughter, Fanny Mansel. 


@@@@@


doc= 17988


Mansel, Henry Longueville (1820-1871), dean of St Paul's and theologian, was born on 6 October 1820 at Cosgrove, Northamptonshire, where his father, also called Henry Longueville (1783-1835), was rector of the parish. His mother, Maria Margaret Longueville, was the daughter of Admiral Sir Robert Moorsom. The Mansel (Maunsell, Mansell) family were for some centuries landowners in Buckinghamshire. Early in the seventeenth century one Samuel Maunsell acquired by marriage the property of Cosgrove, where his descendants thereafter lived. Young Henry's grandfather John was a soldier who attained the rank of major-general and who fought and fell at the battle of Coteau in Flanders in 1794. The boy's uncle Robert served in the Royal Navy and became an admiral. The fourth of eight children, six of whom were girls, Henry was brought up at Cosgrove, a pleasant village for which he retained a lifelong affection. 
After attending a preparatory school at East Farndon, Mansel entered the Merchant Taylors' School, London, in autumn 1830. Here he soon displayed the aptitudes of a scholar, loving books -- on which he readily spent his pocket money -- and despising games. He wrote regularly for the school magazine and in 1830 published a little book of verses, 'The Demons of the Wind and other Poems', with a fairly obvious debt to Coleridge and Shelley but not without intrinsic merit. On his father's death in 1835 his mother left Northamptonshire and resided in London for a few years, but returned to Cosgrove in 1842, where a house had been bequeathed especially for her use. In 1838 Henry won the school prize for English verse, and also a medal for Hebrew awarded by Sir Moses Montefiore, distinctions to be followed by further prizes, now in classics, in 1839, the year in which he matriculated as a scholar of St John's College, Oxford. Here the promise he showed at school was borne out by the diligence he applied to his studies in classics and mathematics. He was likewise assiduous in his religious observance, attending college chapel daily. He was no swot, however, and enjoyed the company of his fellow undergraduates, with whom he was popular. His tutor in his last two years, Archdeacon James Augustus Hessey, was impressed both by his refusal to shirk difficulties and by his keen sense of humour. The result of his efforts was that he gained a double first in his finals, although at his 'viva voce' examination he risked his chances by arguing with the examiner about what he regarded as a false assumption in the first question put to him, so causing a protracted discussion. Such pertinacity was to prove not untypical of the mature man. The same characteristic may even have been present in the child, coupled, it might seem, with precocity in metaphysics: his mother used to relate of him that at a still tender age he would perplex himself with the question: ''My' hand: 'my' foot. But what is 'me'?' (Burgon, 2.157). 
On graduating Mansel remained in Oxford, a city which was to be his home for most of his life. Clearly his work was to teach, and he began to take in pupils immediately, being very soon in great demand as a tutor. But ordination to the ministry was his intention; at Christmas 1844 he was made deacon, and a year later he was ordained priest by the bishop of Oxford. Mansel continued to apply himself to his studies, however, learning French and German and improving his Hebrew. He also started to read ecclesiastical history. His presence in St John's senior common room was a marked asset to college life by reason of his conversational gifts, enhanced by wide-ranging knowledge and an often scintillating wit, despite, perhaps, his fondness for puns. His high-tory politics matched his high-churchmanship, giving him the air, for all his youth, of a typical don of the old school. His earliest academic publications were in the field of logic: 'Ars logicae rudimenta' (1847), a revised version of Henry Aldrich's much-used textbook, and 'Prolegomena logica' (1851), on the philosophy of science. But his 'fragments of an Aristophanic drama', 'Phrontisterion' (1850), was a signal demonstration of his talent for satirical verse. In it he depicted the invasion of Oxford by a host of German philosophers and theologians: '
Theologians we, 

Deep thinkers and free, 

From the land of the new Divinity; 

Where critics hunt for the sense sublime, 

Hidden in texts of the olden time, 

Which none but the sage can see. 

' A Strauss, a Bauer, a Feuerbach are then each neatly lampooned. So, '
Presbyters, bend, 

Bishops, attend: 

The 'Bible's' a myth from beginning to end. 
('Phrontisterion', 2nd edn, 1852, 14-15)' The occasion for this 'jeu d'esprit' was the appointment by Lord John Russell of a commission on university reform. 
In 1849 Mansel applied for the university chair of logic, but unsuccessfully. Five years later he was elected to the hebdomadal council, heading the poll for members of convocation regardless, it seems, of his junior standing and comparative youth. On 16 August 1855 he married Charlotte Augusta (1824/5-1908), daughter of Daniel Taylor of Clapham Common, London, a union which brought him lifelong happiness; she herself was to outlive him by very many years, dying in 1908 at the age of eighty-three. As a married man he gave up residence in college and took a home of his own in the High Street. On 17 May in the same year he was elected to the Waynflete readership in moral and metaphysical philosophy at Magdalen College, becoming the first Waynflete professor in that subject in 1859, without, however, receiving the full professorial salary until 1862. In April 1864 he was re-elected professor-fellow at St John's, a token of the college's respect, which greatly pleased him. 
Mansel's inaugural lecture on the Waynflete foundation was published in 1855, and another on Kant in 1856, while in 1857 he wrote the article 'Metaphysics' for the eighth edition of the 'Encyclopaedia Britannica'. In that year, too, he was selected as Bampton lecturer for 1858. The title he chose for the latter undertaking was 'The limits of religious thought examined', and the delivery and subsequent publication in 1859 of the lectures became the event on which his memory now largely rests. They were certainly arresting -- for the Bamptons quite unusually so -- and in outcome controversial, particularly for the vigorous attack on their whole argument levelled by Frederick Denison Maurice, one of the best-known theologians of the day. 
Mansel derived his thesis from the Scottish philosopher Sir William Hamilton, whose 'philosophy of the conditioned' owed much to Kant. Knowledge, Hamilton contended, is from the very nature of the human mind itself limited to the conditioned: what is unconditioned, free of all determining circumstances, is incognizable and inconceivable, serving only as the negative of the conditioned and relative. When, that is, a fact is said to be known, it is so only as limited or conditioned by other facts known in conjunction with it. But he went on to maintain that what is conditioned necessarily implies the unconditioned as its complement or ground, albeit only as the negative of the conditioned. Hamilton did not himself venture upon the theological terrain, but his remarks that 'a God understood would be no god at all', and that 'to think that God is, as we think him to be, is blasphemy' (W. Hamilton, 'Discussions on Philosophy and Literature, Education and University Reform', 2nd edn, 1853, 15 n.), indicated the way in which his own philosophy, he thought, might provide 'the most useful auxiliary to theology' (ibid., 621). Mansel accordingly pressed the case that the speculative reason has no place in theology, which gains nothing from such spurious metaphysical help. If indeed philosophers had been less ready to assume the possibility of a purely rational knowledge they would have spared themselves the illusions of both idealism and scepticism. And the limits of philosophy in general must be applicable to religious philosophy in particular. In either realm, consciousness of the infinite or the absolute, both of which are contradictory of the finite and relative, whereof alone -- such being the constitution of the human mind -- we can have knowledge, is not open to us. Religion speaks of God as personal, but personality, as we understand it, implies limitation. Inevitably the language of religion is anthropomorphic, and is the better for being so: 'It is only by conceiving [God] as a Conscious Being, that we can stand in any religious relation to Him at all, that we can form such a representation of Him as is demanded by our spiritual wants, insufficient though it is to satisfy our intellectual curiosity. (H. L. Mansel, 'The Limits of Religious Thought Examined', 1859, 61)' But for the religious believer this metaphysical incapacity is made good by divine revelation, contained, for the Christian, in the 'Bible', under forms relating directly to human experience. Its truths are not presentative but regulative only, valid 'quoad nos', in our human and 'fallen' situation. To criticize the revelation is pointless; it must be received as it stands, as a sufficient guide to practice. 'Where the doctrine is beyond the power of human reason to discover, it can be accepted only as resting on the authority of the teacher who proclaimed it; and that authority must be guaranteed by the external evidence of supernatural mission, (ibid., 155)' in the forms of prophecy and miracle. To the implications of biblical criticism, which was then beginning to make some impression, not always adverse, on the minds of churchmen, Mansel was apparently indifferent. His theology remained in the grooves of the orthodox tradition. 
This appeal to what amounts to theological agnosticism satisfied some, if a little perversely, as a defensive apologetic in face of rationalism, but it scandalized others, not least Maurice. His indignation overflowed. Mansel, it seemed to him, had substituted theological language for the knowledge of God, and nescience for the assurance of faith. He answered the Oxford divine in 'What is Revelation?' (1859), made up of sermons and supposed 'Letters to a student of theology', but expressed with a confused vehemence that did nothing to elucidate the question at issue, as even his friends realized. Mansel promptly retorted, describing Maurice's book as 'a tissue of continuous misrepresentations without a parallel in recent literature' (Burgon, 193), and further exchanges were made, although to no avail in reconciling their antithetical opinions. That there was some personal animosity behind Maurice's strictures was recognized at the time (ibid., 193 n.). Little given to critical analysis, he clearly did not appreciate the extent of the epistemological problem which talk about 'the knowledge of God' raises. But he was not alone in denouncing Mansel's views. J. S. Mill, from a very different standpoint, found them 'loathsome', while F. J. A. Hort wondered 'what a very juiceless and indigestible morsel' Mansel's book 'must be to its orthodox admirers' (A. F. Hort, 'The Life and Letters of Fenton John Anthony Hort', 1896, 1.402). Certainly its publication was no small contribution to the religious controversies with which the following decade was fraught. What is likely to interest the modern reader is the way in which the 1858 Bampton lectures anticipated some twentieth-century developments in religious thinking. 
But Mansel had other occupations as well. In 1857 he edited the four volumes of Hamilton's lectures on metaphysics and logic in collaboration with John Veitch. From 1860 to 1862 he was university select preacher, a duty to be repeated by him from October 1869 until June 1871, and continued his output of sermons and articles, including a paper entitled 'Modern German philosophy' in the 'Quarterly Review' (reprinted in his 'Letters, Lectures, and Reviews', published posthumously in 1873). In 1865, largely for health reasons, he and his wife took a continental holiday, touring Italy for nearly three months, during which his visit to Rome was of special delight to him. On his return he immediately answered Mill's 'An Examination of Sir William Hamilton's Philosophy' (1865) in an article in the 'Contemporary Review' (January-February 1866; republished in his own 'The Philosophy of the Conditioned', 1866), in which he accused Mill of ignorance of Kant's doctrines. In any case he could not approve Mill's utilitarianism, considering it 'utterly mischievous'. 
At the end of 1866 Mansel was appointed to the university professorship of ecclesiastical history, which carried with it a residentiary canonry at Christ Church (he had already, in 1864, been made examining chaplain to the bishop of Peterborough and an honorary canon of Peterborough Cathedral). The ecclesiastical history chair may seem to have been an odd exchange for a noted philosopher, but Mansel had not neglected his theological studies, and in his new capacity he delivered in the Lent term of 1868 a series of lectures, 'The Gnostic heresies', for which his knowledge of ancient philosophy gave him added qualification. Thanks to the editorial work of J. B. Lightfoot, they were published posthumously in 1875. 
In 1868 Mansel was offered the deanery of St Paul's Cathedral and he willingly accepted it. His departure from his beloved Oxford was eased for him by his dissatisfaction with the recent course of events in the university, which appeared to him secularizing, as well as a growing weariness from the pressure of university business that intruded more and more upon his proper vocation as a scholar. He hoped, in fact, that purely ecclesiastical office would afford him more leisure for literary activities, among them the completion of his part in the 'Speaker's Commentary' on the 'Bible'. But in this he was to be disappointed. The administrative duties, which won his full attention, were, he discovered, engrossing. He managed nevertheless to get away to Cosgrove from time to time, staying with his brother-in-law. But on one of these visits, in the summer of 1871, he died suddenly in his sleep on 30 July from the rupture of a blood-vessel in his brain. He was buried, as he would have wished, in Cosgrove churchyard on 6 August. A window in St Paul's erected to his memory was unveiled on St Paul's day in 1879. 
As a thinker Mansel was astute and logical, if somewhat narrow in his intellectual sympathies. As a writer he was lucid and incisive, and in controversy could be acerbic. As a man he was, by all accounts, genial and hospitable. He greatly valued friendship, although it was his friends' actual presence he enjoyed: correspondence by letter he disliked, presumably as too impersonal. His biographer J. W. Burgon speaks of his 'profound humility' (Burgon, 274), and, for all his rather dry theologizing, his personal religion was sincere and heartfelt. 


@@@@@


doc= 17989


Mansel, John (d. 1265), administrator and royal councillor, is said by Matthew Paris to have been the son of a country priest. A papal letter of 1259, confirming a dispensation granted to Mansel by Pope Innocent IV, reports that Mansel's father, a man of noble family, married Mansel's mother and lived with her as his wife without revealing the fact that he had previously been ordained a deacon. Repenting of his conduct, Mansel's father later returned to his orders and a divorce was declared between the couple by the local diocesan. The resulting imputation of illegitimacy clung to Mansel and his siblings throughout their lives, and may go some way toward explaining Mansel's own restless pursuit of property and preferment. 
Mansel entered royal service as a young man, but it is not known how or when he did so. He is first recorded as a clerk at the exchequer of receipt, where from July 1234 until October 1236 he kept one set of the receipt rolls. From October 1236 to April 1238 he was chamberlain of the king's wines at Southampton. He continued his associations with the receipt, however, where the bulk of the revenue from the thirtieth of 1237 passed through his hands. In 1238 Mansel went with a detachment of troops supplied by King Henry to support Emperor Frederick II's military campaigns in Lombardy. Mansel may have been sent on this expedition as paymaster, but he also took an active part in the fighting, earning a reputation as a soldier he would further enhance in Gascony. 
Mansel's movements from 1239 until 1242 are poorly documented. He was abroad on royal service in October 1239 and in August 1240. Already, however, he had begun to accumulate the vast combination of custodies, lands, and ecclesiastical offices that would make him, by the 1250s, the wealthiest of all King Henry's clerical administrators. In 1235 he was presented to the church at Bawburgh, Norfolk. In 1238 he acquired custody of the lands and heirs of Adam Fitzwilliam. In 1240 and 1241 the king granted him several manors formerly held by the disgraced keeper of the royal seal, Master Simon d'Etelan. In 1241 he received a papal provision to the prebend of Thame, but when Bishop Robert Grosseteste of Lincoln resisted the provision Mansel resigned his claim. King Henry made good the loss, appointing Mansel to the church of Maidstone, Kent, and to two prebends at St Paul's Cathedral. Mansel already held the church at Haughley, Suffolk, and the prebend of Malling South in Kent. In May 1243 the king appointed him chancellor of St Paul's also. 
Mansel accompanied the king's expedition of 1242-3 to Gascony, where once again he distinguished himself as a soldier. In July 1242, at the battle of Saintes, Mansel unhorsed and captured Pierre Orige, the count of Boulogne's seneschal. In November 1242 Henry appointed Mansel custodian of Gascony until a seneschal could be found, and in February 1243 made him seneschal. Shortly thereafter, however, his military career came to an end. While participating in the siege of the monastery of Verines in Bordeaux, he was seriously wounded by a stone hurled by the defenders that crushed his leg. Nursed back to health by Master Pierre de Montibus, physician to Peter of Savoy, Mansel remained in Gascony until the end of September 1243, when he returned with the king to England. Mansel's injury cemented the king's attachment to him. The court poet, Master Henry d'Avranches, addressed a poem to 'John Mansel's Leg', and stories of Mansel's bravery circulated widely. 
Mansel's influence with the king continued to grow. In 1244 he became a member of the king's council, a position he would retain until 1263. In 1245 he was much involved in the diplomatic and administrative aspects of the king's campaign in Wales. From 8 November 1246 until 28 August 1247, and again from 17 August 1248 to 8 September 1249, he was keeper of the king's seal, an office he had briefly held in Gascony. Between 1247 and 1248 he carried out an unsuccessful mission to negotiate a marriage between Henry III's eldest son, the Lord Edward, and the daughter of the duke of Brabant. In November 1249 he fell violently ill at Maidstone, probably of food poisoning, but he was sufficiently recovered by March 1250 to take the cross with the king and other members of the royal household. In June 1250 he hosted a famous banquet for the Dominican general chapter meeting at Holborn. In October he went, with Peter Chaceporc, as the king's emissary to instruct the monks of Winchester to elect Henry's half-brother Aymer de Lusignan to the vacant bishopric. 
Mansel's influence at court during these years extended well beyond the formal offices or the specific diplomatic duties entrusted to him. Between 1244 and 1258 Matthew Paris described him variously as the king's chief or special councillor and as his 'secretarius' (Paris, 'Chron'.). The special intimacy such terms imply made Mansel a particularly valuable intercessor for those in need of the king's favour. In 1251 Mansel protected Henry of Bath, a royal justice accused of corruption, from the king's wrath, and then secured a pardon for him. He did the same for Philip Lovel, an exchequer official accused of accepting bribes from Jews in return for favourable tax assessments. Mansel himself had brought Lovel into the king's service. He now paid Lovel's fine, and arranged the petition by Alexander III, king of Scots, that restored Lovel to the king's favour. The following year Mansel engineered Lovel's appointment as royal treasurer. Mansel knew, however, not to press his influence too far. When in 1251 he was an arbiter (with William Button the elder, bishop of Bath and Wells) in a dispute between the abbot and convent of Westminster over the division of goods, although he was a friend of the abbot Mansel settled the affair by a compromise, one approved by Henry III. 
Such discretion brought Mansel a continuing series of rewards. In 1244 he acquired properties from the Arundel honour, including Wepeham and Bilsington, Kent, where he established an Augustinian priory. He also received a prebend in Chichester, along with another in a series of dispensations for pluralism. In 1246 Mansel was appointed dean of Wimborne in succession to Ranulf the Breton, and in 1247 became provost of Beverley, Yorkshire. He acquired many other livings also, among them Axminster in Devon; Howden and Hooton in Yorkshire; Wigan in Lancashire; and Ferring in Sussex. In 1251 he became a papal chaplain, and in 1256 the king appointed him treasurer of York, one of the richest benefices in the kingdom. Even before his promotion to York, however, Matthew Paris had declared Mansel the wealthiest cleric in England, estimating his annual income in the early 1250s at 4000 marks. The Melrose chronicler gave an even higher figure, and reported Mansel as having remarked, upon receiving a new benefice worth $20 per year, 'This will provide for my dogs' ('Chronicle of Melrose', 214). 
Mansel also took care to promote the interests of his family. In 1245 his nephew and namesake, Master John Mansel, became parson of the royal church at Lugwardine, Herefordshire, for which he received a series of royal protections. In 1251 he went abroad to study. When he returned, he entered royal service, where he worked closely with his uncle. Master John Mansel was most likely the son of Mansel's brother Reyner, who appears occasionally around the royal court during the 1250s as Brother Reyner, the brother of John Mansel. Sarah of Farlington, described as John Mansel's niece, may have been Master John Mansel's sister; if so, then Amabillia of London, niece and eventual heir of Master John Mansel, would perhaps have been the daughter of Sarah of Farlington. 
Mansel seems to have been particularly attached to his two sisters. He arranged their marriages and directed a stream of royal gifts towards them. It was probably for Emma that Mansel was promised a marriage worth $30 or more by the king in 1238. She eventually married Alard the Fleming, a royal tenant-in-chief who served John Mansel as a squire until he was knighted by the king in 1251. Their daughter Joan married Henry Huse, son and heir of Matthew Huse, in a match arranged by Mansel in 1252-3. Like Alard the Fleming, Henry Huse also became a member of Mansel's 'familia', serving Mansel during the early 1260s. Mansel's other sister, Claricia, married Geoffrey of Childwick, a royal marshal and one of the most troublesome of the knightly tenants of St Albans Abbey. Matthew Paris claimed that Mansel sustained Childwick in his quarrels with the abbey, and that Mansel used his influence at court to frustrate the abbey's attempts to get justice against Childwick. Professional pleaders refused to take the abbey's case, and the royal justices declared that John Mansel so dominated the kingdom that they were afraid to give sentence against him. Mansel eventually offered the abbey his good favour, however, and the abbey, realizing they were beaten, settled with Childwick. 
Mansel had already gained considerable knowledge of Gascony in 1242-3. After the collapse of Simon de Montfort's lieutenancy in Gascony, however, Mansel emerged as the man principally in charge of Henry III's Gascon and Spanish diplomacy. As such, Mansel led the diplomatic mission of 1253-4 to Castile that culminated in the marriage of the Lord Edward to Eleanor of Castile, and that produced, in consequence, King Alfonso's formal cession of Castilian claims to Gascony. Mansel was accompanied on this mission first by the bishop of Bath and later by the bishop of Hereford, but it was upon Mansel and his confidential clerk, Master John Clarel, that the burden of the negotiations rested, and to whom the credit for their success is due. Mansel continued to advise the king on Gascon and Castilian affairs thereafter. He went on several further diplomatic missions himself, and wrote lengthy letters of instruction when other royal officials were sent in his stead. 
Less clear is Mansel's role in negotiating the disastrous grant by the papacy of the Sicilian throne to Henry's second son, Edmund. Mansel was absent from court during the last half of 1253 and early 1254. It seems unlikely, therefore, that he could have been one of the principal architects of the Sicilian scheme that came to fruition during these months. He was, however, present with the king in Gascony during March 1254 when Henry accepted the papal offer, and at the king's command he set his own seal on the formal documents accepting the papal terms. There are hints he may have done so reluctantly, but if so, his objections were more likely to the terms of the offer than to the offer itself. He gave steady support to the Sicilian project thereafter, even when other royal councillors, such as Bishop Walter de Cantilupe of Worcester, outspokenly opposed it. 
Mansel's direct diplomatic involvements were not limited to Gascony and Castile. He was a key figure in the king's campaign to put Richard, earl of Cornwall, on the throne of Germany. He planned the mission of 1256 by Robert Walerand and the earl of Gloucester to sound out support for Richard among the German princes, and he accompanied Gloucester on a similar mission in 1257. Mansel was also a frequent visitor to the Scottish court during the 1250s, where he was sent several times by King Henry to restore peace between Henry's daughter and her husband, the young king of Scots, and the guardians of the Scottish kingdom. 
When the baronial reform movement began in 1258, Mansel was one of three royalist representatives appointed to the new royal council of fifteen. He was clearly trusted by the reformist party, despite his long association with the king. His clerk, John Clarel, was sent to Rome to negotiate new terms for 'the Sicilian business', and Mansel himself was put in charge of Aymer de Lusignan's confiscated property at Tickhill. In August Mansel went once again to Scotland, and in September his nephew, Master John Mansel, received the prebend of Fenton, Yorkshire, a gift that quickly embroiled him with the pope, who had provided another claimant. Mansel was a frequent target of complaint in Hugh Bigod's judicial eyre of 1258-9, but he continued as one of the key members of the council throughout the summer and autumn of 1259. He played an active role in negotiating that year's treaty of Paris, including the settlement of Eleanor de Montfort's dower claims, but was reluctant to agree to the alienation of any royal demesne lands to her. Hostility between Mansel and the Montforts grew steadily thereafter. 
In November 1259 Mansel went to Paris with the king, and in February 1260 witnessed the letters by which Henry delayed a scheduled meeting of parliament. With Peter of Savoy, Richard of Cornwall, and Robert Walerand, Mansel began now to plan the gradual restoration of the king's authority. The council of fifteen finally collapsed in December 1260; in January 1261 Master John Mansel was sent to Rome to ask Pope Alexander IV to absolve King Henry from his oaths to observe the provisions of Oxford. In February Mansel and the king withdrew into the Tower of London to await events. In May Mansel was appointed constable of the Tower. In June he travelled personally to Winchester to warn Henry of the danger he was in, and to accompany him back to London. Henry and Mansel remained in the Tower continuously from 22 June until 30 July. By the time they emerged, the resistance was over. On 21 November Mansel negotiated the treaty of Kingston, by which the reformers effectively abandoned the provisions of Oxford. The king's coup was completed in May 1262, when Pope Urban IV reissued his predecessor's decree annulling the provisions. The bull was addressed to Archbishop Boniface of Canterbury, Bishop Simon of Norwich, and to John Mansel, treasurer of York. 
By July 1262 King Henry felt sufficiently secure to return to France. Mansel did not join him until the end of August. By October, however, Mansel was so alarmed by the news from England that he begged the king to abandon his pilgrimage and return to England. Henry would not agree, however, and he and Mansel remained abroad until 20 December 1262. In the spring of 1263 Mansel's lands were a particular target of attack by Montfort's partisans, who blamed him for the papal quashing of the provisions. Once again Henry and Mansel retreated to the Tower, but this time the munitions were inadequate to sustain a siege. Mansel fled down the Thames and across the channel. His properties were immediately confiscated and given to Simon de Montfort the younger. 
In September 1263 Mansel appeared at the Boulogne conference between Montfort, King Henry, and King Louis of France, to plead for the return of his lands. In November it seemed briefly that Mansel's pleas would be answered. Henry recovered his authority, revoked the grant to young Simon, and placed Mansel's lands in the hands of royal custodians. Mansel himself, however, remained in exile, his return to England blocked by Henry's failure, in December 1263, to secure control over Dover Castle. In January 1264 Mansel was again at King Louis's court, this time for the mise of Amiens. Louis's arbitration failed, however, and the resulting civil war left King Henry a prisoner in Montfort's hands. During the summer and autumn of 1264 Mansel co-operated with the queen, Archbishop Boniface, Peter of Savoy, William de Valence, and others of the royalist exiles to mount an invasion of England from Flanders. No invasion was ever launched, however, and in early 1265 Mansel died in exile. News of his death had reached England by 7 February 1265, when Montfort appointed his youngest son Amaury to succeed Mansel as treasurer of York. 
Mansel's executors were unable to act until after Montfort's defeat and death at the battle of Evesham on 3 August 1265. But in November they were granted free administration of all his property. None of his property, however, seems to have descended to his heirs. His sister Emma outlived him, and was able to have the manors her brother had given her during his lifetime confirmed to her by the crown. Master John Mansel died within the year, leaving his own London houses to his niece Amabillia of Ripon. Nothing of his uncle's property, however, seems to have passed to him. Mansel left Bilsington Priory to King Henry, who in 1272 proposed to give it to the church of St Mary at Boulogne. But the remainder of Mansel's vast estate appears to have been treated as a crown escheat. Perhaps this was appropriate for a man whose labours on behalf of the crown, in so many different spheres, had brought him such rewards. Contemporaries were in no doubt as to Mansel's importance in matters of state. The value which the king placed on his services was noted by Matthew Paris, but most eloquently expressed by Henry III himself, in a message sent to the pope in 1262: 'He was trained under my wing. I have tested his ability, his character and merits since his boyhood. He has always been serviceable and loyal in my affairs and in those of the kingdom' (Powicke, 294). 


@@@@@


doc= 17990


Mansel, William Lort (1753-1820), bishop of Bristol and college head, was born at Pembroke on 2 April 1753, the son of William Wogan Mansel, of Pembroke, and his wife, Anne, daughter of Major Roger Lort, officer in the Royal Welch Fusiliers. He was educated at Gloucester grammar school, under Mr Sparks, and was admitted pensioner, aged seventeen, at Trinity College, Cambridge, on 2 June 1770. Elected scholar in 1771, he graduated BA in 1774 and proceeded MA in 1777. He was made junior fellow in 1775, full fellow in 1777, and held many college offices, twice serving as junior dean (1783-4 and 1785-6). He was ordained deacon at Peterborough on 18 June 1780 and priest on 28 September 1783, after which he was appointed vicar of Bottisham, Cambridgeshire, by the bishop of Ely. On 6 November 1788 his college presented him to the vicarage of Chesterton, and in the following year, on 20 January, he married Isabella Haggerstone, the daughter of a Cambridge attorney. 
In college Mansel was known as a fine wit and mimic, and delighted in satirizing academic rivalries. His popularity led to his election as public orator in 1788. He often preached before the university and took part in county politics as a strong supporter of William Pitt's government. He was linked to the administration through his position as chaplain to Pitt's master of the rolls, Sir Richard Pepper Arden. His former pupil Spencer Perceval recommended him to Pitt for the mastership of his college; Mansel was duly appointed on 25 May 1798, with instructions 'to maintain the authority of the situation, and (what is much wanted) to improve the discipline of the College' (William Pitt to George III, 12 May 1798, 'Later Correspondence of George III', 3.61). The elements of political and religious radicalism in Trinity -- encouraged by two of the fellows, Thomas Jones and James Lambert -- certainly dispersed under 'the perfectly orthodox' Mansel (ibid., 3.61), who also served as vice-chancellor in his second year as master. Mansel's loyalty to the political establishment was recognized when Perceval, then chancellor of the exchequer, promoted his candidacy for the bishopric of Bristol, to which he was consecrated on 30 October 1808. He was further rewarded, in 1810, with the wealthy living of Barwick in Elmet, Yorkshire, which was in Perceval's gift as chancellor of the duchy of Lancaster. 
Mansel published only three of his sermons. He died at the master's lodge, Trinity College, on 27 June 1820, and was buried in the chapel on 3 July. He had five daughters and at least three sons, the youngest of whom, Spencer Perceval Mansel (1797-1862), was named after his great patron. 


@@@@@


doc= 17991


Mansell, Francis (1579-1665), college head, was born at Muddlescombe, Carmarthenshire, and baptized on 23 March 1579, the third son of Sir Francis Mansell and his first wife, Catherine, daughter and heir of Henry Morgan of Muddlescombe. After attending the free school in Hereford, he matriculated from Jesus College, Oxford, on 20 November 1607. He graduated BA on 20 February 1609 and proceeded MA on 5 July 1611. In 1613 he was elected to a fellowship at All Souls as founder's kin. 
On the death of Griffith Powell on 28 June 1620, Mansell was elected principal of Jesus College, and was admitted by the vice-chancellor, in spite of opposition from a number of fellows. On 13 July Mansell expelled three of his opponents from their fellowships and proceeded, on the authority of the vice-chancellor, against a fourth. His position does not appear to have been secure, however, and before his year of grace from All Souls expired he resigned from the principalship and retired to his fellowship, proceeding BD and DD on 3 July 1624. When his successor at Jesus, Sir Eubule Thelwall, died on 8 October 1630, Mansell was re-elected, his success on this occasion perhaps a result of the patronage of William Laud, the new chancellor. In the same year he became rector of Easington, Oxfordshire, and in 1631 rector of Elmley Chapel, Kent, prebendary of St David's and treasurer of Llandaff. 
During Mansell's second tenure of office Jesus College buildings were altered and enlarged. In 1636-7 the chapel was extended westwards. Thelwall's new library, raised on a colonnade which was insufficiently strong, was pulled down and the north and south sides of the inner quadrangle were completed. Mansell was a tireless fund-raiser and gave much of his own money to the college, including $100 towards the second quadrangle. 
When war broke out in 1642 Mansell was in Wales settling the details of some benefactions. He returned to Oxford at the end of the year but in 1643 was forced to leave the city to look after the affairs of his brother Anthony, who had been killed at the battle of Newbury. For the next few years he rallied support for the royalists in Wales. He was sequestered from his Kent rectory before 4 March 1646 but on 11 June that year was one of those clergy whom the House of Commons wished to secure in some suitable place. When the parliamentary visitation of the university began in 1647 he returned to Oxford to look after college interests, and although ejected from the principalship in May 1648, took a year to ensure that the college's affairs were in order before handing over to his successor, Michael Roberts. 
Mansell then retired to Llantriddyd, Glamorgan, where he encountered some harassment. In 1651 he again returned to Oxford, residing with a Mr Newman, a baker in Holywell Street. He found employment teaching a small group of sons of Welsh gentry at the home of a Mr White, which received the nickname 'little Welsh hall'. Later invited to take rooms in Jesus College, he resumed tutorial duties, teaching among others the young Sackville Crowe. In letters to Crowe's father Mansell advocated a broad curriculum for all commoners, not just those destined for the church or for academe. 
Following the Restoration, on 1 August 1660 Mansell was reinstated as principal of Jesus. However, age and bad eyesight induced him to resign the following year, and having gradually become more infirm, he died on 1 May 1665. He requested burial in the college chapel, where a memorial was placed. By his will dated 3 January 1661, he left small bequests to the poor of parishes in Carmarthenshire and Glamorgan, and the residue of his estate to his friend, executor, and successor at Jesus, Leoline Jenkins, in trust for the benefit of the college and of the church in Wales. 


@@@@@


doc= 17992


Mansell, Sir Robert (1570/71-1652), naval officer and administrator, was the fourth, or possibly the sixth, son of Sir Edward Mansell (1530/31-1585) of Margam, Glamorgan, and Lady Jane Somerset, the youngest daughter of Henry, second earl of Worcester, and his second wife, Elizabeth, daughter of Sir Anthony Browne. A student at Staple Inn in 1585, he attended Brasenose College, Oxford, in 1587, but did not graduate. 
In 1591 Mansell captained a privateer on an expedition to the West Indies led by Thomas, Lord Howard, to whom he was related by marriage through his nephew, Sir Lewis Mansell. Within a few years he had married Elizabeth, daughter of the late lord keeper, Sir Nicholas Bacon, and widow of Sir Francis Wyndham (died 1592), a Norfolk squire whose property lay at Pentney, about 8 miles from King's Lynn. This union, which proved childless, connected him to the influential Gawdy and Bacon families, and led in 1593 to his appointment to the Norfolk bench. However, he did not settle himself in the county but instead embarked upon a naval career. During the Cadiz expedition of 1596 he rose to the command of a royal warship after the previous captain was killed, and received a knighthood from the earl of Essex (27 June). In the following year he served as Essex's flag captain on the Islands' voyage, and then as vice-admiral in the narrow seas. Between February and October 1599 he was admiral of a small squadron on the Irish station, and saw action against the rebels at Waterford. In 1600 he belatedly attempted to develop his standing in Norfolk, where he was regarded as an outsider. On 24 April he was appointed the county's vice-admiral, and later that year he offered himself as knight of the shire for the parliament which was soon expected to meet. However, his hopes of representing his county were jeopardized by a duel with Sir John Heydon on 9 October 1600, which also cost him the use of his right arm and, briefly, his place on the bench. After helping to round up the accomplices of the rebellious earl of Essex in February 1601, Mansell served as admiral of a squadron in the western channel, capturing six Hanseatic vessels laden with Portuguese merchandise. He failed to overcome the damage done to his reputation by his earlier duel, and in the parliamentary election for Norfolk held on 5 October he was defeated. However, four days later he was chosen as senior burgess at King's Lynn. He made only a modest impact on the 1601 parliament. 
During the closing years of Elizabeth's reign Mansell served as admiral of the narrow seas. In September 1602 he performed a notable service when he intercepted six Spanish galleys, driving them into the hands of a waiting Dutch squadron, which destroyed them. On the accession of James I he signalled his desire to give over his employment at sea in favour of 'some place of attendance' ('Salisbury MSS', 15.43). He achieved his ambition in April 1604 when, aided by his distant relative Lord Admiral Nottingham, and the surveyor of the navy, Sir John Trevor, his associate in a recent privateering venture, he displaced Sir Fulke Greville as treasurer of the navy. About the same time he was also made a gentleman of the privy chamber. As treasurer Mansell proved keen to enrich himself at the government's expense. Corruption was allowed to flourish at every level while he himself regularly exacted exorbitant fees from the navy's suppliers as a condition of payment. In 1605 he hired to the crown the 'Resistance', a new ship of about 140 tons of which he was a part owner, for service as a victualler in the fleet which accompanied Nottingham on the latter's embassy to Spain that year. Although equipped at government expense, the ship's true cargo was 50 tons of lead, which it carried on behalf of a private merchant. Moreover, her hire was paid on the false basis that she was a ship of 300 tons, and none of her rigging, worth $379, was ever returned to the navy's stores. By such underhand means Mansell amassed a fortune, so enabling him to invest in various enterprises such as the Muscovy Company. His fraudulent dealings were exposed in 1608-9 by the commission appointed to investigate corruption in the navy, but although the evidence against him was damning he went unpunished. 
During the first Jacobean parliament (1604-10) Mansell acted as a spokesman for the navy. He represented Carmarthenshire, where he apparently leased some property. In 1605, while parliament was prorogued, he accompanied Nottingham to Madrid, and in the following year, during a further prorogation, he commanded the fleet which returned the Danish king, Christian IV, to his native country. By 1610 Mansell had been drawn into the circle of those who advised the young Prince Henry. Improbable though it may seem, Henry hoped to enlist Mansell in a campaign of naval reform, while Mansell supported the prince's bid to discover a north-west passage. It was probably Mansell who suggested that the expedition to find the passage should be commanded by his own nephew, Sir Thomas Button. Henry's sudden death in November 1612 deprived Mansell of his patron. In February 1613 Mansell staged a mock sea-fight to celebrate the marriage of Princess Elizabeth to the elector palatine, a project over which he took great care. Three months later he was imprisoned in the Marshalsea after he had advised Nottingham to question the legality of a second commission of inquiry into the navy. The immediate cause of his incarceration, however, was his refusal to identify the lawyer whose advice he had solicited. On 12 June he was arraigned before the privy council where he confessed his fault, avoiding the sort of intemperate outburst to which he was prone. Soon after his release he attached himself to the royal favourite, Robert Carr, earl of Somerset, whose agent he was in the parliamentary elections of 1614. He was again returned for Carmarthenshire, and also at Harwich, in recognition of his support for its bid for local admiralty jurisdiction. Mansell plumped for the county seat and again acted as the navy's spokesman. 
Mansell was unaffected by the fall of Somerset in 1615. In that year he expanded his commercial interests by obtaining the monopoly on glass production, buying out the other members of a syndicate to which he belonged. To cut production costs he reorganized the works, but his search for a suitable site for a new furnace outside London proved ruinously expensive. Attempts to establish works in Nottinghamshire, Dorset, and Pembrokeshire all ended in failure, and by the time he discovered the ideal location at Newcastle upon Tyne he had expended $28,000, 'almost to the exhausting of all his estate' (BL, Add. MS 12496, fol. 165). The cost of financing the glassworks may have been one of the considerations which induced Mansell in the spring of 1618 to sell the treasurership of the navy to a fellow Muscovy merchant, Sir William Russell. However, his main motive was undoubtedly that he had learned that a further investigation of the navy was now inevitable, allied to which it was clear that the power of his patrons, the Howards, was on the verge of collapse. Before Mansell agreed to sell the treasurership, he sought appointment as lieutenant of the admiralty. This office, which would allow him to retain his links with the navy, was also known as the vice-admiralty of England. Though little more than a sinecure, in status it ranked second only to that of lord admiral. It was duly conferred on Mansell in May 1618 by the young marquess of Buckingham, whom Mansell encouraged to seek appointment as lord admiral in succession to Nottingham. It seems likely that the main reason Buckingham lent his support was that Nottingham made Mansell's appointment a condition of his own resignation. 
Over the next few years Mansell was questioned by the newly appointed navy commissioners regarding his accounts as treasurer, many of which he had failed to submit. A clause in his grant of the lieutenancy stipulated that he could not be dismissed for any offences he had previously committed, but he enjoyed no immunity from financial liability for any irregularities which the commissioners might expose. His response to the commissioners' demands was to present them with a bill for travelling expenses amounting to $10,000, which he alleged he had incurred as treasurer. This evidently achieved the desired result, as the commissioners, faced with such an enormous sum, discontinued their investigation, and Mansell's accounts were not finally declared until 1639. Mansell's victory over the commissioners coincided with his appointment in 1620 as admiral of a fleet which was charged by Buckingham, the new lord admiral, to suppress the pirate base at Algiers and free the prisoners held there. The fleet anchored off Algiers on 27 November and after some negotiation forty English captives were released. These, it was maintained, were all that they had, but though Mansell was aware that this was false, his crews were sick and his ships short of supplies. He therefore retired to Spain, returning to Algiers in May 1621. On 24 May he sent five or six fireships into the harbour, though only two of the corsairs' vessels were destroyed. Before Mansell could undertake a fresh assault he was recalled, as it was thought that his ships might be needed in the channel against the Dutch in the dispute triggered by repeated acts of violence against the English in the East Indies. 
During his absence in the Mediterranean Mansell's glass monopoly was condemned by parliament, despite the best efforts of his second wife, whom he had married on 11 March 1617. This was Elizabeth Roper (died 1658), formerly his mistress and a maid of honour to the late Anne of Denmark. His grant was accordingly revoked in May 1623, but the privy council, noting that Mansell was 'a well deserving servant to his majesty' who had been 'abused in that business' ('APC', '1621-3', 406-7), immediately awarded him a fresh patent on terms almost identical to the first. This new grant came under parliamentary attack in 1624, but this time Mansell was himself in the Commons, as knight of the shire for Glamorgan. He obtained an exemption for his patent from the 'Act of Monopolies', possibly because the Commons valued his views on the feasibility and cost of the forthcoming war with Spain, about which he spoke at length on 11 and 19 March. The government, too, held his long naval service in high regard, and before the parliament was adjourned Mansell was appointed to a newly established council of war. However, he soon grew disenchanted with the council's proceedings and in February 1625 he withdrew from its meetings. 
Mansell bore one of the flags at the funeral of King James in May 1625. Returned for Glamorgan to the 1625 parliament, he took little part in its proceedings until 10 August, when, at the invitation of Sir Robert Phelips, he alleged that the council of war had not been properly consulted about strategic matters. Over the next couple of days he bitterly criticized the conduct of Buckingham as lord admiral. Not only had Buckingham ignored Mansell's advice, but he had chosen incompetent commanders for the king's ships and had left the narrow seas without adequate defence. Not surprisingly, his sharp outbursts caused him to be arraigned before the privy council on 14 August. In the event he was treated leniently, presumably because many of the duke's enemies were then present, among them the lord chamberlain, the earl of Pembroke, who by the beginning of the new year had enlisted Mansell in his power struggle with Buckingham. It was Pembroke's agent, William Coryton, who secured Mansell's return to parliament for Lostwithiel in January 1626. During the course of this parliament Mansell was prevented by his colleagues on the council of war from speaking openly regarding the advice that they had given to Buckingham, but he nevertheless renewed his former assault on the duke, whom he lambasted for having lent the French a number of ships the previous year and for failing to guard the narrow seas. Moreover, he supported the house's efforts to impeach Buckingham, and on 9 May he called for the duke to be imprisoned. There was now no possibility that he would escape punishment for his hostility to Buckingham, and on 3 May he was removed from the council of war. On 8 July, following the dissolution, he was also dismissed from the commissions of the peace for Norfolk and Kent. 
These punishments, and the 'rapprochement' between Pembroke and Buckingham effected after the 1626 parliament was dissolved, may have persuaded Mansell to moderate his criticism of the duke in the 1628 assembly, in which he again represented Glamorgan. Although he remained critical of the conduct of the war, which had been widened to include France, he was careful not to single out Buckingham for blame, and in early July, during the interval between parliamentary sessions, Mansell was reconciled with Buckingham after a two-hour meeting. This accommodation, which led to his restoration to the Kent commission of the peace, encouraged Mansell to hope that he would now be permitted to take a more active role in naval affairs, but this expectation was soon dashed. In the following month Buckingham was assassinated and his place taken by admiralty commissioners, among whom was Mansell's sworn enemy, Sir John Coke. Over the next ten years Mansell's naval duties were largely limited to the naming and launching of new ships, although he was consulted in 1633 over the size of the manning establishment and in 1635 over the proposed dimensions for the 'Sovereign of Seas'. By the time the admiralty commissioners were replaced by the earl of Northumberland in April 1638, Mansell was in his late sixties and recovering from a mild stroke, which had left him temporarily paralysed down one side. It was because of his age that in June 1642 the king refused to entrust to him the task of seizing control of the Channel Fleet from the admiral appointed by parliament. 
Mansell's Newcastle glassworks were disrupted by the English defeat at Newburn in August 1640, when many of his workmen fled south in fear of the victorious Scots. Later that year Mansell, who presumably feared a renewed assault in parliament on his glass monopoly, canvassed his neighbours in Kent (where he had been living since at least 1626) for a county seat in the Long Parliament, but he was obliged to abandon his candidacy for lack of support. Mansell's patent was subsequently challenged in a petition to the House of Lords in May 1641. While waiting to give evidence to the house, Mansell witnessed members of the Commons fleeing in panic after mistaking the sound of a board breaking for an explosion; though he drew his sword and cried 'stand for shame' (Fletcher, 27) he proved unable to stem the exodus. He was finally forced to surrender his glass patent in June 1642 after a London merchant complained that some of his chests of imported glass had been seized by Mansell, though this did not prevent him from continuing to manufacture glass. 
Mansell played no active part in the civil war. The parish register of St Alfege, in East Greenwich, where he lived, indicates that he was buried on 21 August 1652, so it is difficult to explain why licences to export horses were issued in his name in October 1655. He died childless and intestate, letters of administration being granted on 26 June 1656 to his widow, who died in 1658. As a director of the New England Company in 1622 Mansell had sponsored the discovery of Mount Mansell, but his attempt to leave his mark on the map of North America was thwarted by Champlain, who subsequently renamed the mountain Mount Desert. 


@@@@@


doc= 17993


Mansell, Sir Thomas (1777-1858), naval officer, third son of Thomas Mansell of Guernsey, was born at Guernsey on 9 February 1777. He entered the navy in January 1793, on the frigate 'Crescent' with his fellow Guernsey man Captain James Saumarez. He followed Saumarez to the 'Orion', in which he was present in Lord Bridport's action off Lorient, and at the battles of Cape St Vincent and the Nile, after which he was promoted by Nelson acting-lieutenant of the 'Aquilon' (confirmed by the Admiralty to 17 April 1799). He subsequently served in the channel and on the French coast, and at the capture of the Cape of Good Hope, whence he was sent home by Sir Home Popham in command of an armed transport. On 1 November 1806 he married Catherine, daughter of John Lukis, a merchant of Guernsey: they had four daughters and four sons. 
Mansell was flag-lieutenant to Sir James Saumarez in the 'Diomede', 'Hibernia', and 'Victory', and on 17 September 1808 was promoted to the command of the sloop 'Rose', in which he took part in the capture of Anholt in the Baltic on 18 May 1809, and was at different times engaged with the Danish gunboats. In 1812 the tsar presented him a diamond ring, for piloting a Russian squadron through the Belt; and the king of Sweden awarded him the order of the Sword. In 1813 Mansell commanded the brig 'Pelican' (18 guns) on the north coast of Spain, and on 7 June 1814 was promoted captain. Reportedly while commanding the 'Rose' and 'Pelican' he captured at least 170 vessels, some of them powerful privateers. In 1837 he was nominated a KCH and knighted. On 9 October 1849 he became a rear-admiral on the retired list. After the death of his first wife Mansell married a daughter of John Wood of Guernsey. He died at Guernsey on 22 April 1858. His sons almost all entered the navy or marines. The second, Arthur Lukis, for some years commanded the surveying ship 'Firefly' in the Mediterranean, and died, a retired vice-admiral, in 1890. 


@@@@@


doc= 17994


Mansfield, Charles Blachford (1819-1855), chemist and traveller, was born on 8 May 1819 at Rowner, near Gosport, Hampshire, the son of John Mansfield, rector at Rowner, and Winifred, eldest daughter of Robert Pope Blachford of Osborne House, Isle of Wight. His younger brother, Robert Blachford Mansfield (1824-1908) became a sportsman and barrister. Although they lived comfortably, the Mansfields do not seem to have been a happy family. Charles Mansfield was educated first at a private school at Twyford, and afterwards at Winchester College (1831-5), which he detested. At the age of sixteen his health broke down from what seems to have been poliomyelitis, which left him partially deaf and with a stiff arm. In consequence he passed a year with a private tutor in Northamptonshire, where his scientific interests were encouraged by the marquess of Northampton, a council member of the Royal Society. On 23 November 1836 he entered his name at Clare College, Cambridge, but was unable to take up residence until October 1839. Owing to frequent absences due to ill health, and intellectual and social diversions he did not graduate BA until 1846, then MA in 1849. During these years, he read widely and through his charisma rapidly gathered many friends around him. With Charles Kingsley, who was a contemporary at Cambridge, Mansfield formed a lifelong friendship. Only gradually did such friends learn of Mansfield's secret life, and how to help him during periodic bouts of melancholic depression. Despite earlier illness he had grown into a handsome, athletic young man who easily attracted the opposite sex. On 3 February 1842 he secretly married a widow, Catherine Shafto, daughter of a London merchant, William Warne Higgs, but they separated immediately. He was never able to divorce her and had many love affairs. 
A medical career attracted Mansfield for a time, and while still at Cambridge he attended some classes at St George's Hospital in London. However, when he settled in London in 1846 he decided to devote himself to chemistry, while occupying his leisure with a diversity of interests ranging from natural history and mesmerism (he hypnotized Kingsley during the composition of 'Yeast'), to abstruse studies in medieval science. Chemistry, he decided, was the central science for a system of quasi-Platonic knowledge that he had already worked out for himself, whose aim would be 'the comprehension of the harmonious plan or order on which the universe is constructed -- an order on which rests the belief that the universe is truly a representation to 'our' ideas of a Divine Idea, and is in fact a visible symbol of thoughts working in a mind infinitely wise and good' (C. B. Mansfield, 'A Theory of Salts', 1865, ix). 
In 1848, after completing the chemistry course at the Royal College of Chemistry, Mansfield undertook, at the request of its director, A. W. Hofmann, a series of experiments which resulted in the fractional distillation of impure benzene, toluene, and xylene from coal tar, and the development of procedures for the large-scale conversion of benzene into nitrobenzene. In premises in Hanover Square, close to the Royal College of Chemistry, he manufactured aniline for Hofmann's researches and helped him prepare scientific papers and reports. The extraction method, which he patented in May 1848 (no. 11,960), effectively laid the foundation of the European coal tar and dyestuffs industries though others were to reap the profits. In 1849 he published a pamphlet, 'Benzole, its Nature and its Utility', to indicate what he foresaw as some of the most important applications of benzene. These included perfuming soaps, urban illumination, surgical plasters, and dry-cleaning. 
During the critical cholera years of 1848-9, when Chartism appeared likely to promote political disruption, Mansfield became a Christian socialist, joining J. F. D. Maurice, Kingsley, J. M. Ludlow, Nevil Story Maskelyne, and others in their efforts at social reform among the workmen of London, supporting these efforts financially, and helping to provide pure water for districts like Bermondsey, where every drop was sewage-tainted. He wrote several articles in 'Politics for the People', edited by Maurice and Ludlow, and afterwards in the 'Christian Socialist', and he was strongly supportive of the group's efforts to create a working men's college in 1854. In September 1850 an account of a balloon inflating machine constructed in Paris led him to investigate aeronautics, and in the next few months (following correspondence with Sir George Cayley), he wrote his 'Aerial Navigation', an original and suggestive work that appeared posthumously in 1877. In addition, he published a Utopian fantasy on space travel in 'Fraser's Magazine'. In the winter of 1851-2 he delivered a Royal Institution lecture course on the chemistry of metals, which apart from remarkable generalizations, contained strange triadic speculations concerning chemical classification which were published posthumously as 'A Theory of Salts' in 1865, by which time the theory of chemical structure had superseded it. 
In the summer of 1852 Mansfield started for Paraguay, partly 'to gratify a whim of wishing to see the country, which I believed to be an unspoiled Arcadia' (C. B. Mansfield, 'Paraguay, Brazil and the Plate', 1856, 8), but also to escape a sexual entanglement with a working-class woman that had shocked his Christian socialist friends. He arrived at Buenos Aires in August, and having obtained permission from Urquiza, the leader of the Argentine confederation, to sail up the River Parana, he reached Asuncion on 24 November, where he remained two and a half months. Paraguay, under Jose Francia and his successor Carlos Lopez, had been shut off from the world for forty years, and Mansfield was, if not the first English visitor to the capital, certainly the first to go there merely to take notes. His letters, published after his death, contained bright and careful descriptions of Paraguayan society, the scenery, plant and bird life, and a scheme for the colonization of the Gran Chaco, a dream that remained with him for the remainder of his life. A sketch of the history of Paraguay, valuable for the period immediately preceding and following his arrival, formed the conclusion to his letters. Other letters (all originally addressed to Kingsley, Ludlow, and Maskelyne), printed in the same volume, dealt in a similar manner with Brazil. These were translated into Portuguese by Pascual, and published at Rio de Janeiro together with critical essays on Mansfield's narrative, the first volume in 1861, the second in 1862. 
Mansfield returned to England in the spring of 1853, resumed his chemical studies, and began a book on the constitution of salts based upon his Royal Institution lectures. He also took up the study of law in emulation of his brother, and became involved in controversy with the manufacturing chemist F. C. Crace Calvert over the validity of Mansfield's 1848 patent. In his private life he became entangled with Mary Ellen Meredith, the unhappy wife of the writer George Meredith. Meanwhile, Hofmann had invited him to prepare specimens of pure benzene for the Paris Exhibition, and on 17 February 1855, while preparing these in a building he had hired for the purposes by the Regent's Canal, a naphtha still overflowed and a benzene/air mixture explosion occurred. Mansfield, in attempting to save the premises by carrying the blazing still into the street, was horribly burned, and died nine days later on 26 February in the Middlesex Hospital, surrounded by friends. He was buried in Weybridge churchyard. His tragic death, with so many of his talents unfulfilled, affected his friends emotionally for several years to come. Even in death his private life continued to embarrass them, for Mansfield left his fortune to a former lover, a Mrs Burrows, 'nee' Gardiner, even though she had subsequently married another man; she declined the bequest. 
Vegetarian, teetotaller, and mesmerist, brilliant conversationalist, and eccentric, Mansfield possessed a personality which dazzled all who fell into his company. His works, published at various intervals after his death by his brother, Kingsley, and Maskelyne, are unfortunately mere fragments to which he had not added the finishing touch, yet each bore the unmistakable impress of a polymathic mind of the highest order. The private testimony of those who knew him well, such as Kingsley, Ludlow, and Maskelyne, confirmed Hofmann's commemoration of Mansfield as 'this highly-gifted young chemist and noble-hearted young man. In him science has lost one of its most ardent and most promising cultivators' ('Report of Juries 1862 Exhibition', 123). 


@@@@@


doc= 17995


Mansfield, Sir James (bap. 1734, d. 1821), judge, was baptized at Ringwood, Hampshire, on 30 May 1734, the son of John James Manfield, attorney, of Ringwood, and his wife, Elizabeth. His grandfather was reputedly of foreign descent and was at one time employed in Windsor Castle. Little is known of his personal life, and while most sources state that he never married it is known that he fathered at least five children. Among them was John Edward Mansfield, father of William Rose Mansfield. He attended Eton College between 1745 and 1750, when he entered King's College, Cambridge, as a scholar. At university he changed his surname from Manfield to Mansfield, and in 1754 was elected a fellow of King's. He graduated BA in 1755 and proceeded MA in 1758. 
Like his father Mansfield pursued a career in law. On 11 February 1755 he was admitted at the Middle Temple and on 28 November 1758 he was called to the bar. As a lawyer he acquired prestige and success, and practised at common law as well as in chancery. When John Wilkes returned to England in 1768 Mansfield was appointed one of his counsel and argued in the court of king's bench, albeit unsuccessfully, in favour of Wilkes's application for bail on the grounds that he had been outlawed improperly. He was appointed king's counsel on 24 July 1772 and a bencher of the Middle Temple on 6 November 1772. He was involved in numerous trials, including that of Elizabeth Chudleigh, duchess of Kingston, for bigamy, in 1776, and in the same year that of the four candidates who had stood for parliament at Hindon in 1774, for bribery. He was also defence counsel, in 1777, for James Aitken (John the Painter), the pro-American arsonist who torched naval stores at Portsmouth and warehouses at the port of Bristol, and appeared as crown prosecutor in 1779 against George Stratton and others who took over the administration of Fort St George (Madras) without authorization in 1776. 
Mansfield's ability drew interest from political patrons. In 1776 the earl of Carlisle offered to bring him into the Commons for Morpeth but Mansfield declined, as he was hoping for judicial office, which would preclude his sitting in the Commons. In 1778 Lord North, considering the appointment of a new attorney-general and solicitor-general, suggested Mansfield and James Wallace to George III as 'the gentlemen who stand foremost, are sensible men and good lawyers' (Christie), though he doubted the potential of both as parliamentarians. Mansfield was not appointed on this occasion. He eventually stood for the Commons at Cambridge University in 1779, supported by the chancellor (the former prime minister Grafton) against the government candidate, but after his election he voted with North's administration. On 1 September 1780, following Wallace's promotion to attorney-general, he was appointed solicitor-general. In this role he took part in the government's prosecution of Lord George Gordon for high treason in 1781. 
Mansfield left office in April 1782, following the resignation of North, and opposed the Rockingham and Shelburne administrations. William Eden observed in September 1782 that he was 'very earnest for the demolition of Lord Shelburne's Government at any rate, and yet he has not fallen in love with Fox' (Christie). In November 1783 he was returned briefly to office in the coalition between North and Charles James Fox, but the ministry was dismissed in December of that year and Mansfield was again forced into opposition. His parliamentary career ended in April 1784, when he was defeated at the general election, and while his oratory achievements in parliament are not distinguished, the 'English Chronicle' in 1781 described him as 'a man of keen but not elegant parts -- he speaks with point, labour and precision, but without any of those graces which give energy to talents and make eloquence pleasing, as well as instructing' (ibid.). 
Mansfield returned to his legal career. In 1782 he had been elected reader at the Middle Temple and in 1785 he was elected treasurer. In 1795 he and John Scott, subsequently lord chancellor and earl of Eldon, represented the fellows of Trinity Hall, Cambridge, in Francis Wrangham's appeal against the fellows' decision not to elect Wrangham to a fellowship. The argument turned upon the proper construction of the words 'idoneus moribus et ingenio' in the college statutes, and Wrangham's counsel cited Terence, Horace, and other Latin authors to prove that 'mores', as applied to an individual, could only mean morals. Mansfield successfully argued that 'mores' referred to manners and character, quoting a line from Ovid describing two mistresses -- 'Haec specie melior, moribus illa fuit' -- and Wrangham lost his appeal. He was also counsel for the plaintiffs, with Samuel Romilly, in the case of 'Thellusson v. Woodford', in 1797, which established that there was no distinction in law between trusts designed to prevent the alienation of property by creating a series of limited interests preventing the vesting of property in an absolute owner in the future, and a trust for accumulation designed to restrict the uses of inherited property by heirs. 
Mansfield was appointed chief justice of Chester in July 1799 and chief justice of the common pleas on 24 April 1804, when he was knighted. He also became a serjeant-at-law, taking the motto 'serus in coelum redeas', alluding to his exclusion from office. As a judge he was known for 'an ungraceful delivery and a husky voice' ('DNB') and for his unsteady temper, which was easily exploited in court for the amusement of counsel, rather than for the high quality of his judgments. However, a merchant, Joseph Minet, told Joseph Farington that Mansfield 'preserved High Authority in the Court of Common Pleas by his superior knowledge of Law, which was such that in Chancery Lord Eldon was afraid of Him, & was glad to have him appointed to the Chief Justiceship' (Farington, 'Diary', 6.2428). He enjoyed shooting, and on circuit liked to rise at five 'to kill something before breakfast' ('DNB'). In 1806 he was the Grenville ministry's next choice after Edward Law, first Baron Ellenborough, for the lord chancellorship, but like Ellenborough he refused. He opposed the bill in 1807 that prevented the crown granting reversions to office. As chief justice he upheld the earlier rulings by William Murray, earl of Mansfield, that a moral obligation should count as a valuable consideration in contract law, in the cases 'Barnes v. Hedley' (1809) and 'Lee v. Muggeridge' (1813). On 15 May 1812 he presided over the trial of John Bellingham for the murder of Spencer Perceval. There he instructed the jury that Bellingham's belief that Perceval was the cause of his mistreatment by the authorities was a ''fancy' and his consequent behaviour 'an opportunity to gratify revenge'' (Eigen, 54); unlike the insane, Mansfield argued, Bellingham was able to act rationally and could distinguish right from wrong. 
Mansfield resigned on 21 February 1814, on account of ill health. It is clear that he had been a better legal practitioner than a parliamentarian but Sir Nathaniel Wraxall described him as a man 'of acknowledged talents, parliamentary no less than professional' and as one who 'manifested great energies of mind and character' (Christie). He died on 23 May 1821 at his house in Russell Square, London, having instructed, through his will, that all his personal papers be burnt following his death. 


@@@@@


doc= 17996


Mansfield, William Rose, first Baron Sandhurst (1819-1876), army officer, was born on 26 June 1819 at Ruxley, Kent, the fifth of seven sons of John Edward Mansfield of Diggeswell House, Hertfordshire, and his wife, Mary Buchanan, daughter of General Samuel Smith of Baltimore, USA. He was the grandson of Sir James Mansfield, and among his brothers were Sir Samuel Mansfield, a senior member of council, Bombay, Colonel Sir Charles Mansfield of the diplomatic service, and John Mansfield, a London police magistrate. He was educated at the Royal Military College, Sandhurst, and passed out in November 1835 at the head of the five most distinguished cadets of his half-year. 
Mansfield was commissioned ensign in the 53rd foot on 27 November 1835, and promoted lieutenant in 1838, and captain in 1843. After serving in the Mediterranean and at home, he accompanied his regiment to India, and was present at Badiwal, at Aliwal (28 January 1846), and at Sobraon (10 February 1846), during the First Anglo-Sikh War. During the last-mentioned engagement he acted as aide-de-camp to Lord Gough. On 3 December 1847 he was promoted major, and early in 1848 commanded a small detached force that suppressed civil disturbances in Bihar. Mansfield commanded the 53rd foot during the Second Anglo-Sikh War, and on 21 February 1849 fought at the battle of Gujrat. On 9 May 1851 he became a junior lieutenant-colonel at the age of thirty-two, passing over Henry Havelock, having purchased all his promotions apart from the first. In 1851-2 he was constantly employed in the Peshawar district on the north-west frontier, in operations against the trans-border Pathans, either in command of the 53rd or attached to the staff of Sir Colin Campbell (afterwards Lord Clyde), who commanded the area. During this period Mansfield established a close friendship with Campbell, who formed a high opinion of his abilities. 
Mansfield briefly considered an alternative career, either in journalism or in banking, during the 1850s, but finally decided to stay in the army. On 2 November 1854 he married Margaret ['see 'Mansfield, Margaret, Lady Sandhurst (bap. 1827, d. 1892)], daughter of Robert Fellowes of Shotesham Park, Norfolk; they had four sons and a daughter. He was promoted brevet colonel on 28 November 1854, and in April 1855 exchanged to the unattached list and was appointed deputy adjutant-general in Dublin. In June 1855 he was sent to Constantinople, with the temporary rank of brigadier-general in Turkey, to act as military adviser to the British ambassador, Lord Stratford de Redcliffe. When he arrived in Constantinople a plan for relieving the city of Kars with the Turkish contingent was under active consideration. Mansfield maintained constant communication with the Turkish authorities on the subject, and afterwards accompanied the ambassador to the Crimea where he rendered valuable services. Following the end of the war in 1856 he received the quasi-military appointment of consul-general at Warsaw, with the rank of brigadier-general in Poland. After the outbreak of the Indian mutiny in May 1857 Mansfield was recalled by special request of Sir Colin Campbell, who had been appointed commander-in-chief in India following the death from cholera of Sir George Anson. An entry in Campbell's diary, dated 11 July 1857, reads: 'Before going to the Duke of Cambridge I had settled in my mind that my dear friend Mansfield should have the offer made to him of chief of the staff. His lordship (Panmure) proposed the situation of military secretary, but that I told his lordship was not worth his acceptance, and I pressed for the appointment of chief of the staff being offered to him, with the rank of major-general and the pay and allowances of that office in India. (Shadwell, 1.405)' On 7 August 1857 Mansfield was appointed chief of the staff in India, with the local rank of major-general. While passing through London, 'en route' for India, he was consulted by the government, and submitted a plan of operations based on the same principles as that communicated in confidence by Campbell to the Madras government on his way to Calcutta. Mansfield acted as Campbell's right-hand man and as his strategic mentor throughout the period that followed, and played a key role in planning the reconquest of the area occupied by the mutineers. 
In late October 1857 Mansfield left Calcutta with Campbell to take command of the force assembled to relieve the besieged garrison of Lucknow. Mansfield participated in the advance on Lucknow and in the second relief of the city in November 1857 (for which he was made a KCB on 24 March 1858). On 6 December he was present when the Gwalior contingent was routed at the third battle of Cawnpore. During this engagement he was sent by Campbell late in the afternoon to occupy the Subahdar's Tank, blocking the line of retreat of the enemy's centre and right wing. Mansfield halted, however, rather than advancing after dark through a mile of ruined buildings where the rebels were still located, thereby allowing them to escape with all their artillery. He accompanied Campbell in the advance on Fatehgarh and the engagement at Kali Nadi, and at the siege of Lucknow (when he was promoted major-general for distinguished service in the field). He then participated in the summer campaign in Rohilkhand, at the battle of Bareilly and at Shahjahanpur, in the campaign in Oudh during 1858-9, and in the operations in the trans-Gogra. Following the end of the uprising he shouldered the chief burden of reorganizing the shattered fragments of the Bengal army and dealing with the disgruntled European troops of the now defunct East India Company. Although Mansfield was a resolute critic of the company's troops, and played an instrumental role in their eventual transfer to the crown, he did not agree with the official policy towards the company's officers and men which had provoked the 'white mutiny'. 
In December 1859 Mansfield was offered the command of the north China expedition, but refused it in the hope he would be appointed commander-in-chief following the end of Lord Clyde's period of command. He was disappointed in this hope, however, and until 23 April 1860 remained chief of the staff in India. He held the command of the Bombay presidency, with the local rank of lieutenant-general, from 18 May 1860 to 14 March 1865. He was appointed colonel 38th foot in 1862 and was made lieutenant-general in December 1864. On 14 March 1865 he was appointed commander-in-chief in India and military member of the executive council, a position he held until 8 April 1870. Throughout this period he was a warm supporter of Lord Lawrence, but his tenure of command in India did not prove a great success. He was unpopular, and on several occasions had painful and discreditable quarrels; he sometimes lacked both good temper and judgement in dealing with subordinates. The incident most damaging to his reputation occurred when he court-martialled a member of his personal staff against whom he had levelled charges of peculation and falsifying accounts, none of which could be substantiated. Mansfield commanded the forces in Ireland between 1 August 1870 and 31 July 1875. He was made a GCB in May 1870, sworn of the Irish privy council in August 1870, and awarded the honorary degree of DCL at Oxford in June 1870. Two years later he was promoted general. Mansfield was also unpopular in Ireland, and several times showed a lamentable lack of judgement. On 28 March 1871, during Gladstone's first administration, Mansfield was created Baron Sandhurst of Sandhurst, Berkshire. A Liberal in politics, he took an active part in debates in the House of Lords, talking on such topics as army organization and the abolition of the purchase system which he believed would result in 'stagnation, tempered by jobbery'. He died on 23 June 1876, aged fifty-seven, of 'congestion of the lungs', at his London residence, 18 Grosvenor Gardens. He was buried at Digswell church, near Welwyn, Hertfordshire. His eldest son, William (1855-1921), succeeded to the peerage, and was governor of Bombay from 1895 to 1900 and lord chamberlain from 1912 to 1921. 
Mansfield was tall and wiry, with dark hair. He possessed undoubted intellectual abilities and was a staff officer of considerable aptitude, but his haughty, often contemptuous and arrogant manner made him unpopular with his subordinates and fellow officers throughout his career. He disliked advice, was unable to delegate authority to others, and had many personal enemies. An able and courageous staff officer and administrator, he lacked the necessary leadership ability to prove a successful commander in the field and his personal judgement was frequently questionable. 


@@@@@


doc= 17997


Henry Manship (c.1520-1569), merchant, freeman of the town, and long considered the author of 'Greate Yermouthe: a Booke of the Foundacion and Antiquitye of the Saide Towne' (1847) which is now reliably attributed to Thomas Damet. So far as is known, he completed his formal education at the town's free grammar school, though he went on to serve Yarmouth as town clerk from November 1579 to July 1585, as one of four attorneys to the borough court, and in other 'ad hoc' capacities on the borough's behalf. By 1613 he had married Joan, daughter of Henry Hill of King's Lynn and his wife, Anne, 'nee' Gourney. 


@@@@@


doc= 17998


Manship, Henry (c.1550-1625), historian, was almost certainly born in Great Yarmouth, the son of Katherine and 
Manship's perpetual pugnacity and even dishonesty plagued him all his life. An unspecified infelicity cost him a royal appointment to a customs post in 1585; he was temporarily dismissed from his burgess-ship in 1604 for calling Yarmouth's two MPs 'sheep' and 'dunces'; an unauthorized loan in the borough's name placed him under a cloud in 1616; and in 1620 he published a self-serving pamphlet at the borough's expense. The two signal achievements which command attention, Manship's reorganization of the borough's records in 1612 and his completion of 'The History of Great Yarmouth' in 1619, seem partly intended to restore his favour with the borough's ruling elite. 
On 16 June 1612 Manship received permission from Yarmouth's borough assembly to establish a committee of aldermen and common councillors to set about the methodical retrieval, description, and reorganization of Yarmouth's official documents, which had become widely scattered both within the borough and far beyond. In twenty-three meetings over two months' time, the committee fulfilled its task. A later transcription of Manship's report on this project (BL, Add. MS 23737, fols. 4-31) describes this signal achievement in the annals of local record keeping. It did restore his standing, and gained him several 'ad hoc' official assignments on Yarmouth's behalf in the 1610s. 
Manship obviously employed his intimate and thorough familiarity with these records in completing his 'History' in 1619. It was not published until 1854 when the local freeman and antiquary Charles John Palmer transcribed it from a then-extant manuscript copy. No original copies are now known. Manship's 'History' is remarkable for the breadth of its research in authorities both contemporary and ancient, its critical use of source material, and its polemical support for the rule of magistrates and the law. It illuminates the local identity and history of Great Yarmouth, thus encouraging the loyalty and pride of fellow townspeople. Several copies seem to have circulated from an early time and subsequent local historians such as Henry Swinden and Francis Blomefield relied heavily upon it. The failure to publish it in his own time probably had to do with Manship's personal standing and with the expense of so doing. Though rewarded with $50 for completing the 'History', his final disgrace, the offending pamphlet of 1620, seems to have eclipsed his fortunes for the last time. Manship died a relatively poor man in 1625, and was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 17999


Manson, David (1726-1792), schoolmaster, was born in the parish of Cairncastle, co. Antrim, the son of John Manson and Agnes Jamieson. As his parents were poor he worked as a farmer's servant-boy, but was allowed by his employer to attend a school kept by the Revd Robert White in the neighbouring town of Larne. There he made such good progress that he himself opened a school in his native parish -- according to tradition, in a cowhouse. He next became tutor to the Shaw family of Ballygally Castle, and then taught at a school in Ballycastle. It was probably at this time that he married Miss Lynn, of Ballycastle; they had no children. 
In 1752 Manson moved to Belfast, where he started a brewery, and in 1755 he opened an evening school in his house in Clugston's Entry, where he taught English grammar, reading, and spelling. The school grew, so that in 1760 he moved to larger premises in High Street and employed three assistants. He advertised that his pupils would be taught 'without the Discipline of the Rod by intermixing pleasurable and healthful exercise with Instruction' (Benn, 452), and instead used a complex system of rewards to encourage them in their studies. In 1768 he built a still larger schoolhouse, in Donegall Street, where he was able to accommodate boarders for the first time. He taught both boys and girls; one of his pupils was Mary Anne McCracken. To amuse his pupils he devised various machines, one a primitive kind of velocipede. He wrote and published a number of school books, which enjoyed a long-lasting reputation in the north of Ireland and elsewhere. These were a spelling book, a primer, a pocket English dictionary, and a pronouncing dictionary. 'Manson's Spelling Primer' continued to be published in the 1840s, and a new edition of his pronouncing dictionary was printed in Belfast in 1823. He set out his methods of teaching in 'A plan for the improvement of children in virtue and learning', printed in 'A New Pocket Dictionary' (1762). He also published a small treatise in which he advised Irish handloom weavers to live in the countryside, where they could supplement their income by cultivating the soil. He invented an improved machine for spinning yarn. 
In 1775 Manson was listed among the seatholders in the First Presbyterian Church, Belfast, and in 1779 he was admitted a freeman of the borough. He died on 2 March 1792 at Lillyput, a house which he had built near Belfast, and was buried at night, by torchlight, in the churchyard at the foot of High Street. 


@@@@@


doc= 18000


Manson, George (1850-1876), wood-engraver and landscape and genre painter, was born on 3 December 1850 in Edinburgh, the son of Magnus Manson, a merchant. As a boy he was encouraged to paint by his father, who was an amateur artist. He read the works of John Ruskin and worked his way through all the practical exercises in 'The Elements of Drawing' (1857). On leaving school he began an apprenticeship with the publishers William and Robert Chambers, where he worked as a punch cutter, making the steel dies used in the production of printers' type. Rising very early in the morning before work, he would sketch various scenes around his home on the southern outskirts of Edinburgh. He joined the Craigmillar Sketching Association and for their monthly meetings made numerous sketches of the oldest buildings in Edinburgh. This he called his 'religious work' (Gray, 8), since he viewed himself as a conservationist recording the ancient buildings before they were destroyed. This work later led him to have a deep admiration for the haunting Parisian views of Charles Meryon. 
Manson worked in pencil, watercolour, and oils but also made wood-engravings from an early age. Inspired by the work of Thomas Bewick, his blocks are simply composed and forthright. In 1870 he competed for a prize offered to apprentices by the Edinburgh Society of Engravers on Wood. Manson's work did not sufficiently meet the exacting stipulations of the award for him to win the main prize, but the quality of his entry -- a study of a farm with trees and sheep grazing in a field -- was nevertheless noticed by the judge, and he was awarded a special prize in recognition of his 'artistic feeling in landscape'. He first exhibited at the Royal Scottish Academy in 1869 with 'Study of a Doorway at Craigmillar Castle'. In 1870 he exhibited 'Milking Time' and the following year 'Children at a Well'. It was perhaps the encouragement of other artists that prompted him to become a professional painter that year: James Cassie bought the last of these three paintings and became one of many artists who admired and patronized Manson throughout his short career. 
Mixing with such artists and studying at the Trustees' Academy in Edinburgh, Manson soon came under the influence of realist European artists, and particularly the Dutch Hague school of painters. In 1873 he visited Europe with W. D. McKay (1844-1924): in Paris they sketched from the paintings in the Louvre and, with a letter of introduction from the art connoisseur John Forbes White, called on the Dutch genre painter Adolphe Artz. In The Hague they visited Josef Israels. Influenced by the work of the Dutch artists with whom he had become acquainted Manson began to concentrate on depicting seascapes and fishing folk: like Israels, he became renowned for his ability to depict the pathos of working-class life. 
In 1874 the first signs of consumption pre-empted a visit to Sark, but Manson continued to visit Scotland, touring the highlands and spending prolonged periods of time in Edinburgh and Galashiels. In January 1875 he travelled to France with Patrick W. Adam (1854-1930) and there began to etch, receiving instruction from a M. Cadart. In St Lo he contracted pneumonia, and thereafter his physical decline was rapid. On his return to Britain he settled in Shirley, near Croydon. His last known work was a small study for a scene from Allan Ramsay's 'Gentle Shepherd' (1725). He died of consumption at Lympstone in Devon on 27 February 1876 and was buried in Culliford churchyard. Three years later more than 300 subscribers funded the publication of a book on Manson and his art. Compiled by J. M. Gray, it served as a fitting testimonial to Manson's artistic achievements. In 1881 an exhibition of his watercolours was held in London; his expert use of both detailed brushwork and 'wet' watercolour washes attracted great interest and the admiration of critics and artists alike. 


@@@@@


doc= 18001


Mant, Richard (1776-1848), bishop of Down, Connor, and Dromore, eldest son and fifth child of Richard Mant DD (died 1817), was born at Southampton on 12 February 1776. His father was the master of King Edward's Grammar School, and afterwards rector of All Saints', Southampton; Mant was educated by his father and at Winchester College. He entered as a commoner at Trinity College, Oxford, in 1793, and in 1794 obtained a scholarship. In 1797 he graduated BA, and in 1798 was elected to a fellowship at Oriel, which he held until his marriage on 22 December 1804 to Elizabeth (died 1846), daughter of William Wood or Woods of Chidham, Sussex. Mant's essay 'On commerce' obtained the chancellor's prize in 1799. In 1800 he began his long series of poetical publications with verses in memory of his old master at Winchester, Joseph Warton. He graduated MA in 1801, was ordained deacon in 1802, and, after acting as curate to his father, took a travelling tutorship, and was detained in France in 1802-3 during the war. 
Having been ordained priest in 1803, Mant became curate in charge (1804) of Buriton, Hampshire. After acting as curate at Crawley, Hampshire (1808), and to his father at Southampton (December 1809), he became vicar of Coggeshall, Essex (1810), where he took pupils. In 1811 he was elected Bampton lecturer, and chose as his topic a vindication of the evangelical character of Anglican preaching against the allegations of Methodists. The lectures attracted notice. Charles Manners-Sutton, archbishop of Canterbury, made him his domestic chaplain in 1813, and on going to reside at Lambeth he resigned Coggeshall. In 1815 he was made rector of St Botolph without Bishopsgate and took a DD at Oxford. He was presented in 1818 to the rectory of East Horsley, Surrey, which he held with St Botolph's. 
In February 1820 Mant, though lacking any previous Irish interest or connection, was nominated by Lord Liverpool for an Irish bishopric. He is said to have been first intended for Waterford and Lismore (though this was not vacant), but was ultimately appointed to Killaloe and Kilfenora, and was consecrated at Cashel on 30 April 1820. The Catholic south was not an easy post for a Church of Ireland cleric, and W. B. Mant's memoir of his father reports considerable turmoil during Mant's four years there. He voted against Roman Catholic emancipation in 1821, and again in 1825. On 22 March 1823 he was translated to the more congenial Ulster diocese of Down and Connor, succeeding Nathaniel Alexander who had been translated to Meath. There was no official residence connected with his diocese, and Mant made his home at Knocknagoney (Rabbit's Hill), in the parish of Holywood, co. Down, a few miles from Belfast. He had come from a diocese which was largely Roman Catholic to a stronghold of protestantism, mainly Presbyterian, and he succeeded in doing much for the prosperity of the then established church. Mant was on the royal commission of inquiry into ecclesiastical unions (1830); the publication of its report in July 1831 was followed by considerable efforts of church extension in his diocese. He found Belfast with two episcopal churches, and left it with five. He took an active part in connection with the Down and Connor Church Accommodation Society, formed (19 December 1838) at the suggestion of Thomas Drew, which between 1839 and 1843 laid out $32,000 in aid of sixteen new churches. In 1842, on the death of James Saurin, bishop of Dromore, that diocese was united to Down and Connor, in accordance with the provisions of the 'Church Temporalities Act' of 1833. The united diocese was a large one, being 'a sixteenth of all Ireland'. The last bishop who had held the three sees conjointly was the seventeenth-century prelate Jeremy Taylor, to whose memory a marble monument, projected by Mant, and with an inscription from his pen, had been placed in 1827 in the cathedral church at Lisburn, co. Antrim. 
Mant was an indefatigable writer; the bibliography of his publications occupied over five pages in the British Library catalogue. His poetry is chiefly notable for its copiousness. Many of his hymns were adapted from the Roman breviary, and four survive in 'Hymns Ancient and Modern' at the end of the twentieth century. The annotated 'Bible' (1814) prepared by George D'Oyly and Mant, at the instance of Archbishop Manners-Sutton, and at the expense of the Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge, was largely a compilation but was influential in its time, upon the young W. E. Gladstone, among others. It was followed by an edition of the prayer book (1820), on a somewhat similar plan, by Mant alone. 
Mant's most enduring work is his 'History of the Church of Ireland from the Reformation to the Revolution' (2 vols., 1840). It was undertaken to provide as detailed a narrative of the Church of Ireland as James Seaton Reid provided in the first two volumes of his 'History of the Presbyterian Church in Ireland' (1833-7). No one was so well equipped for the task as Charles Richard Elrington, but on his withdrawing owing to ill health, Mant came forward. His style is readable, and his facts are usually well arranged, though his comments and general point of view are those of a committed partisan. The earlier church history of Ireland is ignored, and the period immediately preceding the Reformation is treated somewhat in the manner of a protestant pamphlet; but the real topic of the book, the post-Reformation annals of the Irish establishment to the Union, still stands, more than a hundred and fifty years later, as a useful, if biased, account. 
Mant was taken ill on 27 October 1848 while staying at the rectory, Ballymoney, co. Antrim, and died there on 2 November 1848. He was buried on 7 November in the churchyard of St James's, Hillsborough, co. Down. He was survived by a daughter and two sons; the elder son, Walter Bishop Mant, was his father's biographer. 


@@@@@


doc= 18002


Mant, Walter Bishop (1807-1869), Church of Ireland clergyman, was the eldest son of Richard Mant (1776-1848), bishop of Down, Connor, and Dromore, and Elizabeth Wood (died 2 April 1846). He was born on 25 June 1807 at Buriton, Hampshire. He matriculated at Oriel College, Oxford, on 6 February 1824, and graduated BA in 1827, proceeding MA in 1830. In 1831 he took holy orders, and was appointed archdeacon of Connor by his father. He married the Hon. Marianne Blackwood, daughter of Hans, third Lord Dufferin and Claneboye, on 15 October 1831. They had two daughters before her death on 22 February 1845. In 1832 he attended Trinity College, Dublin. He became rector of Hillsborough, co. Down, in October 1834, and was appointed archdeacon of Down. 
For many years Mant was provincial grand master, and afterwards provincial grand chaplain, of the freemasons of Down and Antrim. On 5 January 1847 he remarried; his new wife was Emily Neville (died 1865), daughter of Lieutenant-Colonel Marcus Corry, of Hillsborough, co. Down. They had two sons. Mant wrote poetry and was interested in antiquarian subjects, contributing to the 'Proceedings' of local societies. His published works include 'Horae apostolicae' (1839), 'Memoirs of... Richard Mant' (1857), 'Christophoros and other Poems' (1861), and 'Bible Quartets' (1862). He died on 6 April 1869 at the archdeaconry, Hillsborough, where he was buried in the churchyard on 10 April. A tablet to his memory was erected in the village church there. 


@@@@@


doc= 18003


Mante, Thomas (bap. 1733, d. c.1802), army officer and historian, was baptized Thomas Mant on 3 December 1733 at St Faith's parish church, Havant, Hampshire, the eldest of the eight children of Thomas Mant (1702-1768), an estate manager, and his wife, Mary (died 1781), the daughter of the Revd Joseph Bingham (1668-1723), rector of St Faith's, Havant, a church historian and antiquarian, and his wife, Dorothea Pococke (1672-1755). Nothing is known of his early years until his appointment as senior second lieutenant of the 94th company of marines on 25 June 1756. On 1 November 1759 he transferred to the 56th company of marines as its junior first lieutenant. As a marine officer he participated in the West Indies campaigns of 1759 and 1762, and by 7 June 1762 he was one of seventeen assistant engineers engaged by the earl of Albemarle for the siege of Havana. By 24 June 1762 he was a lieutenant in the 77th regiment of foot, which left for New York late in August 1762 after the capture of Havana from Spanish forces. Following the peace of 1763 newer regiments such as Mant's 77th were disbanded, but Mant's company joined Colonel Henry Bouquet's campaign against Pontiac's coalition of Native American tribes during the summer of 1763. His next post was brigade major in Colonel John Bradstreet's expedition in 1764 to make peace with Pontiac's coalition. 
Having been placed on half pay, Mant spent the years 1765-73 primarily in London working on numerous projects. As agent for John Bradstreet, now a general in America, he worked unsuccessfully from 1765 to 1768 with the Board of Trade to set up a colony in Detroit with himself as lieutenant-governor and Bradstreet as governor. He was also unable to earn an adequate income, and his constant borrowing from Bradstreet and Sir Charles Gould, judge advocate-general of the army, alienated these powerful figures who might have advanced his career. Mant was employed during this London period by John Robinson, secretary of the Treasury and head of foreign intelligence, to gather intelligence concerning a possible war with France. On 29 June 1769 he married Mary Silver at St Peter's parish church, North Hayling, near his ancestral home of Havant. 
Mant's first period in London is noteworthy for his literary activity. He prepared four books for the press: his masterpiece, the 'History of the Late War in North America' (1772) and three translations of works on military tactics by Colonel Joly de Maizeroy or his school, 'A Treatise on the Use of Defensive Arms' (1770), the two-volume 'System of Tactics' (written in 1769-71, though not published until 1781), and the 'Elementary Principles of Tactics' (1771). The three works on military science provide the theoretical foundation for his 'History', and the four works should be regarded as a tetralogy of 1600 pages offering an epic portrait of men at war. His 'History' has been widely praised by historians, and some passages have been quoted repeatedly, such as the description of the horrors of thirst and yellow fever at the siege of Havana in 1762. Mante changed the spelling of his name between 1770, when his 'Defensive Arms' was published under the name Thomas Mant, and 1772, when his 'History' was published under the name Thomas Mante. 
The change in name reflects Mante's permanent move in 1773 to Dieppe, Normandy, where he had lived intermittently since 1769. In 1769 he had been recruited by General Grant de Blairfindy, who regarded him as 'peut etre le plus grand genie de l'Europe' (Cole, 102), to spy for the French ministry of war against Britain. Mante was in the employ of the French authorities until 1774, when payments stopped because of suspicions that he was a double agent. However, he was still able to work in France as an excise officer and then, during the years 1775-8, as the owner of an estate near Dieppe for raising British sheep. This project was a failure, and in 1778 Mante's heavy indebtedness threw him into debtors' prison. He was nevertheless able to convert his failure as a farmer into a book, published in 1778 as 'Traite des prairies artificielles, des enclos, et de l'education des moutons de race angloise'. The work was officially approved by the keeper of the great seal, and Louis XVI gave his 'Ame le sieur de Mante' (Cole, 120) and his heirs the privilege to publish. From debtors' prison Mante inscribed a copy to Benjamin Franklin, American ambassador to France in 1778, from whom he received several gratuities. 
After being released from prison early in 1781, Mante returned to London destitute and in poor health. He was rebuffed by both family and friends as a traitor, but he found a new friend in the London publisher Thomas Hookham, who in 1781-2 published Mante's novels 'Lucinda' and 'The Siege of Aubigny', which were paraphrases from French sources. Mante's main effort during this second London period, however, was his monumental 'Naval and Military History of the Wars of England' ('c'.1795-1807). While relying heavily on the histories of Hume and Smollett in the early volumes, he trusted his own expertise in volumes 5 and 6 covering the wars of 1714-71. His account of the Seven Years' War in America, in which he had been both participant and chronicler, however, lacks the richness of detail so characteristic of his earlier 'History'. Mante wrote only half of volume 7, and an unnamed editor completed volume 7 and wrote volume 8, covering the period 1791-1807. Mante died about 1802 while working on his seventh volume and after publishing under a pseudonym nineteen essays entitled 'Retrospect of the eighteenth century' in the 'Gentleman's Magazine' (1800-01). 


@@@@@


doc= 18004


Mantell, Gideon Algernon (1790-1852), surgeon and geologist, was born on 3 February 1790 at his family's home in St Mary's Lane, Lewes, Sussex, a middle child among the eight of Thomas Mantell (1750-1807), a shoemaker, and his wife, Sarah Austen (1755-1828), originally from Kent. Joshua Mantell was a younger brother. Precluded from attending grammar school and the universities by his father's well-known political and religious views (radical whig and Methodist, respectively), he was educated by John Button in Lewes and by his uncle George Mantell in Wiltshire. In 1805 he was apprenticed in Lewes to James Moore, a surgeon, with whom (following six months at St Bartholomew's Hospital in London) he entered into partnership. In 1816 Mantell married Mary Ann Woodhouse (1795-1869) of Maida Hill, London, the daughter of one of his first patients, and further established himself in Lewes, eventually buying out his partner, Moore. The four surviving children of his marriage were Ellen Maria (1818-1892?), who married John W. Parker, Walter Baldock Durrant Mantell (1820-1895), Hannah Matilda (1822-1840), who died unmarried, and Reginald Neville Mantell (1827-1857). 
Although Mantell contributed several medical publications to 'The Lancet' and other journals, he is notable primarily for his work in geology and palaeontology, fields that had attracted him in childhood. This work earned him the nickname 'Wizard of the Weald'. His assiduous investigations of the strata and invertebrate fossils of eastern Sussex culminated in 'The Fossils of the South Downs' (1822), his first book (of twelve), with lithography by his wife. Having by then explored the rich vertebrate deposits of Tilgate Forest (near Cuckfield), he announced in February 1825 the discovery of 'Iguanodon', one of the various kinds of dinosaurs (not yet so called) with which he was subsequently associated. Although his earliest evidence consisted of teeth only, these were sufficient to establish the, at the time unique, identity of 'Iguanodon' as an extinct gigantic herbivorous reptile and to secure for Mantell entry into the Royal Society. He had been admitted to the Geological Society of London as early as 1818 and in 1835 became the second recipient (after William Smith) of its Wollaston medal on the basis of his saurian discoveries. 
In 1827 Mantell published 'Illustrations of the Geology of Sussex', which was devoted to the vertebrate fossils of Tilgate Forest and is the earliest book of any to deal primarily with dinosaur remains. His 'Geology of the South-East of England' (1833) then combined text from his books of 1822 and 1827 with a Geological Society paper in which he announced his discovery of a second kind of dinosaur, 'Hylaeosaurus'. Heavily armoured, 'Hylaeosaurus' confirmed that dinosaurs walked on solid ground and were not amphibian, as had earlier been thought. 
Mantell's discoveries, honours, and books, together with a private geological museum he had established, brought him much-sought-after recognition, and even friends among the aristocracy, his lowly social origins notwithstanding. His lifelong hunger for respectability, whetted by a generous grant of $1000 from the very rich third earl of Egremont, led Mantell to abandon Lewes for nearby Brighton, which the king and his retinue visited every winter. Mantell failed to achieve a viable medical practice there but by expanding and eventually institutionalizing his geological museum, he became the local leader of scientific and other learned endeavour. In 1834 his American correspondent Benjamin Silliman of Yale (whom he was not to meet until 1851) secured for Mantell an honorary LLD. On the strength of this blatantly solicited honour, Mantell chose ever after to be known as Dr Mantell, though his distinction was literary rather than medical. 
It was also in 1834 that Mantell acquired his most famous specimen, the Maidstone 'Iguanodon', which was bought for him from its discoverer by friends. As one of the two most nearly complete dinosaur fossils then known (his 'Hylaeosaurus' being the other), it considerably increased available knowledge and became the chief attraction of his museum. Forced by economic necessity to buy a medical practice (in Clapham Common), and needing money, Mantell sold his fossils to the British Museum in 1838 for $4000. His wife and elder son left him the next year and his favourite daughter, Hannah Matilda, died of tuberculosis in 1840. 
After months of despair over his quadruple loss, Mantell recovered his tenacity of spirit and began a decade of remarkable creativity, during much of which he was assisted by his remaining daughter, Ellen Maria, who contributed drawings by herself to several of his books, including the very popular 'Wonders of Geology' (1838), 'Medals of Creation' (1844, opposing evolution), and 'Thoughts on Animalcules' (1846, on microscopy). His last books on geology, 'A Pictorial Atlas of Fossil Remains' (1850) and 'Petrifactions and their Teachings' (1851), include contributions on rare or recently extinct New Zealand birds by his son Walter. 
The word 'dinosaur' was coined only in 1842 by Richard Owen, a brilliant but unscrupulous comparative anatomist whose envy of Mantell's original discoveries spoiled what should have been a congenial relationship between them. It was Mantell, not Owen, who first emphasized (in 1831) what Cuvier had affirmed earlier -- that there had been an age of reptiles preceding the age of mammals. Besides 'Iguanodon' and 'Hylaeosaurus', Mantell's dinosaur finds included 'Megalosaurus', 'Cetiosaurus', 'Regnosaurus', 'Pelorosaurus', and the later-named 'Hypsilophodon'. He also discovered dozens of other prehistoric creatures: new fossil fishes, further vertebrates, and a very large number of invertebrates, together with microspecies and plants. 
By the end of his remarkable career (blighted from 1841 on by a painful spinal condition), Mantell had won the royal medal of the Royal Society (1849) and numerous domestic and foreign honours. He contributed importantly to stratigraphy, palaeontology, evolutionary biology, ornithology, microscopy, archaeology, and local history; his medical knowledge and astute detective work once saved the life of a local woman, Hannah Russell, who had been falsely accused of poisoning her husband. Though a popular writer and lecturer, most of his publications were specialized, highly technical papers for either the Geological Society or the Royal Society. Mantell died in bed at his final home, 19 Chester Square, London, on 10 November 1852, possibly from an overdose of opium taken to assuage his continual spinal pain. He was buried four days later in Norwood cemetery beside his favourite daughter, Hannah Matilda, the only member of his immediate family who (in his eyes) never rejected him. 


@@@@@


doc= 18005


Mantell, Joshua (1795-1865), surgeon and horticulturist, was born on 3 November 1795 at St Mary's Lane, Lewes, the fourth son of Thomas Mantell (1750-1807), shoemaker, and his wife, Sarah Austen (1755-1828). Gideon Algernon Mantell was an elder brother. Though hunchbacked and desultory, Mantell displayed an aptitude for science and eventually gave several public lectures on chemical topics to local audiences. In 1821 he managed a stationer's shop in Brighton for John Baxter (1781-1858), a local printer and publisher. In 1822 he was apprenticed as a surgeon to his older brother Gideon. Joshua moved to London the following year for study at Westminster Hospital and the Fever Institute, returned to Lewes and his brother, and then went back to London (1827-8) for further study at St George's Hospital and other institutions. Now with proper credentials, he established himself as a surgeon in Newick, Sussex, and was both liked and respected by his patients. An avid botanist, Mantell founded the Newick Horticultural Society in 1830 and in 1832 published a short, practical essay on floriculture in the second edition of Baxter's 'Library of Agricultural and Horticultural Knowledge', a volume he may also have edited. 
In March 1836 Mantell was thrown by his horse, permanently injuring his brain. His scientific and professional effects were auctioned off that September (by his older brother Thomas) and it was rumoured that Mantell had died. In April 1839 he was admitted as a patient at the respected Ticehurst Asylum; he died there on 28 March 1865 from 'decay of nature' complicated by asthma, and was buried at Newick. He never married. 


@@@@@


doc= 18006


Mantell, Sir Thomas (1751-1831), antiquary, was born on 17 October 1751 at Chilham, Kent, the only son of Thomas Mantell, surgeon, of Chilham, and Catharine, daughter of John Nichols, rector of Fordwich. He belonged to the Kentish branch of the Mantells. The antiquary Samuel Pegge was his godfather. Early in life he settled in Dover as a surgeon but retired on being appointed agent for prisoners of war and transports at Dover. In 1814 he was appointed to the demanding post of agent for packets at Dover. He was for many years a magistrate at Dover, and six times its mayor. He was knighted on 13 May 1820 during his mayoralty. He married on 31 December 1778 at St Mary the Virgin, Dover, Anne, daughter of William Oakley; they had no children. 
Mantell was elected fellow of the Society of Antiquaries in 1810. He investigated the tumuli in various parts of Kent, and was a collector of antiquities. In 1811 he published 'An Account of Cinque Ports Meetings'; this was republished with additions in 1828. He further published 'An Account of Coronation Ceremonies Relative to the Barons of the Cinque Ports' in 1820. He also published two medical papers. Mantell died at his home in Dover on 21 December 1831, aged eighty, and was buried in the family vault at Chilham. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 18007


John Manton (1752-1834) was also a gun maker, with a reputation little inferior to that of Joseph. He was born on 6 November 1752 at Grantham, the eldest son of John Manton (1725-1802) and his wife, Mary, 'nee' Gildon. He was apprenticed in 1766 to John Dixon, gun maker, at Leicester, turned over in 1768 to W. Edson at Grantham, and from about 1774 worked for John Twigg of Piccadilly, rising to be his foreman. He and his wife, Catherine, whom he married about 1786, had four children. At Michaelmas 1781 he set up on his own at 6 Dover Street, Piccadilly, where he carried on business until his death. Between 1797 and 1821 he developed a flintlock with a V-shaped flash pan which was very successful, a single trigger action, a vertical sear, and a new breech system, all protected by patents. His business prospered despite a temporary set back in 1823-4 when he continued with flint ignition while other makers were using percussion locks. Eventually he yielded to the increasing knowledge of the times and thereafter his trade recovered. 


@@@@@


doc= 18008


Manton, Joseph (1766-1835), gun maker, was born in April 1766 and baptized on 29 April at St Wulfram's Church, Grantham, Lincolnshire, the youngest of six children of John Manton (1725-1802), farmer, and his wife, Mary, daughter of Henry Gildon, yeoman, and his wife, Ann. He was apprenticed first to William Newton of Grantham and then to his elder brother, John Manton, at 6 Dover Street, London. He married Mary Ann Aitkens on 17 January 1792. They had nine children; of these, Frederick was sent out to India in 1822 where he established a gun making business in Calcutta, and Charles became master furbisher at the Tower of London in 1829. In 1789 Joseph Manton branched out on his own and by 1791 he was established in business at 25 Davies Street, Berkeley Square, London, where he remained until 1818. The possession of one of his guns was an object of ambition to sportsmen, many of whom frequented his shop. Colonel Peter Hawker was a great friend and admirer of Joe Manton, as he was almost universally called, and his 'Instructions to Young Sportsmen' abounds with references to Manton's skill. 
Manton took out twelve patents between 1792 and 1825 for a variety of ideas. These included an improved hammer and breeching; a spring to prevent the trigger from rattling; cartridges; a perforated hammer to allow air to escape when the charge was being rammed down; the 'elevated rib' connecting the barrels of double guns; the 'gravitating stop' to prevent accidental discharge; and the 'musical sear', by which a musical sound was produced on cocking the piece. Manton applied for a patent in 1790 for a machine for rifling cannon, and for an improved shot with a base of soft wood to take into the grooving. Experiments were carried out at Woolwich and he was offered a sum of $500 for these inventions, which he declined. Finally in 1792 the patent was granted. Had he co-operated more closely with the authorities, Manton would have met with more success but he had already developed those characteristics of doggedness and determination which were to colour his whole life. In his best guns he introduced platinum touch-holes for preventing corrosion, and his barrels were proved by hydraulic pressure. He claimed that none of his guns had ever been known to burst. His famous reputation as the 'king of the gun makers' was founded on the speed of ignition of his flintlocks and the overall excellence of his work. His other inventions comprised a method of enclosing clocks in exhausted cases to make them airless; airtight sliding tubes for telescopes; and a tool for boring holes in horses' feet, so that shoes might be attached by screws instead of by nails. Hawker claimed for Manton the introduction of the copper percussion cap, but this is not borne out by the evidence. 
In 1816 Manton started to make guns with percussion ignition, first with a pellet lock and in 1818 with a tube lock. The quality was superb but they were very costly, and whereas in 1815 he had an annual production of 400 arms, by 1825 the figure was less than 100. Several legal actions for alleged infringements of his patents, one against his own brother John, were also a great expense and in 1825 he was imprisoned for debt. He was declared bankrupt in January 1826. He had recovered by June 1827, but was again imprisoned four times between 1828 and 1831. At the time of his bankruptcy he was carrying on business at 11 Hanover Square and at 315 Oxford Street but the next year he was in the New Road, Marylebone, then in Burwood Place, and in 1834 at 6 Holles Street, in partnership with his son John Augustus. Manton died at 4 Lyon Terrace, Edgware Road, Maida Hill, on 29 June 1835, aged sixty-nine, and was buried in Kensal Green cemetery, his epitaph being from the pen of Colonel Hawker, who printed it in his 'Instructions'. Manton's business was carried on by his son at 6 Holles Street until 1838, when it was acquired by Messrs Charles and Henry Egg, also a name of repute in the gun trade. His brother 
In 1814 John Manton took his son George Henry into partnership and the firm was known as John Manton & Son. Shortly afterwards annual production was about 250 arms and Colonel Hawker gave this opinion: 'No one can dispute the excellence of Mr John Manton's guns, although he may have left to other members the risk or merit of trying experiments, and bringing out new patents or inventions.' John Manton died at 6 Dover Street on 24 November 1834 and was buried at St George's, Hanover Square, bequeathing the whole of his business to his son George Henry. 


@@@@@


doc= 18009


Manton, Thomas (bap. 1620, d. 1677), nonconformist minister, was baptized on 31 March 1620 at Lydeard St Lawrence, Somerset, where his father, Thomas Manton of Whimple in Devon, was probably curate. 
Manton was educated at the free school in Tiverton, Devon, and on 11 March 1636 matriculated as a plebeian from Wadham College, Oxford. He graduated BA from Hart Hall, Oxford, on 15 June 1639, proceeded BD from Wadham on 20 April 1654 (the degree was incorporated at Cambridge in 1658), and was created DD at Oxford on 19 November 1660. Bishop Joseph Hall ordained Manton to the diaconate in 1640, although his leanings towards presbyterianism prevented him from seeking further ordination. Anthony Wood, the Anglican polemicist of the 1680s, alleged that Bishop Galloway ordained Manton to the priesthood in 1660. The balance of probabilities is against this assertion; Edmund Calamy states, on the basis of Josias Hill's testimony, that it was Manton's 'judgement that he was properly ordained to the ministerial office, and that no powers on earth had any right to divide and parcel that out at their pleasure' (Calamy). 
Until September 1643 Manton was lecturer to the parish church of Sowton, near Exeter, where he married Mary Morgan (died 1701) of Sidbury on 15 May 1643. After Exeter fell to royalist forces on 4 September the Mantons were forced to move first to Lyme and then to Colyton. Further royalist advances led Manton to decide to flee the west altogether, and in July 1645 he moved to London, where he was installed by Alexander Popham, the godly MP and parliamentarian colonel, as rector of St Mary's, Stoke Newington. 
During the late 1640s Manton was involved in the campaign to establish presbyterianism in the London region. He established the government at St Mary's, Stoke Newington, in 1646 and was joined by Alexander Popham as the parish's ruling elder. Manton was a committed member of the eighth London classis and was often a delegate to the London provincial assembly, which gave him the task of persuading the ministers of the failed eleventh classis to set up church government. 
Manton's ministry at Stoke Newington was a model of rigorous evangelical Calvinism; in particular he preached long expository sermons of the epistles of both 'James' and 'Jude'. In so doing he caught the attention of the House of Commons and, in the troubled years of 1647-8, was twice invited to preach at official parliamentary fasts. He ostensibly chose moderate themes for both of these sermons. On 30 June 1647, at the peak of the crisis between the army and the City of London, Manton preached 'Meate out of the Eater, or, Hopes of Unity in and by Divided Times', a sermon on 'Zechariah' 14: 9. In his epistle to the Commons he stated that the purpose of the sermon was ''to reduce men from their' violences '&' extremities 'to some better' temper 'and' moderation'. The main thrust of the sermon, however, was that parliament should establish presbyterianism as the official church system in England and allow only a modicum of accommodation for dissenting opinion. 
On 28 June 1648, during the second civil war, Manton was again invited to preach before the Commons. His sermon, entitled 'England's Spiritual Languishings; with the Causes and Cure', was on 'Revelation' 2: 3 and had as its doctrine 'That a speciall way to save a Church and people from imminent and speedy ruine is the repairing of decayed godlynesse'. He bemoaned the fact that religion had become the 'stalking horse to every selfe seeking designe' and once again asked parliament to settle presbyterianism as a means to rectify England's sins. Appalled by Pride's Purge and the trial of Charles I, in January 1649 he was a signatory to the London presbyterians' printed protests about both addressed to Lord General Fairfax. Manton also joined the ministers of the London provincial assembly in private fasts convened to seek the guidance of God about the revolutionary events. He preached a sermon for this purpose to the assembly on 6 February 1649. 
During the first three years of the republic the London presbyterians plotted against the regicides' regime for the return of Charles II and the solemn league and covenant. The result of this plotting was the arrest, trial, and condemnation of Christopher Love for treason in the summer of 1651. In August 1652 Manton joined Edmund Calamy and Simeon Ashe in spiritually preparing Love for his execution. Manton intended to preach at Love's public funeral, but when this was forbidden by parliament, who feared rebellion, he was forced to give his oration to a midnight audience at Love's parish of St Lawrence Jewry. Despite the threatening presence of the army a correspondent noted that 'a mighty throng of people' gathered to hear him. He lectured on '1 Corinthians' 15: 57 and applied the text in a Calvinist manner against Love's persecutors. Manton used the logic of predestination to interpret the passage, holding that it revealed a 'terror for wicked men' as 'none but a childe of God can have true and solid courage against death'. In condemning those who had executed Love, Manton equated the republic to the Babylonian tyranny of Belshazzar in the book of 'Daniel'. 
Although Manton refused to co-operate with the republic's government his star was in the ascendancy during the protectorate of Oliver Cromwell, and on 20 March 1654 he was appointed one of the commissioners for the approbation of public preachers, or 'triers'. The state papers show that he was often called upon to perform this duty. In April 1654 he joined his fellow presbyterians Edmund Calamy, Stephen Marshall, Simeon Ashe, and Richard Vines for talks on accommodation with the congregationalists Joseph Caryl, Philip Nye, Sidrach Simpson, Samuel Slater, and William Carter. He also joined the senior presbyterian and Independent ministers of Oxford, Cambridge, and London in signing a letter recommending John Durie in his mission to create unity among European protestants. 
Manton's willingness to seek accommodation with the congregationalist clergy meant that he became the principal presbyterian voice on protectorate committees discussing religious matters. In October 1654 he was chosen for the committee convened to help resolve the rift in the Church of Scotland between the resolutioners and the remonstranters. In November that year a parliamentary subcommittee chose Manton to join ministers such as Thomas Goodwin, John Owen, Henry Jessey, and Richard Baxter to agree on the fundamentals of religion that would be essential for subscription to the protectorate church. He also sat with the council of state in November 1655 to hear Menasseh ben Israel's proposals for the readmission of the Jews into England. 
Manton's connections with the protectorate earned him high appointment. He was chosen to be lecturer at Westminster Abbey on 18 January 1656, and on 21 December following the earl of Bedford called him to be admitted as rector of St Paul's, Covent Garden, whose congregation also included Oliver St John and Sir William Fleetwood. Manton was keen to establish presbyterian discipline at St Paul's, but the policy was resisted by his parishioners, as well as by his assistant Abraham Pinchbecke. Despite his presbyterianism he showed charity to clergymen of other persuasions; in May 1658 the Anglican diarist John Evelyn recalled that Manton arranged a collection for the 'Anglican' clergy sequestered during the civil war. He was also nominated an assistant to the Middlesex commission on 24 October 1657. When Oliver Cromwell was offered the crown by parliament in the same year, Manton was chosen alongside John Owen, Joseph Caryl, Philip Nye, and George Gillespie to pray with the lord protector in order to help him seek God's guidance in making a decision. Although Cromwell finally refused the crown Manton was chosen to deliver the public blessing at the inauguration of the second protectorate parliament in June. 
Manton welcomed the protectorate of Richard Cromwell and its call for unity among the orthodox godly clergy. On the opening day of Richard's ill-fated parliament Manton wrote to Richard Baxter about the possibility of calling an assembly of divines to seek agreement between presbyterians and Independents, a suggestion Baxter opposed on grounds that agreement was unlikely. When the army deposed Cromwell, Manton joined his fellow presbyterians in seeking the restoration of Charles II and was one of the divines who attended Charles at Breda. He was also one of the ministers deputed to give the oath of loyalty to the king on his procession through London in May 1660. Despite these overtures to the king Manton's belief in the need for a godly and disciplined church did not wane. In 1660 he joined his fellow ministers in signing the 'Seasonable exhortation... to the people of their respective congregations', warning of the dangers of popery and heresy. He was also a co-signatory with Edmund Calamy and other London presbyterians in writing a private letter to brethren in Scotland, warning of the threat to the godly cause from the restoration of episcopacy and the Anglican liturgy. 
Manton's connection with the king meant that he received some favour in the early days of the Restoration. He was officially instituted at St Paul's, Covent Garden, on 10 January 1661, although some of his parishioners petitioned the bishop of London to make him read the 'Book of Common Prayer'. Despite his opposition to the ceremonies Manton reluctantly complied with the bishop's orders. 
With the re-establishment of episcopacy the moderate presbyterian ministers sought to use their favour at court to remodel the national church in the Reformed mould. In 1660 Manton republished the 1641 work of the presbyterian ministers who wrote under the eponym 'Smectymnuus'. This was an extremely provocational act as the work argued that in the 'New Testament' the Greek words for 'bishop' and 'priest' were used synonymously. Smectymnuus claimed that this proved that the hierarchy between bishop and priest was false and thus a sinful human innovation. Manton stated in his epistle, 'if the quarrell of Episcopacy were once cleared, and brought to an issue, we should not be so much in the dark in other parts of discipline.' 
The main concern of the presbyterians was to prevent the institution of the revised Anglican liturgy, which they saw as containing the worst abuses of Roman Catholicism. Manton was present at a meeting at Edmund Calamy's Aldermanbury house on 2 April 1660 and attended discussions at Sion College. The purpose of these meetings, also attended by Richard Baxter, was to resolve contents of the presbyterian liturgy. On 22 October, Manton and other senior presbyterian clergy attended the king at Lord Chancellor Manchester's residence to present their proposals. These talks led to the ill-fated conference between the Anglicans and presbyterians at the Savoy on 25 March 1661, the failure of which prompted Clarendon to remark to the thin Baxter that if he 'were but as fat as Dr. Manton, we should all do well' (Keeble and Nuttall, 1.377). Manton was offered the deanery of Rochester if he conformed, but rejected this offer. 
The failure of the attempts to reach an accommodation in church matters and the rise of the cavalier party in the House of Commons meant that the puritan clergy were ejected from the Church of England for nonconformity on 24 August 1662. Like other London ministers Manton preached a poignant farewell sermon, choosing 'Hebrews' 12: 1 as his text. He may have been disappointed with Charles II's failure to intervene to stop the great Ejection, for George Wild, the bishop of Derry, noted that Manton seemed to make a slur on the title 'Defender of the Faith' in his prayer for the king. Dr Patrick, later bishop of Ely, replaced Manton at Covent Garden on 23 September 1662. Manton attended his services at Covent Garden, but was accused by Patrick of circulating libels about him among the congregation. In 1669 Manton was referred to the bishop of London's court for not receiving communion. 
Manton was at the centre of early nonconformist organization and generally held the chair of dissenters' meetings. This was possibly due to his influence with the king and nobles. In March 1663 Charles II summoned him alongside Edmund Calamy, William Bate, and possibly Richard Baxter to discuss his plans for the comprehension of moderate dissenters in the Church of England. His main influence, however, was with the presbyterian aristocrats and gentry who attended various conventicles at his house in King Street, Covent Garden, at White Hart Yard, near the Strand, and at Lord Wharton's residence at St Giles-in-the-Fields. In January 1664 a government agent noted that Manton preached to the countess of Exeter, Sir William Waller, and Lord Wharton at Arthur Jackson's residence in Whitefriars. In the same year another agent noted that he regularly met at an unnamed lord's house some 17 miles from London with Edmund Calamy, Richard Baxter, and others to plan nonconformist strategy. Manton's preaching was particularly popular with nonconformist ladies; reports mention ladies Bedford, Manchester, Clare, Clinton, Wortland, Scarsdale, Seymour, and Trevor and the earl of Anglesey's sister as having attended his services. He also seems to have had some influence with Scottish presbyterian peers, especially the earl of Lauderdale. 
In September 1668 Manton was asked by Charles II through Sir John Baber to make an address thanking the king for indulgence. In making this request Baber was joined by William Bates and Thomas Jacombe. This prompted hopes for a 'rapprochement' between the presbyterians and the established church, and Manton joined Richard Baxter and Bates in discussing comprehension with the king and others at Lord Arlington's residence. Baxter reports, however, that the congregationalist John Owen, who refused to accept anything but full toleration, wrecked the talks. 
The breakdown of communication between the king and the nonconformists led to a wave of repression in the form of the revised Clarendon code. In 1670 Arlington received communication that Manton, speaking for the presbyterians, had resolved with the leaders of the congregationalists and the Baptists to resist the 'Conventicle Act' of 1668 as a united body. Manton was also involved in talks with the congregationalist clergy on obtaining a common liberty of conscience. His reward was to be arrested under the 'Five Mile Act' in March 1670 and imprisoned for six months in the Gatehouse. Upon release his peace-making skills were required in the presbyterian camp. In December 1671 he joined William Bates and Thomas Jacombe, the so-called 'dons' (presbyterians who wanted comprehension with the established church), in negotiations with Samuel Annesley, Nathaniel Vincent, and Thomas Watson, called the 'ducklings' because they represented the younger generation of presbyterians who wanted to remain separated from the Church of England. 
Reconciliation among the presbyterians came in time for the declaration of indulgence in 1672. Manton was licensed as a presbyterian at his home in Covent Garden on 2 April. He took full advantage of the opportunity created by the indulgence and was elected one of the joint congregational and presbyterian lecturers at Pinners' Hall in Old Broad Street, London. He also preached at the revival of the presbyterian morning exercises. Manton applied 'Acts' 2: 38 to give counsel on baptism at Cripplegate in 1674 and applied '2 Thessalonians' 2: 15 in defending the doctrine of the sole sufficiency of scripture in the morning exercises against popery in 1675. 
In 1675, with the end of the king's indulgence, Manton's congregation was broken up. He, however, continued to preach to his aristocratic followers at Covent Garden until his death. In April 1675 he joined William Bates, Matthew Poole, and Richard Baxter in more ill-fated accommodation talks with the latitudinarian clergy John Tillotson, George Morley, Seth Ward, and Edward Stillingfleet. In the following year he was a co-signatory to Baxter's 'The Judgment of Non-Conformists, of the Interest of Reason, in Matters of Religion'. 
Manton's health began to fail in late 1675, and he 'languish'd many months but presuming he should be too strong for his infirmity, neglected it, till at last it became insuperable and mortal' (W. Bates, 'A Funeral Sermon Preached upon the Death of... Thomas Manton', 1678, 58). He died on 18 October 1677 and was buried in the chancel of St Mary's, Stoke Newington, on 22 October. Ralph Thoresby noted that the nonconformist ministers were paired with priests of the established church during the funeral procession and that Manton was styled 'the King of Preachers'. William Bates preached Manton's funeral sermon and chose '1 Thessalonians' 4: 17 as his text. His former presbyterian colleagues Thomas Case and John Collinges also commemorated his life in sermons. 
Manton's wife, Mary, lived until 1701 but few of their children survived them. One daughter, Ann, married John Terry and died on 16 March 1689. A son, Nathaniel, was a bookseller at the Three Pigeons in Poultry. Manton left little money, but a vast library of books was sold at public auction at his house in King's Street on 25 March 1678 for the benefit of his family. 
Manton's works were generally well regarded by his contemporaries. Archbishop Ussher described him as a 'voluminous preacher' and William Bates commended his technique of 'represent[ing] the inseperable connection between Christian duties and priviledges' ('DNB'). His Calvinism was, however, too much for Lord Bolingbroke, whose family had been under Manton's ministry at Covent Garden. Bolingbroke told Jonathan Swift that 'Manton taught my youth to yawn, and prepared me to be a high churchman, that I might never hear him read or read him more' ('DNB'). The younger Calamy gave a more favourable judgement, noting that he 'was endowed with extraordinary knowledge of the scriptures, and in his preaching gave a perspicacious account of the order and dependence of divine truths'. 


@@@@@


doc= 18010


Manuche, Cosmo (bap. 1613, d. 1673?), playwright, was baptized on 24 October 1613 at St Andrew's, Holborn, in the liberties of the City of London, the eldest surviving son of James Manuche ('c'.1590-1633), a painter, and Katherine, who lived near the Windmill in Shoe Lane, Holborn. His grandfather Jacomo Manuche (died 1593), first went to England some time before 1573 and worked for many years in England and abroad in Sir Francis Walsingham's intelligence-gathering network. In 1577 he was rewarded by the queen with a $40 annuity for life. James Manuche, a middle child of Jacomo, was a member of the Painters' Stainers' Guild, having been apprenticed to John de Critz the elder about 1610. 
In 1626 Cosmo Manuche entered Merchant Taylors' School, London, a few years after John Webster, the future dramatist, whose family were near neighbours of the Manuches in Shoe Lane. He probably would have left school in 1631 or 1632. There is no record that Cosmo Manuche matriculated at either Oxford or Cambridge, the course one might expect, but it must be admitted that university registers for this period are notoriously incomplete. Family difficulties may have prevented him. On 7 March 1633 his father, James Manuche, 'a man a painter', was buried at St Andrew's, Holborn, 'out [of] his house near the Windmill in Shoe Lane' (parish register, St Andrew's, Holborn, Guildhall Library). There is evidence that Cosmo Manuche continued to live in the family home in Shoe Lane in the early 1630s, and on 19 January 1636 he married Anne Cooley (died 1641) at St Dunstan and All Saints, Stepney. There is no record of any children of the couple being baptized at St Andrew's, Holborn. They almost certainly continued to live there, for when Anne was buried on 11 April 1641 she was buried in this parish. On 27 October 1648 in the parish of St Bartholomew-the-Less, London, Manuche married his second wife, Frances Brewster. There were certainly offspring from this marriage, as Manuche says in the dedication to the earl of Northampton of his play 'The Feast' ('c'.1664) that the manuscript is being carried by his daughters and he hopes Northampton will be able to help them to get on in the world. 
When the civil war broke out Manuche joined the forces of the king. Surviving records indicate that he was a serving officer, probably of a company of foot initially, from 1642 until at least 1645, though there is circumstantial evidence that he continued serving until the final collapse of the king's cause. Whatever his initial rank, he eventually rose to the rank of major. On 19 October 1645 Major Cosmo Manuche and Lieutenant Francis Manuche, probably a cousin, and serving under the ultimate command of Sir John Berkeley, governor of Exeter, were taken prisoner by the army of Sir Thomas Fairfax at the siege of Tiverton. However, Cosmo Manuche must have been soon released or exchanged, for on 12 December 1661 Lord John Berkeley of Stratton, Sir Gilbert Talbot, and Sir Lewis Dyves, his commanders in the west during the civil war, testified that he continued to fight in Ireland and the Isles of Scilly for as long as any sort of armed resistance lasted (BL, Egerton MS 2623, fol. 34). 
What happened to Manuche after the final defeat of the royalists is not clear, but it seems likely that he had some patronage from the earl of Northampton, although Northampton too was suffering from the deprivations laid on him by parliament. Another play, 'Love in Travell' ('c'.1650), a tragicomedy, was dedicated to Northampton: 'The former favours I have received by your honours free and noble acceptation of my weak endeavours (the productions of a disturbed brain, through want); in point of gratitude and duty (with my soul's affection), could no less than present the first fruits of my last endeavour to your honour. (BL, Add. MS 60275, fol. 3'r')' This dedication indicates a previous connection, and all of Manuche's known works, save 'The Bastard' (1652), are dedicated to Lord or Lady Northampton, or both together. 
There is an implication in the testimony of his former commanders given on 12 December 1661 (previously cited) that Manuche was imprisoned in London several times in the 1650s, but what is certainly known is that he published three plays in 1652: 'The Bastard', 'The Loyal Lovers', and 'The Just General', the first a tragedy and the latter two tragicomedies. Various entries in the state papers suggest that Manuche boarded, and perhaps taught, scholars in the country, possibly in Kent, between 1652 and 1656. But Manuche, clearly in need of funds, followed the example of some other royalists and made a sort of peace with the interregnum government. On 4 June 1656 'Capt.' Cosmo Manuche petitioned Cromwell for money for having turned in several seditious persons. He was paid $10 for his 'publique service' ('CSP dom.', '1655-6'). 
In 1659 and early 1660 Manuche composed 'The Banished Shepherdess', a political pastoral comedy about the impending restoration of Charles II. In the play the dowager queen, Henrietta Maria, is the banished shepherdess and her son Charles II is Charilaus, but the composition cannot be later than the early spring of 1660 since the restoration is hinted at but clearly has not happened yet. Manuche produced two very careful presentation copies in his own hand, one for Henrietta Maria (Hunt. L., MS EL 8395) and one for the earl of Northampton (BL, Add. MS 60273). When Charles II offered small financial rewards for those officers who had served the crown loyally during the civil war, one who came forward was Cosmo Manuche on 27 June 1661, when he was awarded $20 ('Treasury Books'). 
Manuche's sixth and last play, another tragicomedy, is 'The Feast' (BL, Add. MS 60274; Worcester College, Oxford). Its date of composition can be no earlier than January 1665 since it contains references to Sir Samuel Tuke's 'Adventures of Five Hours', performed either on 15 or 23 December 1664, and to John Dryden's and Sir Robert Howard's 'The Indian Queen' which opened on 25 January 1664. On 7 November 1673 a Major Mullinax was buried in the Dark Cloister of Westminster Abbey, and it is likely that this was Cosmo Manuche, for on 11 January 1676 Mrs Frances Manuche was buried in the cloisters of Westminster Abbey as well (Chester, 'Westminster Abbey Registers'). 


@@@@@


doc= 18011


Maynwaring, Roger (1589/90?-1653), bishop of St David's, was born at Stretton, Shropshire, into a Cheshire gentry family, according to David Lloyd on 9 November and, if the age at death recorded in his epitaph is accurate, in 1589 or 1590. He attended the King's School, Worcester, before going early in 1604 to Oxford, where he became a bible clerk at All Souls College. He graduated BA in February 1608 and proceeded MA on 5 July 1611. While his 'critical skill in Greek and rational head' recommended him to the college, his 'discreet carriage, and observing head' (Lloyd, 271) prompted the unknown 'noble lord' who was his patron to make him his chaplain and help him to the perpetual curacy of St Katharine Cree, London, where the advowson was owned by Magdalene College, Cambridge, and where he was admitted on 11 July 1611. Five years later he resigned and on 3 June 1616 was instituted as rector of St Giles-in-the-Fields, also in London. Although Lloyd says that he kept three diaries, for personal life, for recording public affairs, and for noting 'the most remarkable passages of Providence in the World' (ibid., 272), none appears to have survived and much about his private affairs is uncertain. He probably married during his earlier years at St Giles, since three daughters named in his will were apparently themselves married, but the identity of their mother and his first wife is unknown. 
On 2 July 1625 Maynwaring proceeded BD and DD, and about the same time was appointed a chaplain-in-ordinary to the king. When the imposition of forced loans to fund government policy aroused discontent in 1626-7 he was one of several royal chaplains to heed Bishop William Laud's direction to preach on the theme of subjects' duty of obedience to their king. A sermon by Robert Sibthorpe and his own delivered at Oatlands on 4 July 1627 and at Alderton on 29 July attracted both controversy and the enthusiastic approval of Charles I. Ignoring Laud's advice 'to think better of it that there were many things therein which will be very distasteful to the people' (Cust, 62), the king ordered that Maynwaring's be printed with the inscription 'by his Majestie's special command'. 'Religion and Alegiance', which appeared in August, contained much commonly accepted divine right theory: to assert that 'lawfull Soveraignes are no lesse then Fathers, Lords, Kings and Gods upon earth' (vol. 1, p. 4) was to uphold mainstream political thinking. However, the sermons transgressed the boundaries of that thinking in two respects: instead of vague generalizations they applied theory to particular circumstances and policies, and they extended the religious obligation of obedience in such a way as to ignore the claims of common law and parliamentary precedent. 'To Kings... nothing can be denyed that may further the supply of their Urgent Necessities', stated Maynwaring, who outlined what these were. Although in one breath he seemed to concede that kings might command only 'what stands not in any opposition to the originall Lawes of God, Nature, Nations and the Gospell', in the next he asserted that the subject was bound to obey unquestioningly, 'though it be not correspondent in every circumstance, to Lawes Nationall, and Municipall', on 'hazard of his own Damnation in rebelling against God' (vol. 1, pp. 19-20). Assemblies such as parliament were instituted not as consultative bodies, 'to contribute any Right to Kings, whereby to challenge Tributary aydes and subsidiary helpes', but as executive bodies, which fine-tuned the details, 'for the more equall Imposing, and the more easie Exacting of that, which, unto Kings doth appertaine' (vol. 1, p. 26). Christ himself had shown the way. In unhesitatingly affirming that one should render to Caesar what was Caesar's, 'our blessed Lord did with that Readinesse, not expecting any Parliament, at Rome, or in Judea, to bee first assembled' (vol. 2, p. 37). Even though, unlike the current situation, this question was put in peacetime, 'no sooner was He demanded, but... Pay hee did' (vol. 2, p. 38). 
When the next parliament opened in March 1628 Maynwaring was one of several preachers and writers associated with unpopular policies whose books were investigated by the committee for religion. Its initial report to the house on 31 March observed that 'they say he disavowes' his sermon, 'owning it only so far as a way to get preferment, wherein nevertheless he says he hath failed' (Johnson and others, 2.219), but on 4 May he reiterated his views in his own pulpit at St Giles. Subsequent committee reports relayed by Francis Rous and John Pym were damning. Ready to believe that he aimed at promotion they none the less took his arguments seriously: he had invested the king with absolute power unbound by law, supported illegal action, deprived subjects of private property, and defamed parliament; in so doing he was on the verge of both blasphemy and treason. The Commons' official charge on 4 June alleged 'a wicked and malicious intention to seduce and misguide the conscience of the king... touching the observation of the laws and custome of this kingdom, and the rights and liberties of subjects', as well as to incite the king against those who refused the loan and 'to avert his Majesty's mind from calling of parliaments' (ibid., 4.102). Answering before the Lords on 13 June Maynwaring expressed sorrow and contrition, but rejected any seditious or malicious motivation, protesting that his views on divine right monarchy went no further than the scriptures or John Calvin, and did not go against law. The submission mollified the Lords slightly, but the judgment announced the following day was still severe: imprisonment during the pleasure of the house; a $1000 fine to the king; formal acknowledgement of his offences before parliament; suspension for three years from the exercise of his ministry; and permanent disablement from holding any ecclesiastical dignity or secular office. 
Brought from the Fleet prison on 21 June to make his submission Maynwaring did so, according to several accounts, with tears. However, although the king had formally expressed his concurrence on 18 June and Maynwaring's sermons were called in on 24 June to be burnt, the limits of parliamentary power to impose on Charles something so contrary to his real will rapidly became apparent. On 30 June Sir Francis Nethersole wrote in disbelief to Charles's sister the queen of Bohemia of rumours that Maynwaring would be absolved from his suspension. On 6 July Charles ordered a pardon, issued on 8 July; on 18 July he presented Maynwaring to the rectory of Stanford Rivers, Essex; and on 28 July he issued him with a dispensation to hold it 'in commendam' with St Giles-in-the-Fields. If Maynwaring had suffered any loss of confidence it was soon restored. Later that year, pointing to the fact that he had been 'so lately bruised only for his devotion to the king' ('CSP dom.', '1628-9', 421), he appealed to the latter for support in a St Giles tithe dispute which had escalated into a Star Chamber case. By late December Laud, now bishop of London, had received a paper in which he specified particularly reverential behaviour towards the king by a proposed lecturer and in the service by parishioners. Early in 1629 he lobbied Laud to oppose a move in parliament to abolish fees for burials. His confidence was well placed: awarded the additional rectories of Muckleton, Staffordshire (1630), and Mugginton, Derbyshire (1631), on 28 September 1633 he was presented by the king to the deanery of Worcester, although he was not installed until 5 September 1634. 
There is no direct evidence that Maynwaring was or became a doctrinal Arminian, but his championing of clerical rights and his liturgical innovations reveal him to have been an enthusiastic proponent of a strong and authoritarian church and of order and ceremonial in worship. The exaction of fees at St Giles continued to cause litigation in the 1630s. By September 1635, as he reported to Archbishop Laud, whom he evidently considered his patron, he had effected significant changes in Worcester Cathedral: he had erected, decorated, and railed in a marble altar, regulated the unseemly behaviour of the choir, destroyed vestments and other ornaments debased through the misuse of the organist, Nathaniel Tompkins, and had beautified the king's audit hall. A final reward, and defiance of the 1628 sentence against Maynwaring, followed quickly. On 28 February 1636 he was consecrated by Laud as bishop of St David's in the only such ceremony of the reign attended by members of the royal family. Little is known of his episcopate, but a letter of 18 October 1637 to secretary of state Francis Windebank suggests a loyal servant of the king, and he was later accused of 'popish innovations'. 
With the opening of the Short Parliament in 1640 Maynwaring evidently expected retribution. On 6 April the king licensed his absence from the Lords, and he did not appear in convocation, but his original offence and later preferment were prominently remembered in debates on breaches of parliamentary privilege. The 1628 declarations against him were rehearsed, and despite a royal order on 29 April to halt proceedings, the Lords were not silenced. His name resurfaced in the Long Parliament. In February 1641 the Commons deputed a committee to review the case against him, both old scores and new allegations of his conduct at Worcester, and to draft a reversal of his pardon; his arrest was also agreed. On 25 August it was recorded in the Lords that those serving a formal summons had not found him at home, and the seizure of his temporalities was ordered. The next day, according to one diarist, John Williams, bishop of Lincoln, doubtless no friend, 'affirmed that he roved from alehouse to alehouse in disguise' and 'moved his bishopric might be sequestered' (Russell, 232). 
At some point Maynwaring had fled his diocese and seems to have gone to Ireland. In his 'A True Relation of the Taking of Roger Manwering' (1642), Captain John Pointz described recognizing and apprehending him on board the 'Eagle' as he made a return voyage on 28 June 1642. With him was his wife,'a very neere kinswoman to him before he married her, being of the age of 22 year', but he had left 'his sister poore and lying in the parish where he formerly lived', and 'his children by his former wife to shift for themselves' (p. 2). Having landed at Minehead, Somerset, he was examined before a magistrate, Thomas Lutterall, and 'confessed that he departed... into Ireland, for preferment upon the Kings promise' (p. 3). 
After a period in custody Maynwaring retired to Wales, where he lived on the income from a small estate. When he drew up his will on 29 June 1653 he was living at the college of Brecon. Leaving 5's'. each to his 'eldest son' Thomas and daughters Elizabeth Stevens, Mary Brooke, and Sarah Mellyn, and 20's'. to his sister Susanna Stevens, he bequeathed the residue of his estate to his wife, Jane, whom he made the sole executor and guardian of 'my children'. He died within hours, aged sixty-three or in his sixty-third year, and was buried on 1 July by the altar in Brecon collegiate church. For David Lloyd, royalist memoirist, this was an orderly and stern but sociable and jovial man, an improving landlord eventually hounded to his death by plunder and continual persecution. Anthony Wood stressed his zeal for the church and his keenness to bring both Catholics and sectaries to conversion and inclusion. The motivations of this most infamous of proponents of royal absolutism remain obscure. 


@@@@@


doc= 18012


Manwood, John (d. 1610), legal writer, was a relative of Sir Roger Manwood (died 1592), chief baron of the exchequer, with whom he has occasionally been confused. Sir Roger's brother, John Manwood (died 1571), MP for Sandwich in 1571, had a son John who may be the same person. According to the posthumous 1615 edition of the book on forest law for which Manwood is known, he was a member of Lincoln's Inn, though no trace of him can be found in the records of that society and it must be open to doubt whether he was qualified as a barrister. Some, at any rate, of the author's expertise in the forest law was gained by practical experience as gamekeeper of Waltham Forest, and as a justice of the New Forest, which stimulated him to read the law books and records on the subject. 
Manwood married Mary (perhaps Crayford); their second son, Jasper, was admitted to Lincoln's Inn in 1624 (as John) and called to the bar in 1632. The admissions register describes the father as being of Chigwell, Essex, and Manwood also acquired the estate of Priors in Broomfield, near Chelmsford, where his descendants lived until the eighteenth century. According to Manwood's preface of 1598, the forest laws had 'growen cleane out of knowlege in most places', and he had therefore decided to 'hold the candle and begin the first enterprise herein'. Nevertheless, although his book was the only substantial work on the subject ever to reach the press, it was in fact the successor to two detailed and widely circulated inns of court readings by Richard Hesketh and George Treherne, which Manwood occasionally cited. Manwood also stated that he had the assistance of 'grave and learned men... in the perusing of this treatise' and in the provision of legal citations, which tends to confirm his modest admission of a lack of professional expertise on his own part. 
Manwood had a first version of his book printed for private circulation, in or about 1592, as 'A Brefe Collection of the Lawes of the Forest'. An enlarged edition, with twenty chapters, was published in 1598 as 'A Treatise and Discourse of the Lawes of the Forrest', and dedicated to Charles Howard, earl of Nottingham and chief justice of the forests south of the Trent. Manwood died in 1610; a posthumous edition followed in 1615, which was further enlarged by the insertion of five chapters on forest courts taken from the private edition but omitted in 1598. This version was reprinted in 1665. In 1717 William Nelson of the Middle Temple produced a fourth edition, with the material rearranged under alphabetical headings in modernized English; this was reprinted in 1741. An abridgement was published in Nicholas Cox's 'Gentlemen's Recreation' of 1696 and in subsequent editions. Manwood was also the author of a brief 'Project for improving the land revenue by inclosing wasts', submitted to Sir Julius Caesar on 27 April 1609 and first printed as an appendix to John St John's 'Observations on the Land Revenue of the Crown' (1787). 


@@@@@


doc= 18013


Manwood, Sir Peter (1571-1625), judge and antiquary, was born at Hackington, Kent, the eldest son of Sir Roger Manwood (1524/5-1592), a judge, and his first wife, Dorothy (died 1575), daughter of John Theobald, of Seal. His younger brothers John and Thomas died childless, while his two sisters married into the county's judicial elite: Margaret to John Leveson, of Halling, and Anne to Percival Hart, heir of Sir George Hart. Sir Roger Manwood was a revered judge of great legal learning who was accused of using judicial offices for personal gain. Peter followed his father's intellectual pursuits but not his profession, as he declined being called to the bar. He entered as a student of the Inner Temple on 20 November 1583, his father having arranged a room for him over benchers' chambers at Serjeants' Inn in 1587. He spent much time at the Inner Temple, where he pursued antiquarian interests throughout his life, and had his own four sons specially admitted to the inn. He married in January 1588 Frances (1573-1638), daughter of Sir George Hart, of Lullingstone. 
Manwood inherited his father's Kent, Essex, and London properties in 1592, and leased land from the archbishop of Canterbury. By 1600 he had the manors of Hackington, Ash, Chislet, and Raynhurst, Flint Castle, and houses in Sandwich and St Bartholomew's, London. The Manwoods had six sons and four daughters. Their eldest son, Thomas, graduated BA from Lincoln College, Oxford, in 1611, was a student at the Inner Temple, and drowned in France in 1613; their second, John (died 1653), became Manwood's heir. The couple were also generous benefactors to local schools, churches, and hospitals. Their legacy was a lease of many lands in trust for charitable uses in 1615. 
Manwood was senior MP for Sandwich in 1588-9, 1592-3, 1597, and 1601; for Saltash, Cornwall, in 1603-4; for Kent in 1614; and for New Romney in 1620-21. Though he sat in parliament and was appointed to a few committees concerned with legislation, he did not participate in debates. His political allegiance was anti-Catholic, anti-Spanish, and pro-puritan. A 'moderate Sabbatarian' (Clark, 345), he devoted his public interests to his county as a justice of the peace, where he was a member of the quorum of the court of quarter sessions (1593-1620). He was appointed commander of Dover haven by 1591; a commissioner for grain in 1596, for musters by 1597, and for the oyster fisheries in 1598; deputy lieutenant of the Cinque Ports (1600), and of Kent (1601); sheriff of Kent (1602-3); mayor of Canterbury (1605); and commissioner of sewers for Kent (1619-23). After being knighted at the coronation of James I on 25 July 1603, by the 1620s he was the only one of three Elizabethan governors still prominent in Kent. 
As a public official, Manwood was a patron of learned men as well as a scholar in his own right. He collected notes on English affairs from Edward the Confessor to Henry VIII and Cardinal Wolsey in the 1590s, which he exchanged with John Stow, and on Kent topology. He also collected transcripts of state papers between 1564 and 1618, and political tracts on Ireland, France, the Low Countries, north Africa, and Asia Minor. He had a licence to travel beyond the seas 'for his increase in good knowledge and learning' ('CSP dom.', '1598-1601', 132). Manwood liked to gather scholars at his family seat of St Stephen's, Hackington, near Canterbury, and patronized the translators Edward Grimstone and Richard Knollys. His commonplace books were unique, combining letter-books for the governments of England, Ireland, and the Low Countries and proclamations for kings and sultans. Mentioned with great respect by William Camden in 1607, Manwood became a member of the Society of Antiquaries in 1617. He gave part of the manuscript of Sir Roger Williams's 'The Actions of the Lowe Countries' to Sir John Hayward for revision; it was published in 1618 with a dedication to Sir Francis Bacon as 'good history' designed to excite men to take up arms for good causes (Williams, xlv-xlvi). He gave many of his books to the Bodleian Library in 1620. 
Manwood's large family, his inattention to his properties, and his lavish style of living brought financial difficulties which caused him to leave the country in August 1621. He had net liabilities of about $3000 in 1593, a total estate valued at only $1500 in 1614, and nothing left in current funds by the early 1620s. After returning to Dover in April 1623, he made arrangements with his creditors that allowed him to remain, and he was steward of the Inner Temple Christmas feast that winter. Lord Zouche, his lifelong friend, had written to Secretary Conway begging him to use his influence with the king for his protection. James complied because Manwood was one of those long-suffering county governors who served in numerous local offices at his own expense. He advised his son John to 'keep a good house within the proportion of his living' but his lessons to wife and son in household management were insufficient, and the family fortune was in disarray at the time of his death at Sandwich in 1625. He was buried in St Stephen's Church, Hackington, Kent. 


@@@@@


doc= 18014


Manwood, Sir Roger (1524/5-1592), judge, was born in Sandwich, Kent, the second son of Thomas Manwood (died 1538), draper, and Katherine (died 1566), daughter of John Galloway of Cley, Norfolk. The offspring of a long-established local merchant family, he was educated at the Thomas Ellis Chantry School, Sandwich. 
Manwood was admitted to the Inner Temple in February 1548 and by July 1553 he was doing legal work for the Cinque Ports. He was called to the bar by 1555, and became counsellor to the ports and recorder of Sandwich. He was one of the borough members for Hastings in the parliament of 1555, and represented Sandwich in 1558 and in every subsequent parliament until his appointment as a judge. He also obtained important clients among local families, including Sir Thomas Cheyney, lord warden of the Cinque Ports. By 1557 he had married a twice widowed woman, Dorothy Alleyn (died 1575), daughter of Richard Theobald, who had been married first to Dr John Croke and who brought Manwood her jointure lands and a stepdaughter. In that year he was suing for her jointure in the courts on a difficult technical point. Problems of leasehold were one of his specialities, and he put his knowledge into practice for both himself and his clients. His views on this are known from his readings in 1565 on 21 Hen. VIII c. 3, and his arguments, for example in 'Winter's case', were long accepted as authoritative. His second reading as serjeant-elect in 1567 was on the 'Statute of Westminster I c. 37'. 
In 1561 Manwood played the part of chief baron of the exchequer in the Inner Temple entertainment, the 'Masque of Desire and Beauty', which Robert Dudley, the Inner Temple's patron, put on for Queen Elizabeth on St Stephen's day. Sir Christopher Hatton was also involved. Manwood thus had connections to the inner circle at court, and his committed protestantism made him a safe appointment as a JP in Kent and on other commissions. In 1562 he was adjudicating piracy cases. In 1563 he arranged to establish a grammar school in Sandwich. His commitment throughout his life to education for the bright but impoverished is as clear as his desire for a clean water supply. Later he established four scholarships at Oxford and Cambridge. His benefactions to his home parish of Hackington, Kent, included a hospital with six almshouses. He also gave two new bells, augmented the income of the vicarage, and built a conduit and the fourth aisle of the church. His rapid rise in his profession made him increasingly valuable to Sandwich and the Cinque Ports and prominent in Kent. He became steward of the liberties to Archbishop Parker and steward in the chancery and admiralty court of the warden at Dover. In 1566-7 Gresham in a letter to William Cecil begged him to 'Have my friend Mr Manwood in remembrance' (Burgon, 2.175). 
Manwood was called to the lucrative order of serjeant-at-law on 24 April 1567. As a serjeant he served as an assize judge, acted as an arbitrator, and gave legal opinions on such matters as the privileges for battery and the use of the calamine stone. In 1570 he surveyed all the grounds previously used for archery near London. On 30 March 1571 he, together with Thomas Leighton, wrote a report on the death of Cardinal Chastillon. With John Jeffreys in 1571 he arbitrated in a matter between Weymouth and Melcombe Regis. As an active adviser to the Cinque Ports he was one of their representatives in the exchequer where he handled issues of their franchises, liberties, privileges, and exemptions from loans and aids. He also remained on close terms with his old inn, and was concerned for the well-being of family and friends, especially his son Peter Manwood. He was reluctant to become a judge. Gresham wrote on 16 April 1572 that there were others of more ancient standing, and 'because yet his welthe doth not serve to accept anie such office upon him' he should be passed over (Burgon, 2.478). Manwood had prepared for it, however, by settling his already considerable estates, worth approximately $475 a year. On 30 May 1571 he provided for his wife and entailed the property on his only surviving son, and in default to his daughters. 
Manwood had resigned as recorder of Sandwich on becoming a serjeant. Becoming a puisne justice of common pleas on 14 October 1572 required him to resign all other lesser offices and to cease to represent clients. In 1572 he aroused comment by appearing twice in 'White's case', first as serjeant and later as judge, even though this might have prejudiced his former client's case. He had long kept records of cases, and there are various references to reports he kept during his tenure of judicial office. He also continued to be involved with Canterbury, Sandwich, and the Cinque Ports in matters of law. Because of his expertise in their abstruse privileges, the crown required him to determine issues involving conflict between the ports and the warden. Sometimes his judgments were unpopular with the ports. 
The privy council called on Manwood as a judge to deal with cases elsewhere involving royal rights and local privileges. He was involved in amending the laws of Star Chamber, and gave his opinion on the observation of the penal statutes. He advised on the action to be taken when assizes in Cornwall and Lancaster had charged the wrong man. He assisted Wells with its new charter of incorporation, and was helpful to Southampton, which made him free. Manwood also arbitrated in a festering controversy between Oxford University and the city. In matters of felony he was severe, and routinely charged juries who acquitted against the evidence, but he was also sceptical, so it is not surprising that Reginald Scot dedicated 'The Discovery of Witchcraft' (1584) to him. In 1577 Manwood advised that a man persisting in speaking ill of the queen after the pillory and having his ears cut off might either be imprisoned for life or have part of his tongue excised. He was not abrasive to his fellow lawyers -- in 1578, when Plowden had given bad advice to a sheriff concerning a writ of extent, Manwood tactfully observed that perhaps Mr Plowden did not know of an entry that indicated that execution had not taken place. 
Manwood's religious commitment explains his role in ecclesiastical affairs. In June 1575 he served on a commission against Anabaptists, and in April 1576 became a member of the high commission. Later he served on commissions for ecclesiastical causes, for reformation of the court of arches and audience, and at a conference concerning the powers of ecclesiastical laws to mulct and otherwise punish offenders. By 1577 he was being considered for the position of chief baron of the exchequer. Francis Walsingham promised to help, knowing 'no man in England so fit for it... but... he hath great enemies and those that have chiefest voice in chapter' ('Finch MSS', 1.22). Cecil may have been this principal opponent; if so, his opposition may have rested on Manwood's profound commitment to the common law as the subject's protection, and his dislike of the intervention of the privy council at the petition of favoured individuals. Manwood's classical tags, that truth made enemies ('malas causas habentes semper fugiunt ad potentes; ubi non valet veritas, praevalet auctoritas'), were unpopular. However, he was knighted on 15 November and installed as chief baron on 17 November 1578. His one-time client Nicholas Bacon gave the address. In 1582 it was rumoured that Manwood had offered money to be chief justice of common pleas; if so he was unsuccessful. In July 1586 he wrote to Lord Burghley explaining how the people of Kent were grieved by purveyors and suggesting better regulations; and in 1589, when unpaid mercenaries were in distress at Sandwich, he intervened to get them paid. 
Manwood's promotion sealed his position in society. His first wife, Dorothy, had died 'of a sore breast' on 14 September 1575; she was buried in the church of St Gregory by Paul, London. His second marriage, 'c'.1580, to Elizabeth (died 1595), daughter of John Coppinger of All Hallows, Kent, and widow of John Wilkins of Stoke, Kent, was another indication of increased status. He married his daughter Margaret to John Leveson of Harling, and in 1587, by agreeing to a very generous settlement, he arranged with Dame Elizabeth Harte a double marriage by which Percival Harte married Manwood's daughter Anne, and Manwood's heir, Peter, married Percival's sister Frances. He was to pay $200 a year for them to live with Dame Elizabeth. 
As lord chief baron, Manwood actively protected the exchequer's jurisdiction in matters relating to the queen's prerogative and rights. In 1585 he sharply forbade Julius Caesar to hear a case in the admiralty. He maintained that cases of controversy over patentees, as well as decisions over the property of Sir Francis Englefield who had 'adhered to the queen's enemies', belonged in the exchequer (Hunt. L., Ellesmere MS 482, fol. 236). He also made legal doctrine. In a case in exchequer chamber concerning variations in the meaning of the term 'corporation' he wrote a letter to Burghley about what was and was not substantial, contradicting Burghley's own views. He required the solicitor-general to answer ''pro bono publico' and to deliver himself in conscience because the matter would be cited for a precedent... to the prejudice of many other suitors' (Hunt. L., Ellesmere MS 2650). 
Manwood sat on all the state trials, including the trial of the supporters of the Jesuit Edmund Campion, and argued for heavier punishments. When Cartwright and his puritan fellows refused to take an oath, he claimed this tended to the overthrow of the common justice of the land in all civil and ecclesiastical causes. He was also concerned with the case of Mary, queen of Scots, and sought to show that the queen had dealt honourably with Mary, whereas Mary had dealt dishonourably with the queen. In the Star Chamber case against William Davison he put the crucial argument: 'if the warrant were sealed yet was it not lawful to kill her because the direction was special and not general' ('State trials', 1.1230). The complaints that Burghley entertained against Manwood for abuse of his office are varied. Some concerned legitimate use of his position in the queen's interest. In others, where undue pressure was alleged, the evidence that he exceeded his legal rights is slender. Those involving mutual recriminations, as in the highway robberies at Gaddeshill where Edward Hoby and Manwood accused one another of maintenance, seem insoluble. 
After 1588 Manwood was overtly troubled by royal encroachments on the traditional rights of citizens. His enemy Sir John Smythe reported that Manwood condemned the conscription of soldiers for overseas service. In June 1591 he and most of the other judges formally complained against arbitrary impressment. By 1590 the privy council was entertaining various complaints about his possibly corrupt verdicts, but he produced adequate explanations. He increasingly seems, however, to have come into conflict with Burghley over the use of royal power to override normal process of law. The case over which he was finally humiliated concerned a gold chain, which Manwood had recovered from a goldsmith named Roger Underwood. The law seems to have been on Manwood's side, but the privy council pressured him to admit that justice demanded concessions. His rigid refusal to accept privy council authority in this offended Burghley and the council and he was obliged to submit, confessing his folly first in a letter and publicly two days later on 14 May 1592. Historians believe that he none the less again offered money to be chief justice of queen's bench, although his extant letter to Burghley (in which he gives his age as sixty-seven) refers only to his undoubted seniority as serjeant. 
After this, although his old enemies renewed their complaints, Manwood continued actively in office until his death in St Stephen's parish, Hackington, on 14 December 1592. His will, dated 12 December, left money for annual sermons to be preached at Hackington and St Mary's, Sandwich, in which mention was to be made of the frailty and vain delights of this world. He recounted all his good deeds -- the most recent being a hospital for poor priests in Canterbury and the gaol house of correction there -- as 'rei publice', the 'one tenth of his value being the talent in this life to me lent by Almighty God'. Claiming he would 'do as he would be done unto', he gave large sums of money to his extended family. His widow was to receive $550 a year. His heir, Peter, would inherit providing he lived five years beyond Elizabeth's death without committing treason. He was buried in St Stephen's Church, Hackington, under a monument, erected before his death, which depicts him in his robes as a baron, with two wives, five children, and a life-size wooden skeleton. His extensive lands were closely focused in eastern Kent and the Isle of Thanet. He was exceptionally litigious in a litigious age. If his adversaries described him in slanderous terms, he sued. It was said that he brought more cases of 'scandalum magnatum' than any other person. 
Manwood was a man who aroused strong feeling. His hard dealings in property transactions were legal but not necessarily equitable, as he clawed himself from nothing to own property worth at least $1500 a year. His enemies revived their hatred when they judged him vulnerable. His neighbour at Shorne, Richard Burston, was not assuaged by the provision of free running water to his house, and pursued him for oppression to his death. 
Manwood was the centre of many controversies and the subject of myth-making. Christopher Marlowe, perhaps his protege, perhaps merely grateful that Manwood had released him at the London assizes in 1589, wrote a Latin eulogy, which starts: '
Here lies the dour scourge of the profligate 

Instrument of the hardened criminals fate 

Fearsome to vagrants, Hercules from Jove sent 

Celebrate you old lags! If innocent, 

Weep with dishevelled hair and mournful breast, 

Law's light and glory now has gone to rest. 
(Bakeless, 286-7)' Archbishop Parker, thirty years earlier, had praised Manwood's charity, describing him as a living example that not all lawyers were concerned first and last with their own well-being. Richard Mulcaster in his 'Elementarie' (1581) wrote of him as one of the 'greate founders to learning both within the universities and in the countries about them'. Sir Edward Coke said he was 'A reverend judge of great and excellent knowledge of the law and accompanied with a ready invention and good elocution' (Coke, pt 3, 26a). Legal historians see him as a sage of the law and a justice of proven reputation. His enemies, however, damned him: 'as proud a man as ever I knew', and 'so given to revenge' that no one dared 'meddle in his causes' (BL, Lansdowne MS 71, no. 1); a cruel man who oppressed his neighbours and used corruption and bribery to further his career. In 1577 Thomas Digges claimed 'he rejoiced that he lived in that estate where Mr Justice Manwood was not the best but that there were Superior Magistrates he doubted not were able to rule and govern him according to equity'. Manwood retorted, 'Rule me. No there is none in England shall rule or govern me'. Digges replied: 'I hope there is one ys able to rule you... The Queen'. 'Tush', quoth Master Manwood. 'She is a woman. I say there is no man in England shall rule me and that I will make you feel' (BL, Lansdowne MS 24, no. 30, fol. 91). Scurrilous stories circulated. When a murder was committed in Canterbury, Manwood allegedly took $240 and obtained the culprit a free pardon. His legal aphorisms, such as 'In the Common Pleas there is all law and no conscience; In the Queens bench both law and conscience, in the chancery all conscience and no law and in the Exchequer neither law nor conscience' ('Diary of John Manningham', 91), circulated widely and some became legal commonplaces. 


@@@@@


doc= 18015


Map, Walter (d. 1209/10), royal clerk, raconteur, and satirist, was probably born in or about the early 1130s. He sprang from a border family, probably living in Herefordshire, and may have been partly Welsh: his surname is a version of the Welsh Vab or Mab or ap, meaning 'son of'. His attitude to his Welsh 'compatriots' ('compatriote', his own word), as to many people and institutions in his world, was ambivalent: he claimed kinship, but spoke disparagingly of them. His family were probably prosperous Herefordshire landowners of the second rank -- prosperous enough to have some access to Henry II. Map may well have been related to the lay lord of Wormsley near Hereford, who was also called Walter Map, as was his son. But the only relative who can be securely identified is a nephew, Master Philip Map, who was also a canon of Hereford Cathedral, and a chaplain of Giles de Briouze, bishop of Hereford (1200-15). 
Walter may have had early schooling at Gloucester Abbey; by 1154 he was a student in Paris, and was very likely there over a long period in the 1150s and 1160s -- hence, doubtless, his title 'magister'. Thereafter he followed a very characteristic 'cursus honorum' for an aspiring, highly educated secular clerk of the age -- in the service of bishop and king, with widely scattered benefices, and dignities in the chapter of Lincoln Cathedral. 
Map won patronage from the bishop of Hereford, Gilbert Foliot (1148-63), in whose service he is to be found in the 1160s. Later on, when Foliot was bishop of London (1163-87), Map won a prebend in St Paul's Cathedral, presumably from the bishop, which to this day bears his name -- Mapesbury ('Map's 'burh'', or 'fortress'), very likely based on one of his jests. Meanwhile, from the early 1170s and certainly by 1173, Map is recorded in royal service: in February 1173 he was in attendance on Henry II at Limoges, and on the king's behalf entertained the saintly Pierre, archbishop of Tarentaise; in 1179 he was one of the king's representatives at the Third Lateran Council in Rome; in 1183 he was at Saumur in Henry's service when Henry, the Young King, Henry II's eldest surviving son, died at Martel. He acted from time to time as a royal itinerant justice. 
Map seems thus to have spent at least a part of his time in royal service, until the death of Henry II in 1189, and he is the source of a vivid description of the rigour of living in the royal court, which he likened to hell. But some years before 1189 he won patronage in the see of Lincoln, possibly during the long vacancy between 1166 and 1183, during part of which Henry II's illegitimate son, Geoffrey -- a particular bugbear of Map -- was bishop-elect (1173-82), more probably from his associate in the royal service, Walter de Coutances, who was bishop of Lincoln in 1183-4. In any case Map occurs as canon in the period 1183-5, and as chancellor by 1186. That is to say, he was in charge of the schools of Lincoln at a time when they were about to enjoy an exceptional reputation as a centre of learning, especially in theology -- and at the moment when Hugh of Avalon became bishop (1186-1200). In his own writings Map affects the role of a worldly secular clerk, deeply suspicious of the religious orders -- though making something of an exception for the Carthusians from whom Hugh sprang. But he must have been acceptable to Hugh, to say the least, for Hugh made him first precentor of the cathedral ('c'.1189), then archdeacon of Oxford (from 1196 or 1197), an office he appropriately occupied during the period when Oxford was first visibly becoming the home of a university, in the 1190s. In addition he enjoyed the revenues of parish churches as far apart as Westbury-on-Severn in Gloucestershire and Ashwell in Hertfordshire; and he was clearly prosperous. In his 'De nugis curialium' (Map, distich 1, cap. 10) he grumbles humorously at the cost of maintaining his nephews and servants, who for ever press him to further expense: 'You are but spending what you have. Trust in the Lord: it's common talk that they'll make you a bishop.' Early in 1199 the cathedral chapter of Hereford, of which Map was or had been a member, petitioned Richard I to ask permission to elect Walter Map their bishop; but Richard died (6 April 1199) before their petition could be answered. King John arranged for Giles de Briouze, son of his favourite William (III) de Briouze, to receive the bishopric. And in 1203, after his friend Gerald of Wales had failed in his attempts to become bishop of St David's, Map was suggested as a possible candidate, but again without result: he died an archdeacon on 1 April 1209 or 1210. 
Map's was a career clearly illustrating the opportunities open to a talented and able man who enjoyed at least some early patronage; but it was his writings, spurious and authentic, which have given him fame. Two of the poems in the prose cycle of Lancelot of 'c'.1215-30, the 'Queste del Saint Graal' and the 'Mort Artu', claim to be French translations of a Latin original preserved at the abbey of Salisbury (which never existed), composed 'by Walter Map at the request of King Henry his lord'. The translation topos appears in many vernacular poems of the twelfth and thirteenth centuries, and is commonly, as in this case, fictitious. No modern scholar believes that Map had a substantial role in the composition of these poems, nor their immediate source; but why they should have been attributed to him remains an intriguing puzzle. Similarly, a large quantity of secular Latin verse -- including some of the most sophisticated poetry now attributed to the Archpoet -- came, at the end of the middle ages and later, to be attributed to him; but no modern scholar now believes him to be the author of more than a tiny fraction of this goliardic verse. 
Map's modern fame depends mainly on the 'De nugis curialium' ('Courtiers' trifles'), a work undoubtedly his which survives only in a single late-fourteenth-century copy (Bodl. Oxf., MS Bodley 851 (3041)), which only became at all widely known after the publication of the 'editio princeps' by Thomas Wright in 1850. One section of the 'De nugis' (Map, distich 4, cap. 3-4) occurs separately in over fifty manuscripts: it is a witty tract against marriage, 'Dissuasio Valerii ad Ruffinum philosophum ne uxorem ducat' ('A dissuasion of Valerius to Ruffinus the philosopher, that he should not take a wife'). It was printed among the works of St Jerome in the earliest editions of Jerome's works: though far more entertaining, it clearly owes some inspiration to Jerome's 'Aduersus Iouinianum'. Some of the stories in the 'De nugis', with other specimens of Map's wit and prejudices, especially against the Cistercians and the Jews, were reported by Gerald of Wales (clearly a friend of Map, though perhaps not a very close friend), evidently from Map's conversation. The 'De nugis' is meant to entertain, and often succeeds; but it is very difficult to define its genre or subject. Therein, indeed, lies its interest; it is a kind of inventory or florilegium of the mental furniture of a learned and witty twelfth-century clerk. At the beginning and end is a heavy satire on the court -- with some abuse, too, of his own household. But it soon passes into a jumble of stories -- including two very moving accounts of miracles performed by St Pierre of Tarentaise -- and descriptions of religious orders. The reader is rapidly transported to 'A Digression of Master Walter Map on Monkery', his celebrated diatribe against the Cistercians. Some of the satire is entirely wild; some -- his accusation that Cistercians moved villages and displaced peasants -- is now known to have had substance; it is all very readable. 'It is prescribed to them that they are to dwell in desert places, and desert places they do assuredly either find or make' (Map, distich 1, cap. 25, pp. 92-3). For the rest, the book comprises a remarkable gathering of disparate elements: humorous stories, serious stories, ghost stories, satirical stories -- some of them exceedingly sophisticated, some crude -- and fragments of history. Distich 5 largely comprises a sort of garbled history of England in the eleventh and twelfth centuries; it contains some interesting nuggets of fact amid a great deal that cannot be true; it concludes with a fragment of autobiography: 'This lord king [Henry II] was served by a certain clerk, who has written these matters for you, whose surname was Map. He was dear and acceptable to the king, not for his own merits, but for those of his forebears who had been faithful and useful to the king, both before his accession [in 1154] and after it. (Map, distich 5, cap. 6, pp. 494-5)' As commonly, Map invites the expectation of genuine revelations, but instead breaks into scurrilous tales about Henry's illegitimate son, Geoffrey, who had been Map's predecessor in his London prebend, then (1173-82) bishop-elect of Lincoln, and was later (1191-1212) archbishop of York. The value of his witness is sometimes most difficult to assess when it could be most authentic. The title of the book, 'De nugis curialium', was also the subtitle of John of Salisbury's 'Policraticus', which is in part a 'mirror of princes'; and it may perhaps be said that Map's book was designed to be a parody of a 'mirror of princes'; yet frivolous and serious elements in it are bafflingly combined. It survived, clearly, as a collection of loose quires, not in any final form -- composed originally 'c'.1181-2, but added to at a variety of later dates; it never received any final revision. 
Map's Latin style is of its age, heavily charged with biblical echoes, yet revealing too a wide classical learning, especially in Horace, Virgil, Ovid, and Juvenal. It can show extraordinary point and wit; it often illustrates his own peculiar type of humour. Thus in the 'Dissuasio' he tells us that: 'Pacuvius, weeping, said to his neighbour Arrius: 'Friend, I have a disastrous tree in my garden: my first wife hung herself on it, so did my second later on, and now my third has done the same.' Said Arrius, 'I wonder that after so many strokes of luck you find it in you to weep.' And again, 'Good gods, what expenses has that tree suspended for you!' And a third time: 'Friend, give me some cuttings of that tree to plant'. (Map, distich 4, cap. 3, pp. 302-3)' The story comes originally from Cicero, the names from Aulus Gellius; Map's version is better than either. But his wide reading does not only show in his use of the 'Bible' and the classics: it is clear, for example, that he had read Geoffrey of Monmouth's 'History of the Kings of Britain', had detected it for the fraud it was, and enjoyed telling stories that parody it. Although many of his stories have morals (or a notable lack of them), very few reveal any interest in theology -- a partial exception may perhaps be made for some of his fairy stories, which are classics for the intermediate world between men and angels in which many folk believed, but whose inhabitants were hard to place among God's creatures. Yet Map must have had some knowledge of theology, if his own account that he was officially invited to hold disputation with the future heresiarch Valdes at the Third Lateran Council of 1179 is to be believed (Map, distich 1, cap. 31). Furthermore, he was chancellor of Lincoln Cathedral not long before it became a leading school of theology under Master William de Montibus. But since he was a royal justice it is likely that he had legal learning too. Like John of Salisbury, he was a polymath, a characteristic product of the leading schools in northern Europe in the age of the twelfth-century renaissance, especially Paris. 
Gerald of Wales reports a conversation in which Map drew a distinction between Gerald, who wrote, and Walter, who talked -- between Gerald's writings ('scripta') and Walter's sayings ('dicta'); and there is a sense in which much of the 'De nugis' reads like a man talking to his friends. Thus he tells the man Geoffrey -- not identified -- who, he claims, inspired him to write, that he has set his hand to a vast toil, to put down 'the sayings and doings which have not yet been committed to writing... that the reading of it may amuse, and its teaching tend to moral improvement' (Map, distich 1, cap. 12). However this may be, Map in his own day was evidently known for his talk; in the twentieth century he is known for the 'De nugis'. A. G. Rigg has established a strong probability that the 'De nugis' survived in Oxford, there to be copied in the late fourteenth century for Brother John of Wells, scholar of Oxford and monk of Ramsey: the book (Bodl. Oxf., MS Bodley 851) also contains -- besides other matter, some of it added later -- a celebrated copy of 'Piers Plowman', called by A. G. Rigg and Charlotte Brewer the Z version. Though Langland seems strange company for Map, it is the eclectic tastes of Brother John that are responsible for the survival of Walter Map's 'De nugis'. 


@@@@@


doc= 18016


Maplet, John (d. 1592), writer on natural philosophy, matriculated as a sizar from Queens' College, Cambridge, in December 1560 and graduated BA in 1564. He was a fellow of St Catharine's College in August 1564, and was ordained deacon at Ely on 5 November of that year. He was a fellow of Gonville and Caius College in 1566/7 and proceeded MA in 1567. On 26 November 1568 he was instituted, on the presentation of Sir Thomas Mildmay, to the rectory of Great Leighs, Essex, which he exchanged for the vicarage of Northolt, Middlesex, on 30 April 1576. His marriage to a widow named Ellen Leap (died 1595) brought five children: Margaret, Ellen, John, Thomas, and Mary, born between 1577 and 1581. 
When Maplet was in Cambridge he wrote the first of the two works for which he is known, 'A Greene Forest, or, A Naturall Historie'. This was printed in London in 1567 and dedicated to Thomas, earl of Sussex. It is divided into sections on minerals, plants, and animals, each of which consists of alphabetically organized descriptions drawn from classical, Islamic, and humanist sources. A decade and a half later, when installed as vicar in Northolt, Maplet wrote another small book, 'The Diall of Destiny'. He finished writing this in December 1581, and it was printed in London, with a dedication to Sir Christopher Hatton, the following year. In this treatise Maplet, again drawing on scholarly sources, argues that the heavens influence earthly events. He discusses the properties, effects, and qualities of each of the known planets in turn (the moon, Mercury, Venus, the sun, Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn), and touches on a range of subjects from elephants to earthquakes. A third work by Maplet, 'Argemonie, or, The prynciple vertues of stone' is reputed to have been printed in London in 1566; although this might have been the first part of 'A Greene Forest', issued separately, no copy of it seems to have survived (C. H. Cooper, 2.135-6). Maplet was buried in the chancel of Northolt church on 7 September 1592. A few weeks later his widow married Matthew Randall, a servant of her husband's glebe; she died at Ealing in 1595. 
While Maplet's books number among the few dozen vernacular treatises on natural philosophy printed in sixteenth-century England, they have not figured in histories of these subjects. During Maplet's lifetime John Bossewell included his name alongside Geoffrey Chaucer, Sir Thomas Eliot, and others as sources for information relevant to heraldry, probably referring to 'A Greene Forest'. Maplet's works continued to be read after his death. For instance, about the turn of the century Simon Forman the astrologer physician cited 'A Greene Forest' for information about metals and 'The Diall of Destiny' on comets; in 1675 William Cooper included 'A Greene Forest' in a catalogue of English alchemical books. 


@@@@@


doc= 18017


Maplet, John (1611x15-1670), physician, born in the parish of St Martin's-le-Grand, London, was the son of John Maplet, a shoemaker. He was educated at Westminster School, and in 1630 he was elected to Christ Church, Oxford; he claimed to be twenty in 1632, when he matriculated. He graduated BA on 8 July 1634, MA on 17 April 1638, and DM on 24 July 1647. On 9 December 1643 he was elected junior proctor on the death of William Cartwright, and served for the remainder of the year, and in the autumn of 1647 he was nominated principal of Gloucester Hall. He was a delegate of the university appointed to receive the parliamentary visitors, and is said to have submitted to their authority, but he quickly left the university. 
About 1648 Maplet became tutor to Lucius Cary, third Viscount Falkland, with whom he travelled in France for two years, staying chiefly at Orleans, Blois, and Saumur. During the tour he made many observations, which he committed to writing, 'in a neat and curious hand, with a particular tract of his travels in an elegant Latin style' (Guidott, 181). He afterwards went with Henry Cary, Lord Falkland, brother of Lucius, to the Low Countries, where an uncle of his seems to have lived. On 5 March 1651 it was certified to the committee for reformation of the universities that he was 'absent upon leave' (Burrows, 329), but while still abroad he appears to have been ejected from his offices at Oxford. 
On his return Maplet settled as a physician at Bath, practising there in the summer and at Bristol in the winter 'with great respect and veneration from all people in those parts'. He may have returned to Oxford at some point, as a poem by J. Maplet, a doctor at Christ Church, appeared in 'Musarum Oxoniensium elaiophoria' (1654). About that time he married Mrs Anne Hull of Bristol. He was acquainted with the leading physicians of his time, and helped Thomas Guidott in his early days. At the Restoration he resumed the principalship of Gloucester Hall, but retired in 1662. He died at Bath on 4 August 1670, said to be aged fifty-five. In the north aisle of Bath Abbey, where they were buried, Guidott erected an elaborate monument, with a black marble tablet bearing a Latin inscription to Maplet's memory. Under it is another small tablet with an inscription to his wife, who died in February 1671, aged thirty-five, and his children, a son John, aged three years, and a daughter Mary, aged three months. Of Maplet, Guidott says: 'He was of a tender, brittle constitution, inclining to feminine, clear skinn'd and of a very fresh complexion' (Guidott, 152). Wood says, 'he was learned, candid, and ingenious, a good physician, a better Christian, and an excellent Latin poet'. 
Maplet left a number of works in manuscript, including the account of his foreign travels. In 1694 Guidott published Maplet's 'Epistolarum medicarum specimen de thermarum Bathoniensium effectis', which was dedicated to the leading contemporary physicians. Guidott also transcribed some Latin verses by Maplet on catarrh in the eyes, and some lines headed 'De catarrhi fuga' and 'In primum canitiem', with a rhymed translation of the latter. He considered Maplet's 'style terse, his words choice, but his periods a little too elaborate' (Guidott, 193). 


@@@@@


doc= 18018


Mapletoft, John (1631-1721), physician and Church of England clergyman, was born on 15 June 1631 at Margaretting, Essex, the second of the three children of Joshua Mapletoft (1594-1635), vicar of Margaretting and rector of Wickford, and his wife, Susanna (died 1657), daughter of John Collett of North Thoresby, Cambridgeshire, and his wife, Susanna. After his father's death his mother married James Chedley and Mapletoft was brought up with his brother and sister at Little Gidding in the well-known, if small, religious community established there by his great-uncle and godfather Nicholas Ferrar. In 1645 he was sent to Westminster School by his uncle Robert Mapletoft, later master of Pembroke College, Cambridge, and dean of Ely. He entered Trinity College, Cambridge, as a pensioner on 20 May 1648, and graduated BA in January 1652 and MA in 1655. In May 1652 he was admitted a student of Gray's Inn, but he does not appear to have remained there long, as in October 1653 he was elected a fellow of Trinity College, where he later supported Isaac Barrow's scheme for building a library. 
On leaving Cambridge in 1658 Mapletoft became tutor to Joceline, son of the earl of Northumberland. Two years later he travelled abroad to France and Rome, where he lived in the household of Algernon Sidney, in order to study physic. By early 1664 he had rejoined the earl's family at Petworth. He took his MD in 1667 at Cambridge, and incorporated the degree at Oxford in 1669. 
Mapletoft established a successful practice as a physician in London, numbering several aristocratic families among his patients. He attended Lord Essex on his embassy to Denmark in 1670, and the dowager countess of Northumberland in France in 1672 and again in 1676. Against stiff competition, he succeeded Jonathan Goddard as Gresham professor of physic in 1675. Mapletoft lived in the college for the next three years until he resigned in order to marry, on 18 November 1679, Rebecca, daughter of Lucy Knightley of Hackney, a Hamburg merchant, with whom, as he told his friend Robert Nelson, he learned the vanity 'of believing myselfe as happy as any man, either single or married' (BL, Add. MS 45511, fol. 1). Together they had two sons, Robert (1684-1716) and John (1687-1763), and a daughter, Elizabeth (died 1761). Rebecca Mapletoft died in November 1693, on the fourteenth anniversary of their marriage. 
Through his distant relation Thomas Firmin, Mapletoft became part of an extensive circle including noted natural philosophers such as Robert Hooke, physicians such as Thomas Sydenham, and clergy, particularly latitudinarians such as John Tillotson. Mapletoft was elected a fellow of the Royal Society in February 1676 and was a member of its council in 1677, 1679, 1690, and 1692, during which time he took part in discussions and experiments. He had been at school with John Locke, and they remained on close terms for many years, corresponding regularly when either of them was abroad and consulting each other over difficult patients. Together they became involved with Sydenham's medical researches, acting as secretaries and examining cases. Mapletoft translated several of Sydenham's works into Latin for publication, most notably much of 'Observationes medicae' (1676), which was dedicated to him, and other texts published in 1683. The extent and details of his role are uncertain, although it seems likely that the idiomatic flavour and classical references in 'Observationes' reflect his rather florid style. 
Mapletoft had always had an inclination towards theology, and following his marriage he gave up physic to prepare himself for ordination. Although he had some scruples about subscribing to the 'Thirty-Nine Articles', seeking advice from Simon Patrick about the matter (see Patrick's letter of 8 February 1683 in BL, Add. MS 5878, fol. 151), he took deacon's and priest's orders on 3 March 1683. He had already been presented as (non-resident) rector of Braybrooke, Northamptonshire, and in January 1685 became lecturer at Ipswich, and later that year lecturer at St Christopher's, London. In January 1686, with the support of several prominent city figures, he was selected as vicar of the united parishes of St Lawrence Jewry and St Mary Magdalen, Milk Street, London, the parish in which he had been married, where he succeeded the prominent latitudinarian and former provost of King's College, Cambridge, Benjamin Whichcote. He remained vicar there until his death, preaching until he was over eighty years old. In 1690 he graduated DD at Cambridge. Mapletoft was an early member of the Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge, joining in 1699, and of the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel in Foreign Parts. He was also active in Sion College, an institution designed as a guild of the clergy of the City of London and its suburbs, serving as assistant in 1688 and 1689, senior dean in 1694, and president in 1707, and was involved with Greenwich and St Thomas's hospitals. During his time at St Lawrence Jewry he published a number of sermons, minor works on theology, and collections of proverbs and classical extracts, several of which were republished on a number of occasions. His writings were deeply concerned with the everyday faith of his parishioners, and he distributed copies of his 'Principles and Duties of the Christian Religion' (1710), a 'True, Plain and Useful' account of religion, to each household in his parish. 
For most of the last decade of his life Mapletoft lived in Oxford and Westminster with his daughter, who had married Francis Gastrell, canon of Christ Church, Oxford, and bishop of Chester. Mapletoft died in Westminster on 10 November 1721 and was buried under the communion table of St Lawrence Jewry in the same tomb as Benjamin Calamy on 15 November. 


@@@@@


doc= 18019


Mapletoft, Robert (1609-1677), college head, was born on 25 January 1609, at North Thoresby, Lincolnshire, the son of Hugh Mapletoft, rector of that parish, and his wife, a member of the Stennits family of Wainfleet, Lincolnshire. He was educated at the grammar school at Louth. He was admitted a sizar of Queens' College, Cambridge, on 25 May 1625, graduated BA in 1628, and proceeded MA in 1632. On 8 January 1631 he was elected fellow of Pembroke College and became chaplain to his friend and patron Bishop Matthew Wren. On Wren's recommendation, in 1639, the year he proceeded BD, he was presented to the rectory of Bartlow, Cambridgeshire, by Charles I. 
Mapletoft was cousin to Nicholas Ferrar, whom he assisted with his translation of a temperance treatise by Leonard Lessius. He frequently wrote to and visited Ferrar's religious community at Little Gidding, Huntingdonshire. Mapletoft was there when Ferrar died in 1637; he preached the funeral oration and officiated at the funeral. His brother, Joshua, married Susanna Collett, Ferrar's niece, and was father of John Mapletoft (1631-1721), the physician and clergyman. 
During the civil war Mapletoft was among the fellows who unsuccessfully attempted to prevent William Dowsing, the iconoclast, from cleansing Pembroke College chapel. Mapletoft was ejected as a malignant from his living at Bartlow in 1643 and at the parliamentary visitation of the university in 1644. The charges against him included refusing the solemn league and covenant and permitting Bishop Wren's son to wear Prince Rupert's colours. He subsequently 'lived as privately and quietly as he could' (Baker MSS, CUL, MS 36, fol. 103) and was sheltered in Sir Robert Shirley's house in Leicestershire, where he met Gilbert Sheldon, afterwards archbishop of Canterbury. During the protectorate Mapletoft provided prayer book services to a private congregation in Lincoln. 'Being discovered, he was like to come into some trouble, but came off safe when it became known that his congregation had made a considerable purse for him, which he would not accept' (ibid.). 
Following the Restoration, on 28 July 1660 Mapletoft received the degree of DD by royal mandate. On 23 August he was presented by the crown to the subdeanery of Lincoln Cathedral and the prebendal stall of Clifton, and on 8 December revived the mastership of the Spital Hospital. While subdean he was involved with a dispute with the cathedral's precentor, John Featley, about capitular appointments, and was attacked by him in the manuscript tract 'Speculum Mapletofianum' ('DNB'). As master of Spital Hospital he received the practically defunct charity with Dean Michael Honywood. A bill in chancery was exhibited in 1662 against Sir John Wray for the restoration of the estates, and Mapletoft at his own expense rebuilt the demolished chapel and increased its revenues, making the office rather one of expense than profit. He was nominated master of Pembroke College, Cambridge, but Mapletoft's recommended candidate, Mark Frank, served in the office until Mapletoft succeeded him, in 1664. He held the mastership until his death. He was made dean of Ely on 7 August 1667, holding the subdeanery of Lincoln with the deanery until 1671. 
When in 1668 Anne Hyde, duchess of York, began to waver in her allegiance to the Church of England, Mapletoft was recommended as her chaplain by his friend Sheldon, as a 'primitive and apostolical divine' (Baker MSS, CUL, MS 36, fol. 103) whose influence might prevent her secession, but feeling himself 'unfit for court life' (Baker MSS, CUL, MS 38, fol. 191) he was reluctant to undertake the office. Shortly after resigning the subdeanery he moved to Cambridge, serving as vice-chancellor in 1671. He received from the crown the living of Clayworth, Nottinghamshire, which in 1672 he exchanged for the college living of Soham, near Ely, resigning his fellowship; he held the living of Soham until his death. 
Mapletoft died, unmarried, on 20 August 1677 in the master's lodge at Pembroke, and, by his desire, was buried the same day in the chapel near Bishop Wren. It is recorded of him that 'wherever he resided he kept a good table, and had the general reputation of a pious and charitable man' (Baker MSS, CUL, MS 38, fol. 192). He was exceedingly thin, 'vir valde macilentus' (ibid.). In his will he made numerous bequests, including his library, the 'small reserves from the late plundering times' (Cambridge University Archives, will, vol. 4, 158), $100 to Ely Cathedral, and the same sum to poor clerical widows in Ely. He also founded catechetical lectures at Queens' and Pembroke colleges, and petty schools at North Thoresby and at Louth. 


@@@@@


doc= 18020


Donald, sixth earl of Mar (d. in or after 1297), magnate, was the son of William, fifth earl of Mar (d. in or before 1281), and Elizabeth Comyn, his first wife. He was knighted by Alexander III at Scone in 1270 and succeeded as earl before 25 July 1281, when his name appears, with other Scots nobles, on the ratification of the treaty for the marriage of Margaret, the maid of Scotland, to Erik, king of Norway. At Scone in February 1284 he was among those who undertook to acknowledge the daughter of that marriage, Margaret, the maid of Norway, as heir to the throne of Scotland in the event of Alexander's death without other issue. Along with many of the barons and prelates of Scotland, he wrote to Edward I of England in March 1290, agreeing to negotiate for the marriage of the king's son to the maid of Norway, and was a signatory to the resulting treaty, signed at Birgham, Berwickshire, in July 1290. After the death of the maid of Norway in September of that year, when different claimants appeared for the Scottish crown, Mar was one of those who was rumoured to be raising forces in Scotland, presumably to support Robert (V) de Brus's claim to the throne. His alignment with the Brus faction is also clearly demonstrated by his involvement with the document known as 'The appeal of the seven earls of Scotland', which seems to have been an attempt to prevent any hasty elevation of John Balliol to the throne. The relationship between the Mar and Brus families was close: Donald's daughter Isabel married Brus's grandson, the future king Robert I, probably in the mid-1290s; it has also been suggested that his son Gartnait married a sister of King Robert. 
Mar was an important participant in the Great Cause, the lengthy legal proceedings by which Edward I decided that John Balliol should be king of Scots. He swore allegiance to Edward at Upsettlington, Berwickshire, on 13 June 1291, and acted as one of the forty auditors appointed by Brus to hear the case. He was a witness to Edward's protest at Berwick on 3 July 1292 as to his claim to be lord superior of Scotland. In June 1294 King John, with Mar and other Scottish nobles, was summoned to London to join the English army setting out for France. They did not attend, but instead sent 'impotent and brief excuses' ('Chronicle of Walter of Guisborough', 264). As the Scots prepared to rebel against Edward I in 1295, Mar was one of the council of twelve elected to 'advise' Balliol; he was also one of the signatories to the ratification of the treaty of Paris in February 1296. Following the battle of Dunbar (1296) he came to Edward at Montrose, and afterwards swore fealty again at Berwick. He was, notwithstanding, ordered to accompany Edward to England, but was allowed to visit Scotland in June 1297, Edward at the same time exacting from him a pledge that he would serve him against France. 
Mar then disappears from the records, and may have died about this time. In December 1297 'Alexander, son of the earl of Mar', was imprisoned in the Tower of London by order of Edward I. It is not clear, however, if this is Mar's own son or that of his son and successor in the earldom, Gartnait (father of Donald, eighth earl of Mar). Mar married Elena, daughter of the Welsh prince Llywelyn ap Gruffudd, and left at least four children: Gartnait, Duncan, Isabel, and Marjory, who married John, earl of Atholl. A daughter Mary, who is said to have married Kenneth Sutherland, fourth earl of Sutherland ['see under 'Sutherland family (per. c.1200-c.1510)], may be the same person. 


@@@@@


doc= 18021


Donald, eighth earl of Mar (1293-1332), magnate, was the son of Gartnait, seventh earl of Mar, who died 'c'.1302, when his heir was still a child. Although it has been asserted that Donald's mother was Christian Bruce, sister of the future King Robert, it seems more likely that she was an elder Bruce sibling whose name is unknown. When Robert Bruce, still earl of Carrick, submitted to King Edward in 1302, the conditions of his submission included the granting to him of the wardship and marriage of a boy who was his nephew twice over, as son of his sister and of his wife's brother (Bruce had been married to Isabel, Gartnait's sister). It can be presumed, therefore, that the young Donald, who succeeded as eighth earl of Mar in 1305, had little choice but to attend his uncle's coronation in April 1306. The lad was captured by the English a few months later, most likely in Kildrummy Castle, the centre of his earldom, which fell to Edward I in early September of that year. It was ordered that he should be sent to Bristol Castle, where he was to be spared warding in irons because of his tender years, but in the end he remained in the royal household, serving as a page of the chamber to Edward II. He became closely attached to the English king. 
In 1314, as a result of the English defeat at Bannockburn, Earl Donald, together with a number of other important Scottish prisoners, was set free. Having reached Newcastle, however, he changed his mind and elected to stay in the country of his upbringing, rather than return to that of his birth. This had potentially important implications for the long overdue settlement of the Scottish succession. The Bruces claimed the throne of Scotland by virtue of being nearest in degree to David, earl of Huntingdon (died 1219), through their descent from his second daughter, Isobel. If Earl Donald was indeed descended from an elder sister of King Robert, then he had an interest in the succession which, though it would probably not have taken precedence over the claims of Robert's daughter Marjorie or his brother Edward, was nevertheless of some consequence. As it was, in the absence of his nephew, King Robert (who as yet had no male child) in 1315 settled the succession on Edward and his descendants, followed by the future children of Marjorie, who was soon to be married to Walter Stewart (died 1326). 
Having decided to stay in England, Earl Donald was exonerated from all suspicion of rebel sympathies and was clearly high in royal favour: he received a number of grants from Edward II and in 1320 went abroad with the king. In 1321 he declared his intention of going on pilgrimage to Santiago de Compostela. As a firm supporter of the English king Donald naturally fought on the royalist side at Boroughbridge in 1322, and was also present later that year when the Scots defeated an English force near Byland. His loyalty was rewarded with the constableship of Bristol Castle in 1326, but, with the deposition of Edward II later in the year, he finally went back to Scotland, primarily in order to lobby for an attempted restoration of the errant English king. King Robert took his nephew's return at face value, restoring his lands to him and even giving him command of one of the Scottish battalions which invaded England in 1327, after the murder of Edward II and the coronation of the young Edward III. Earl Donald was still in Scotland when King Robert died in 1329; his closeness to the throne of Scotland is further underlined by the fact that on 2 August 1332 he was chosen to succeed Thomas Randolph, earl of Moray, as guardian of Scotland on behalf of his cousin David II. Nevertheless there were suspicions that Mar had retained sympathies with England and with Edward Balliol, the son of King John, whom Edward II had invited to the English court from France in 1324, and who led an English-backed invasion of Scotland in the summer of 1332. These suspicions surfaced to disastrous effect when the Scottish forces faced the invaders on Dupplin Moor on 11 August. Robert Bruce of Liddesdale, King Robert's illegitimate son, chose this moment to accuse Mar of being in league with the enemy, whereupon Mar, by way of demonstrating his patriotism, announced that he would himself be the first to engage with the enemy. The result was a thoroughly disorganized attack, which ended in a total Scottish defeat; Mar himself was killed. 
Earl Donald had married Isabel Stewart, supposedly the daughter of Sir Alexander Stewart of Bonkill. They had a son, 
Thomas married twice. His first wife was Margaret, daughter of John Graham, earl of Menteith, whom he later divorced 'at the instigation of the devil' ('Scots peerage', 5.585). He subsequently married Margaret Stewart, eldest daughter and coheir of Thomas Stewart, earl of Angus; she outlived him. He had no surviving children of either marriage, and his heir was his sister Margaret, who married William, earl of Douglas. 


@@@@@


doc= 18022


Thomas, ninth earl of Mar (c.1330-1377), who reached his majority in the 1350s, indicating that his parents married about 1328, after Donald's return to Scotland. On 15 January 1348 Edward III (presumably on the strength of his control of much of southern Scotland) assigned Thomas to the care of William Carsewell, Isabel's third husband, who had outlived her. But on 15 May 1350, having by now succeeded to the earldom, he witnessed a charter of David II at Dundee, and in June 1351 made an active entry into the Scottish political scene, being appointed as a commissioner for a peace treaty with England. In 1357 he became a hostage for the payment of David II's ransom, but he was back in Scotland, where he held the office of chamberlain, between 1358 and 1359. Even so he maintained close links with England and on 24 February 1360 entered Edward III's service, saving his allegiance to the king of Scots. This brought him an annual pension of 600 marks, with the additional proviso that he would receive $600 if he lost any lands in Scotland. King David regarded this relationship as unacceptable and in 1361 besieged and took Kildrummy Castle, granting it to Sir Walter Moigne. It has also been suggested that Thomas was a tyrannical overlord and practised extortion on his people; either that, or he had fallen out with Sir William Keith, one of the king's favourites. As an incentive to mend his ways Mar was fined $1000, payable in five years under pain of losing his castle altogether. Kildrummy was still in Moigne's hands as late as 1364, although Thomas was allowed to draw on the issues of his earldom. The castle was finally restored to him at some point before August 1368. In the same year he was granted a safe conduct to go on pilgrimage to St Jean d'Amiens. He continued to travel up and down to England until his death in early 1377, from which date his brother-in-law, William Douglas, earl of Douglas (d. 1384), styled himself earl of Mar. 


@@@@@


doc= 18023


William, fifth earl of Mar (d. in or before 1281), magnate, was the son of Duncan, fourth earl of Mar (died 1242x4), and grandson of Morgrund, second earl of Mar (died before 1183). He probably succeeded his father in 1243: Duncan was alive at an unspecified date in 1242, but William appears as earl, witnessing a charter of Alexander II, in February 1244. He also witnessed the agreement between Henry III of England and Alexander II in the same year. His right of succession was contested by Alan Durward (died 1275), who asserted that William's father and grandfather were both of illegitimate birth and that he ought to succeed as lawful heir. But apparently the case was arranged on the footing of an agreement which had been made in the 1220s with Thomas Durward, father of Alan, who received a large accession of territory in Mar; the earldom remained with William. 
Mar was one of those who accused the Durward faction of treachery at Christmas 1251, leading to their fall from power. In 1252 he was appointed chamberlain of Scotland, which office he held until 1255. In that year, owing to political dissensions, he was removed from the government and received a safe conduct from Henry III to visit the English court. In 1259 he was a party to the treaty between some of the Scots and Llywelyn ap Gruffudd (died 1282), not to make peace with Henry III without one another's consent, notwithstanding Henry's agreement in the previous year to support him, along with the others in the newly emerging Scottish government, so long as they acted righteously. Despite the Scottish chronicles' condemnation of the Comyn regime, Mar remained active in government as Alexander III assumed personal control. He had again become chamberlain by 1264, and continued in the office until 1267. He was also sheriff of Dunbartonshire, and in the summer of 1264, following the battle of Largs in 1263, he was sent by Alexander III with a military force against the chiefs of the Western Isles who had supported Hakon IV, king of Norway. Bower claims that, in dispute with the bishop of Moray in 1268, Earl William was excommunicated, but he was nevertheless sent as an ambassador from Alexander III to Henry III, in a vain attempt to gain the honour of Huntingdon, in 1270. 
Mar married Elizabeth, daughter of William Comyn, earl of Buchan; they had one son, Donald, who succeeded as sixth earl, and possibly another, named Duncan. After Elizabeth's death in 1267 he married Muriel, daughter of Malise, earl of Strathearn, and granddaughter and one of the heirs of Robert Muschamp. She died in 1291, leaving no children. Mar probably died in 1281, since, although he was apparently alive at Michaelmas, his son Donald was styled earl in July. 


@@@@@


doc= 18024


Mara, Gertrud Elisabeth (1749-1833), singer, was born in Kassel, Germany, on 23 February 1749, the daughter of the violinist Johann Schmeling. She received her early musical education from her father, who trained her as a violinist. He subsequently exhibited her as a child prodigy in many countries of Europe, including the Netherlands, Germany, and England. On the advice of some London ladies, she abandoned the instrument, regarding it as unladylike, and took up singing. Her first lessons, while profitable, were fraught with difficulty; she was removed from the so-called care of the London master Pietro Domenico Paradies 
(formerly Paradisi; 1707-1791)
, who was said to have been less than discreet in their pupil-teacher relationship, although the details of his aberration are unknown. Her soprano voice was soon noted for its brilliance, rapid execution, and wide range. As a diva, she was unusual in that she sang in tune and kept accurate time. The brilliance and rapid execution appear to have come from subsequent lessons in Leipzig with Johann Adam Hiller, to whom her accurate time-keeping can also be attributed; his course of instruction included work as a keyboard player, and her study culminated in public performances of harpsichord concertos. There can be no doubt that this conservatory-style training was one of the chief causes of her ability to survive well past the usual age in the less than kind career of a professional singer. However, she was considered to be an extremely poor actress, a factor which was doubtless responsible for the large number of concert and oratorio engagements she undertook, including a close association with the Lenten oratorio season. 
Schmeling's personal appearance was the subject of comment by many, and was not prepossessing; Burney, describing her aged twenty-three, thought her 'short and not handsome' (Highfill, Burnim & Langhans, 'BDA') with irregular teeth, but commented on her good humour, which 'rendered her addresses 'very' engaging' (ibid.). These physical drawbacks were probably the result of malnutrition; there is evidence that she had rickets in her early childhood, and her father's business as a freelance musician and repairer of instruments suggests if not poverty, at least periods of hardship. 
Throughout her career, Schmeling was dogged by controversies both manufactured and otherwise, and her capricious behaviour was destructive both personally and professionally. Perhaps it was the security and wealth she had acquired when she was taken up by Frederick the Great, king of Prussia, in 1771 as a permanent court singer at Berlin and Potsdam on a salary for life (reputed to be in the order of 11,250 francs), or perhaps it was the sudden privileges of being a court 'prima donna', but whatever the reason, she proceeded to live the role of the diva to the full. Against all advice and objections from the king, she married in 1772 Giovanni Battista Mara (1744- 'c'.1808), who as a husband proved to be what all those who objected to him thought he would be; an uncouth womanizer, a sub-standard musician, and more attached to alcohol than to his wife. According to Mozart, at a concert in Munich in 1780 Mme Mara, her husband, the orchestra, and the conductor were involved in a public row on the concert platform before the elector of Bavaria. She was restive in Berlin, and antagonized Frederick, who finally released her from her contract. She travelled via a number of cities to Paris, where in 1782 she immediately entered into rivalry with the Portuguese mezzo-soprano Luiza Todi. French musical society divided into the 'Maratistes' and the 'Todistes' in a debate which was conducted with wit and panache. 
Mara's London debut in 1784 was a triumph. It was witnessed by Mrs Papendiek, who noted that: 'the 'tutti' or symphony of the air commenced, and led up in a crescendo to a high note, upon which Mara began. She held it for a few bars, then brought it to a long shake, and from it ran down an octave or more in notes as clear as bells. When she had finished her song the excitement was intense. The people almost screamed. (Papendiek, 1.215-16)' The performance earned her the recognition of the prince of Wales (afterwards George IV), although he was not, as he later claimed, the first to recognize her talents. 
Mara was soon engaged for a short series at the Pantheon, which was a financial failure; Charles Burney blamed the general election. This did not stop the Mara star ascending, and she was in demand to sing opera and oratorio alike, appearing both in the Pantheon concerts and in the concerts of the Academy of Ancient Music. In February 1786 she made her debut at the King's Theatre, where she appeared until 1792; her roles included Dircea in 'L'usurpatore innocente', Cleofide in 'La generosita d'Alessandro', and the title role in 'Dido, queen of Carthage' by Prince Hoare and Stephen Storace. She also excelled in Handel roles such as Cleopatra in 'Giulio Cesare'. As her voice declined, she took on a number of roles in ballad opera, such as Polly in John Gay's 'The Beggar's Opera' and Rosetta in 'Love in a Village' by Isaac Bickerstaff and Thomas Arne. She also made a number of continental forays to fulfil prestigious singing engagements. During this period her husband, who had accompanied her to London, found work in the London orchestras. 
It was not long before a new London rivalry grew up, this time between Mara and the great Elizabeth Billington. The London press loved, fomented, and sometimes created this sort of polarized competition, but as far as the Mara-Billington axis is concerned, their careers naturally followed similar paths -- so much so, in fact, that not only was the most famous role for both sopranos -- the part of Mandane in Arne's 'Artaxerxes' -- performed with 'the anticipated and pleasing labour of encores' (Bacon, 219), but attempts were made to personalize it in a competitive manner by the addition of numerous extra songs; this claim is borne out by the numerous published song sheets of their additional arias. 
Mara's English career was blighted by professional incidents. Although she sang successfully at the 1784 Handel commemoration, in 1785 the press were outraged at her 'insolent' behaviour (she laughed during the rehearsals) and at her leaving the abbey before the end of the performance. Her attempts to organize a subscription series which challenged the Professional Concert -- referred to by the newspaper 'The Register' in November 1785 as the 'Hanover Square phalanx' -- met a hostile reaction in the press; she appears to have mishandled some of the administration, laying herself open to charges of deception, of being a dishonest foreigner, of employing only foreigners, and of being a profiteer. By June she was singing in Oxford, where her insistence on leaving the stage after she had sung and her refusal to stand up during the choruses led to her being hissed and booed and ordered to leave the Sheldonian Theatre by the vice-chancellor. She publicly apologized, offering a chronic problem with her leg as an excuse, and carefully placed articles, mostly written by John Taylor, seem to have had some effect. But the following year she was pilloried in a vicious caricature entitled the 'Wapping Concert', an illustration which shows her sitting, and referring to 'Le Genou Inflexible, or (Stiff Knee) which prevents her standing' (Highfill, Burnim & Langhans, 'BDA'). By April 1787 she was being attacked again, this time because she was refusing to sing in the Handel commemoration that year in protest at the request by the dean and chapter of Westminster Abbey for $1200 to be deducted before the proceeds were given to charity. Her oratorio performances were cancelled by order of George III in the same year because they clashed with performances by the Academy of Ancient Music, an event which inspired a vicious poem by John Wolcot, which also made use of the stiff knee image. 
However, Mara's voice was universally praised, and most contemporary essays and discussions of vocal technique refer to her on at least one occasion, and usually many. They mostly touch on her vocal agility and brilliance, but Bacon reports that she was unusual in being able to dance and sing at the same time. She survived many attacks on both her personal attributes and her integrity, a survival that may well be in part attributable to her 'masculine understanding' (Taylor, 2.103); she preferred male society and 'was animated in company, and uttered humorous and shrewd remarks' (ibid.). 
Mara ended her days as flamboyantly as she lived the earlier years of her life. She was financially ruined by imprudent -- and well-publicized -- love affairs with two obviously unsuitable, much younger, singers. By 1786 she was having an affair with the 26-year-old singer Samuel Harrison (1760-1812), with whom she visited Margate and Paris, but the relationship ended about 1787. 
By summer 1794 she had eloped to Bath with Charles Florio, with whom she remained until the end of his life (she and her husband separated at some point after 1795). She courted public censure by living openly with him in Brompton, and public disgrace by beating her cook in 1798; although she and Florio were both brought before the magistrate Sir Richard Ford on 11 August, the matter was settled out of court. She left England with Florio in 1801, and after travelling to Paris and to Berlin in 1803, she settled in Moscow in 1807, only to be made destitute by the burning of the city by Napoleon in 1812; she lost two houses and all her worldly goods in the flames. After Florio's death in 1819 (he had starved himself for days and become violent, insisting that Mara was attempting to poison him) she suffered the indignity of attempting a disastrous London comeback on 16 March 1820, unaware that her musical powers had declined. She died in Reval, Russia (now Tallinn, Estonia), on 20 January 1833, not entirely forgotten; Goethe had sent her a birthday poem 'Sangreich war dein Ehrenweg' in 1831. 


