@@@@@


doc= 18025


Mare, William de la (fl. 1272-1279), Franciscan friar and theologian, is of unknown origins. Little is known of the events of his life. He studied theology in Paris, where in the early 1270s he commented on the 'Sentences' (probably 1272-4) and then was regent master (probably 1274-5). The 'Sentences' commentary (books 1 and 2, ed. H. Kraml, 1989, 1995; manuscripts include Florence, Biblioteca Nazionale, Z. MS Conv. soppr. A.2.727, and Toulouse, Bibliotheque Municipale, MS 252, which also contain parts of books 3 and 4) is a largely unoriginal work, closely based on Bonaventure's commentary and also using the commentary by John Pecham, who may have been William's teacher. William also preached sermons in Paris and produced a set of 'quaestiones disputatae'. 
William de la Mare then returned to England. Recorded as preaching to the Franciscan convent at Lincoln, between 1277 and 1279 he produced a critique of Aquinas, his 'Correctorium fratris Thomae', claiming that many of Thomas's positions -- for instance, that man has no direct intellectual cognition of singulars, that it cannot be demonstrated that the world had a beginning in time, and that the intellective soul is the one substantial form of a man -- were heretical. William wrote this 'Correctorium' before August 1279. Later he extended and revised it (Vatican City, Biblioteca Apostolica Vaticana, MS Vat. lat. 4413). A much shorter form of the work ('Declarationes magistri Guilelmi de la Mare OFM de variis sententiis S. Thomae Aquinatis', ed. F. Pelster, 1956, from Assisi, Biblioteca Comunale, MS 174), edited as William's original version, has been shown to be an abbreviation by an unknown writer. The 'Correctorium' was very influential. In 1282, at their general chapter at Strasbourg, the Franciscans decided that members of their order should not read Aquinas's 'Summa' unless accompanied by the 'Correctorium'. For the Dominicans' part, four detailed replies to it had been written before 1284 -- the authors of these anonymous works were probably Jean de Paris, Robert Orford, Richard Knapwell, and William of Macclesfield. A text of William's 'Correctorium' is found within one of these replies, which quotes it so as to respond to it ('Le correctorium corruptorii quare', ed. P. Glorieux, 1927). 
William de la Mare was also one of the most learned and judicious of the thirteenth-century scholars who tried to improve the text of the 'Vulgate Bible'. Using his knowledge of both Greek and Hebrew, he wrote a 'Correctorium Bibliae' (Vatican City, Biblioteca Apostolica Vaticana, MS Vat. lat. 4240), in which he sensibly refrains from assuming that the Latin text must be corrected whenever it departs from the Hebrew or Greek. He also used his linguistic knowledge to write 'De Hebraeis et Graecis vocabulis glossarum Bibliae' (Toulouse, Bibliotheque Municipale, MS 402; Florence, Biblioteca Laurenziana, MS Plut. xxv sin. cod. 4). 


@@@@@


doc= 18026


Marbeck, John (c.1505-1585?), composer and writer, was probably born in Beverley, Yorkshire, and may have trained as a chorister of the minster there. The chapter's payment to him during 1531-2 of a gratuity of 4's'. in return for his donating musical compositions suggests that he had earlier connections with the church, and had made his gift on the occasion of a family visit to the town, where one Robert Marbeck was a substantial tenant of minster property. It is likely that John was taken thence by commission to be a chorister of St George's Chapel, Windsor Castle, and that he received there the rest of his education, since in the preface of his 'Concordance' (1550), addressed to Edward VI, he states that he was 'altogether brought up in your highnes College at Wyndsore, in the study of Musike and plaiyng on Organs'. The earliest mention of his name occurs in an inventory of domestic plate belonging to the vicars-choral and minor canons of St George's dated 1 May 1531; among the items was 'one sylver spone wrytyn theron John Marbeke'. He married about this time, for in 1543 he was reported to have had five or six children; one of them, Roger Marbeck, later became provost of Oriel College, Oxford, and physician to Elizabeth I. The earliest surviving payment to Marbeck dates from 1541-2, when he received 40's'. for playing the organ; however, his employment was principally as one of the lay clerks who, with the minor canons, vicars-choral and choristers, sang the liturgy in plainsong and polyphony at eight daily services in St George's. 
In September 1540 Marbeck wrote out the will of William Tate, canon of St George's, who bequeathed him $5. However, his activities as a copyist, combined with a thirst for biblical knowledge, nearly brought him to the stake, for in March 1543 he was arrested and charged with heresy along with Henry Filmer, Anthony Peerson, and Robert Testwood, a fellow lay clerk of the Windsor choir. The events surrounding Marbeck's detention are related in the preface to his 'Concordance' and in the account that he prepared for the second edition of Foxe's 'Acts and Monuments' (1570). During the mid-1530s Marbeck apparently became deeply interested in theology, and when the English 'Matthew' 'Bible' appeared in 1537, he resolved to own a copy. Being unable to afford one, he began writing it out by hand, but later diverted his energies to the more useful enterprise of compiling a concordance to the same publication. However, by the late 1530s a Catholic reaction to reform had set in, and Marbeck and his associates were arrested under the provisions of the 'Act of Six Articles'. On 16 March 1543 Marbeck's house at Windsor was searched, and books and manuscripts, including his nearly finished concordance, were confiscated as evidence. After appearing before the privy council, he was committed to the Marshalsea on charges of expressing contempt for the mass and of writing and possessing heretical documents. His interrogation mainly concerned his work on the concordance, but he was also closely examined on the copy of a John Calvin letter (probably the 'De fugiendis impiorum illicitis sacris' of 1537) that had been found in Marbeck's handwriting. His defence was that he had copied it for a priest named Marshall before the six articles became law, and therefore could not be judged guilty. Four months after their arrest, the accused were returned to Windsor where, at their trial on 26 July, all four were found guilty and sentenced to death. Three died in the flames two days later, but Marbeck obtained a royal reprieve and eventually a full pardon. In the first edition of his 'Acts' (1563), Foxe reported that Marbeck was martyred with the others, though he corrected this statement in the corrigenda and later editions. On his release, Marbeck returned to his musical duties at Windsor and resumed work 'ab initio' on his concordance. 
The death of Henry VIII removed one of the main obstacles to protestant reform, and Marbeck greeted the new reign with enthusiasm. On 1 December 1547 his name headed the list of fourteen lay clerks in a petition presented to Edward VI's commissioners. In 1549 he supplicated Oxford University for the degree of BMus, but it is not known if it was granted. A year later Marbeck published his 'Concordance' and 'The Booke of Common Praier Noted'. Both works broke new ground, the former being the first concordance in English to cover the whole 'Bible', and the latter the first musical setting of services prescribed by the 1549 prayer book. Initially the 'Concordance' could not find a publisher on account of its great length, so Marbeck produced a third, abbreviated version, itself of over 900 folios each divided into three columns. In the preface he expressed regret at having 'consumed vainly the greatest part of my life' as a church musician. 'The Booke of Common Praier Noted' was composed for the use of cathedral and collegiate choirs, and represents an attempt to reconcile the austerity of Reformation attitudes to music with the assumption evident in the rubrics of the 1549 prayer book that such choirs would continue to exist. Marbeck provided monodic settings in syllabic style of the preces and responses, matins, evensong, 'Benedicite', 'Quicunque vult', communion, and burial of the dead, placing utter priority on the audibility of the words. Within two years his book was rendered obsolete by the appearance of the second Edwardian prayer book. Certain later composers, however, used Marbeck's melody for the preces and responses as the basis of their own polyphonic settings. 
St George's found itself at the forefront of Edwardian attempts to restrict the scope of music at cathedral and collegiate foundations. The royal injunctions of 8 February 1550 reduced the number of choristers and laid down stringent guidelines for the appointment of future singers, placing more emphasis on virtue than on musical skill. A further set of injunctions issued in October excluded Marbeck and his colleague George Thaxton from duty as organists, though they still received a stipend. In 1552 the Windsor chapter granted Marbeck the reversion of the presentation of the benefice of Tintagel, Cornwall. 
After his near-martyrdom in the early 1540s, Marbeck abstained from religious controversy during Queen Mary's reign, which saw the reformed services abolished and the Latin rite restored. The only records concerning him in these years relate to his work as a copyist: in 1553-4 and 1555-6 he received payment for examining and correcting books for the choir, and in 1557-8 he wrote out a collectarium for one of the canons. At the time of Elizabeth I's accession Marbeck was serving as both lay clerk and organist of St George's. In the two terms following Christmas 1558 he was remunerated both as joint organist with Mr Preston and as supervisor of the choristers; however, he had ceased to hold the latter post by 1562-3 when he and Robert Golder are described as 'agitatores organorum'. By 1564 Marbeck was merely a lay clerk and sole organist. He headed the list of lay clerks for the last time in 1571, when Henry Hastings, the puritan earl of Huntingdon, recommended his appointment to the nominal office of chaplain to the Hastings chantry in St George's, a sinecure whose profits doubtless helped to provide financial security in his retirement. He devoted the rest of his life to writing a series of theological works, some of which violently attacked the papacy. They include: 'The Lyves of Holy Sainctes' (1574), 'The Holie Historie of King David' (1579), 'A Booke of Notes and Common Places' (1581), 'The Rippinge up of the Popes Fardell' (1581), 'Examples Drawen out of Holy Scripture' (1582), and 'A Dialogue between Youth and Old Age' (1584). He died presumably in 1585, when John Mundy succeeded to the post of organist. 
Marbeck is chiefly remembered for 'The Booke of Common Praier Noted' which, since its revival in the mid-nineteenth century, has been widely used and adapted by Anglicans and other denominations. His four surviving polyphonic works include 'A virgin and mother', possibly adapted from a setting of a Latin text, and a five-part mass of about 1530 based on 'Per arma justiciae', the antiphon sung at terce during Lent. His two large-scale votive antiphons, 'Domine Jesu Christe' and 'Ave Dei patris', are typical of the genre in falling into triple- and duple-time halves, with passages for reduced voices alternating with those for full choir. 


@@@@@


doc= 18027


Marbeck, Roger (1536-1605), college head and physician, was probably born at Windsor, where his father, John Marbeck (c.1505-1585?), was organist. He is thought to have been educated at Eton College, and in 1552 was elected student of Christ Church, Oxford, where he probably lived for about fifteen years, graduating BA on 26 January 1555, and MA on 28 June 1558. 
Although Marbeck was apparently never ordained, he held several clerical positions. On 3 February 1559 he was made prebendary of Withington in Hereford Cathedral. In 1562 he was senior proctor, and again in 1564, and on 18 November of the same year he was appointed first public orator for life, with a yearly pension of 20 nobles ($6 13's'. 4died) from the university chest. Copies of some of his speeches and addresses, which are notable for their elegant Latinity, are among the Rawlinson MSS in the Bodleian Library, Oxford. 
Early in 1565 Marbeck was made canon of Christ Church; and after some negotiation with the visitor, Nicholas Bullingham, bishop of Lincoln, he was unanimously elected provost of Oriel College by the whole body of fellows on 9 March 1565. He fulfilled the role enthusiastically, immediately ordering three absentee fellows to return and dismissing the dean, Francis Webber, for refusing to take the oath of allegiance to Queen Elizabeth. 
Early in 1566 the queen paid a visit to Oxford, and Marbeck, who was 'deliciae Latinarum literarum', delivered a Latin speech. The queen received him very graciously, and said to him, 'We have heard of you before, but now we know you.' She visited Oxford again in the same year on 6 September, and Marbeck again delivered the customary Latin oration. At this time he seems to have been a particularly popular and distinguished member of the university. However, his marriage to Anne Williams, daughter of Alderman Thomas Williams of Oxford, led to his resigning all his offices, due to her Catholicism, and her 'notorious whoredoms' (Gilpin). His wife died soon after. They do not seem to have had any children. 
Marbeck then turned his thoughts to medicine. Where he studied medicine is unknown, but on 1 July 1573 he became bachelor of medicine at Oxford, and the following day, doctor of medicine. Marbeck joined the College of Physicians, London, and was elected fellow about 1578. He was the first registrar of the college, and after filling that office for two years, he was on 3 November 1581 elected for life, with a salary of 40's'. a year, plus various fees of 3's'. 4died According to Munk, he was a careful and diligent registrar. 
Marbeck filled various other college offices: censor (1585, 1586), elect (1597), and consiliarius (1598, 1600, 1603, 1604). During this time he re-established his acquaintance with the queen, and was appointed chief of the royal physicians. In 1589, at the age of fifty-three, he was admitted to Gray's Inn, an honorary distinction offered to a number of well-known men of the time. 
In September 1596 Marbeck accompanied the Lord High Admiral Howard in the expedition against Cadiz. There is in the British Library (Sloane MS 226) a beautiful manuscript, probably written by Marbeck himself (he was a noted calligrapher), entitled 'A breefe and a true discourse of the late honorable voyage unto Spaine, and of the wynning, sacking, and burning of the famous towne of Cadiz there, and of the miraculous ouerthrowe of the Spanishe navie at that tyme, with a reporte of all other accidents thereunto appertayning, by Doctor Marbeck attending upon the person of the right honorable the lorde highe admirall of England all the tyme of the said action'. Another manuscript copy is in the Bodleian Library (MS Rawl. D. 124), and it is printed, without Marbeck's name, in Hakluyt's 'Voyages' (1599, 1.607). A pamphlet, entitled 'A Defence of Tobacco' (1602), is attributed to Marbeck because his name appears in an acrostic forming the dedication. 
Marbeck died at the beginning of July 1605, and was buried in St Giles Cripplegate, London, on 5 July. He left a considerable collection of manuscripts in his own hand, now in the Bodleian Library. 


@@@@@


doc= 18028


Marcet, Alexander John Gaspard (1770-1822), physician and chemist, was born in Geneva, Switzerland, the only son of Marc Marcet ('b'. 1734), a merchant of Huguenot descent, and his wife, Louise-Marguerite, 'nee' Nadal. Educated in Geneva, Marcet was apprenticed in commerce but after two years he obtained his father's permission to study science. During the political disturbances in Geneva following the French Revolution he was indicted for serving in the national guard and, after the fall of Robespierre in 1794, he was banished from Switzerland for five years, with his boyhood friend Charles Gaspard De La Rive. Together they studied medicine at Edinburgh, and graduated MD on 24 June 1797. Marcet's thesis, printed at Edinburgh in the same year, was on diabetes. It is a compilation showing no evidence of clinical experience, but it reveals his inclination for chemical experiments. 
After moving to London, Marcet became assistant physician to the Public Dispensary, Carey Street. He was admitted a licentiate of the Royal College of Physicians on 25 June 1799 and was appointed physician to the City Dispensary at Finsbury. On 4 December 1799 he married Jane Haldimand (1769-1858) ['see 'Marcet, Jane Haldimand], only daughter of Anthony Francis Haldimand (1740/41-1817), a Swiss merchant living in London, and his wife, Jane, 'nee' Pickersgill (died 1785). They took a house in Russell Square, and later had two daughters, Louisa and Sophie, and one son, Francois (1803-1883), who became a distinguished physicist. In 1800 Marcet took British citizenship and on 18 April 1804 he was appointed physician to Guy's Hospital, London, on the recommendation of William Saunders. In 1805 Marcet contributed an essay on the Brighton chalybeate spring to a new edition of Saunders's 'Treatise on Mineral Waters'. This essay, also published as a separate octavo pamphlet, describes various chemical experiments which show that, unlike the Tonbridge spa, the Brighton mineral water could be taken warm without precipitation of iron. Encouraged by Saunders, Marcet also analysed samples of sea water from various parts of the world. 
Marcet attended meetings of the London Medical Society and, discovering dissatisfaction among the members, became a founder member in 1805 of the Medico-Chirurgical Society of London. He was its foreign secretary until his death in 1822. On 2 June 1808 he was elected a fellow of the Royal Society, and in the following year he took charge of a temporary military hospital at Portsmouth for troops suffering from a virulent fever contracted during the expedition to capture Flushing and Walcheren. Marcet himself suffered an attack of this fever. 
Between 1807 and 1820, with William Babington and William Allen, Marcet lectured on chemistry at Guy's Hospital medical school. Unusually for that time, the lectures were illustrated by demonstration experiments and the students were also given access to a chemical laboratory. About 1812 Marcet began a friendship with the Swedish chemist J. J. Berzelius, with whom he investigated the properties of carbon disulphide during the latter's visit to London. Marcet also persuaded Berzelius to publish some analyses of animal fluids in the 'Medico-Chirurgical Transactions', thus helping to introduce Berzelius's animal chemistry studies to English chemists. In 1817 Marcet published his most important and original work, 'An Essay on the Chemical History and Medical Treatment of Calculous Disorders', which contained much chemical information and some good drawings of renal and urinary calculi. In chemical tests Marcet used very small quantities, a valuable technique which he derived from the work of William Hyde Wollaston; he also used the blowpipe. He was probably the first to remark that the pain caused by a renal calculus is often due to its passage down a ureter, whereas it may grow in the kidney without causing acute suffering. The book was useful to chemical pathologists, but Marcet regretted that no London hospital then kept any regular record of calculus cases. He identified a new type of urinary calculus, consisting of xanthic oxide, and he later investigated alcaptonuria, the condition in which the urine turns black. 
Marcet was punctilious in dress and behaviour. He always sought to improve conditions for his patients, but his enthusiasm for medical practice declined as his interest in chemistry increased. He retired from the staff of Guy's Hospital on 10 March 1819, after inheriting a large fortune from his father-in-law. He had paid a short visit to Geneva in 1815 and he returned in 1821, intending to live there. He was warmly received and was made both a member of the representative council and an honorary professor of chemistry, sharing lectures with his friend De La Rive. In 1822 he returned to England to settle his affairs prior to moving permanently to Geneva, but while visiting Edinburgh he suffered an attack of 'gout of the stomach' (Munk, 'Roll'). He returned to London, and was attended by William Babington and Astley Cooper, but he died at Babington's home in Great Coram Street, London, on 19 October 1822. He was buried at Battersea, and was survived by his wife, who died on 28 June 1858. 


@@@@@


doc= 18029


Marcet, Jane Haldimand (1769-1858), writer on science and political economy, was born in London, one of twelve children and only surviving daughter of the Swiss merchant and banker Anthony Francis Haldimand (1740/41-1817) and his wife, Jane (died 1785). She was baptized on 23 June 1769. The Haldimands' was a wealthy, comfortable household, which fostered intellectual achievement in its children together with business acumen, a combination typified by the career of Jane's younger brother William Haldimand, who became a merchant banker, director of the Bank of England, and member of parliament. Jane shared in the excellent home education provided for her brothers. A serious, lively child, highly intelligent but constitutionally literal-minded, Jane read widely and with discrimination in English and French. Her later career indicates that her parents respected her curiosity and encouraged her development as a reader and an intelligent listener, if not as an original thinker in her own right. When Jane was fifteen she took over the running of the family household upon the death of her mother (in October 1785), including the care of her brothers and a sister who appears to have died in childhood. She developed a close, companionable relationship with her father, who was to live with her even after her marriage. Together they travelled to Italy when Jane was seventeen, where she became interested in painting. Through her father she met and studied with Joshua Reynolds and Thomas Lawrence. Jane served as her father's hostess when he entertained scientists, politicians, and intellectuals. 
On 4 December 1799 Jane Haldimand married the amiable and attractive physician Alexander John Gaspard Marcet (1770-1822); this was a highly successful marriage which was to allow them both to develop as intellectuals. Marcet was born in Geneva, had been imprisoned there for political activities as a young man, was exiled from Geneva after 1794, and studied medicine in Edinburgh. Although Marcet had a successful practice he preferred research and writing in the field of physiological chemistry, to which he made important contributions. For the first twenty years of their marriage he continued to practise medicine, and he and Jane entertained some of the most distinguished scientists and thinkers of their time. 
Jane Marcet gave these men her intelligent and undivided attention, sat openly at their feet, remembered every word they uttered, and, if she did not understand a nuance, sought an explanation from her husband. Alexander Marcet appears to have understood the depth of her need both for information and for inclusion in his circle, and to have supported her efforts to become literate in the unfamiliar language of science. During this time their four children were born -- their son Francois Marcet (1803-1883) was to become a well-known physicist -- and Jane's friend Maria Edgeworth describes a happy home, their children lively and intelligent, the house full of welcome visitors who were on occasion entertained with elaborate home theatricals, written by Jane and performed by parents and children. Despite their domestic felicity, Jane began to suffer from depression, the cure for which lay in hard and useful work. Encouraged by her husband, she wrote, but did not publish, a textbook on the basic components of scientific knowledge: physics, mechanics, astronomy, the properties of fluids, air, and optics. Later published as 'Conversations on Natural Philosophy' (1819), the book established a format which she was to use successfully in future works. She presented her information in the form of a dialogue among three characters, Caroline, the flippant pupil, Emily, the serious pupil, and Mrs Bryan, their teacher. 
Like many fashionable London women, Jane Marcet attended Sir Humphry Davy's lectures at the Royal Institution; unlike many of these, she paid attention to their content rather than to the charms of the speaker, discussed what she had heard with her husband, repeated the experiments at home, and invited Davy and his wife to dine. Inspired by the knowledge she had gained and wishing to impart it to other women, she published her 'Conversations on Chemistry, Intended More Especially for the Female Sex' anonymously in 1805. The work had taken her about three years to write and illustrate and was carefully edited, probably with the help of Alexander Marcet and his friend John Yelloly (Crellin, 459-60). It was one of the first elementary science textbooks and became enormously popular. It went through sixteen editions in England, which Marcet updated meticulously, adding new discoveries and deleting those for which she felt she had made over-optimistic claims. It was translated into French and went through twenty-three editions in America, where it was widely plagiarized. Although not intended as a school text, the 'Conversations' was adopted in England by students at mechanics' institutes and by medical apprentices, and it became a successful text in the women's seminaries established in America after 1818. There, its insistence on demonstration by experiment and its theoretical rigour appealed to teachers who wished to give girls a sound scientific education, not merely a gloss on more obviously feminine preoccupations such as domestic science or theology. At the same time 'Conversations', though presented in the form of a classroom dialogue, was read with respectful interest by adults of both sexes and all walks of life. Most notably, it was read by the young bookbinder's apprentice Michael Faraday, who credited Marcet with introducing him to electrochemistry and with giving him the courage to propound his early theories. Faraday was to become a friend of the Marcets, and Jane incorporated his work in later editions. 
Although Jane Marcet continued to update 'Conversations on Chemistry' (lastly at the age of eighty-four), her next publication took another direction, exploring the new science of political economy. As she had done before, Marcet profited from her friendships with a circle including Brougham, Malthus, Jeffrey, Sydney Smith, and, most significantly, Ricardo. Her 'Conversations on Political Economy' (1816) utilized principles of Ricardian economics before the publication (1817) of Ricardo's 'Principles of Political Economy'. As in all her works Marcet laid no claim to original thought, but she wrote in a lucid, pleasant style, incorporating the latest, often controversial, theories in her popular works. 'Conversations on Political Economy' was praised by Macaulay and Say, and was approved by Malthus, McCulloch, and Ricardo. Her confident presentation of complex ideas in the form of appealing dialogue repelled later economists (notably Alfred Marshall) and led others to conclude that hers was economics for schoolgirls (Schumpeter), but the book's popularity with adult readers grateful for a simple introduction to a new and forbidding field of knowledge indicates Marcet's accurate perception of a wide and generally sophisticated readership for an introductory economics text. The book inspired Harriet Martineau to begin writing fiction with economic themes. Martineau became a close friend of Marcet, though an occasionally critical one, for Marcet's secure position at the heart of the whig literary establishment sometimes infuriated the radical outsider Martineau. 
Emboldened by the success of her first books, Marcet published her 'Conversations on Natural Philosophy' in 1819. It had been written before 'Conversations on Chemistry' and was intended as an introduction to it. It, too, proved highly successful and remained in print well after Marcet's death. The Marcets meanwhile inherited a large fortune from Anthony Haldimand, enabling Alexander to resign his position at Guy's Hospital and devote himself to research. They travelled to Geneva in 1820 and intended to settle there, but Alexander died suddenly while on a visit to Britain in 1822. His death threw Jane into a state of nervous prostration, through which she was nursed by her children and by a large circle of friends in Geneva. Her adult children having dispersed in England and Switzerland, she returned to London after a few years in Geneva but retained close ties with her Swiss friends. In London she continued her family tradition of entertaining a wide circle of famous men and women. 
Although Jane Marcet continued to write some works on scientific themes (her 'Conversations on Vegetable Physiology' was inspired by her friendship with the naturalist Candolle) and finally abandoned her anonymity as the author of her works, it appears that her work took a less challenging direction after the death of her husband. She wrote one important collection of stories with economic themes for working people and many stories for the education and amusement of young children. The former, 'John Hopkins's Notions on Political Economy' (1833), was a product of the climate of fear of working-class rebellion that characterized the early 1830s. Possessing none of Martineau's radical sympathies, Marcet believed implicitly in the community of interest between rich and poor; she supported the abolition of the corn laws and was scolded by her friend Malthus for the simplicity of her belief that wages could remain high as the price of corn fell (Malthus to J. Marcet, 22 Jan 1833; Polkinghorn, 'Unpublished letter', 845). Her choice of format made the little book impossible for working people to afford; rather, it was intended to be bought by landowners and distributed to the poor in their neighbourhoods, as Malthus appears to have done. When the panic of the 1830s subsided, sales of 'Hopkins' slumped. It never approached the popularity of her 'Conversations' and has not remained readable over time. While she is known for her ability to address young women without patronage, the same can not be said of her tone in speaking to the working man. 
Marcet was more successful in her works for children, which made up the bulk of her literary output after 1833. In her widowhood she spent a great deal of time in the company of her grandchildren, and this undoubtedly inspired her interest in writing for the very young. Her works for children were very well received, including 'Mary's Grammar' (1835), which became a classic text. They include many stories of the family life of a boy named Willy and his sisters. Willy's curiosity leads him to investigate everything from the building of a new house to the working of a coalmine. In these books working men are polite but not deferential, confident, and proud of their skills; children are boundlessly curious and not overly obedient; parents are kind, tolerant, and endlessly willing to support their children's quest for information. It seems reasonable to suppose that, in her old age, Marcet turned to writing for children in order to recreate in imagination her happy family life, both in her father's house and with her husband. 
In the last seven years of her life Jane Marcet increasingly inhabited a world of her own, untouched by events in the outside world. Presumably she suffered a recurrence of the nervous complaint which had always afflicted her in periods of stress; her friend the Swiss physicist and naturalist Auguste de La Rive described it as a 'shadow enveloping an energetic and active spirit' (La Rive, 464). She died peacefully at her daughter's house, 14 Stratton Street, Piccadilly, London, on 28 June 1858, where she had been living, having asked her children not to allow her to be forgotten in Geneva. 
Harriet Martineau wrote of Marcet's almost excessive modesty and humility, commenting rather slightingly on the narrowing effects of her conventional way of life upon her thought. Maria Edgeworth wrote that while others talked endlessly of what they knew, Mrs Marcet sat quietly and listened. Her modesty has usually been accepted by critics at its face value, to the detriment of her reputation. After Marshall's denunciation of both Marcet and Martineau as mere popularizers Marcet's work received little attention. More recent writers have tended to view her either as a figure in the history of chemistry (notably as the inspirer of Faraday) or in the history of political science (less exclusively as a popularizer of Ricardo). She may more justly be seen as a figure of great importance in the history of women's education. In her prefaces Marcet addresses the presumed unsuitability of her topics for study by women and dispenses with objections, stating bluntly that public opinion has come to accept these subjects as appropriate for women. For Mrs Marcet writing was the outcome of her restless search for truth, rather than merely a rather canny appreciation of a gap in the market which she could fill. In 'Conversations on Political Economy' Mrs B's flippant pupil, Caroline, says that she would have thought a woman could be excused ignorance of that topic. Mrs B replies tartly, 'When you plead in favour of ignorance, there is a strong presumption that you are in the wrong' (Marcet, 11). By her sheer refusal to accept that scientific subjects lay beyond women's grasp, Jane Marcet used her position as hostess to great thinkers, coupled with great energy, a formidable intelligence, and the ability to express complex ideas clearly, to bring the new developments in science and political economy within the reach of ordinary women. 


@@@@@


doc= 18030


March, John (1611/12?-1657), barrister and legal writer, came from obscure origins and little can be ascertained of his family background. He appears to have been the same John March of St Stephen Walbrook, scrivener, who married Alice Matthews of St Nicholas Olave in spring 1638 at the age of twenty-six. Recent scholarship has challenged the 'Dictionary of National Biography''s contention that March was the second son of Sam March of Finchampstead, Berkshire, on grounds that that John March died unmarried and childless. He was possibly the John March admitted to the degree of BCL at St Edmund Hall, Oxford, on 27 November 1632, and probably the 'John Marche, St. Andrew Holborn London' who entered Barnard's Inn on 15 April 1635 (Brooks, 86) and continued his studies at Gray's Inn, where he was admitted on 18 March 1636 and called to the bar on 11 June 1641 NS. 
In 1642 March rose to prominence when he published a defence of the Long Parliament's militia ordinance entitled 'An argument or, debate in law: of the great question concerning the militia; as it is now settled by ordinance of both the houses of parliament'. In this tract March argued that, although power to proclaim war and peace and hence control over the militia ordinarily lay with the king, in time of 'imminent danger' to the kingdom and 'extream necessity' the two houses of parliament could lawfully put the militia in a posture of defence without the king's authority (J. March, 'Argument', 1642, 5-7). This tract has sometimes been attributed to John Milton although Thomason's copy is clearly marked 'J. Marsh'. In March 1644 he was in the employ of the committee of both kingdoms at Darby House and in 1647 he published 'Actions for slaunder, or, A methodicall collection under certain grounds and heads, of what words are actionable in the law, and what not?' A second, augmented, edition of this work appeared the following year along with a set of printed reports entitled 'Reports, or new cases; with divers resolutions and judgements given upon solemn arguments, and with great deliberation'. 
At the end of August 1649 the Commonwealth dispatched March to Guernsey as one of four commissioners for the ordering and settling of its affairs there. March also made an important contribution to the debate on law reform during the Commonwealth and protectorate. He represented, along with fellow barristers William Sheppard and Sir Matthew Hale, a branch of the interregnum law reform movement that advocated reform from within the existing structures of the common law. He is best known for his 'Amicus republicae, the Commonwealth's friend, or, An exact and speedie course to justice and right, and for preventing and determining of tedious law-suits' (1651; Thomason's copy is dated May). This work, dedicated to the lord president of the council of state, John Bradshaw, was probably an attempt to influence the deliberations of the Hale commission on law reform. March held that although the core of the common law remained pure, over the centuries both procedural and substantive corruptions of it had crept into the administration of justice. He likened the common law to a tree that would grow better 'for the pruning, and cutting off of its exuberant and unnecessary branches' ('Amicus', preface). In practical terms he advocated an end to benefit of clergy, the abolition of the death penalty for petty theft, the right to legal representation in capital cases, the end of imprisonment for debt, the legitimization of bastards by the subsequent marriage of the parents, and an end to 'peine forte et dure' -- the practice of 'pressing to death' in instances where the accused refused to enter a plea. He argued more generally that punishments should be proportional to the crime committed. More controversially he called for a fusion of common law and equity on grounds that it would provide uniformity of procedure in all courts and minimize jurisdictional rivalries. Around this time he also published a translation (from law French), 'Some new cases of the years and time of King Hen. 8 Edw. 6 and Qu: Mary; written out of the great abridgement, composed by Sir Robert Brook, knight' (1651). 
Following the defeat of Scottish and royalist armies in 1652 March travelled to Scotland on the orders of the council of state. There he served until 1653 as one of a commission of four Englishmen and three Scots charged with the administration of justice. About this time he was also one of a commission of nine charged with regulating the church and universities. He appears to have returned to London by 1656, when he served the trustees for the sale of crown lands at Worcester House. He died early in 1657 after 'a long and expensive sickness' in a state so impoverished that his widow, Alice, on 5 February 1657 petitioned Lord Protector Cromwell for assistance in her husband's burial ('CSP dom.', '1656-7', 264). The council subsequently ordered payment of $20 'For her relief' (ibid., 592). His surviving family also included two small children, one of whom may have been the Elizabeth March of Richmond, Surrey, who married James Howseman of St Margaret's, Westminster, on 20 January 1668, aged about eighteen. Another John Marsh, whose identity remains uncertain, matriculated at Trinity College, Cambridge, during Easter term 1631. 


@@@@@


doc= 18031


March, John (bap. 1640, d. 1692), Church of England clergyman and scholar, the son of Richard March, apothecary, was baptized at St Nicholas's Church, Newcastle upon Tyne, on 17 February 1640. His parents, who died while he was a child, were said to have been Anabaptists, and after their death March was entrusted in 'some way' to the care of Ambrose Barnes, a prominent north-eastern dissenter ('Ambrose Barnes', 144). After education at the grammar school in Newcastle under George Ritschel, a kinsman of Barnes, March matriculated as a commoner at Queen's College, Oxford, on 15 June 1657. In December 1658 he followed his tutor, Thomas Tully, to St Edmund Hall, where the latter had been elected principal. March proceeded BA in 1661, MA in 1664, and BD in 1674. From 1664 until 1672 he served as tutor and vice-principal of St Edmund Hall, where one of his pupils was John Kettlewell, later a nonjuror, and where March's son, Humphrey, matriculated in 1695. 
March returned to the north-east in June 1672, when he was appointed by Merton College to the vicarage of Embleton in Northumberland. His abilities marked him out for an important part in the ecclesiastical affairs of the region. When Nathaniel, Lord Crewe, was translated to the palatine see of Durham in 1674 March became a chaplain to the new bishop and in 1676 he was appointed afternoon lecturer at St Nicholas's, the principal parish church in Newcastle. In 1679 he became vicar of St Nicholas's at a salary of $60, with an additional $10 as lecturer, and resigned the living of Embleton. In 1682 the corporation of Newcastle increased his salary to $90. 
Despite his early upbringing March was a zealous high-churchman, asserting the excellence of the Church of England against dissenters and Roman Catholics alike. An erudite preacher, he was particularly noted for his sermons at annual services held on 30 January and 29 May to mark the respective anniversaries of the martyrdom of Charles I and the restoration of Charles II. Several of these sermons, delivered before the mayor and aldermen of Newcastle, were published at the request of the hearers. One, delivered on 30 January 1677, characteristically apostrophized the dissenters as 'sons of 'Belial'' (March, 'A Sermon', 8) and included a notable encomium on Charles I, whose 'Eikon basilike' March frequently quoted. Another, 'The False Prophet Unmask't, or, The Wolf Stript of his Sheeps-Clothing', delivered on 30 January 1683, when March's brother-in-law Nicholas Ridley was sheriff of Newcastle, condemned the 'dangerous principle... that all power is originally seated in the people' (p. 16) and employed quotations from Augustine, Chrysostom, Ignatius, and Optatus to show the schismatical condition of the dissenters. However, March was equally prepared to contend against the errors of the Church of Rome, boldly employing arguments from Augustine, Basil, Chrysostom, Irenaeus, Jerome, and Tertullian for this purpose in an undated assize sermon delivered during the reign of James II. 
March was not only an able controversialist, he was also a faithful and diligent parish priest. Continuing work begun by the archdeacon of Northumberland, Dr Isaac Basire, he proved remarkably successful in his efforts to restore conformity to the Church of England after the sectarian confusion of the 1650s. Constantly resident, March officiated at daily public prayers and was diligent in catechizing and in visiting the sick, while 'his known abilities in resolving cases of conscience drew after him a great many good people, not only of his own flock, but from remoter distances, who resorted to him as a common Oracle' (March, 'Sermons', preface). He preached effectively, in an eloquent and direct style, exhorting his hearers to holiness of life, warning against the Epicurean tendencies of 'the Infamous Author of the Monstrous 'Leviathan'' (ibid., 19) and urging adherence to the Church of England, the nursing mother of Charles I, 'the first Royal Martyr that ever was in the World', of the emperor Constantine, and of ''Lucius', the first Christian King' (ibid., 123). By 1683 it was reported that 'Newcastle was brought to a very great degree of conformity, by the zeal and diligence of the Vicar' ('Remains of Denis Granville', 167). This achievement earned March the approval of William Sancroft, the archbishop of Canterbury; Leoline Jenkins, the secretary of state; and the bishop of Oxford, Dr John Fell. 
During the early 1680s March was a member of a clerical club which met monthly in Durham to promote church principles, 'according to the practice of Dr [Peter] Samways and Dr [Thomas] Comber' ('Remains of Denis Granville', 171). At least three members of this assembly later became nonjurors (Denis Granville, archdeacon and later dean of Durham; John Cock, vicar of St Oswald's in Durham and later rector of Gateshead; and Thomas Davison, vicar of Norton, whose brother Jonathan Davison, another nonjuror, was appointed lecturer at St Nicholas's, Newcastle, in 1686). Following the revolution of 1688 March remained loyal to James II. He refused to preach at the thanksgiving service ordered by the convention on 31 January 1689 and caused the 'Homily Against Rebellion' to be read instead ('Ambrose Barnes', 435). On the previous day, the anniversary of the martyrdom of King Charles I, in defiance of the order of the House of Lords, which for that year suppressed the official marking of the day, March had preached, as usual, in favour of passive obedience and non-resistance, denouncing the argument from self-defence as 'an old fanatick Principle' and declaring that 'whoever meddled with the King's Forts, Castles, Militia and Revenue, were... guilty of Damnation' (March, 'Vindication', 3). When criticized by James Welwood, a Scottish doctor practising in Newcastle, March firmly restated his convictions: 'I have always preached this Doctrine on January the 30th... If the Times be changed, Truth is not, and 'English' Ministers of all men ought not to be time-servers' (ibid., 6). 
Like many high-churchmen March took the oath of allegiance to William of Orange with deep reluctance and 'with such a declaration or limitation as should still leave him free' to serve James II ('Ambrose Barnes', 436). Such ambiguous behaviour caused Thomas Hearne to believe that March might have been a nonjuror ('Remarks', 2.60) and led to a further deterioration in his relationship with the corporation of Newcastle, which had been under strain since a disagreement over the appointment of a preaching curate for All Saints' parish in 1686. On 15 July 1690 March was warned that his salary would be stopped if he continued to refuse to name William and Mary explicitly in the state prayers, and on 3 December 1692, the day after March's death in Newcastle and before he had even been buried, the corporation resolved that his $90 stipend should not be continued to any successor. 
March was buried in St Nicholas's Church on 4 December 1692. A collection of twelve of his sermons was published in November 1693, and a second edition, with a brief biographical note of March by his fellow high-churchman John Scot, appeared in 1699. 


@@@@@


doc= 18032


March, William (d. 1302), administrator and bishop of Bath and Wells, is consistently described in records as 'magister', and is assumed to have been a graduate of Oxford University. First recorded as rector of Thorpe in Nottinghamshire in 1277, he entered the king's service and was employed in the wardrobe, where he was cofferer (1280-84) and controller (15 August 1283 to 1 May 1290), and in the latter capacity had temporary charge of the great seal in February 1290. He was treasurer of the exchequer, in succession to John Kirkby, from 6 April 1290 until his dismissal on 16 August 1295. As treasurer he presided over important reforms in the administration of taxation. Henceforward the exchequer controlled the receipt, auditing, and expenditure of lay subsidies, and the financial independence of the wardrobe was considerably reduced. The king's personal confidence in him was clearly displayed on 13 October 1289, when Edward I appointed him to a prestigious commission of seven trusted men, headed by the bishops of Winchester and Bath and Wells, to hear grievances against the king's ministers over wrongs committed by them during the king's recent absence abroad. Nevertheless March became the only great officer of state who fell permanently from office for political reasons in Edward I's reign. He was dismissed by the king in 1295 in a blaze of unpopularity. 
March's involvement in Edward I's financial extortions, particularly the scrutiny of money on 4 July 1294, which gave royal agents access to wealth stored in religious institutions, brought him notoriety among churchmen. 'Flores historiorum' claimed that he should be called 'not bishop of Bath but tyrant', and that he was 'not protecting the church but attacking it' (3.274). Edward I was willing to make his treasurer a scapegoat. The scrutiny may have been an important cause of March's dismissal, but another contributory factor was his extraordinary unpopularity in London, arising from his tight grip on civic administration as treasurer while the city was in the king's hand between 1285 and 1298. A roll of two membranes containing unanswered petitions from London citizens to the king and council against March, internally datable to August or September 1295, survives to bear witness to the city's hatred. The Dunstable annals suggest he tried to buy his way out of trouble with a large sum of money. But the Osney annals give a more favourable picture of him at the time of his appointment to the treasury, as a man of foresight, discretion, and circumspection. 
March amassed a number of benefices during his career. In 1291 a papal dispensation, at the king's request, to the treasurer March (specifically described therein as subdeacon) listed eight churches in four dioceses, which, in addition to the deanery of St Martin's-le-Grand, he had held without papal dispensation and without being ordained priest within a year of receiving them. He resigned the rectory of Thorpe, and was prepared to resign two more, but sought permission to retain the rest, together with canonries in Salisbury, Chichester, and Wells, and a portion in the chapel of St Clement, Pontefract, and also to accept another or other rectories on resigning one or more of these. On 28 January 1293 he was elected bishop of Bath and Wells, the royal assent was signified on 1 March, temporalities were restored on 19 March, and consecration took place at Canterbury on 17 May, being performed by the bishops of London, Rochester, Ely, and Dublin in the vacancy following the death of Archbishop Pecham. 
The precise date of March's death, long cited as 11 June 1302, is now uncertain, but he was buried at Wells on 17 June, and administration of his will was granted on 3 July 1302. A Somerset inquisition recorded ignorance of his heir, but the award of a papal nuncio in a subsequent dispute, in 1313, names two close kin: March left 100 marks to pay his brother, John March, if still living, or his nephew, Robert Urry, to go to the Holy Land for him at the first subsequent crusade. His executors had deposited this money in September 1311 with the dean and chapter of Wells, to be paid at the first expedition; there was no crusade and the money attracted borrowers and claimants for over thirty years. 
In June 1324 the dean and chapter of Wells advised their proctors at the papal court of their decision to urge Bishop March's canonization, and began their campaign. The archbishop of Canterbury and eight English bishops wrote to Pope John XXII ('r'. 1316-34) on 4 December 1325 pressing the case. Edward II and later Edward III lent support to the request, and the diocesan clergy granted a tenth to finance costs. The attribution of healing miracles gives an impression of sanctity beyond the more general claims to moral probity and generous alms-giving, but it is possible that part at least of March's popularity in his own diocese arose from his financial prowess. On 19 January 1295 March had entered a bond to repay on demand $1000 advanced to him and the prior and convent of Bath and dean and chapter of Wells by the bishops of Lincoln and Winchester (agents of the papacy for the crusading tenths granted to Edward I in 1291); the bond stated that the sum had been spent by March on his own and the bishopric's business and indemnified the prior and dean and their chapters. The chapter house at Wells is ascribed to his time as bishop, and is architecturally of the period. 


@@@@@


doc= 18033


Marchant, Nathaniel (1738/9-1816), gem-engraver and medallist, came from a family long-established in the village of Mayfield, Sussex. Details of his parentage and birth are obscure, although he was possibly the son of another Nathaniel Marchant ('b'. 1702), at one time an apprentice watchmaker. Marchant was recorded in 1761 as the winner of a premium for gem-engraving offered by the London Society for the Encouragement of Arts, Manufactures, and Commerce, and gained three further premiums in successive years, making him the foremost prize-winner in this field. As prescribed by the society, his winning entries were intaglios reproducing casts from ancient statues in the third duke of Richmond's gallery, where artists were trained in copying from the antique. Until 1765 he was the apprentice of Edward Burch, a fellow prize-winner, whom he joined that year as an exhibitor with the Society of Artists, showing copies of his prize-winning gems. He exhibited his intaglios there until 1768 and remained loyal to the society even after Burch's defection to the Royal Academy, but from 1769 he showed only wax models for future gems and casts from those completed, an indication that the originals were already sold; his 'Garrick with the Bust of Shakespeare' became a best-seller in Wedgwood's copy. 
The most important of Marchant's early patrons was George Spencer, fourth duke of Marlborough, a passionate gem collector, whose help was probably material in enabling Marchant to travel to Rome to fulfil his ambition to study original works of the ancients 'in situ'. He set out in 1772; his last exhibition entry for the society, sent two years later, was pointedly described as 'after the original head of the Antinous in the Villa Albano, near Rome' (exh. Society of Artists, 1774). Henceforth he devoted himself almost entirely to copying Rome's antiquities on his intaglio sealstones. From 1774 to 1786 he lived and worked in via Babuino, in the middle of the artists' and antiquaries' quarter, then until 1788 in strada Felice (later via Sistina) on the healthier heights near Trinita de' Monti. He kept up his connection with the duke conscientiously, informing him about the availability of ancient gems and offering him and other collectors at home his own newly engraved stones; but having attracted the attention of important antiquaries and dealers, he soon found new commissions in Italy itself. His exquisitely engraved gems were sought especially by grand tourists as mementoes of their visits; he also practised very successfully a second popular genre, cutting very accomplished portraits from life, such as that of Emma Hart, later Lady Hamilton (Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York), and came to be considered the only rival to the pre-eminent Giovanni Pichler. From 1781 he began to send gems for exhibition in the Royal Academy. 
The Roman diaries and correspondence of Lord Herbert (later eleventh earl of Pembroke) and his circle paint a vivid picture of Marchant's painstaking, thoughtful approach to the lengthy process of engraving and his self-confidence as an artist: 'I have kept the work as light as possible in imitation of the best Greek gems' ('Henry, Elizabeth and George', 487). As his fame grew he received commissions from European and British royalty and nobility, and was allowed to model the pope from life, but it was among the British visitors that he found not only patrons but influential friends, moving with remarkable ease in high society. He seems to have benefited from good schooling: he wrote fluent letters in a practised hand, made a point of learned quotations in his published 'Catalogue', and acquired a reputation in Rome for connoisseurship as well as his art. In 1788, after a sojourn of sixteen years, he was at last ready to return home, confidently expecting to build on his fame and his connections. 
Settling in Bond Street, Marchant renewed links with artist friends, most now members of the Royal Academy, and was elected an associate in 1791. The following year he exhibited the casts from 100 of his finest gems, a catalogue of which he was preparing for publication; though virtually all after antiquities, he included his masterly essay in modern history, 'General Wolfe, Receiving the News of the Victory, as he was Expiring' (Brocklesby Park, Lincolnshire). The 'catalogue' (1792) meticulously documented the ancient models for his stones, together with the names of their prestigious owners: the project attracted 446 subscribers, at their head the prince of Wales and the duke of Gloucester. He received some further important commissions and was elected to membership of the academies of Vienna, Stockholm, and Copenhagen, but to his continuing disappointment, as vividly described in Joseph Farington's diary, the Royal Academy dragged its feet: he had to wait until he was seventy years of age before he was at last elected. 
Marchant was, however, appointed to the Royal Mint in 1797 as probationer and later assistant engraver; in 1799 he became senior engraver to the stamp office, which provided him with elegant accommodation in Somerset House. In 1801 he was named his majesty's engraver of seals. Marchant fulfilled his duties conscientiously, although in later years in indifferent health; in 1815 he was superannuated, suffering from a lengthy and debilitating illness. He died a wealthy man, unmarried, on 24 March 1816 at his home, New Somerset House, Somerset Place, and was buried in Stoke church, Buckinghamshire, where he is commemorated by an inscribed memorial by his friend John Flaxman. His contemporary fame as the foremost recorder in miniature of Rome's antiquities is enshrined in the many souvenir collections of its sights, in the form of plaster casts from gemstones, produced for gentlemen's libraries; his reputation as one of the finest glyptic artists of the eighteenth-century revival, equally brilliant in classical subjects and in portraiture, has endured. A representative group of his gems in the British Museum includes the noble portrait 'George John, Second Earl Spencer' and an exquisite 'Bacchus and a Bacchante'. Plaster impressions are held by the Society of Antiquaries of London; Sir John Soane's Museum, London; Mompesson House, Salisbury, Wiltshire, and Kingston Lacy, Dorset; the Ashmolean Museum, Oxford; and the Fitzwilliam Museum, Cambridge. 


@@@@@


doc= 18034


Marchi, Giuseppe Filippo Liberati (1735?-1808), painter and engraver, was born in the Trastevere district of Rome of unknown parentage. His date of birth is usually given as 1735, although he told Farington in January 1795 that he was then '73 or 4' (Farington, 'Diary', 2.291). He was probably therefore fifteen, and already showing some talent for painting, when he caught the attention of Sir Joshua Reynolds, whom he accompanied on his leisurely return through the towns of northern Italy and Paris. They arrived in London in 1752. One of Reynolds's first portraits after his return was that of Marchi in a turban, much admired at the time and now in the Royal Academy. In 1764 Reynolds invited Marchi to reside with him for six months and to paint for him, offering to pay him $50. Marchi kept Reynolds's appointment books, set his palette, painted draperies, and became one of Reynolds's most trusted copyists, responsible for many of the replicas of popular pictures that the studio produced. Marchi also took up mezzotint engraving and from 1766 to 1775 exhibited both paintings and mezzotints with the Society of Artists, of which he was a fellow as a painter and a director in 1775. He produced only about a dozen mezzotints but they were of high quality and included fine prints after Reynolds of Oliver Goldsmith (1770) and George Colman (1773). Only one of his mezzotints records a portrait that he himself painted, namely that of Princess Czartoriska (1777). 
In 1768 Marchi had made a brief attempt to establish himself as an independent painter in London. In September of that year he also visited Wales with his old friend Thomas Jones the painter. While staying at Pencerrig he painted portraits of Jones himself, his brother Major John Jones, and other family members and friends, before he and Jones returned to London in November. In the following year he returned to Reynolds at a salary of $100. He remained a part of Thomas Jones's lively social set: in 1769, for instance, he was in the party with Jones, Mortimer, Farington, and Lawranson that visited the Indiaman 'Duke of Gloucester'. Coming ashore late at night, they beat off the crew of a customs house boat that had taken them for smugglers, an incident in which John Hamilton Mortimer almost lost a hand to a cutlass stroke. Marchi remained with Reynolds until the master's death in 1792. Reynolds made no bequest to him, but the artist's niece arranged that his salary should continue. Subsequently he was much employed on cleaning and restoring paintings by Reynolds, an activity for which he was uniquely qualified since he alone understood Reynolds's idiosyncratic techniques. 
Towards the end of his life Marchi, who was unmarried, sought the help of his friend Joseph Farington to write his will; it transpired that at the time of his departure from Rome he had two sisters in a convent at Lodi, another sister in Rome, and a brother, Lorenzo, but he did not know if any was still living. Provision was made for $200 to be divided among any surviving siblings. The rest of his estate, valued at under $1500, was distributed among his friends and colleagues. He died, probably at his Wardour Street home, on 2 April 1808, and was buried at St Anne's, Westminster. 


@@@@@


doc= 18035


Marckant, John (d. in or before 1586), Church of England clergyman and poet, is of obscure origins. Through the patronage of John, Lord Darcy, he was inducted vicar of Great Clacton, Essex, in August 1559, a living which he retained until his death. He also held the Essex vicarage of Shopland from 1563 until his resignation in 1568. Other biographical details are scant, although he may have been the John Markan who was a scholar of St John's College, Cambridge, and a fellow of Pembroke College, Cambridge, in 1555. 
Marckant contributed to the English metrical psalter produced by the court poet Thomas Sternhold and the Suffolk minister John Hopkins, the first complete edition of which appeared in 1562. The singing of metrical psalms had become popular under Edward VI among the continental protestant emigres sheltering in London, and the tradition continued among the English protestants exiled in Europe during Mary's reign. Although not officially part of the Elizabethan liturgy, congregational psalm singing was allowed under the royal injunctions of 1559, and was swiftly adopted by godly congregations. Marckant translated psalms 118, 131, 132, and 135. These were initialled 'M.' in the earliest editions, but in 1565 his surname was printed in full; it occasionally also appears as 'Market'. The Sternhold and Hopkins psalter reigned unchallenged until the new version by Tate and Brady of 1696, and retained its place in English parish churches well into the nineteenth century. Marckant was also responsible for two additional prayers in the 1562 psalter: the eleven-stanza 'The Lamentation of a Sinner', an urgent entreaty to be admitted at the gate of mercy and not held to strict account, which also became known as a hymn; and a plea for grace, 'The Humble Sute of a Sinner', expressing the plaintiff's real hope of finding a place with the angels and the saints. 
Taken together, his devotion to the psalms and his cure of souls in Essex imply that Marckant was influenced by Calvinism. Evidently not one to hide the light of Christ under a bushel, he turned from the metrical psalter to the popular press. In 1571 the Fleet Street printer Wylliam Gryffith produced a broadside ballad by Marckant, 'A Notable Instruction for All Men to Beware the Abuses of Dice Wyne and Wemen'. This tells the story of a once affluent man who has frittered away his wealth on wine, gambling, fine apparel, and the base delights of 'Venus Pallace'. The reader is lectured by the anonymous unfortunate, who ruefully reflects upon his lost youth, squandered among women who loved him only for the pounds in his pocket: '
Let this example of my smarte, teache others to be ware 

Of Wemen, Dyce and Wyne also, which have made me thus bare. 

For where my Parents gave to me, great summes of golde most fyne, 

That I consumd at dauncinge schole, on Wemen Dyce and Wyne. 

' So low has he sunk, admits the wanton, that he has come close to taking his own life at 'Tyborne tree'. But Marckant concludes his vividly imagined portrait of one man's descent into degeneracy with a message of hope: those who hold fast in the love of God 'can not want or quayle'. One further verse ballad can be attributed to Marckant, namely 'The Purgacion of the Ryght Honourable Lord Wentworth, Concerning the Crime Layde to his Charge' (1559), for which Owen Rogers was fined for printing without entering. Other of Marckant's compositions are known only from the Stationers' register, including 'With speed retorne to God', and 'Verses to Diverse Good Purposes', the latter licensed to Thomas Purfoote in November 1580. John Marckant was dead by 24 February 1586, when he was succeeded by Hugh Smith as vicar of Clacton. 


@@@@@


doc= 18036


Marcuard, Robert Samuel (1756-1788?), engraver, was born in England on 25 December 1756 and entered the Royal Academy Schools as an engraver on 31 May 1777. He was a pupil of Francesco Bartolozzi, whose manner he successfully followed, and it is likely that he remained in Bartolozzi's employ until his own death. He produced a large number of stipples after allegorical and fancy pictures, mainly by Angelica Kauffmann, William Hamilton, and G. B. Cipriani. G. K. Nagler mentions two subjects by Marcuard after his own drawings, and he also produced portraits of both Bartolozzi and Ralph Milbank after Joshua Reynolds. The latest date to appear on one of his prints is 1786, and an advertisement of 1788 for the sale of drawings by Marcuard at Bartolozzi's address suggests that he had probably died shortly before that date. 


@@@@@


doc= 18037


Mardeley, John (fl. 1548-1558), government official and author, wrote a series of polemical protestant poems, including 'A shorte resytal of certayne holy doctours whych proveth that the naturall body of Christ is not conteyned in the sacrament of the Lordes supper but fyguratyvely', partly written in Skeltonic metre (Collier, 1.515-16). It was published by Thomas Raynolde probably in 1548 and, according to W. T. Lowndes, was 'written in answer to John Aungell's 'Agreement of the Holy Fathers and Doctors'' (Lowndes, 3.1471). 
Mardeley's critique of transubstantiation was continued in a prose treatise, 'A Declaration of the Power of Gods Worde Concerning the Holy Supper of the Lord', published by Raynolde in 1548 and dedicated to Protector Somerset. It attacked those bishops resistant to Edward VI's religious reforms and who sought 'His godly reformacion, utterly to delay' (sig. A1'v'). Mardeley was committed to the idea of a reformed church, and a further prose treatise, 'A Necessary Instruction for All Courteous Men', published by Raynolde probably in 1548, provided opportunity for a caustic aside on how 'gready al kinde of men' 'be in these dayes, as wel the clergye as the layitie' (sig. A2'r'). 
Under Edward VI, Mardeley was clerk of the mint. Unsurprisingly, considering his strong affiliations to protestantism, he published nothing during the reign of Mary, but greeted the accession of Elizabeth in 1558 with an extended poetic treatise on 'The supper of the Lord' presented to the queen in manuscript form (BL, MS 17 B.xxxvii). In this work Mardeley celebrated England's release from Marian persecutions and urged the new monarch to 'Redresse the abuses of the spiritualitie' (fol. 17'v'). As a poet, Mardeley tapped into vernacular traditions of Skeltonic metre and the idioms of Wyatt's epistolary satires. 
Bale credits Mardeley with various works (now lost) in verse and prose, including a book 'On the ingratitude of the Scots', verse translation of twenty-four psalms, and 'The complaint of the English republic', probably the anonymous 'A Ruful Complaynt of the Publyke Weale to Englande', printed between 1547 and 1553?, owing to which work, according to Bale, Mardeley 'only evaded death with great difficulty' (Bale, 'Cat.', 2.106-7). Some verse translations in the psalter of 1562 signed M and attributed by Haslewood to Mardeley are by John Marckant. 
Mardeley may have been the John Mardeley of the parish of St Katharine Cree, London, whose wife, Eleanor, was granted administration of his estate on 25 January 1560. 


@@@@@


doc= 18038


Mardisley, John (fl. 1350-1375), Franciscan friar and theologian, was probably born in the 1320s, and entered the order at its Oxford convent. He studied in Oxford in the 1340s and became doctor of theology soon after 1350. By 1355 he was a member of the York convent; probably in that year he disputed there with the Dominican William Jordan in the chapter house and the chancellor's school on the subject of the conception of the Blessed Virgin Mary. Given these locations, this must have been intended as a formal academic exercise, but Mardisley seems to have attracted bitter criticism for his opinions, from Jordan himself and other observers, and the chapter at York found it necessary to issue letters exonerating him. Mardisley seems to have followed up his verbal defence of this doctrine with a written exposition of his arguments; it was known to Bale but no longer survives. 
Scarcely more than a year later he had become involved in further controversy, joining another Franciscan, Roger Conway (died 1360), in replying to Richard Fitzralph's attacks on the mendicants. Mardisley's growing reputation as an outspoken theologian may explain his appointment in May 1374, together with a Dominican and a Benedictine, to deliberate at a great council in Westminster Hall over the right of the pope to interfere in temporal affairs in England. The meeting of the council, and Mardisley's contribution, is discussed in some detail in a contemporary chronicle, the 'Eulogium historiarum', compiled by a monk of Glastonbury. The Dominican refused to answer, and the Benedictine, Uthred Boldon (died 1397), resolutely defended papal authority. Mardisley gave a more detailed answer, and somewhat surprisingly, given his status, upheld the claims of the crown that Christ conferred only spiritual rule on Peter, not earthly dominion. His argument can be seen as an attempt by the English Franciscans to improve their political position and to win royal favour. The drama of the scene and the uncompromising nature of the dialogue led earlier historians to assume that the entire episode was fictional, contrived by the chronicler in order to raise some important and controversial issues, but it has since been shown to have taken place. 
Mardisley was elected minister provincial of the order in England in 1375. He resigned his office towards the end of the 1370s, and probably died at the York convent within a decade and was buried there. Bale suggests he died in 1376, but his evidence for this is obscure. Several theological works have been attributed to Mardisley, but none is known to survive. A commentary on the 'Sentences' of Peter Lombard which survives in Padua, MS Antoniana IX 159, was for some time thought to be the work of Mardisley, but is now believed to be the work of another author. 


@@@@@


doc= 18039


Mare, Thomas de la (c.1309-1396), abbot of St Albans, was perhaps born in Northumberland, where he is known to have had family connections. He was related to several noble families: through his father, John de la Mare, and his mother, Joanna (both 'c'.1275- 'c'.1340), daughter of Sir John Harpsfield, he claimed kinship with William Montagu, earl of Salisbury, William, Lord Zouche, and John Grandison, the distinguished bishop of Exeter. 
Thomas de la Mare was one of five children, and his three brothers and his sister followed him into the religious life, two brothers also becoming monks at St Albans. Nothing is known of his early life, but he probably studied for a time at a local grammar school. He must have entered St Albans in his late teens, because according to the 'Gesta abbatum' he made his profession soon after the election of Abbot Richard of Wallingford in 1326. He passed his novitiate year at the abbey's dependent priory at Wymondham, Norfolk, and returned there after his profession to serve as chaplain to the prior. According to the 'Gesta', while at Wymondham, he also devoted himself to the study of the 'ars dictaminis' and rhetoric and became so proficient in letter-writing that later, when he became abbot, he composed all his own letters himself, including correspondence with the pope. 
De la Mare was recalled to St Albans in 1336 and was made an obedientary, serving first as kitchener and then in the more substantial office of cellarer. In 1340 he was appointed prior of the abbey's dependent priory at Tynemouth, Northumberland. Located near the Scottish border the community had suffered repeated attacks and had almost fallen into ruin. De la Mare appears to have succeeded in reviving both its material fortunes and religious life. He attracted the support of substantial local patrons, such as the Percys, to whom he became confessor, and implemented a series of wide-ranging internal reforms. In particular, he encouraged the monks to engage in intellectual activities and invited scholars from nearby houses to teach and preach in the community. He forged especially close links with the monks and scholars in the circle of the archbishop of York, John Thoresby, and with the Augustinian friars at the York convent, one of whom, Dr John Waldeby, later dedicated a series of homilies on the apostles' creed to de la Mare. In early 1349, following the death of Michael Mentmore, de la Mare returned to St Albans and was elected abbot. The black death was at its height, fifty monks in addition to Mentmore had died from the pestilence, and although he was not the preferred candidate, de la Mare seems to have emerged as the best prospect after the monks' first choice, Prior Henry Steukly, had himself fallen ill. Following his election de la Mare travelled to Avignon to receive papal benediction. Shortly after arrival he became ill, having drunk infected water. According to the 'Gesta' he came near to death, but experienced a miraculous recovery through the agency of St Alban: despite this, news reached the abbey that he had died. Before his return de la Mare entered into negotiations with the authorities in the curia to secure confirmation of the abbey's many exemptions and privileges. His efforts were inconclusive, and so costly that no abbot travelled to the papacy again for eighty years. 
After his return to St Albans in 1350 de la Mare concentrated his energies on repairing the damage done to community life by the black death. In 1351 he issued a series of reforming constitutions for St Albans and its dependent cells. He also conducted a thorough visitation of all the communities and churches under his jurisdiction, and established an annual chapter at which disciplinary problems were resolved and further reforming constitutions ratified. The rigour of his administration was such that Thomas Walsingham compared his rule to that of Julius Caesar. In addition, he began a substantial programme of rebuilding, renewing the abbot's chambers, the cloister, the dormitory, and the infirmary, and constructing a fortified gatehouse at the main entrance to the abbey. He also sought to increase the community's income, both by improving the administration of his officials and through the acquisition of a wide range of properties in the St Albans area and in London: according to the 'Gesta' he even surrendered some of his own income to increase the abbey's resources. De la Mare's efforts to revive the fortunes of St Albans also led him to enter into litigation with a considerable number of local landowners and tenants. He fought protracted and very public battles over rights, rents, and taxation with the king's escheator, John of Gaunt, duke of Lancaster, and Alice Perrers, as well as more local figures. His dispute with John Chiltern, a Langley tenant, continued for almost thirty years, between the 1360s and 1390s. He also brought actions against landowners and patrons who threatened the independence of the St Albans cells: his dispute with Henry Despenser, bishop of Norwich, over the latter's appointment of the prior of Binham as collector of a subsidy was only resolved through royal mediation. 
In most of these disputes de la Mare emerged victorious, but the cost to the community was considerable and even at his death there remained debts arising from his litigation. De la Mare also continued to negotiate through his proctors in the curia for further confirmation of the abbey's exemptions, and before his death he had succeeded in securing several important new privileges, including certain episcopal rights for the abbot, release from the latter's obligation to receive papal benediction in person, and exemption from the reversion of abbatial resources to the crown during a vacancy. In the first decades of his administration de la Mare also dedicated himself to raising the profile of the shrine of St Albans. He encouraged pilgrimage to the church, inaugurating a lavish procession on the martyr's feast day and building extensive new accommodation for visitors: in 1368 the cortege bearing the body of Blanche, duchess of Lancaster, to London halted for a night's vigil at St Albans. About 1376 he refounded the abbey confraternity, and over the next decades attracted a succession of distinguished figures to become members, including Richard II, his mother, Joan of Kent, Robert de Vere, earl of Oxford, and Sir Lewis Clifford. About 1379 he attempted to establish a similar confraternity for the townsmen in the church of St Peter at St Albans, but their hostility forced him to abandon the project. 
De la Mare was above all a determined administrator, but he also did much to encourage education and scholarship among his monks. He introduced a more rigorous curriculum of studies into the cloister and even taught liturgy and song himself. He also encouraged able monks to attend the universities, constructed separate chambers where they might pursue their studies, and made significant benefactions to Gloucester College, the Benedictine studium in Oxford. He bought and commissioned a large number of new books for use in the cloister, and in the 1370s constructed a new scriptorium in which, under the supervision of the chronicler Thomas Walsingham, a wide range of new books was compiled and copied. He also began work on a conventual library above the cloister, which was completed after his death. He was a supportive patron of his own monks' scholarship: he encouraged Walsingham in his historical writing, and between 1377 and 1385 he commissioned Nicholas Radcliffe to compile a series of dialogues on the errors of Wyclif. He also offered his patronage to other scholars and artists, attracting to St Albans such figures as the illuminator Alan Strayler, and the architect Henry Yevele. 
In addition to his work for his own community de la Mare also pursued a very public career as a leader and spokesman for the Benedictine order in England. He served as president of the order's general chapter continuously from the 1350s to the end of the 1380s, and played a key role in its efforts to reform English communities. In 1363 he compiled and issued a series of statutes to reinvigorate monastic study at the universities, making substantial changes to the curriculum and requiring each community to support its students with sufficient funds. His reputation led Edward III in the 1360s to appoint him to conduct visitations and introduce reforms at Abingdon, Battle, Chester, Eynsham, and Reading. In the 1370s he was also called upon to settle a rebellion and supervise an abbatial election at Bury St Edmunds. He was, however, also a vigorous and vocal defender of the monasteries' traditional independence. In 1389 he intervened on behalf of Gloucester College in its dispute with William Courtenay, archbishop of Canterbury, over a threatened visitation, and persuaded Courtenay to abandon his plans not only in Oxford but with regard to all exempt houses within his province. 
In his defence of his own house and of his order as a whole de la Mare benefited from close relations with the crown -- he seems to have been on intimate terms with Edward III almost from the time of his election. Walsingham recalls the 'great love' shown to the abbot by the king, and makes uncorroborated claims that the king appointed de la Mare a member of his privy council. Edward was certainly a frequent visitor to St Albans and a considerable benefactor, but the evidence suggests de la Mare actually enjoyed closer relations with his son Edward, the Black Prince, who intervened on several occasions to defend de la Mare and protect the interests of St Albans. The Black Prince's register records a number of gifts of plate and wine to the abbot. 
In the course of his career de la Mare emerged as a distinguished public figure of no small political importance. But according to the memoir in the 'Gesta abbatum' he also continued to adhere to the highest monastic and ascetic ideals in his personal life. He submitted to frequent flagellation and other mortifications of the flesh, and observed frequent vigils, often reciting the psalter alone 'while the other monks slept' ('Gesta abbatum', 3.403). He was said to have abstained from meat and other rich food, even when entertaining important visitors, and forswore the hawking and hunting enjoyed by many in the community. In the late 1350s he seems to have undergone a spiritual crisis, and encouraged by Jean II, king of France, who was held captive at St Albans, he briefly contemplated retiring from the abbacy to lead a solitary ascetic life. In addition to these mortifications de la Mare also continued to pursue his studies in scripture and other devotional literature. In his theological knowledge, according to Walsingham, he surpassed 'the sum of learned clergy' ('Gesta abbatum', 3.409). 
De la Mare suffered from poor health for much of his life. Although unaffected in 1349, he was struck down in the second wave of pestilence in the 1360s and never fully recovered, his infirmity being compounded by his own punishing regime of abstinence. Even before the end of the 1380s illness had forced him to pass many duties over to his younger officials. From 1390 to his death in 1396 the community was effectively governed by the cellarer, John Moot. De la Mare's long decline undermined much of what he had achieved: his long absences from parliament led to the abbot of Westminster's claim to the title of first among the parliamentary abbots, and St Albans was once more threatened by the king's escheator. But he continued to be regarded as a distinguished elder statesman, and even on his deathbed he was visited by Richard II, John of Gaunt, and the archbishops of Canterbury and York. De la Mare died on 15 September 1396 and was buried in the north aisle of the abbey church beneath an elaborate Flemish brass which he himself had commissioned. He was regarded in later generations as the greatest of all the abbots of St Albans, and his achievements were celebrated in various lives written during the fifteenth century. 


@@@@@


doc= 18040


Maredudd ab Owain (d. 999), king of Gwynedd and of Deheubarth, was the son of Owain ap Hywel Dda of Deheubarth (d. 988). Maredudd ruled the kingdom of Gwynedd and other parts of north Wales from 986 and subsequently Deheubarth in the south from 988 until his death in 999. The extent of his power is uncharacteristic of this period, matched only by that of his paternal grandfather, Hywel Dda ap Cadell, and in records of his death he is called 'the most famous king of the Welsh'. His father, Owain, had inherited Deheubarth and other southern Welsh regions from Hywel Dda in 950, whereas the northern Welsh lands were reclaimed by a different branch of the dynasty. Owain did not die until 988, but Maredudd had been active for at least two years before this. It was perhaps because of his father's longevity that initially he sought power beyond his hereditary kingdom in the south. Indeed, his brother Einion had also acted seemingly independently of Owain until he died in 984, and it is possible that Einion's death enabled Maredudd to assume a more active political role. 
Maredudd seems to have exploited the political divisions that fractured Gwynedd on the death of Hywel ab Ieuaf in 985. In that year Hywel's brother Cadwallon is said to have slain one Ionafal ap Meurig (a possible kinsman and rival) and thus to have assumed control of Gwynedd, Anglesey, and Meirionydd. The year 986 witnessed the killings of Maig ab Ieuaf (or Meurig ab Idwal Foel), possibly by Maredudd, and of Cadwallon, most definitely at Maredudd's instigation. Maredudd was thus able to bring this northern kingdom under his power and he subdued it under tribute to him. There is no strong evidence that he lost his dominance in the north until his death. Thus, in 987, when Godred Haraldsson (Gofraid mac Arailt), king of Man, raided Anglesey, capturing 2000 people (or slaying 1000, according to an Irish chronicle), it was Maredudd who took the survivors southwards into Ceredigion and Dyfed. Furthermore, two years later he ransomed what were probably some of those captured in 987 by paying the vikings known as the 'Black Host' a penny per head. 
Maredudd no doubt harboured interests in his father's southern kingdom. Thus, if the Llywarch ab Owain blinded in 987 was his brother, this act may indicate a fraternal struggle before Owain's demise. When that king did die, in the next year, it seems likely that Maredudd was in a position to add Deheubarth to his territories. However, he was not free of dynastic rivals: his nephew Edwin ab Einion aspired to this southern part of Maredudd's territories, while Idwal ap Meurig (died 997) and his brothers sought to exercise their hereditary claim to Gwynedd. In 991 Maredudd attacked 'Maeshyfaidd', probably the plain of Radnor, then under Mercian control. This may have antagonized the English, for in 992 Edwin ab Einion, in allegiance with an English leader called Edelisi (possibly AEthelsige), raided Maredudd's southern territories of Ceredigion, Dyfed, Kidwelly, and Gower, taking hostages. One account states that Edwin had taken hostages on at least one previous occasion. Maredudd is also said to have raided the neighbouring kingdom of Morgannwg in 992 with the help of viking mercenaries. His son Cadwallon died in this year. The following year saw trouble in Maredudd's northern territories. On the one hand Anglesey was ravaged by vikings (not necessarily Maredudd's erstwhile allies), and on the other the sons of Meurig ab Idwal Foel raided Gwynedd. Maredudd also fought and was heavily defeated by the sons of Meurig in 994 at Llangwm (in Dinmael), where his nephew Tewdwr ab Einion fell. The political implications of this defeat for Maredudd's position in the north are not apparent. It has been suggested that Idwal had established himself in north Wales before this battle and that it represented an attempt by Maredudd to oust him thence; alternatively, it may have been a further attempt by Idwal and his brothers to regain their rightful kingdom. It is possible that these northern troubles ceased following the death of Idwal ap Meurig in 996 or 997. Maredudd lived for a further two or three years, dying in 999, as far as can be determined of natural causes, despite the aspirations of his dynastic rivals. While none of Maredudd's direct male descendants seems to have succeeded him to the kingship, his daughters Angharad and Lleucu were married into dynasties of later importance. 


@@@@@


doc= 18041


Maredudd ap Bleddyn (d. 1132), king of Powys, was the son of Bleddyn ap Cynfyn and, according to later medieval pedigrees, Haer, daughter of Gillyn. After supporting Robert de Belleme's revolt in 1102, he was soon seized by his brother Iorwerth, who had him imprisoned. However, Maredudd escaped in 1107 and co-operated with his nephew Owain ap Cadwgan, after the latter received Iorwerth ap Bleddyn's share of Powys in 1111; two years later Maredudd captured Madog ap Rhiryd and received the latter's share of the kingdom from Owain. After Owain's death in 1116 Maredudd was the most prominent member of Bleddyn ap Cynfyn's line. Although forced to submit and pay a huge tribute of cattle to Henry I after the latter's campaign against him in 1121, Maredudd survived and exploited the feuding between his nephews -- one of whom, Llywelyn ab Owain ap Cadwgan, he ordered to be blinded and castrated in 1130 -- so as to establish a hegemony over the whole of Powys by his death in 1132. He was succeeded by Madog ap Maredudd (d. 1160), one of three sons he had with his wife, Hunydd, daughter of Einudd. In addition he had another son, Iorwerth Goch, with Cristin, daughter of Bledrus, and fathered up to four other children whose mothers are unknown. 


@@@@@


doc= 18042


Maret, Philippe (d. 1637), legal official in Jersey, was born in the parish of Trinity, Jersey, the second son of Charles Maret and his wife, Marguerite, daughter of Noel Le Cerf. He graduated BA from Merton College, Oxford, in 1598. Although his enemies later claimed that he spent time in Spanish seminaries, there is no evidence for this. Maret served as receiver-general in Jersey from his nomination by the governor, John Peyton, on 21 January 1608 until 1615 and concurrently as solicitor-general from 1607 until 1613. He became attorney-general on 14 October 1613 and held that office until 1616. 
Controversy surrounded Maret for most of his life, complaints being frequently made about his tenure of office in the island. The two main issues were his combination of the offices of receiver-general and attorney-general and his appointment to those offices by Peyton. Maret's main opponent was the bailiff Jean Herault, who claimed that the right of presentation lay with the king and not (according to his patent) the governor, with whom Herault was already in dispute. Following the discovery in May 1616 that a paper relating to a court case in progress had been removed by Maret, he was summoned to the royal court of Jersey by the 'denonciateur'. Having initially refused to comply, Maret finally entered the court, with his hat on, while the senior jurat, Philippe De Carteret, seigneur of St Ouen, was giving his opinion, and interrupted him, accusing De Carteret of having sent his men to his house by night to assassinate him. Maret was subsequently ordered to ask pardon publicly of God, the king, and the court for his contempt of court, and he was fined 50 crowns for insulting De Carteret. On his refusal to pay he was suspended from office as attorney-general and ordered to appear within forty days before the privy council. In the meantime De Carteret's brother Elie was sworn in as attorney-general on 13 June. In July, Maret was committed by the council to the Gatehouse prison. When he returned to Jersey, he told the court that his case had not been tried, but the bailiff had a letter from the secretary of the council to the effect that Maret had been ordered back to acknowledge his offence. Since he refused to do this he was imprisoned in Jersey, first in Mont Orgueil and then in Elizabeth Castle. From there he petitioned the king that the case be heard before the commissioners Conway and Bird who were coming to Jersey, and he complained, falsely, that he had been fettered and manacled during his imprisonment in the island. In 1617 he brought before the commissioners charges of tyranny and corruption against Herault and charged his enemies, especially De Carteret, of ousting him from office without reason in order to advance their own candidate as attorney-general. The commissioners declared all his charges to be unfounded. In June 1618 Maret was twice ordered to acknowledge his offence and make public submission, the second time on pain of banishment from Jersey. 
Maret was often accused by his opponents of being a papist, but there is no evidence for this charge. He always claimed to support the introduction of Anglicanism to Jersey, and he represented the side favouring it at the inquiry before the privy council in 1614 as to whether the Calvinist form of church government should be continued in the island or the Anglican form adopted. He was involved in a protracted dispute with the Calvinist colloquy of the island, and in 1617 he complained that he had been persecuted for a long time by the elders and consistory of the parish of St Helier and been suspended from the Lord's supper. 
In 1628 Maret married Martha Lempriere, the widow of Elie Dumaresq, seigneur des Arbres in the parish of St Brelade. In the same year he bought the Fief des Arbres from his two stepsons and moved to La Haule. He had one child, Philippe. In 1629 he was elected jurat; although the election was disputed, he remained in office until his death. He became deputy lieutenant-governor in 1632, being sworn in by Lieutenant-Governor Francis Raynsford on 28 January. Maret died on 8 January 1637 at La Haule, and was buried two days later in the church of St Brelade. 


@@@@@


doc= 18043


Marett, Sir Robert Pipon (1820-1884), politician in Jersey and poet, was born at St Peter, Jersey, on 20 November 1820, the eldest of the eight children of Peter Daniel Marett (died 1838) and his wife, Mary Ann, eldest daughter of Thomas Pipon, lieutenant bailiff of Jersey. Marett belonged to a family established in Jersey for many centuries, and was a descendant of Philip Maret (or Marett). His father had served in the East India Company's Madras infantry with the rank of major, and married his mother on retiring to Jersey. 
Marett's early education at McMahon's School, Jersey, revealed great academic potential. A contemporary chronicle records: 'The spiritual activity and love of work, which were already characteristic of him, never deserted him in the course of a career filled not only with legal and professional achievements but also with literary and scientific studies, the gift of great intelligence. ('Almanach de la Chronique de Jersey', 227)' In 1840 Marett commenced a five-year course of study at the University of Caen. He was called to the Jersey bar in November of the same year. On completing his studies he spent one year in Blois with his family, where his widowed mother had gone for health reasons, and was involved in founding an English church there, building being his lifelong hobby. 
Reform was the watchword of the time, and local politics were dominated by two parties, the laurel on the right and the rose on the left. In this contentious atmosphere Marett stood for moderation. He was defeated in the 1852 election for constable of St Helier as an independent candidate, but elected unopposed at the next election, in 1856. As constable (mayor) he used the full weight of his influence to improve the town, widening streets and creating public parks. He took the far-sighted view that as the island had no capital but that which came from outside, everything possible had to be done to make it attractive to outsiders. 
The progress of Marett's career was rapid. He was appointed solicitor-general in 1858 and attorney-general in 1866, and sworn in as bailiff in 1880. He was knighted in May 1881. His opinion on legal reform was valued throughout his career: he gave evidence before a commission of the privy council in 1861, and drafted a law fundamentally changing and simplifying the inheritance of real estate, which was passed in 1879. He edited four volumes of manuscripts encapsulating Jersey law, written by Philip Le Geyt, an earlier lieutenant bailiff, and wrote a learned treatise as preface to the edition published by the states of Jersey in 1882. His standing as a legislator is such that his writings were regularly quoted by counsel in cases before the courts even at the close of the twentieth century. 
Marett's other local concerns included designs for a new harbour at St Helier, the founding of the Societe Jersiaise, patronage of societies ranging from the orphanage and general dispensary to the Agricultural and Horticultural Society, and being a governor of both Victoria College and the Jersey Ladies' College. 
In 1865 Marett married Julia Anne ('b'. 'c'.1830), youngest of the four daughters of Philip Marett, seigneur of La Haule, and a distant cousin, with whom he had one son, Robert Ranulph Marett, who became a distinguished anthropologist, and three daughters. 
Marett's interest both in classical and in English literature was wide, and he built up a valuable library at his home, Blanc Pignon, which was destroyed by fire in 1874, whereupon he and his family moved into La Haule Manor. He was fluent in English, French, Latin, and Jersey Norman French, and is considered a pioneer of Jerriais as a written language, having published a number of poems in the vernacular in the liberal journal 'La Patrie', of which he was a founder, under the pseudonym Laelius. 
Marett's death, on 10 November 1884 at La Haule Manor, plunged the island into mourning, and the local newspapers devoted many columns to the most handsome tributes and to voluminous lists of the multitude of local notables and ordinary citizens who attended his funeral at St Brelade's parish church. 


@@@@@


doc= 18044


Margaret (d. 1093), queen of Scots, consort of Malcolm III, was the eldest child of Edward AEtheling (d. 1057) and his wife, Agatha, who was a kinswoman of the emperor Heinrich II ('r'. 1002-24). Margaret's father was one of the two sons of Edmund Ironside (d. 1016), briefly king of England in succession to his father, AEthelred. Edward and his brother, Edmund, were exiled by King Cnut, perhaps with the intention that they would be murdered. Instead, they seem to have been sheltered by the king of Sweden and sent to the court of Jaroslav, prince of Kiev. Before 1046 they were persuaded by a fellow exile at Kiev, Andrew, first cousin once removed of Stephen, king of Hungary (died 1038), to join the successful expedition which secured for Andrew the Hungarian throne. Either while still at Jaroslav's court, or (less probably) after reaching Hungary, Edward was provided with a bride. Although Agatha's parentage cannot be established with certainty, the hypothesis which fits the surviving evidence most convincingly is that she was the daughter of Liudolf (died 1038), margrave of West Friesland, son of Gisela of Swabia and Bruno, brother of Heinrich II, the Saxon. Through her grandfather, Agatha was the great-niece of Heinrich II, brother-in-law of King Stephen of Hungary, while through her grandmother she was related to Heinrich III, the Salian ('r'. 1039-56). 
In 1057 Edward and his family travelled to England, but Edward died within the year, and his young son Edgar AEtheling was not seriously considered as a successor of Edward the Confessor, who died childless early in 1066. After the duke of Normandy had secured the English throne for himself by his victory at Hastings, the AEtheling and his family, having briefly come into the Conqueror's peace and protection, became involved in the movement of resistance to the Norman invaders chiefly originating in northern England. In 1068 Edgar, with his mother and sisters, Margaret and Christina, fled to the Scottish court. In either 1069 or 1070 Margaret was married to the Scottish king, Malcolm III, at Dunfermline. It was said that the marriage was against her inclinations, since she wished to enter the religious life; but in the circumstances she and her brother and mother could hardly defy Malcolm III's will. The marriage lasted for some twenty-three years and produced six sons and two daughters who all survived to adulthood. Three sons, Edgar (d. 1107), Alexander (d. 1124), and David (d. 1153), became kings of Scots, while the elder daughter, Matilda (d. 1118), otherwise known as Edith or Mold, became queen of England in 1100 on marrying Henry I. 
Margaret converted the church in which she was married, Holy Trinity at Dunfermline, into a Benedictine priory which, under the auspices of Archbishop Lanfranc, drew its first community of monks from the cathedral monastery (Holy Trinity or Christ Church) of Canterbury. In 1128 this priory was raised to the status of an independent abbey at the behest of David I, the first abbot being Geoffrey, prior of Canterbury. Margaret also persuaded her husband to remit the ferry charges at the most popular crossing of the Firth of Forth (later to be known in her honour as Queensferry) for bona fide pilgrims, most of whom would be visiting St Andrews, a shrine which Margaret greatly venerated. 
Thus far in establishing Margaret's character and significance the facts are largely incontrovertible. Beyond that, the greater part of the information regarding her is derived from the life written 'c'.1100-07, at the request of her daughter Queen Matilda, by Turgot, then prior of Durham but formerly for some years Margaret's chaplain. This work, the fullest version of which relates several miracles attributed to Margaret, may have been designed to put the case for her canonization, the postponement of which for over a century is hard to explain. Evidence more objective than the life shows a woman of outstanding piety and religious devotion, with a zeal which may have stemmed from her childhood in a country only recently and partially converted to Christianity. The life stresses her compassion towards children (especially orphans) and the poor, the severity of her self-denial, including much fasting, her love of formality and etiquette (she was, rather oddly, fond of fine clothes and jewellery), and her anxiety to bring the Scottish church into conformity with what she understood to be the doctrine and practices of western Catholicism. In particular, she urged the clergy and people of her adopted country to receive communion more frequently than once a year at Easter, to abstain from ordinary labour (for example, farm work) on Sunday, to observe the Lent fast from Ash Wednesday instead of the Monday following, to forbid marriage between a man and his stepmother or sister-in-law, and to celebrate the mass by a universally accepted ritual. None of these points touched the fundamentals of Christian doctrine. It may be agreed that Margaret made a deep impression upon the Scottish clergy; that she persuaded many of them to alter their rites and practices must be regarded as doubtful. The life mentions, significantly, Margaret's reverence for the ascetic clergy scattered throughout Scotland, evidently communities of Celi De ('Clients of God'), who followed an eremitical regime. This statement is borne out by her recorded benefactions to the Celi De of Loch Leven, and lends weight to Orderic Vitalis's report that she tried to restore the church of Iona. 
It would have been impossible for Margaret to pursue her reform programme in the Scottish church without the goodwill and co-operation of Malcolm III. The life, indeed, emphasizes the extent to which the king helped his wife, not only in her charitable activity but also in the conduct of conferences with the Scottish clergy. According to Turgot, Margaret's customary language was English (not, as might have been expected, French), and, since her husband was fluent in English as well as in his own Gaelic speech, he acted as interpreter. 
Queen Margaret died at Edinburgh Castle on 16 November 1093, three days after Malcolm III had been killed near Alnwick while leading his fifth raid into Northumberland; she was buried before the high altar in Dunfermline Priory church. Grief and shock at hearing of the death of her husband and of her eldest son may have been the immediate cause of Margaret's death, but the life tells that she was greatly exhausted by years of self-denial and under-nourishment. She enjoyed a very high reputation in the Anglo-Norman world of the early twelfth century, and was eulogized by William of Malmesbury, John of Worcester, and Orderic Vitalis, the last of whom described her as 'eminent for her high birth, but even more renowned for her virtue and holy life' (Ordericus Vitalis, 'Eccl. hist.', 4.273). The Hexham writers, Prior John and Ailred of Rievaulx, refer to her as 'holy' and 'religious', and in 1199 King William the Lion (died 1214) was dissuaded from invading England by a vision he experienced while spending a night at his great-grandmother's tomb at Dunfermline. But although there developed in Scotland, from soon after her death, a cult of St Margaret which seems to have had a genuinely popular character, it was only in 1249-50, in response to a campaign organized by Scotland's most senior clergy (and doubtless encouraged by the crown as a counterpoise to the cult of Edward the Confessor promoted both by Westminster Abbey and by Henry III), that the papacy authorized her formal canonization. At the Reformation her remains, with those of her husband, were transferred by Philip II of Spain to a chapel in the Escorial at Madrid, and in 1673 Pope Clement X named her patroness of Scotland. 


@@@@@


doc= 18045


Margaret (1240-1275), queen of Scots, consort of Alexander III, was the eldest daughter and second child of Henry III of England (1207-1272) and his queen, Eleanor of Provence (c.1223-1291). She was born at Windsor in October 1240, about the 5th, although the date of her birth is given erroneously by several chroniclers. The early years of her life were passed there along with her brother Edward, who was a year older, and the daughter of the earl of Lincoln. Her brother Edmund was born in 1245. Green's account claims that she was named Margaret after her aunt, Queen Margaret of France, and, quoting Matthew Paris, because her mother in the pangs of childbirth had invoked the aid of St Margaret (of Antioch). On 27 November that year a royal writ ordered the payment of 10 marks to her custodians, Bartholomew Peche and Geoffrey de Caux. 
In 1243-4 there was an outburst of hostilities between Henry III and Alexander II, king of Scots, but the treaty of Newcastle on 13 August 1244 restored peace between England and Scotland, and arranged that the marriage of Margaret and Alexander (1241-1286), the infant son of Alexander II, should take place when the children were old enough. In 1249 the death of Alexander II made Margaret's betrothed husband Alexander III of Scotland. The instability of the Scottish government in the period of minority made it expedient for both countries to effect the marriage sooner rather than later, and on 26 December 1251 Alexander and Margaret were married at York by Archbishop Walter de Gray of York (died 1255). There had been elaborate preparations for the wedding, which Paris states was attended by 1000 English and 600 Scottish knights, and so vast a throng of people that the ceremony was performed secretly and in the early morning to avoid the crowd. Enormous sums were lavished on the entertainments and large quantities of food were consumed. Next day Henry III bound himself to pay Alexander 5000 marks as the marriage portion of his daughter. Around the time of the marriage Henry was involved in the replacement of the Scottish government, which had been led since 1249 by the noble faction headed by the Durward family. Their rivals, the Comyns, were installed as the main force in government. 
The first years of Margaret's residence in Scotland seem to have been solitary and unhappy. She was put under the charge of Robert le Norrey, Stephen Bauzan (died 1257), and the widowed Matilda de Cantilupe. Paris, the fullest source for details of Margaret's life, names Robert de Ros (died 'c'.1270) and John de Balliol as her principal guardians. Geoffrey of Langley (died 1274) was also sent to Scotland by Henry III, but Paris states that he returned to England because of Scottish objections to him. In 1253 Henry III requested that Margaret should be allowed to visit her (pregnant) mother in England, but the request came to nothing. She was dissatisfied with her treatment in Scotland, and seems to have complained bitterly. Paris uses the issue as an excuse for anti-Scottish venom. He states that in 1255 Queen Eleanor sent a famous physician, Reginald of Bath, to enquire into Margaret's health and condition. Finding the queen pale and agitated, and full of complaints against her guardians, Reginald indiscreetly expressed his indignation in public, and soon afterwards died suddenly, apparently of poison. King Henry sent Richard de Clare, earl of Gloucester (died 1262), and John Mansel (died 1265) to act as his agents in assisting another coup in Scotland. Margaret and Alexander III were taken from Edinburgh to Roxburgh, while Henry III and Eleanor were now at Wark. The two royal couples met in both places, and Margaret remained a short time with her mother at Wark. A new settlement of the Scottish government was effected: Ros and Balliol were deprived of their estates and the Durward faction was once again installed as the primary force in the administration. 
Early in 1256 Margaret received a visit from her brother Edward. In August of the same year she and Alexander went to England. They attended the festivities of the feast of the Assumption on the 15th at Woodstock and, thence proceeding to London, were sumptuously entertained by John Mansel. Shortly thereafter, however, there was more political upheaval in Scotland, culminating in the couple's capture by the Comyn faction in October 1257. By 1260 Alexander III had gained personal control of the Scottish government, and in that year he and Margaret again visited England. Alexander returned to Scotland before the end of the year, leaving Margaret to celebrate Christmas at Windsor, where on 28 February 1261 she gave birth to her first child, Margaret. Three years later her eldest son, Alexander, was born on 21 December 1264 at Jedburgh. A second son, named David, was born in 1270. 
Margaret and Alexander III met her brother Edward at Roxburgh early in 1267 and in 1268 they again attended Henry III's court. According to the Lanercost chronicle, she was very anxious for Edward's safety during his absence on crusade, and deeply lamented her father's death in 1272. On 19 August 1274 she and her husband attended Edward I's coronation at Westminster. Margaret died at Cupar Castle on 27 February 1275 and was buried at Dunfermline Abbey. The so-called chronicler of Lanercost (really a Franciscan of Carlisle), who claims to have had his information from her confessor, speaks of her in the warmest terms. 'She was a lady', he says, 'of great beauty, chastity, and humility -- three qualities which are rarely found together in the same person' ('Chronicon de Lanercost', 97). She was a good friend of the friars, and on her deathbed received the last sacraments from her confessor, a Franciscan, while she refused to admit into her chamber the great bishops and abbots. 


@@@@@


doc= 18046


Margaret (1279?-1318), queen of England, second consort of Edward I, was the last child of Philippe III of France (died 1285) and his second wife, Marie de Brabant. The story that Edward initially hoped to marry Margaret's elder sister, Blanche, is unfounded; Philippe IV first suggested his half-sister Margaret as a wife for Edward ['see 'Edward I] in 1294, but the project hung fire until negotiations began in 1298 to end Edward's Gascon war against Philippe. 
Margaret and Edward married amid rich ceremony at Canterbury on 10 September 1299; according to the 'Liber de antiquis legibus', Margaret was then aged twenty. She wore a crown at her wedding and on great occasions thereafter, but was never anointed queen. Her first son, Thomas of Brotherton, later earl of Norfolk and earl marshal (d. 1338), was born at Brotherton in Yorkshire on 1 June 1300, apparently prematurely as Cawood had been prepared for her confinement; an early birth would support the story that she named her son for Thomas Becket, whom she invoked during a dangerous labour. The child reputedly languished on a French nurse's milk, but throve when an Englishwoman replaced her. A second son, Edmund of Woodstock, later earl of Kent (d. 1330), was born at Woodstock on 1 August 1301; Margaret's daughter, Eleanor, born at Winchester on 6 May 1306, died in 1310. 
Margaret was less constantly with Edward than Eleanor of Castile (died 1290), but contemporary chroniclers remark his great love for her, and his letters reveal him to have been most attentive to her welfare and to that of her children. She was friendly with his daughters by Eleanor and in 1305 helped to reconcile him with his son the prince of Wales; she appeared with her husband on such ceremonial occasions as the Feast of the Swans in 1306 and a commemorative mass for Eleanor in 1307. Her official duties are rarely noted, but in 1301 Edward did designate her to determine whether two of his agents had suitable credentials to conclude a truce with the Scots. Margaret was notably active as an intercessor between Edward and his subjects; perhaps she hoped thereby to allay any lingering distrust of her French connections or of the unpopular treaty that led to her marriage, but a story in the later 'Scalacronica', that she once passed strategic information to Philippe IV, suggests she never entirely escaped suspicion. It is unclear, however, if either Margaret or Edward II knew of Philippe IV's project in 1310 to marry her daughter, Eleanor, to a Sicilian prince. 
After Edward I's death Margaret commissioned her chaplain, John London, to write a Latin eulogy of her husband. In 1308 she attended Edward II's wedding to her niece Isabella of France, and in November 1312 witnessed Edward III's birth. Little is heard of her thereafter until her death on 14 February 1318; she was interred in the Franciscans' London church, to the construction of which she had contributed 2000 marks in 1306, and a further 100 marks in her will. Margaret was as richly dowered as Eleanor of Castile, held most of the latter's lands, and enjoyed all the financial perquisites of her office. Her revenues must have been ample, but she was apparently extravagant. By 1302 her debts stood at $4000; to pay them Edward assigned her all receipts from wardships and in 1305 granted her new estates worth $500, while the pope, Clement V, in 1306 allowed her, for her expenses and charities, $4000 from a tenth collected in England for the relief of the Holy Land. She none the less left sizeable debts. 
Contemporary English writers hailed Margaret as 'the flower of the French' (Wright, 178), her physical beauty surpassed only by the purity of her morals; Robert Mannyng of Brunne in 1338 called her 'good without lack' ('Peter Langtoft's Chronicle', 2.306). Her tomb was sold by Sir Martin Bowes about 1550, when the Franciscan priory became a parish church. Two extant pieces of sculpture are often associated with Margaret, though neither is an authentic portrait: a battered queen's head on the tomb of Edward's admiral Gervase Alard in Winchelsea church, and a mid-fourteenth-century statue on the south buttress of Lincoln Cathedral, the features of which may have been recut. 


@@@@@


doc= 18047


Margaret (1424-1445), dauphine of France, was the eldest child of James I (1394-1437), king of Scots, and Queen Joan (d. 1445). Her parents were married in February 1424 and her birth can be assigned to the latter part of the same year. In 1428 she and her sisters were given into the care of Michael Ramsay, the keeper of Lochmaben Castle, Dumfriesshire, while the king and queen travelled to Inverness. At the age of three she assumed significance in her father's diplomacy. An embassy arrived from Charles VII of France in July 1428 to renew the alliance with Scotland. It was empowered to ask for Margaret's hand in marriage for the dauphin, Louis (1423-1483), himself born only in July 1423. In return the French wanted an army of 6000 men. The prospect of an alliance with the French royal house raised the status of James and the Stewart dynasty, but the king was not prepared to commit himself to Charles VII for nearly eight years, while Charles too hesitated after his increased success against England from 1429. Meanwhile James used the proposed alliance to negotiate from strength with both England and France, and the possibility of a match between Henry VI and either Margaret or one of her sisters was also mooted. It was not until 1435, after this threat of an Anglo-Scottish alliance had been raised, that the marriage of Margaret to the dauphin was finally agreed. In March 1436 Margaret departed from Dumbarton with an escort of major lords, a 140-strong household in royal livery, and an 'army' of 1200. She sailed in a French fleet, arriving on the Ile de Re, near La Rochelle, on 17 April. From there she made a formal progress to Tours, where she married the dauphin on 25 June in the chapel of the castle. 
As dauphine, Margaret was committed to the keeping of Queen Marie of France, wife of Charles VII. After the wedding her Scottish household and following were sent home, the French perhaps remembering the demands and disruption arising from earlier Scottish forces in France. Margaret was allowed just a few Scottish attendants, and may have been provided with her own household only in 1437, when her marriage to the dauphin was consummated. The murder of her father in the same year meant that until her death she was heir presumptive of her young brother, James II. The active role of the dauphine in France was limited. Contemporary accounts of her poor relations with her husband probably have some basis. Comparisons of her beauty with his ugliness may be offset by remarks -- admittedly made by English chroniclers -- about the dauphin's being unable to stand her 'evil-savoured breath'. One of the dauphin's complaints in his revolt of 1440 against his father was the lack of revenue assigned to his wife, but Margaret seems to have remained on good terms with the king and to have received grants directly from him rather than her husband. She acted as a mediator between King Charles and the city of Metz, and in 1444-5 attended the celebration of the marriage of Margaret of Anjou and Henry VI of England. Her public role in France was restricted to these formal interventions and appearances at court ceremonial. Attempts to place her in court politics overplay the evidence. 
However, the dauphine became the subject of criticism, instigated, according to later speculation, by her husband. Suggestions that she deliberately prolonged her childlessness through her diet and clothing, and accusations of immorality with members of her household, were made at the French court, and in July 1445 Margaret's relations with Queen Marie became strained in a dispute over the arrangements for their households. In this atmosphere Margaret became ill on 7 August with what was diagnosed as a brain infection which led to ulceration of the lungs. Her reported comments during her illness suggest that her health had been affected by the criticisms, and she was heard to say that she regretted coming to France. On 16 August 1445, at the age of twenty, Margaret died at Chalons-sur-Marne and she was buried in the cathedral of St Etienne in the city. Her wish to lie at the abbey of Thouars, where she had founded a chapellany, was fulfilled by her husband, now Louis XI, only in 1479. 
Much of Margaret's significance derives from her role as a patroness of poets and, reputedly, as a poet herself. One later account ascribed her death to the strain of too many poetic vigils. Although nothing survives which can be proved as her work, as dauphine Margaret was surrounded by a group of poets in her household, including the viscount of Blosseville and one of her ladies, Jehanne Filleul, whose extant works do survive. Margaret's father, James I, certainly shared an interest in literary pursuits, and two of her sisters, Isabella and Eleanor, were similarly patrons and artists within the European princely houses. Margaret's influence is suggested by the existence of three different laments for the dauphine, all composed shortly after her death. One was written by de Blosseville, while another appears in the possession of, and was possibly written by, her sister Isabella. The third account, found in a French manuscript, was incorporated into the 'Liber pluscardensis', a Scottish chronicle, pointing to Franco-Scottish cultural ties. 
Margaret's importance apart from literature lay in her position as the crucial link between the Stewarts and continental royalty. Her marriage related her brother and sisters to the house of Valois, and from 1440 the Scots exploited this fact. A whole range of prestigious unions followed. Isabella was married to Francois, duke of Brittany, in 1442, Mary to the lord of Veere in Zeeland in 1444, and Eleanor, initially proposed as a second wife for the dauphin, married Sigismund, count of Tyrol, in 1447. The Scots relied on the French to make matches for Margaret's sisters, and sent out Eleanor and Joanna for this purpose in 1445. Scotland was able to enter the international marriage market, its efforts culminating in James II's wedding to Mary of Gueldres, niece of Philip the Good, duke of Burgundy, in 1449. If Margaret's marriage produced no half-Scottish kings of France, it raised the prestige of the Stewarts as a dynasty of European consequence. 


@@@@@


doc= 18048


Margaret (1282/3-1290), queen-designate of Scots, was the only daughter of Erik II Magnusson, king of Norway (died 1299), and his first wife, Margaret, the Maid of Scotland, daughter of Alexander III, whose marriage took place in August 1281; Queen Margaret died at Tonsberg on 9 April 1283, possibly in childbirth. On the death of the Lord Alexander in January 1284, Margaret was recognized by the Scottish magnates as heir presumptive to her grandfather on 5 February following; but after Alexander III's death on 18 or 19 March 1286 the succession remained in suspense until the following November because his widow was pregnant. Margaret then became heir, despite an unsuccessful Brus rising, and it became a concern of the Scottish community to carry out Alexander III's wish to marry her to a son of Edward I. The first need was to persuade her father to release her, and this was achieved at Salisbury on 6 November 1289, after Erik had been helped financially by Edward; four months later, in March 1290, Edward I sent formal proposals for a marriage between the Maid and Edward (later Edward II), offering to protect the independence of Scotland and the liberties of its prelates and magnates, but also designating Margaret as queen. The Scots were reluctant to agree because Edward demanded control of their castles, and he confirmed these promises at Northampton on 28 August 1290 because the Maid was about to sail from Norway. The text is ambiguous about her immediate destination: she was to come to Scotland or England in one clause, but in another would go to England and venture to Scotland only if it was peaceable. When she sailed in September 1290 her destination was Orkney. 
In and after the treaty Edward I showed his intention to impose his will upon the Scots, through his agent, Antony (I) Bek, bishop of Durham, supposedly acting for Margaret as 'queen', but without waiting for her arrival, marriage, and inauguration. Before this, and after her death, Margaret was 'Lady of Scotland' to the Scots; to see her as queen is misleading, and effectively connives at the manipulative insensitivity of those men, led by the English king, of whose ambition for political power she was the pathetic child victim. She would have become queen only after the traditional ceremonies at Scone. Margaret sailed from Norway in September 1290, accompanied by two Norwegian bishops, fell ill on the voyage, and died about the end of that month 'between the hands of Bishop Narve' in Orkney (Dunbar, 106), while the Scots gathered at Scone, presumably to inaugurate her. Her body was returned to Norway and buried beside her mother's in the choir of Christ's Kirk, Bergen. 
In 1301 a woman from Lubeck claiming to be Margaret was tried for treason and burned at Bergen. 


@@@@@


doc= 18049


Margaret (1430-1482), queen of England, consort of Henry VI, was born on 23 or 24 March 1430, in France, probably at Pont-a-Mousson or Nancy, in Lorraine. She was the fourth surviving child, and second daughter, of Rene, duke of Anjou (1409-1480), and Isabelle (died 1453), daughter and heir of Charles II, duke of Lorraine. 
Margaret's parental links to a number of important European ruling families destined her from birth to be a pawn in the complexities of European diplomacy. Rene, second son of Louis II, duke of Anjou and king of Naples, and Yolande, daughter of Juan, king of Aragon, was directly related to the French monarchy by his own parentage and through his sister Marie, wife of Charles VII of France. Although having little by way of patrimony in his own name, in 1419, aged ten, Rene was adopted by his great-uncle the Cardinal-Duke Louis, ruler of the duchy of Bar, as his heir, and was married to Isabelle, eldest daughter and heir of Charles II, duke of Lorraine. Rene inherited the duchy of Lorraine on the death of his father-in-law on 25 January 1431 but it was contested by Antoine de Vaudemont, a nephew of the late duke, supported by Philip the Good, duke of Burgundy. On 2 July 1431 Rene was defeated at Bulgneville in Lorraine and taken prisoner by Vaudemont, transferred into the custody of the duke of Burgundy, and held prisoner in Dijon until 1437. During his imprisonment Rene inherited the title to the duchy of Anjou and the county of Provence on the death of his childless brother Louis in 1434. In the following year he also inherited the thrones of Sicily, Naples, and Aragon from Joanna II, queen of Sicily, but his claim was contested by Alfonso V of Aragon, a dispute that was to preoccupy Rene and his wife intermittently for the next five years, necessitating long periods in Italy. 
Her father's fluctuating political fortunes meant that Margaret spent much of her early life either in the care of her mother or, after 1435, her grandmother, Yolande of Aragon (died 1442), living first at Nancy, the capital of the duchy of Lorraine, and then at Saumur and Angers in Anjou. These two strong-minded women played an important part in shaping Margaret's personality during her formative years in a society where, within ruling families, women were able to hold more independent power as regents than in England. She was also exposed to the illustrious court culture of Anjou, both her grandmother and her father being leading patrons of literature and art. 
In 1442 Rene abandoned his fight with Alfonso of Aragon for the crown of Naples and returned to France to devote his time to looking after his more immediate territorial interests, and to ensuring the continued influence of his family in European politics by arranging appropriate marriages for his children. Proposed marriage partners for Margaret included a son of the count of St Pol in 1433, the one-year-old Charles, count of Charolais, in 1435, and Charles, count of Nevers, in 1442-3. None came to fruition. The most enduring, and ultimately successful, marriage negotiations with representatives of the English king, Henry VI (1421-1471), were conducted sporadically from 1439, in the hope of bringing the lengthy and expensive war between England and France to an end. In spring 1444 William de la Pole, earl of Suffolk, led an embassy to Charles VII to negotiate a truce, resulting in a marriage treaty between Rene of Anjou and the English, agreed on 22 May. The solemn betrothal of Margaret and King Henry was celebrated in the church of St Martin, Tours, on 24 May, Suffolk standing proxy for the king. On 28 May a twenty-month truce between England and France was sealed, though the English claim to full sovereignty over Normandy and Gascony, and refusal to renounce the title to the French throne, remained obstacles to permanent peace. Historians have speculated on the benefits of the marriage alliance for the two countries. While it represented a prestigious match for Rene of Anjou, it also brought an important source of influence at the English court to Charles VII, who was to use it to good effect. Though Margaret came with a meagre dowry, consisting only of her mother's empty claims to the kingdom of Majorca and 20,000 francs, and renouncing claims to her father's possessions, she brought links with other strategically important areas of France, such as the duchies of Lorraine and Bar. Lecoy de la Marche, Rene's nineteenth-century biographer, suggests that the English acceptance of so poor a dowry was motivated by nothing more than a desire for friendship with France. 
After a delay of six months Suffolk returned to France with a large retinue to escort Margaret back to England. This substantial and expensive expedition, costing $5573 17's'. 5died, left London in November 1444 and returned five months later. The exact sequence of events between November 1444 and April 1445 is confused. Some writers record a second proxy marriage performed at Nancy in early March 1445 by Louis de Heraucourt, bishop of Toul. It was afterwards claimed by the French that the marriage was deliberately delayed by the Angevins until Suffolk had given a firm undertaking to surrender Maine to Rene of Anjou. There is confusion in the sources between the proxy marriage of Margaret and Suffolk in Tours in May 1444, and that of Rene's eldest daughter, Yolande, to Frederic, son and heir of Antoine de Vaudemont, at Nancy in February 1445, attended by Margaret and other members of the French royal family. The latter coincided with the arrival of an English delegation led by the Garter king of arms to finalize the terms for the marriage treaty and convey Margaret on the first stage of her journey from her homeland to Rouen via Paris. When Margaret eventually reached Rouen, accompanied by a small number of Angevin servants, she was not well enough to attend the splendid welcoming pageant, and her place in the procession was taken by the duchess of Suffolk. 
On her arrival in England on 9 April Margaret was ill again, and remained at Southampton, where, according to the Milanese ambassador, she was visited by the king in disguise, who was anxious to inspect his young bride in person for the first time. By 22 April she had recovered sufficiently for the king's confessor, William Aiscough, bishop of Salisbury, to conduct the marriage ceremony at Titchfield Abbey. The king presented her with jewels appropriate to a queen, including a gold wedding ring set with a ruby made from a ring previously given him by Cardinal Beaufort at his coronation in Paris. She made her state entry into London on 28 May, and was entertained by pageants and tableaux accompanied by verses written by John Lydgate, expressing the high public expectations of the marriage as a symbol of a permanent peace between England and France. The coronation was performed at Westminster Abbey on 30 May by John Stafford, archbishop of Canterbury. Three days of feasting and tournaments followed. 
In July 1445 a French embassy arrived in London to conclude peace negotiations in the wake of the royal marriage. The discussions held now and later were indecisive, and were also bedevilled by Henry VI's readiness to enter into independent diplomatic initiatives and to make commitments which conflicted with the views of his advisers. One of these, a personal letter of 25 December 1445 to Charles VII, promising to surrender Maine by the end of the following April, was ultimately to provide the French king with an excuse for the renewal of war in 1448, with disastrous results for the English. The exact role of the queen in all this, and how much responsibility she should bear for the promise offered by her husband to her uncle, is unclear. A letter of 17 December 1445 to Charles VII, signed by Margaret, indicates that she was under instruction from Guillaume Cousinot and Jean Havart, members of the French king's household, to assist the peace process by encouraging her husband to deliver Maine to the French. In his letter of 22 December to Charles VII, Henry categorically acknowledged the influence of his wife in making the decision to surrender Maine, but it is likely that the peace-loving king would have made this decision of his own free will. 
Margaret was assigned the customary dower for fifteenth-century queens of England of 10,000 marks per annum by parliamentary grant on 19 March 1446. Estates worth $2000 per annum were settled on her from the duchy of Lancaster, concentrated on the midland honours of Tutbury, Leicester, and Kenilworth, with additional lands in Essex, Hertfordshire, Middlesex, Surrey, and London, and the 'ancient south parts' of the duchy, comprising lands in Hampshire, Wiltshire, Somerset, Dorset, Devon, Cornwall, Oxfordshire, Herefordshire, and Worcestershire. The midland estates were to become the heartland of her territorial power base in the later 1450s, and close administrative links between the duchy of Lancaster and her household were quickly established. Key duchy officials such as William Cotton, the receiver-general, John Walsh and Nicholas Sharp, auditors, and William Nanseglos, clerk of the receipt, provided her with financial and legal services. She also received a cash annuity from the duchy of $1000, and, after the death of the duke of Gloucester in 1447, a further annuity of 500 marks. Other substantial sources of income included $1000 from the customs of Southampton, $1009 from the duchy of Cornwall, and $1658 directly from the exchequer. She struggled to receive her revenues in full in the early years of her queenship, because she lacked the power to compete successfully with rival claims on exchequer resources, at a time of increasing financial crisis for the Lancastrian monarchy. On 15 June 1446 Margaret was given custody of Anne, the three-year-old daughter and heir of Henry Beauchamp, duke of Warwick, and was assigned $200 per annum from her estates to maintain Anne in her household. She sold the wardship to Suffolk in November 1446, but Anne died three years later. A further annuity of 500 marks was assigned to her from the duchy of Lancaster in 1447. In June 1448 she acquired the castle and lordship of Berkhamsted, and in July 1448 she was granted a licence to ship wool free of customs from any port in the realm to any destination. 
The limited evidence for the early years of Margaret's married life indicates that she fulfilled the role expected of a late medieval queen consort, devoting her energies to the support of her husband, but failing for a long time in one important queenly duty, the production of an heir, thereby provoking both speculation and anxiety from contemporary observers. Her letters, household accounts, and jewel accounts reveal both a determined and effective distributor of patronage, and a woman concerned for the welfare of her household servants. Her letters provide clear evidence that she understood the importance of her position as a patron, and show her desire to exploit it to secure loyalty and support. The king's and the queen's household establishments enjoyed a very close relationship, with shared personnel and some intermarriage. Three of Margaret's French ladies-in-waiting in the escort accompanying her to England in 1445 married members of the king's household. Margaret formed a particularly close relationship with Suffolk and his wife, but there is no contemporary evidence to support the sixteenth-century view, deriving from the chronicler Edward Hall, that the queen and Suffolk were lovers. It is much more likely that, given the age difference (Suffolk was nearly fifty in 1445), Margaret looked upon Suffolk as a surrogate father from the time of the proxy marriage at Tours in 1444. Relations between the queen and the duchess of Suffolk seem to have been close. Alice was the regular recipient of gifts of jewels and other favours from the queen until 1450. A number of the queen's household servants had strong links with Suffolk and rose to positions of prominence through his influence. After his downfall in 1450, their earlier close association was to damage Margaret's reputation and link her with the English defeat in France. 
Another strong influence on Margaret in these early years was Andrew Dokett, principal of St Bernard's College, Cambridge, who persuaded her to found what is now Queens' College, Cambridge, in 1448, shortly after Henry's foundation of King's College. There has been considerable speculation as to her motives. In her petition to the king requesting permission for the foundation of a sister college to King's, Margaret refers to her desire to emulate her husband and two earlier founders, Elizabeth de Clare and Mary de St Pol, countess of Pembroke. She does not appear to have taken a close personal interest in the foundation, making no significant grants of property or gifts of money to the college, though some of her closest associates were benefactors, including her chamberlain, Sir John Wenlock, her chief steward, Viscount Beaumont, and Marmaduke Lumley, bishop of Carlisle. 
It is difficult to form a clear impression of Margaret's physical appearance or her personality. She was considered good-looking by contemporaries, the French chronicler Thomas Basin describing her in 1445 as 'filiam specie et formam praestantem, quae tunc 'maturo viro foret et plenis nubilis annis'' ('a good-looking and well-developed girl, who was then 'mature and ripe for marriage''; Basin, 1.156, quoting Virgil's 'Aeneid', book 7, l. 53). The Milanese ambassador, writing to Bianca Maria Visconti, duchess of Milan, in 1458, reported, with a measure of diplomacy, that she was 'a most handsome woman, though somewhat dark' ('CSP Milan', '1385-1618', 18-19). Her letters indicate that Margaret enjoyed the conventional aristocratic pursuits of riding and hunting. Sometimes she wrote to her park-keeper in advance of a visit, instructing him to ensure that game stocks were replenished. The Coventry city records indicate that she rode regularly to Coventry from Kenilworth accompanied by her ladies-in-waiting. That it took over eight years for the couple to produce a child has led to speculation that the marriage was not a success, but contemporary evidence indicates that the king and queen spent much of their time together, particularly favouring the royal residences at Windsor, Sheen, Eltham, and Greenwich. In April 1453 Margaret visited the shrine of Our Lady at Walsingham to leave a gift of a pax, a thank-offering for the long-awaited baby that she was expecting later that year. Her joy was short-lived for, within a few months, her husband collapsed with a serious physical and mental illness, and he was totally unaware of the birth of their son on 13 October 1453. 
Margaret's personal circumstances changed dramatically in 1453 with the onset of the king's illness and the birth of her son, Edward, created prince of Wales on 15 March 1454. She was forced into the centre of the political arena, as control of her husband and son became the focus of competing groups among the nobility. It is hard to detect Margaret's true feelings and response to her enhanced political importance, because of the shortage of personal records, but it is likely that a strong motivating force behind her actions was the desire to see her son inherit the throne sooner rather than later. As long as Edward was a minor, during the incapacity of the king, Margaret had to accept that government was likely to be in the hands of those noblemen most senior in rank, and that she would be excluded from power. Her bid for the regency, advanced in January 1454, failed, being rejected by the Lords in favour of a protectorate established in March 1454, headed by the premier duke, Richard of York. 
The queen's relationship with York is crucial to an understanding of power politics in the mid-1450s. Margaret is likely to have regarded York as a serious threat to her son's inheritance, even though the duke swore allegiance to King Henry on many occasions, and claimed that his opposition was directed against his political rival, the duke of Somerset, not against the king. It should not be assumed that the queen had always regarded York as a dynastic threat. He and the duchess are recorded as regular recipients of gifts in the queen's jewel accounts between 1445 and 1453. An undated letter written by Cecily, duchess of York, to Margaret some time during her pregnancy indicates that the duchess saw the queen as a possible mediator between her husband and the king. The birth of her son could be said to have made the queen's position more secure, and to have solved the burning issue of the succession, but the king's incapacity then raised the problem of authority at the centre of government. The choice of York as protector by the Lords could be interpreted as a sign of aristocratic favour towards the dynastic possibilities of his line, the situation being aggravated by the personal rivalry of York and Somerset, another possible claimant to the throne. The queen had long been connected with Somerset, paying him an annuity of 100 marks from the autumn of 1451, and during the power struggle leading to the first battle of St Albans (22 May 1455) she must have regarded him as her natural ally against York. 
Somerset's death at St Albans created a power vacuum at the centre of government in opposition to York and increasingly the new focus of interest became the royal household dominated by the queen. Her authority was wholly dependent upon the king's power, which was seriously diminished after St Albans, especially from November 1455 with the establishment of York's second protectorate. Margaret might have feared that her position would be undermined by York's authority, and she may have been particularly concerned about a possible threat to her financial resources. A renewed inquiry into the size and costs of the royal household had been initiated by the Yorkist regime in the summer of 1454, resulting in the issue of ordinances to limit the size of the household on 13 November 1454. This was followed by a resumption petition presented by the Commons in parliament meeting in July 1455 to provide for financial solvency, and to attempt to establish some control over the royal household. A further petition presented in February 1456 provoked a storm of opposition from the Lords and the queen, anxious to secure exemption from its provisions. The strength of opposition was such that York was forced to resign the protectorship on 25 February 1456, thus providing Margaret with the opportunity to set herself up at the head of an anti-Yorkist power base focused on the royal household. 
In April 1456 Margaret and her son left London to take up residence in the royal castle of Kenilworth and the nearby city of Coventry, being joined in August by the king. The queen spent the summer on a tour of her estates and the prince's patrimony, visiting Tutbury Castle in May and Chester in June. The choice of the midlands as an alternative seat of power was deliberate, for the region lay at the heart of the queen's dower estates and provided ready access to urgently needed sources of revenue and manpower. Two letters from the Paston collection for 1456 indicate that the queen was regarded by contemporaries as an emerging political force. In a letter dated 9 February 1456 John Bocking, writing to Sir John Fastolf, states 'The Quene is a grete and strong labourid woman, for she spareth noo peyne to sue hire thinges to an intent and conclusion to hir power' ('Paston Letters', 3.75), and in another letter written on 7 June 1456, Bocking observes 'My Lord York is at Sendall stille, and waytith on the Quene and she up on hym' (ibid., 3.92). A number of entries in the Coventry records for 1457 also bear out the impression of the queen as an increasingly powerful figure. Members of the great council meeting in Coventry in 1456-7 were expected to show the queen the same deference as the king. When she departed from Coventry for Coleshill on 16 March 1457 she was accompanied by the mayor and sheriffs with the king's sword carried before her. On the feast of the Exaltation of the Holy Cross later that year (14 September) the queen made a triumphal entry into the city, greeted by a pageant of prophets, patron saints, cardinal virtues, and nine conquerors, whereas the king went silent and unnoticed. 
Despite appearances, Margaret had no real basis of independent authority and was forced to work within the established framework of royal power to build up a personal following. She did this partly by controlling appointments to the prince of Wales's council, set up in January 1457, linking her supporters with the wider interests of the Lancastrian monarchy. She used appointments to the prince's council to establish her personal control over the principality of Wales, the duchy of Lancaster, the palatinate of Chester, and the duchy of Cornwall. Many of the key personnel of the council had connections with the queen's household -- William Booth, archbishop of York, for example, and his younger brother Laurence Booth, keeper of the privy seal and (from September 1457) bishop of Durham, both of whom were her former chancellors. She formed close links with a number of leading magnates who held estates and local offices in the north-west, most importantly Humphrey Stafford, duke of Buckingham, John Talbot, earl of Shrewsbury, and Thomas, Lord Stanley. The power exercised by the queen is evident from the wording of a number of warrants dating from 1457-9 authorizing appointments and decisions in the name of the prince of Wales, but expressly with the assent of the queen. 
The chaotic state of royal finances and uncertainty over payments from the exchequer made the queen heavily reliant on her own resources, especially those derived from her duchy of Lancaster estates, boosted by the revenues assigned to the prince of Wales in his own right from January 1457. Her presence, with the prince of Wales, in the midlands and north-west during this period can only have served to strengthen her control over these important assets. Another method used to bind prominent members of the Lancastrian party was marriage alliances. The queen played a prominent part in the arrangement of a number of key aristocratic marriages between 1456 and 1460, including those of Margaret Beaufort, countess of Richmond, to Henry Stafford, son of the duke of Buckingham, in 1457, and Katherine Stafford, daughter of the duke of Buckingham, to John Talbot, son and heir of the earl of Shrewsbury, in 1458. 
On 28 August 1457 there was a French attack on the port of Sandwich, led by Pierre de Breze, seneschal of Normandy, and confidant of both Rene of Anjou and Charles VII. The contemporary French chroniclers d'Escouchy and Chastellain believed that Margaret had encouraged the raid, but this view was rejected by Beaucourt and Basin, and it seems most unlikely that she had anything to do with it. This attack added to the increasing pressure on the court to return to the capital, and the king temporarily asserted himself, instigating the return to Westminster in October and attempting a reconciliation between the Yorkist and Lancastrian lords, by means of a 'loveday' procession through the streets of London on 25 March 1458. In the procession the queen walked hand in hand with her enemy, the duke of York, perhaps signifying that the underlying source of conflict lay here, rather than with York and Somerset's heir. The loveday proved to be a sham and served only to demonstrate Henry's tenuous grasp on the complexities of politics. By spring 1459 strained relations between the Lancastrian and Yorkist lords had reached such a pitch that the king and queen again withdrew to Coventry, where, at a meeting of the great council held in late June, in the presence of the queen and her son, the Yorkist lords were indicted for treason, in their absence. Both sides now prepared for confrontation, the queen touring her Cheshire estates with her son, distributing the prince's livery of the swan and ostrich feathers to the gentlemen of the county. 
On 23 September 1459 the Lancastrian army, largely consisting of Cheshiremen, described in Gregory's chronicle as the 'Quenys galentys' (Gairdner, 204), was defeated by the earl of Salisbury at Bloreheath. An unreliable tradition asserts that Margaret observed the fighting from Mucklestone church tower, and, witnessing the defeat of the Lancastrians, took flight, reversing the shoes on her carriage horses in order to evade pursuit. But the Yorkists were in turn routed at Ludlow on 12-13 October, and their leaders were attainted at the parliament which met at Coventry shortly afterwards. Towards the end of the session, on 11 December, the assembled lords swore a solemn oath of loyalty to the king, and promised to preserve the queen and the honour of Prince Edward, whom they undertook to accept as king in due time. The dynasticism implicit in their oath was soon to be drastically repudiated, when on 31 October 1460, following his capture at the battle of Northampton, King Henry himself was induced to accept Richard of York as the heir to the throne, in place of the prince of Wales. 
The movements of Margaret and her son after the battle of Northampton are unclear, but it seems that they fled westwards from Coventry to Wales, embarking from Harlech for Scotland at the end of the year. Margaret took refuge at the court of her fellow queen, Mary of Gueldres, regent for the young king of Scotland, James III. Contrary to sixteenth-century accounts as finally embodied in one of the most dramatic scenes in Shakespeare's play '3 Henry VI', I.iv, Margaret was not present at the battle of Wakefield, fought on 30 December 1460, when both the duke of York and his younger son, Edmund, earl of Rutland, were killed. However, she was quick to take advantage of the Lancastrian victory, and rallied an army of Scottish supporters and northern men bearing the livery of the prince of Wales to march on London. This force clashed with the Yorkists, led by the earl of Warwick, at St Albans on 17 February 1461, winning a resounding victory for the Lancastrians, and enabling the queen to regain control of the king. But she was unable to follow up the victory by gaining entry to the city of London, essential to ensure control of government and to give access to badly needed supplies. Attempts at mediation by the duchesses of Buckingham and Bedford, and Lady Scales, failed to reassure the citizen body of London that the Lancastrian army was under control, and they refused it admission. On the approach of the earl of March, now the Yorkist leader, Margaret was forced to withdraw and retreat northwards, thus losing the initiative. The decisive defeat of the Lancastrians at Towton on 29 March 1461 left the king, queen, and prince vulnerable once again, and they fled to Scotland for safety. The earl of March was crowned king as Edward IV on 28 June. 
From 1461 to 1471 Margaret was involved in increasingly desperate efforts to win foreign support for the recovery of the throne for either her husband or her son. She retained the loyalty of a significant number of noblemen and government officers, including the dukes of Somerset and Exeter and the earl of Pembroke who posed a real threat to Edward IV from across the Scottish borders in the early years of his reign. After 1464, when Lancastrian support was limited to a small group of household servants, effective resistance was severely hampered by shortage of money and of committed political backing. Despite her best efforts to persuade the ruling houses of Scotland and France to provide financial and military aid, neither was prepared to offer anything substantial. The Lancastrian cause was thus caught up in a complex web of European diplomacy. 
After the battle of Towton, Margaret took refuge initially at Linlithgow Palace, at the invitation of the bishop of St Andrews, and later in the Dominican convent at Edinburgh. Despite the friendly reception given to Margaret in Scotland, the Scottish court was divided over offering aid to the Lancastrians. Following the death of James II on 3 August 1460, leaving an eight-year-old heir, Scotland was governed by a regency council headed by James's widow, Mary of Gueldres, but split into two factions. Margaret was keen to form a firm alliance with the Scots, offering her son in marriage to the baby sister of James III, but Mary of Gueldres was advised against this by her cousin the duke of Burgundy. Despite this opposition, Margaret offered the fortified strongholds of Berwick and Carlisle to the Scottish council in return for their assistance, handing over Berwick on 25 April 1461. French support for the Lancastrian cause was kept alive by the seneschal of Normandy, Pierre de Breze, who led a French attack on the Channel Islands in May, setting the south coast of England on the alert. In July Margaret dispatched Somerset, Sir Robert Whittingham, and Lord Hungerford to France to seek out allies at the French court, but the death of Charles VII on 22 July 1461 changed the political climate in France, and the new king, Louis XI, proved unwilling to commit himself to a strong anti-Yorkist stance. 
In April 1462 Margaret sailed for France with her son, determined to meet Louis XI in person. She was received cordially by Francois II, duke of Brittany, who presented her with gifts worth 12,000 gold crowns. She travelled to Angers to visit her father and de Breze, now out of favour at the French court, and to await a meeting with Louis XI. This she eventually succeeded in obtaining, with the result that a secret agreement was reached at Chinon on 23 June, whereby Margaret agreed to surrender to Louis the English stronghold of Calais in return for a loan of 20,000 francs. More open negotiations were conducted at Tours leading to a treaty of mutual friendship concluded on 28 June, by which Louis agreed to finance an expedition to England led by de Breze, in return for Calais. When Margaret and de Breze at last set sail for Scotland in late October it was with only forty-two ships and some 800 men, paid for not by Louis but by de Breze himself. After taking Henry VI and Somerset on board in Scotland, the force landed on the Northumberland coast at Bamburgh and captured Alnwick for the Lancastrians. But on hearing of the approach of a Yorkist army, Margaret took flight with Henry and de Breze, leaving behind a small garrison. Their fleet was wrecked by a storm and they took refuge in Berwick Castle. By Christmas the castles of Bamburgh, Alnwick, and Dunstanburgh were back in Yorkist hands, only to be recaptured by a Franco-Scottish force in March 1463. In July the young James III, king of Scots, led a large Scottish army over the border to lay siege to Norham Castle, with Margaret, Henry, and Mary of Gueldres in attendance. The expedition was a fiasco and they were forced back having achieved nothing. Margaret left Scotland for France in August, taking her son with her but leaving her husband behind; they were never to meet again. Accompanying her was a small group of loyal supporters including the duke of Exeter, Sir John Fortescue, Sir Edmund Mountfort, Sir Robert Whittingham, John Morton, bishop of Ely, Ralph Mackerell, and seven women attendants. 
Margaret's hopes of enlisting the aid of the French were dashed by the uncompromising attitude of Louis XI, who wanted a settlement with the dukes of Burgundy and Brittany. Edward IV agreed a truce at Hesdin on 8 October 1463, by which Louis specifically renounced all aid to the Lancastrians. Though Margaret was left in a very unfavourable position, she persisted in her efforts to obtain a meeting with her old enemy Philip, duke of Burgundy, eventually succeeding at the beginning of September. She was treated with dignity and respect by the duke, but he was not prepared to commit himself to her cause. He sent her back to St Pol, accompanied by the duchess of Bourbon and her daughter, to whom, according to Chastellain, Margaret recounted her earlier adventures in Scotland, which included an attack by a brigand while she was hiding in woods with her son. Margaret was also received at Bruges by the heir to Burgundy, Charles, count of Charolais, and his brother Antoine, count of La Roche, the Bastard of Burgundy, and was presented with generous gifts. During the winter of 1463-4 she stayed with her father in Nancy, continuing to negotiate with Charolais and Brittany. She kept in touch with her husband, now residing at Bamburgh, via Guillaume Cousinot who reported, in the spring of 1464, that there was still support for Henry VI in England and Wales, and that it would not be difficult to recover the kingdom for the Lancastrians with a little foreign assistance. This was not forthcoming, and a further attempt to recover the country for Henry VI instigated by Somerset in April-May 1464 failed, forcing the remaining prominent Lancastrian supporters to flee overseas. 
Margaret was now living at the chateau of Koeur at St Mihiel in the duchy of Bar assigned to her by her father, with a pension of 6000 crowns. She remained there until 1468, apart from a short pilgrimage to St Nicholas-de-Port at the end of 1464 to offer thanks for the safe recovery of her son from a serious illness, and a visit to her parents at Angers in 1466. The royal household in exile is estimated to have numbered between 50 and 200 people. According to Fortescue, they lived in some poverty, and were very much dependent upon Margaret's father for any extra comforts -- he sent his personal physician Pierre Robin to attend Margaret and her son several times. They were also visited regularly by her brother Jean, duke of Calabria, who came to play an increasingly important part in the negotiations with Louis XI. Margaret continued to woo the kings of Portugal and Castile as well as Charles, count of Charolais (all kinsmen of the house of Lancaster). By 1466 it had become clear that the duke of Burgundy and Edward IV intended to seal their alliance with a marriage settlement (between Edward's sister Margaret and the count of Charolais), thus pushing Louis further towards a Lancastrian alliance. An indication of the continued efforts of the Lancastrians to keep the cause of Henry VI alive in England and Wales is given by the arrest of a messenger sent by Margaret to rebels in Harlech Castle in 1467, and in the following year a servant of Sir Robert Whittingham was caught with letters from Lancastrian exiles to friends in England. He was tortured and accused of treasonable intercourse with Queen Margaret. In June 1468 Louis was prepared to lend support to an expedition led by Jasper Tudor, earl of Pembroke, to Wales, but this too failed. In October 1468 a rumour circulated that Margaret and her son were at Harfleur with an army about to invade England, and Edward ordered the English fleet to scour the channel to look for Margaret's ships. 
The marriage of Margaret of York to Charles of Burgundy in June 1468 probably convinced Louis XI of the wisdom of falling in with Margaret of Anjou and her brother, who were pressing for an alliance with Richard Neville, earl of Warwick, as a means of restoring Henry VI to the throne. He was backed by Fortescue, whose memoranda to Louis XI in 1468-70 indicate his persistent attempts to bring the two parties together by arranging the marriage of Prince Edward to Warwick's daughter Anne, despite the difficulties caused by past allegiances. Louis was reluctant to offer asylum to Warwick and Clarence following their rebellion against Edward IV in 1469-70, but they landed at Honfleur on 1 May 1470, and came to Amboise a month later to arrange a meeting with Margaret. She was eventually persuaded to meet Warwick at Angers, although, according to the tract known as 'The maner and guiding of the earl of Warwick', Margaret was initially 'right dificyle' and said that she could never pardon Warwick 'which had been the greatest cause of the fall of Henry VI, of her and their son' (Ellis, 1.132). After fifteen days of pressure from the king of France and her father's counsellors, Margaret reluctantly agreed to the marriage of her son to Warwick's daughter, but insisted that it should not be 'perfyted' until Warwick had recovered England for Henry VI, and established Prince Edward as regent and governor. The betrothal of Prince Edward and Anne Neville took place in Angers Cathedral on 25 July, and Warwick returned to England in September with a fleet of sixty ships paid for by Louis, under the command of the admiral of France. 
Margaret and her advisers were well aware of the delicacy of their position, and of the need to present Prince Edward as a viable alternative to his Yorkist rival, and he does indeed appear to have been an energetic and warlike youth. Margaret must have believed that any future hope lay with her son rather than her husband, despite the fact that Warwick had entered the city of London unopposed on 6 October and immediately released Henry from the Tower, declaring him king once more. On 14 October Louis publicly proclaimed a treaty of alliance with Henry VI and ordered three days of thanksgiving for his restoration. Margaret and her son came to Paris to take part in the celebrations, but she was still not prepared to risk returning to England until convinced that conditions were right for the safety of her son. It was not until after Christmas that she made her way towards the Normandy coast via Rouen. On 7 December, an exchequer warrant authorized the payment of $2000 for a military escort to accompany Margaret and her son across the channel, but there were further delays as Warwick struggled to establish effective control of the country through the aged Henry VI. 
French ambassadors arrived in London in January 1471 to remind Warwick of the conditions of Louis's support -- an alliance against Burgundy -- and Warwick did his best to convince them that it was safe for Margaret to return to England with her son. Warwick had hoped to be able to travel to France to escort them himself, but in February he dispatched the prior of St John's and others to Honfleur to meet the royal party. Bad weather further delayed the expedition which finally set sail on 24 March. Margaret's ship landed at Weymouth on 14 April only to be greeted by the news of the Lancastrian defeat at the battle of Barnet and the death of the earl of Warwick. According to the 'Historie of the Arrivall of Edward IV in England', the news made her 'right hevy and sory' ('Historie of the Arrivall', 23), but she was encouraged by the duke of Somerset and the earl of Devon to make her way towards Wales in order to join up with the forces of Jasper Tudor, earl of Pembroke. The Lancastrian army camped outside Tewkesbury on 3 May as the Yorkists approached from the east. The following morning Margaret took shelter in a neighbouring religious house (its exact identity is unknown) with her daughter-in-law, Anne Neville, the countess of Devon, and her faithful lady-in-waiting, Lady Katherine Vaux. Here she learned of the death of her son at the hands of the Yorkists, and of the final humiliating defeat of the Lancastrian army. She was found three days later with her fellow widowed companions and handed over to Edward IV. According to the anonymous continuator of the Crowland chronicle, Margaret was borne in a carriage as a prisoner before the king at his triumphal entry into the city of London on 21 May. The death of Henry VI in the Tower that very night meant that Margaret no longer had any political importance as either the wife or mother of a rival king. As a childless widow her status was completely altered, and she became only an embarrassing encumbrance upon the victorious Edward IV. 
Little is known about the last ten years of Margaret's life. She remained in captivity in England until 1475, being moved from Windsor to Wallingford at the end of 1471, into the custody of Alice de la Pole, dowager duchess of Suffolk. Edward was anxious to see her return to her homeland provided a satisfactory arrangement could be made because, although she no longer posed a political threat, she had to be provided for financially. In his negotiations with Louis XI following his abortive expedition to France in the summer of 1475, Edward ensured that one of the conditions of the treaty of Picquigny, signed on 29 August 1475, was the return of Margaret to France. Edward was to surrender all rights over her, and transfer them to Louis in return for a ransom of 50,000 crowns ($10,000), of which the first instalment of 10,000 crowns should be paid when Margaret was handed over. Margaret had to renounce formally all title to the crown of England, to her dower lands in England, and any other claims she might have against Edward. On 13 November 1475 she was committed to the care of Thomas Thwaytes, who in turn handed her over to Sir Thomas Montgomery for her journey to France. Her formal transfer from English into French hands took place at Rouen on 22 January 1476, where two French commissioners made the first payment of her ransom. 
Though technically a free woman, Margaret was still dependent upon others for her livelihood. Her father, now married to his former mistress, Jeanne de Laval, and living in Provence, appeared uninterested in his daughter's fate, and she was left to the mercy of the king of France. Louis forced her to give up all claims to the Angevin inheritance of Anjou, Bar, and Provence from her father, and to Lorraine from her mother, arguing that this was an adequate compensation for the heavy expenses he had repeatedly incurred upon her behalf since 1462. He agreed to provide her with a pension of 6000 crowns and she retired to the chateau of Reculee near Angers. Following her father's death in 1480, when the Angevin inheritance passed into the hands of the French crown, Margaret went to live at the chateau of Dampierre, near Saumur, in Anjou. Here she wrote her short will on 2 August 1482, just three weeks before her death on 25 August. She was buried in Angers Cathedral. Margaret had little to leave to either friends or relations, but the witnesses to her will include Lady Katherine Vaux, widow of Sir William Vaux, killed at Tewkesbury in 1471, who no doubt had stayed loyally with her throughout the ten years of shared widowhood, the loneliest of times for a former queen and mother of the heir to the throne. 
Of all medieval queens consort, Margaret has received some of the harshest criticism from both contemporary commentators and later historians. Concern about her inability to bear a child was expressed as early as 1447, and from the late 1450s she faced slanders against her good character. In 1456 it was first rumoured that Prince Edward was not her son, and soon after, that she was going to force King Henry to abdicate in favour of his son. These rumours were eagerly picked up by foreign observers, such as the duke of Milan's ambassador, who reported in 1461 that it was believed that she had poisoned her husband. The new Yorkist king Edward IV, keen to establish the legitimacy of his dynasty, sought to blacken the names of his Lancastrian predecessors by any means he could. Inevitably Margaret's reputation suffered as she was blamed for leading the country into civil war, and she was presented as the domineering queen in contrast to her mild-mannered, passive husband. Thus the prevalent image of Margaret as a hard-headed, ruthless, cruel, vengeful power-seeker was born, an image perpetuated so effectively by Shakespeare, drawing upon earlier sixteenth-century writers such as Vergil, Hall, and Holinshed. Like Isabella of France, wife of Edward II, Margaret has suffered from an almost universally hostile press, as much because of her nationality as on account of the unfavourable political circumstances of her time. 
Shakespeare's view of Margaret persisted unchallenged into the twentieth century, influencing biographies of the queen by T. F. Tout and J. J. Bagley. Historians have demonstrated a distinct reluctance to seek out independent contemporary evidence, untainted by either political, xenophobic, or misogynist prejudice. Admittedly such evidence is hard to find, but there are some useful sources such as her letters and household accounts for the period before 1453, which indicate that, at first, Margaret conformed to the conventional role of a queen consort. It could be argued that she was subsequently forced, by political circumstance and the weakness of her husband, to take on a much more active role in politics in order to protect both her own position and that of her son. She never exercised independent power, and was always reliant on others for effective action, ultimately failing to achieve her ends. Another view of Margaret, expressed by many French writers, is that of a tragic heroine, the victim of unfavourable political circumstance. This view is epitomized by her contemporary sympathizer Chastellain, who composed a special treatise for her, entitled 'Le temple de Bocace, remonstrances, par maniere de consolation a une desolee reyne d'Angleterre', on the subject of the misfortunes of ruling families related to the house of Anjou, among which Margaret's sufferings occupied 'le premiere place dans le livre des nobles femmes malheureuses' (Chastellain, 7.vii). 


@@@@@


doc= 18050


Margaret (1456/7?-1486), queen of Scots, consort of James III, was the only daughter of Christian I of Denmark-Norway (1448-1481) and Dorothea of Brandenburg. That Maundy alms were given to seventeen people at Easter 1474 probably indicates that Margaret was then aged seventeen and was born in 1456 or 1457. Almost from birth she played a key role in Scoto-Danish diplomatic schemes, which continued intermittently from late 1458 until the treaty of Copenhagen of 8 September 1468. Under this treaty between Scotland and Denmark-Norway, Margaret was to marry James III, king of Scots. It also brought to an end, as part of Margaret's dowry, Scottish payments of the Norway 'annual', the 100 merks that had been due each year since 1266 for the Western Isles, a sum which the Scots had long neglected to pay. The most significant part of the treaty resulted from King Christian's financial difficulties: as he could not afford the bride's dowry of 60,000 Rhenish florins, he pledged first Orkney (1468) and then Shetland (May 1469) to Scotland for the entire sum owed. Christian had every intention of redeeming his pledge and the islands, but subsequent political events made this impossible. 
As soon as Margaret reached the marriageable age of twelve, she was brought to Scotland and married to James III at Holyrood Abbey on 13 July 1469. In the summer of 1470 the queen accompanied her husband on a northern progress, spending a full month in Inverness. Earlier that year the king had granted her the barony of Kilmarnock for life, specifically to pay for her gowns and headgear. In 1478 she was confirmed in the dowry promised her under the treaty of Copenhagen, namely a third of the property and revenues of the crown. This included the lordships of Galloway, Ettrick Forest, Strathearn, Strath Gartney, and Linlithgowshire, the castles of Threave, Stirling, Doune, and Methven, Linlithgow Palace, and much else. She spent a good deal of time at Stirling, though her eldest son, the future James IV, was born at Holyrood on 17 March 1473. She later gave birth to two more sons: James Stewart, duke of Ross, early in 1476, and John, earl of Mar, before 12 July 1480. 
Margaret played an important, if rather enigmatic, political role. A short biography of the queen, written within a few years of her death by the Bolognese Giovanni Sabadino, credits her with more ability than her husband in governing the realm, claims that she and his brother (clearly Alexander Stewart, duke of Albany, is intended) imprisoned him for the good of the kingdom, and comments that James III was unwilling ever to see her during the last three years of her life. These assertions, though undoubtedly exaggerated in transmission, have some substance. Following the Lauder crisis of 1482, when James III was imprisoned in Edinburgh Castle, Albany visited the queen at Stirling; they discussed the education of the heir to the throne, and Albany later played a part in releasing King James from captivity. Collusion between Albany and Margaret would certainly explain the king's subsequent mistrust of his wife, and there is no firm evidence that the two met again after 1482. Margaret of Denmark died at Stirling Castle on 14 July 1486 and was buried in Cambuskenneth Abbey later that month; rebel propaganda which spread to Denmark in 1488 alleged that she had been murdered, possibly poisoned by the king's familiar John Ramsay. This was clearly untrue; but James III's abortive efforts in 1487 to secure his wife's canonization may have been inspired partly by growing rumours of foul play. 


@@@@@


doc= 18051


Margaret, duchess of Burgundy (1446-1503), Yorkist matriarch and mediator, was the third daughter of Richard, third duke of York (1411-1460), and Cecily (1415-1495), daughter of Ralph Neville, first earl of Westmorland. She was born on 3 May 1446, probably at Fotheringhay Castle, Northamptonshire. Little is known of her childhood. She is mentioned by name at Fastolf's house in Southwark with her mother and her brothers, George and Richard, when Richard of York returned from Ireland in September 1460. Following her father's death at Wakefield (30 December 1460) and Edward IV's successful seizure of the crown (March 1461), she usually resided at Baynard's Castle or Greenwich. After Edward married Elizabeth Woodville, whose coronation Margaret attended in May 1465, she frequently accompanied the queen and was well schooled in court etiquette. She practised many of the devotions of her extremely pious mother, and was intelligent and literate. As an unmarried sister of the king she was one of the new dynasty's most valuable diplomatic assets. In 1462 there were rumours of a match with James III of Scotland; a more serious proposal was marriage to Don Pedro of Portugal, claimant to the Aragonese throne, but he died unexpectedly in June 1466. By then a more inviting prospect had already opened up, to consolidate an Anglo-Burgundian alliance -- marriage to Charles, count of Charolais. Negotiations had begun almost immediately after the death of Charles's second wife in September 1465, but were delayed by Burgundian reluctance to break with the Lancastrians, and also by Richard Neville, earl of Warwick, who favoured a French match. In 1466-7 Louis XI unavailingly proposed no fewer than four candidates for her hand, but the death of Philip the Good, duke of Burgundy, in June 1467 provided renewed impetus. On 1 October 1467 Margaret declared her willingness to wed Charles, who later that month commissioned his mother, Isabella of Portugal, to draw up terms. 
Margaret's dowry of 200,000 ecus ($41,666 13's'. 4died), due within three years, was agreed by February 1468, though only just over a half was ever paid, and arrears remained a bone of contention for the rest of Margaret's life. In May 1468 the necessary papal dispensation was granted and an alliance against France concluded. She ceremoniously left London on 18 June, a temporary reconciliation with Warwick being symbolized by her riding pillion on his horse. Margaret and a large entourage sailed from Margate on 24 June, and arrived at Sluys late on 25 June. Two days later she met Charles for the first time and they were married at Damme at 5 a.m. on 3 July, before making a grand entry into Bruges, where onlookers were impressed by the tall, elegant, fair-haired duchess. For the next ten days widely reported festivities of unsurpassed courtly magnificence were held. Similar events greeted them at Brussels on 23 July, though Margaret fell ill at Aire in September. 
Margaret and Charles soon settled into a domestic routine which kept them largely apart; they were together for only 21 days in their first six months of marriage, for 96 days in 1469, and 145 days in 1470, and thereafter, while often residing close to one another, they spent little time in each other's company (a fortnight at most in 1473 and 1474), meeting for the last time in July 1475. Formal relations remained polite, however, and there were many distractions at the splendid Burgundian court, where women had an honoured position. Margaret was on friendly terms with Isabella of Portugal (died 1471), and acted as an elder sister to Marie, the duke's only child and heir, who was only eleven years her junior. The two women often lived together and shared many interests; their portraits appear jointly in several contemporary illuminations and paintings. Margaret commissioned manuscripts, encouraged Caxton, and, especially in her widowhood, indulged a passion for building and charitable works, encouraging education and strict religious movements. Moreover, as Charles's political and military difficulties mounted from 1475, Margaret took a larger administrative role: she led resistance to the French in Artois and negotiated with the Flemish cities. Her skills as a conciliator, displayed in 1471 when Edward IV was an exile in Flanders, mediating between him and Clarence, and again when Edward landed at Calais with an army in 1475 to join Charles, were taxed by the duke's pressing demands for men and money which Margaret presented to the estates general in 1476, before military catastrophe overwhelmed Valois Burgundy. 
In the aftermath of Charles's death at Nancy (5 January 1477) and Louis XI's invasion of Burgundian lands, Margaret, ably assisted by the lord of Humbercourt and Chancellor Hugonet, lent invaluable support to the new duchess, Marie, among whose first acts was confirmation of the extensive dower lands which Charles had conferred on Margaret, including Mechelen which became the dowager's principal place of residence. Margaret also vigorously promoted plans for Marie to marry Maximilian, king of the Romans, despite opposition from the estates, who in defiance executed Humbercourt and Hugonet on 3 April 1477. When Maximilian finally arrived to claim his bride (they were married at Ghent on 18 August), Margaret enthusiastically promised loyalty to him. They seldom disagreed thereafter over policy, with Maximilian solicitous for her personal welfare, while she worked tirelessly in the interests of Habsburg Burgundy. The chief diplomatic purpose of her only visit to England after her marriage (in 1480) was to win back the alliance of Edward IV, in receipt since 1475 of a pension from Louis XI; manuscript illuminations represent her negotiating between her brother and Maximilian. 
The accidental death of Marie in March 1482, Maximilian's unpopular regency, which led to civil war in the Low Countries, and the deaths in quick succession between 1483 and 1485 of Edward IV, Louis XI, and Richard III tested Margaret's abilities to the full. Much responsibility devolved on her for the education of the young duke, Philip the Fair, and she refused to recognize Henry VII's accession; her court became a haven for Yorkist exiles and pretenders. Payments for a proposed expedition ('Reyse') by Margaret to England in 1486-7, and mention at Mechelen in July 1486 of a 'son of Clarence' (her favourite brother), hint at involvement in the conspiracy of Lambert Simnel whose forces were recruited from Maximilian's mercenaries in the Netherlands and paid by Margaret. After their defeat at Stoke by Newark (16 June 1487) new domestic problems, including the capture of Maximilian by the Flemings in early 1488, required Margaret's urgent attention, but her diplomatic intrigues surface occasionally with mention of her envoys at foreign courts including Scotland. 
By February 1492, if not before, Margaret was certainly involved with Perkin Warbeck, a tool of French policy, also subsequently backed by Maximilian, whose coronation as emperor in November 1493 Warbeck attended. In the previous July envoys of Henry VII, led by William Warham (died 1532), future archbishop of Canterbury, had confronted her with knowledge of Warbeck's imposture. But in a letter to Isabella of Castile in August, Margaret maintained he was indeed Richard, duke of York, provided funds for him, and as late as May 1495 wrote to the pope on his behalf. Warbeck's landing in England in that summer was a failure; he eventually found refuge at the Scottish court but Margaret remained in contact. As a result of the Anglo-imperial Intercursus Magnus (27 February 1496) she was obliged to renounce her support for Henry VII's enemies, but it was not until almost a year after the capture and confession of Warbeck (October 1497) that she finally made peace with Henry VII (September 1498). 
As a formidable matriarchal figure Margaret's last years were largely devoted to her proxy Habsburg grandchildren and great-grandchildren. In 1500 she stood godmother to the future Emperor Charles V, and in 1501 visited Halle with Margaret of Austria, the daughter of Marie, duchess of Burgundy, who inherited many of the duchess's personal possessions. Margaret died at Mechelen on 23 November 1503 and was buried there in the house of the Recollects (Observant Franciscans), where her tomb was destroyed in the late sixteenth century. Apart from the many portraits and miniatures of her, and nearly thirty extant manuscripts with which she can be connected, her most poignant surviving memorial is perhaps an exquisite coronet of English make that was part of her trousseau, which she donated during a visit in 1474 to the cathedral of Aachen. 


@@@@@


doc= 18052


Margaret (1489-1541), queen of Scots, consort of James IV, was born at Westminster Palace on 28 November 1489, the eldest daughter and second child of Henry VII (1457-1509) and Elizabeth of York (1466-1503), and baptized in St Margaret's, Westminster, later that year. Attended by Alice Bywmble as her special nurse and Anne Maylande and Margaret Troughton as rockers of her cradle, she spent her earliest years at Sheen on the banks of the Thames with her brothers and sisters, until a fire caused the royal nursery to be moved to Eltham Palace. Less studious than her brothers Arthur and Henry (the future Henry VIII), Margaret learned to play the lute and clavichord and to dance, became skilled at archery, studied Latin, and learned to speak French. Her tutors included such notable scholars as Thomas Linacre, John Colet, and William Grocyn. 
It was inevitable that thought would soon be given to Margaret's marriage. At first her father considered betrothing her to Prince Christian of Denmark, but his thoughts soon turned to nearer home, and on 5 May 1496 he opened negotiations for marrying his daughter to James IV, king of Scots (1473-1513). Later that year diplomatic progress was halted by the outbreak of Anglo-Scottish hostilities resulting from James's support for Perkin Warbeck, but resumed after he had deserted the pretender. The need to obtain a papal dispensation also caused delay. But by late 1501 Scottish negotiators were pressing for the marriage. King Henry calmed critics who feared that such a union would lead to a Scottish king succeeding to the English throne by pointing out that the greater unit (England) would none the less draw the lesser one (Scotland) into its orbit. The marriage treaty was concluded on 24 January 1502. Henry pledged a $10,000 dowry, while James promised his bride $1000 Scots per annum together with lands and castles yielding a further yearly income of $6000. Margaret would be accompanied by twenty-four English servants, and would also have an appropriate number of Scottish domestics. Should she be widowed, she was promised $2000 per annum and the continued income of her lands. 
The earl of Bothwell represented James IV at his king's proxy marriage to Margaret on 15 January 1503, against a background of church bells, bonfires, jousts and tournaments, dancing, and feasting. Although her mother died just before she travelled north to Scotland, on 8 July 1503, now aged thirteen, Margaret left Richmond Palace for her 33-day journey to Edinburgh, accompanied by a large retinue headed by Thomas Howard, earl of Surrey. Henry went with them on the first stage of the journey north. About 1000 Scots met the English company at Berwick and accompanied their new queen into Scotland early in August, after several days of festivities in which James IV played a prominent part. The formal wedding took place in an elaborate service in the chapel of Holyroodhouse on 8 August. Although James provided Margaret with jewels and rich gowns, he continued to visit Janet Kennedy, his mistress since 1498; moreover, Margaret's dower castle of Stirling contained the nursery for her husband's seven illegitimate children. How the queen responded to this evidence for James's physical exuberance is not recorded. 
Early in 1507 Margaret gave birth to a son, James, but the baby prince died at Stirling on 27 February 1508. A daughter, born at Holyrood on 15 July 1508, died the same day. Her brother Arthur had left a significant fortune to Margaret, now in the keeping of Henry VIII, and in spring 1513 Margaret asked the English ambassador, Nicholas West, both for Arthur's bequest and also for the plate and jewels left her by her grandmother Lady Margaret Beaufort. West replied that these would only be handed over if James IV remained at peace with England, instead of joining France. Margaret begged her husband not to go to war against her brother, but in vain, and on 9 September 1513 James was killed at Flodden, along with some 10,000 Scots. Their infant son, born at Linlithgow on 11 April 1512, succeeded his father as James V. 
James IV's will provided that Margaret should serve as regent as long as she did not remarry. A council of four nobles was established to help her govern. Henry VIII was now determined to influence Scottish affairs through his sister, a development resented by patriotic Scots, and on 6 August 1514 Margaret played into their hands by taking a second husband, Archibald Douglas, sixth earl of Angus (c.1489-1557), the greatest Scottish magnate, so forfeiting her right to the regency. Partly because she was distrusted by many Scottish nobles, who also regarded the Douglas family as over-powerful, the council invited a cousin of James IV, John Stewart or Stuart, second duke of Albany, to act as regent until the infant James V came of age. Albany, the son of James III's younger brother Alexander, had grown up in France and was highly regarded as a soldier. The Scots, believing that a man of his eminence was needed to keep order and defend the country against England, persuaded the French to allow the duke to cross to Scotland; he landed at Dumbarton on 18 May 1515 with eight ships bearing supplies and French soldiers. 
Many Scots regarded Margaret primarily as the sister of the hated English king, and suspected she favoured England over Scotland. For her part, Margaret bitterly resented Albany's replacing her as regent and urged Henry to restore her authority by force. She also complained frequently to her brother about her inadequate revenues and welcomed his intervention with the pope to secure the see of Dunkeld for Gavin Douglas, her husband's uncle. But although Henry was angry with Francois I for allowing Albany's passage to Scotland, thereby reducing English influence there, he did little to help his sister. Margaret's circumstances were indeed unhappy, and became more so when her brother's efforts to gain possession of her two sons, James V and Alexander, duke of Ross (born on 30 April 1514), led to the children's being taken from her as a safeguard against English designs. Having lost the regency, her revenues, and control of her own children, the queen fled to England on 30 September 1515, even though she was heavily pregnant. Henry arranged for her to be welcomed at Harbottle Castle in Northumberland with gifts of fine clothes and money, and by the end of the year she had twenty-two gowns of cloth of gold. 
At Henry's behest, Angus and Alexander, third Lord Home, attempted to seize Margaret's sons at Stirling and bring them to England, but the coup failed and they lost sixteen men. Shortly after her arrival at Harbottle, on 7 October 1515, Margaret gave birth to a daughter, Margaret Douglas, an ordeal which nearly killed her and left her so weak that in late November she had to be conveyed to Morpeth in a litter. Angus, Home, and a few others visited her there, and also promised to promote Henry's interests in Scotland. Margaret was herself determined to visit her brother in London, but Angus returned to Scotland to defend his interests there against Albany. On 18 December, while she lay seriously ill at Morpeth, Margaret's second son, Alexander, died. His mother was not informed immediately for fear the shock might prove fatal. On 3 May 1516 she and her entourage finally arrived in London, to be welcomed with jousts, feasting, and celebrations lasting for a month; there Margaret had her first meeting with Henry for thirteen years. She remained in England for over a year, separated from Angus, while Albany and the Scottish council, hoping to prevent English raids, promised to send the queen's jewels after her and to pay her her rents. But although Margaret received her jewels, her revenues were not restored, and she had to borrow money from Cardinal Wolsey. 
After Henry had launched further raids into Scotland to put pressure on the Scots, and after much diplomacy and many threats, in 1517 Francois I called Albany back to France. Before he left the duke gave assurances that Margaret could return to Scotland and take possession of her revenues and property. Moreover, she and her company would be 'free from arrest, injury, or impediment', provided they did nothing 'prejudicial to the king, governor, or realm' (Hannay and Hay, 41). The Scottish estates insisted that Albany had treated Margaret 'with fairness and indulgence', despite her plot to place her children in English hands (ibid., 42). Furnished with a safe conduct, the queen began her journey back to Scotland on 18 May 1517, equipped with fine clothes, jewels, money, and horses. Angus met her at Berwick, and on 15 June accompanied her into Scotland, where her return was greeted with relief by a government hoping now to allay tensions with England. 
Unfortunately Margaret's marriage to Angus was coming increasingly under strain. While she had been in England her husband had been living with a mistress (and former fiancee), Lady Jane Stewart of Traquair, cohabiting with her on Margaret's money. He had also taken the queen's rents from Methven and Ettrick Forest. Discovering his infidelity (which had also led to the birth of a daughter, Janet), Margaret begged her brother to allow her to return to England. Henry, however, sent neither money nor troops, and instead urged her to return to Angus. Deprived of her revenues, and refused permission to live with her son for fear she would remove him to England, she wrote that she would rather be dead than live among the Scottish lords. Thomas, Lord Dacre, the English march warden, echoed her complaint when he asked that aid be sent to Margaret, who 'lies in Edinburgh like a poor suitor' ('CSP Scot.', '1509-89', 7). 
Following his return to France, Albany played a central role in negotiating the Franco-Scottish treaty of Rouen, concluded on 26 August 1517, which provided for mutual assistance should Henry VIII make war on either signatory. On 2 October 1518, however, Francois I made an alliance with Henry, whose terms included an undertaking that Albany would be kept in France as long as this second treaty remained in force. The Scots felt slighted by this, and they desperately wanted Albany to return, regarding his links with France as a safeguard against English aggression. Against this background of international diplomacy, Queen Margaret, lacking funds, power, and authority over her son, had become a figure of little account, and in 1519 she again asked to be allowed to return to England. To add to her misery, her estrangement from Angus was now so severe that she contemplated divorce. Seeing no chance of an improvement in the prevailing situation, Margaret reversed her position and began petitioning Albany to return, thinking that the French duke might treat her better than did the Scottish estates. Her brother was furious, however, and at his urging she reluctantly returned to Angus, through whom Henry hoped to exercise leverage in Scotland. But although the estates promised to safeguard her revenues, her position did not improve, and in October 1520 she was again lamenting her desperate need of money and the fact that she was only rarely allowed to see her son. She threatened to give support to anti-English factions if Henry did not relieve her plight. 
Margaret was miserable over her status, the Scots were unhappy that Albany was detained in France, and Henry was angry that Margaret had again separated from Angus and now supported Albany's return. Margaret even persuaded Albany to promote her bid for a divorce, believing he had influence at Rome. Then in 1521 Henry VIII's alliance with Emperor Charles V led to Francois I's sending Albany back to Scotland. He entered Edinburgh on 3 December and was welcomed by the queen, who continued to hope that he would restore her revenues and help her obtain a divorce. Henry, however, refused to make peace, or even a border truce, while Albany remained in Scotland. The duke did in fact arrange better treatment for Margaret, but this merely fuelled the malicious tales spread by Angus and his followers that Albany supported the queen's divorce so that he could marry her himself, kill James V, and become king. In England there were additional rumours that Margaret had become Albany's mistress, rumours which Henry did not hesitate to convey to his sister in a letter brought to Margaret by Clarenceux herald in February 1522. They reduced her to tears, and prompted an indignant response to Henry's 'sharp and unkind letter' ('LP Henry VIII', 3/2, no. 2038). Supported by the estates, the duke banished Angus and his brother George to France, and in September gathered an army with the intention of invading England. But fear of a repetition of Flodden held the Scots back from attacking Carlisle, and Margaret was able to persuade Albany and Dacre to conclude a truce. Disgusted by the reluctance of the Scots to fight, Albany appointed a regency council, from which the queen was excluded, and on 27 October sailed for France. 
Albany's departure did not end Anglo-Scottish hostilities. Following devastating English raids in spring 1523, Margaret (who had been ill with smallpox in the previous December, but soon recovered) decided in July to co-operate with Henry, in the hope that the English king would help elevate James V to active rule. Implicit in this volte-face was a willingness to see Albany ousted as regent. The Scottish nobility still trusted the duke, however, and again asked Francois I to allow him to return to Scotland. Francois complied, and on 23 September Albany landed at Kirkcudbright with several thousand French troops, planning once more to invade England. Fearing retribution for having urged that his regency be terminated, Margaret yet again petitioned for leave to retire to England, but Henry sent her money and ordered her to stay in Scotland. 
On 23 October 1523 a large Scottish army again refused to cross the border, and Albany, his prestige greatly reduced by this failure, decided to return to France. He established a rotating governorship for the young king, whereby groups of four nobles took turns to have custody of James for three months at a time, and with Margaret's support tried to negotiate an Anglo-Scottish truce to which the French would also be party. But when he departed on 20 May 1524 he had failed to secure the terms he sought, while Henry decided to bring Angus back from France. Albany left Scotland intending to return, though in fact he never did so, and before his departure he obtained promises from Margaret that she would do nothing to undermine his authority, would reject any Anglo-Scottish peace which excluded France, and would uphold the treaty of Rouen. He also secured an undertaking from the estates to treat the queen well. But no sooner had Albany gone than Margaret, who had threatened to leave with him should her hated husband return and again withhold her revenues, won the support of the powerful Hamilton family, led by the second earl of Arran, for a coup which formally ended Albany's regency and on 26 July invested James V with full royal authority. 
James promptly indicated that he would follow Henry's advice, raising the latter's hopes of a rupture in the Franco-Scottish alliance. Meanwhile the English king welcomed Angus in London, causing Margaret, who above all else feared her husband's return, to denounce Henry's plans to exercise influence in Scotland through him. In the hope of keeping Angus away, she and Arran, who with her effectively headed the government, worked for an Anglo-Scottish alliance pleasing to King Henry, who sent large sums to strengthen the position of his sister and her son. There was now a significant additional personal dimension to Margaret's aversion to her husband's return. As the third duke of Norfolk reported to Wolsey on 19 September 1524, 'The Queen is very unpopular for taking so much upon herself, and being ruled only by Arran and Henry Steward; also for her ungodly living, in keeping Angus out of the realm when he is so beloved' ('LP Henry VIII', 4/1, no. 672). Henry Stewart (c.1495-1553/4) was Margaret's treasurer and eventually became her third husband. In November she was reported to be infatuated with him. 
Although the Scottish parliament declared Albany's regency to be over on 26 November 1524, it also resolved to maintain the French alliance; attempts to negotiate peace with England, and even the marriage of King James to Princess Mary, came to grief on this point. Henry provided Angus with 'power, substance and counsaill' in his efforts to prise Scotland and France apart ('State Papers, Henry VIII', 4.207), and also tried to bully his sister into compliance, threatening to stop paying for her 200-strong bodyguard and affecting outrage over her rejection of Angus and liaison with Stewart. Fearing that her regime would be overthrown by its enemies, Margaret asked Henry to pay for 300 guards instead of 200, and when he refused put on a display of Francophilia, further irritating her brother by suggesting that the English ambassadors should go home. 
There was a widespread perception that Margaret lacked good counsel, and that her government was too narrowly based. When parliament met in November 1524 it attempted to remedy this by establishing a council of four to help her rule. But her failure to secure anything more than a two-month truce with England undermined the queen's position, and with the support of Henry VIII, who was tired of his sister's unreliability, her rejection of her husband, and her pleas for money, in February 1525 Angus was able to take a leading position in government. Henry also agreed that Angus should take control of his wife's lands. Presumably it was to strengthen the queen's hand at this difficult moment, and also to prevent James V's marriage to Mary Tudor, that Francois I offered Margaret the French 'comte' of Longy and a pension of 20,000 ecus, on condition that her son should in due course marry his own daughter Madeleine. Such personal satisfaction as the French king's intervention may have brought her was followed later in 1525 by political disaster. It became Angus's turn to have custody of James V, but he refused to surrender the king at the end of his three-month turn, instead keeping control of him and of Scottish government until 1528. No longer supported by Henry VIII, and with control of her son lost to the hated Angus, Margaret was reduced to near despair. Moreover, despite the provision made for her in the Anglo-Scottish peace which was ratified on 12 February 1526, Angus still refused to return her lands. 
An attempt by the third earl of Lennox to free King James from Angus's custody had been defeated at Linlithgow on 4 September 1526. Lennox was killed, and Angus and the Douglases were left without a rival. Margaret had continued to urge Albany to use his influence at Rome to help her obtain a divorce from Angus, since she was determined never to be reconciled with him but to marry Henry Stewart instead. She had originally attempted to justify the separation on the specious grounds that James IV had not been killed at Flodden, but was still alive when she married Angus; however, when Clement VII finally annulled the marriage, on 11 March 1527, it was by reference to Angus's pre-contract to Lady Jane Stewart. Soon afterwards Margaret secretly married Henry Stewart, openly acknowledging him as her husband about the beginning of April 1528. Angus then had Henry Stewart arrested and confined, claiming that Margaret's remarriage had taken place without royal approval. For the queen, this development meant that she could keep company with her present husband only if her former one was removed from power. In May 1528, however, James V escaped from Angus's clutches, proclaimed himself king in his majority, and mustered enough support to expel the Douglases from government. On 19 June his mother caused James, who had come to loathe his erstwhile stepfather, to order that neither Angus nor any other Douglas should come within 7 miles of him. Henry Stewart was created Lord Methven, and in September parliament sentenced Angus and his associates to death 'in absentia', for treason. No doubt Margaret was delighted. She was less pleased, however, when Angus took refuge in England. She angrily accused her brother of having more regard for the earl than for his own nephew. Angus remained in exile at Henry's expense until 1543. 
After 1528 relations between the young king and his mother were generally good, but they differed over foreign policy, Margaret favouring closer links with England, in contrast to James, who renewed the French alliance soon after assuming personal rule. He sought her advice on the rebuilding or renovation of royal castles, but in matters of government took counsel elsewhere, and it is noticeable that Margaret's name is entirely missing from her son's letters dating from after 1534. When Henry proposed a meeting with James at York late in 1534, Margaret's enthusiasm for the event -- partly arising from hopes of arranging the marriage of James to Mary Tudor -- seems to have turned the Scottish king against the conference, which never happened. Two years later plans were again made for the two kings to meet. Margaret prepared to visit England and bought expensive clothes in anticipation of the journey, which likewise never took place. Afterwards she asked Henry for money to repay debts incurred at this time, but her brother refused, advising her to stay in Scotland and either return her purchases or put them to other uses. Shortly afterwards her hopes of an Anglo-Scottish marriage alliance were dashed when James married Madeleine of France in Paris on 1 January 1537, but she still had the gall to beg Henry for funds yet again, so that she could appear suitably dressed at the reception of her new daughter-in-law; this time Henry complied. 
By the mid-1530s Margaret's personal life had turned sour once more, and she sent a stream of letters to Henry VIII and his ministers complaining of her husband, Lord Methven: not only had he taken a mistress, with whom he had a son, but he had so wasted her revenues that she was 8000 merks in debt. She had resolved to divorce him, but her efforts were thwarted by her son, after Methven told James that she proposed to go to England and there remarry Angus. Early in October 1537 she tried to escape to Berwick but was intercepted. Later that month, in an outburst of self-pity, she told her brother, 'wyth owt I get remedy, I wol pas to some relygeous place, and byde wyth them, or I be intretyd as I am' ('State Papers, Henry VIII', 5.120). Queen Madeleine died on 7 July 1537, and in 1538 James married another Frenchwoman, Mary of Guise. Once more Margaret begged Henry to send her money so that she could appear in attire befitting her rank when her son and his new bride reached Scotland. After their arrival Margaret informed Henry that Mary had 'behaved very honorably toward her' ('CSP Scot.', '1509-89', 39). But she now had little influence with either her son or her brother, though she was at the Scottish court in 1541, and gave comfort to James and Mary when their infant sons died in May. The husband she now hated controlled her revenues, and she was lonely and unhappy. She wanted to return to England, but Henry would not invite her, and in her last years practically ignored her. 
On 18 October 1541, in her fifty-second year, Queen Margaret died after suffering a stroke at Methven Castle. She asked for her son, who was at Falkland Palace, but he did not arrive in time. In her last words she asked her confessors to beseech James 'that He wold be good and gracous unto the Erell of Anguyshe, and dyd extremely lament, and aske God mercy, that She had afendet unto the sayd Erell as She hade' ('State Papers, Henry VIII', 5.194). She left just 2500 merks in ready money. Dying intestate, she asked that her valuables should go to Margaret Douglas, but James ignored this request and his mother's goods reverted to the crown. She was buried among the Scottish kings in St John's Abbey, the Carthusian house in Perth. 
It is difficult to gain a clear impression of Queen Margaret, in terms either of her personality or of her impact on events. Scottish sources often reflect native suspicions of an English queen, English ones the hopes -- usually unfulfilled -- of diplomatic advantage. It seems clear that her years in Scotland were generally unhappy. She was only twenty-three when her first husband was killed, her two subsequent marriages both failed utterly, and she had limited contact with both her son in Scotland and her daughter in England. The nature of the sources means that it is usually hard to detach the evidence for her parental feelings from her hopes of material advantage, but she clearly wanted the company of her son during the latter's childhood, and in 1536 she pleaded for Lady Margaret Douglas when she disgraced herself by marrying Lord Thomas Howard. Her choice of husbands was disastrous, however, and her involvement in government usually unsuccessful. Nor was she a skilful manager of her income, and her importunities for money finally exhausted the patience of her brother Henry VIII, who had been remarkably tolerant of her demands. Whether these shortcomings arose from difficult circumstances or from her own lack of judgement, compounded by a greater concern with the trappings than the exercise of power, is again unclear, but her recurrent preoccupation with appearances certainly suggests the latter. But in one respect she was undeniably a successful queen, for it was from her first marriage that there sprang the line that eventually united England and Scotland. 


@@@@@


doc= 18053


Margary, Augustus Raymond (1846-1875), traveller and consular official, third son of Henry Joshua Margary (died 1876), major-general RE, and his wife, Louisa Jane, was born at Belgaum, Bombay Presidency, on 26 May 1846. He was educated in France, at Brighton College, and at University College, London. Having received a nomination from his relative Austen Henry Layard (then under-secretary at the Foreign Office), he three times failed the entrance examination, owing to poor spelling, but was given a fourth chance, on which occasion he was successful. He was appointed a student interpreter in the Chinese consular service on 2 February 1867 and the following month went out to China, where, until 1870, he was attached to the legation in Peking (Beijing). 
In 1870 Margary was sent to the island of Taiwan, where he took charge of the consulate for twelve months. In 1872 he was awarded the silver medal of the Royal Humane Society for saving lives at sea during a typhoon on 9 August 1871; for this action he also received the Albert medal (first class). He was briefly acting interpreter at Shanghai in 1873, and was interpreter at Chefoo (Yantai) from 24 November 1873 to 9 April 1874. 
In August 1874 Margary was instructed to travel from Shanghai, through the south-western provinces of China, to Bhamo in Upper Burma, where he was to meet Colonel Horace Browne and act as his interpreter. Browne's ill-considered mission was to attempt to open up the overland trade route between China and India. Margary successfully completed his outward journey of some 1800 miles through Szechwan (Sichuan), Kweichow (Guizhou), and Yunnan in six months, the first Englishman to make the trip. Having met Browne, he returned with the mission across the frontier. Hearing rumours of danger to the mission, he proceeded alone but for his personal staff into Manyunchieh (Mayunjie), where on 21 February 1875 he and his servants were murdered. His head and those of his servants were then stuck up on the walls of the town; only his cook escaped the same fate. 
The 'Margary affair' was exploited by the British to gain concessions from China on a variety of unrelated issues, including the stationing of a British consulate in Chungking (Chongqing) in Szechwan province; an indemnity of $10,000 from the Chinese was held in trust for Margary's recently widowed mother, three brothers, and nine sisters. 


@@@@@


doc= 18054


Margetson, James (1600-1678), Church of Ireland archbishop of Armagh, was a native of Drighlington, Yorkshire. He matriculated at Peterhouse, Cambridge, in Michaelmas 1619, and graduated BA (1622-3) and MA (1626). Ordained deacon and priest at Peterborough in 1626, he was rector of Thornton Watlass, Yorkshire, from 1626 to 1635. Sir Thomas Wentworth took him as chaplain to Ireland, where he served as dean of Waterford, beginning in 1635, and rector of Arvagh, co. Cavan (1635-7). He became rector of Galloon (Dartry), co. Monaghan, in 1637; dean of Derry in 1638; prebendary of St Fin Barre's, Cork, in 1639; and dean of Christ Church, Dublin, in December 1639. No new dean of Derry was appointed until after the Restoration. Margetson was incorporated doctor of divinity at Trinity College, Dublin, in 1637. He was prolocutor of the lower house of convocation in 1639. 
When the rebellion of 1641 broke out, Margetson assisted refugees in Dublin. In August 1646 he signed the document in which eleven bishops and seventy-seven other clergymen congratulated Ormond upon the conclusion of peace, and thanked him for his efforts on their behalf. The parliamentary forces controlling Dublin in June 1647 ordered the protestant clergy to use the directory for worship instead of the 'Book of Common Prayer'. The bishop of Killaloe and eighteen clergymen, of whom Margetson was one, formally protested, unsuccessfully seeking to continue the traditional liturgy. 
Ormond left Ireland on 28 August 1647, and Margetson fled to England about the same time. There he conducted services according to the 'Book of Common Prayer'. Imprisoned at Manchester, he was freed in a prisoner exchange. After settling in London, he dispersed alms from wealthier cavaliers to needy loyalists in England and Wales, reportedly including William Chappell, bishop of Cork, Milton's old tutor. 
At the Restoration, Margetson was sworn of the Irish privy council in December 1660. On 29 January 1661 he was consecrated archbishop of Dublin and bishop of Glendalough; he also held his old living of Galloon, his Cork prebend, and the treasurership of St Patrick's, Dublin. To augment the revenues of his archbishopric, he and his successors received the lands of those attainted by treason formerly held of the archbishopric and the see of Glendalough, and various properties, rectories, and vicarages in co. Dublin and elsewhere to the value of $1000 p.a. net, but the maximum income was not to exceed $2000 p.a. 
Margetson was translated to the archbishopric of Armagh on 20 August 1663, where he succeeded John Bramhall, who reportedly recommended him on his deathbed to Ormond. As an archbishop, Margetson generally followed a moderate course in dealing with protestant nonconformists. The Presbyterian Patrick Adair, who called him 'a man of mild spirit', averred that he was 'not of a persecuting temper, but rather inclinable to engage the country and increase his estate' (Adair, 282, 300). Although as archbishop of Dublin he had prohibited the Presbyterian Edward Bagshaw from preaching, as archbishop of Armagh he later permitted John Howe, ejected from his living but by then Lord Massereene's chaplain, to preach in Antrim's parish church. When Margetson succeeded Bramhall, he implemented a policy of indulgence for six months, infuriating George Wild, bishop of Derry. On his triennial visitation in 1664, Margetson persuaded some dissenters in Derry to conform. Meanwhile, with Michael Boyle, archbishop of Dublin, he endeavoured to protect protestantism in the face of increased Catholic activity in 1664, and six years later he was monitoring the work of Oliver Plunket, Catholic archbishop of Armagh. 
By 1669 the growing number of conventicles in Dublin worried Margetson, and as covenanter activity increased in the late 1660s he opposed an indulgent policy, avouching that almost every Ulster parish had a Presbyterian meeting-house, and that presbyteries had been established, ministers salaried, and elders elected. To demonstrate his authority over Roger Boyle, bishop of Down and Connor, Margetson declined in 1670 to prosecute nine Presbyterian ministers, though he left four in prison elsewhere for refusing to subscribe the oath of supremacy. 
Margetson acted in numerous ways to uphold the established church, and opposed the practice of holding an ecclesiastical post in Ireland while residing in England. Following Jeremy Taylor's death in August 1667, he insisted that the sees of Dromore, on the one hand, and Down and Connor on the other be separated because they were disorderly and disaffected. He succeeded Jeremy Taylor as vice-chancellor of Dublin University and remained in office until his death. Earlier, in November 1663, he had been appointed the king's almoner, for which he received a stipend of $100 (English). By 1668 his annual income exceeded $3500. Armagh Cathedral had been burnt by Sir Phelim O'Neill in 1642, and Margetson contributed generously to its rebuilding, as he also did to the refurbishing of St Patrick's and Christ Church cathedrals, Dublin. He founded a free school at Drighlington and made the master of Peterhouse its patron. At the king's appointment he was responsible in 1666 for adding special prayers to the 'Book of Common Prayer' for 30 January, 29 May, 23 October, and 5 November, and in 1670 he and other prominent clerics were commissioned to review the profits of all ecclesiastical livings with a view to more accurately assessing first-fruits and twentieths. 
In the winter of 1677 Margetson became seriously ill and suffered fainting spells, but nevertheless insisted on communicating publicly the following May. By this point his house had become an oratory for private devotion. He died in Dublin on 28 August 1678, and was buried two days later within the altar rails of Christ Church. His charity and exemplary life had won him such reputation that many came to his deathbed to receive his blessing. At his funeral Dr William Palliser spoke of his conciliatory attitude towards theological opponents. According to Henry Jones, bishop of Meath, who preached his funeral sermon, he left $4000 apiece to two children. 
Margetson's son James (BA 1676, MA 1679, Trinity College, Dublin) was ordained at Lincoln in 1699, and served as rector of Little Stukeley, Huntingdonshire (1699-1701), and vicar of Exning, Suffolk (1701-37); he died on 4 March 1737. His son John was killed at the siege of Limerick, being then a major in William's army, leaving a daughter, Sarah, from whom the earls of Bessborough and Mountcashell are descended. The earl of Charlemont is descended from Anne Margetson (died 1729), the primate's only daughter. 


@@@@@


doc= 18055


Margoliouth, Moses (1815-1881), Hebrew scholar and convert from Judaism, was born in SuwaLki, Poland, son of a prosperous local merchant named Gershon Margoliouth (died 'c'.1852), apparently originally surnamed Epstein or Epszteyn. In 1834 Moses Margoliouth married Chaja Goldberg (1818-1870), daughter of writer and historian Ber Goldberg (1799-1886) and his wife, Rachel (died 1874), and a daughter, Miriam, was born in the following year. Margoliouth left Poland alone in 1837, arriving at Liverpool on 28 October. On his very first day in the city he met a missionary from the Institute for Enquiring Jews, who offered him lodging, employment, and a Hebrew 'New Testament'. Moses Margoliouth was baptized into the Church of England on the following Good Friday, 13 April 1838. 
Margoliouth was obviously a young man of learning and potential, and he was soon the protege of an anonymous benefactor, who from January 1840 paid for his studies at Trinity College, Dublin, which he completed in summer 1843. In that year he published his first book, 'The Fundamental Principles of Modern Judaism Investigated', printed at Chester and dedicated to Dr Alexander M'Caul (1799-1863), the Christian missionary to the Polish Jews and Hebrew professor at King's College, London. 
Margoliouth returned to Liverpool, to his old position at the Institute for Enquiring Jews, and he was joined in his house at 5 Juvenal Street by his wife and daughter, newly arrived from Poland. On 30 June 1844 he was ordained into the Church of England and granted the curacy of St Augustine's, Everton, Liverpool. But within a few days a better offer came from Bishop Lindsay of Kildare, who gave him the rectorate of Glasnevin, on the outskirts of Dublin. A son was born just then, named Charles Lindsay, so the position could not have come at a better time. On 23 October 1844 Margoliouth took office, and spent the next three years in an undemanding position that gave him plenty of opportunity to carry on with the scholarly work that led to numerous publications throughout his life. Margoliouth also became a freemason and published a monthly magazine, the 'Star of Jacob' (January-June 1847), but it folded after six numbers. 
The life of a provincial Anglican clergyman in Ireland was clearly not enough for Margoliouth, so he sent his wife to live with her newly arrived parents, resigned his living, and in July 1847 set sail for the Holy Land, arriving at Constantinople in March 1848 and finally Jerusalem, where he went at once to see the protestant bishop of Jerusalem, Samuel Gobat (1799-1879). He travelled throughout Palestine until May 1848 and returned to Liverpool, becoming early the next year curate in the parish of St Catherine Tranmere on the Wirral. He fell out with the vicar and resigned in the autumn, although his children remained in the care of a family in the parish while he went to London to supervise the publication of his three-volume 'History of the Jews in Great Britain' (1851). 
In September 1851 Margoliouth was made curate of St Bartholomew's, in Salford. On 4 January 1853 his daughter, Miriam, married William Parker, the son of a local farmer: they and their children emigrated to New Zealand in 1859 and Margoliouth's son Charles followed them a few years later. In May 1853 he resigned his curacy once again, taking a similar post at St Chad's, Wybunbury, Cheshire. This too ended unhappily, and in February 1855 he became curate in Great Coates, near Grimsby, but only for a few months. 
Margoliouth spent a year and a half abroad in 1856-7. His wife Chaja, from whom he had separated about 1847, had moved to Paris with her parents in 1852, leaving the children behind. Margoliouth paid a return visit to his native town in Poland, visiting his mother and his brother Hershel, whose son Gershon would himself come to England twenty years later. Upon his return to Britain early in 1857 Margoliouth became curate in Braintree, Essex. But by July 1858 he had gone again, in order to apply himself to another of his unfinished projects, a new edition of the Hebrew 'Old Testament'. 
Margoliouth spent the next three years living at 25 Great Russell Street, London, working on his edition and writing a semi-autobiographical novel entitled 'The Curates of Riversdale'. In September 1861 he took on another curacy at Wyton, near Huntingdon, and remained for about a year, afterwards taking temporary positions until in 1864 he was given a very satisfying post as assistant minister in the East End parish of St Paul's, Haggerston, where he remained for about ten years. He then moved across London to a curacy at St Paul's, Onslow Square, living at 22 Pelham Crescent in South Kensington. It was while serving in this post that he met a childless widow named Sarah Golding St Osyth Smith (1826-1889), and they were married on 14 October 1874 (his first wife having died in 1870). Two years later Margoliouth was offered a proper living at Little Linford, Buckinghamshire, near Newport Pagnell, and he was inducted as vicar on 30 January 1877 and installed with his wife in a new purpose-built house. The following April he had the pleasure of baptizing there his nephew Gershon (now George), who had recently arrived in England after studying in Germany. Margoliouth died at the Portland Hotel, Great Portland Street, London, on 25 February 1881, attended by his nephew George at the end. He was buried at Little Linford churchyard. 
Margoliouth's nephew George Margoliouth (1853-1924) was ordained in 1881 and became keeper of the Hebrew, Syriac, and Ethiopic manuscripts at the British Museum (1891-1914). His son Herschel Maurice Margoliouth (1887-1959) was educated at Rugby School and Oriel College, Oxford, where he became a fellow in 1935 and an expert on early modern English poetry. 
Moses Margoliouth was probably related to Ezekiel Margoliouth (1816-1894), also born in SuwaLki, the son of the rabbi there, Abraham Margoliouth. The two met in the East End about 1864 and became close friends. Ezekiel was baptized in England in 1848 and worked for the London Society for Promoting Christianity amongst the Jews. His son was David S. Margoliouth (1858-1940), Laudian professor of Arabic at Oxford (1889-1937). 


@@@@@


doc= 18056


Marham, Ralph (fl. c.1380), Augustinian friar and historian, is said by John Bale to have belonged to his order's house at Bishop's Lynn, and to have flourished about 1380. His family presumably came from Marham, a few miles south-east of that town. He studied at Cambridge, where he became DTh, and compiled a history of the world in two volumes, under the title 'Manipulus chronicorum', from the creation to his own times. However, a later claim that he became prior of the Lynn friary arose from confusion with a namesake who became prior of the Benedictine cell at Lynn, and in fact nothing that Bale says about Marham's career can be substantiated, beyond his existence and his authorship of the history attributed to him. The latter survives in two copies, Paris, Bibliotheque Nationale, MS Latin 4928, and Cambridge, Gonville and Caius, MS 26/15, and the incipit of the former contains Marham's name in an acrostic taken from the first letters of its opening words. It is not clear whether Bale is correct in saying that there were two volumes. Both surviving texts end with Christ's ascension, as the author states in his 'explicit', though he also declares his hope of continuing his work at a future date. Passages from a work or works called 'Manipulus chronicorum', relating to Bishop Robert Grosseteste and an episode in the barons' wars respectively, survive among transcripts made by the later antiquaries William Worcester (BL, Cotton MS Julius F.vii, fol. 65) and Brian Twyne (Bodl. Oxf., MS Twyne 21, fol. 133). But in neither case is Marham named as the author, and the problem of the chronological range of his work consequently remains unsolved. It can at least be said that his history suggests that he was a learned man, well-read in the fathers and in other universal histories, with perhaps a working knowledge of Hebrew. 


@@@@@


doc= 18057


Marianus Scotus (1028-1082), Benedictine monk and chronicler, was a native of Ireland. His true name was Moelbrigte, and he became a monk in 1052 at Moville, Down, during the abbacy of Tigernach Bairrech (died 1061). Having left Ireland, he entered the Irish monastery of St Martin at Cologne on Thursday 1 August 1056. On 12 April 1058 he left Cologne for Fulda, was ordained priest by Abbot Siegfried of Fulda on 13 March 1059 at Wurzburg, and on 14 May following became a recluse at Fulda. There he remained for ten years until on 3 April 1069 he left Fulda by command of Siegfried, now archbishop of Mainz, and on 10 July 1069 settled at Mainz, still as a recluse, where he remained in the monastery of St Alban the Martyr until his death, which is said to have occurred on 22 December 1082. 
Marianus composed a universal chronicle, in the tradition of Jerome and Bede, extending from the beginning of mankind to his own lifetime. He thought that the Dionysian date of Christ's nativity was twenty-two years too late, and so dated his annals in two ways, according to his own chronology ('in conformity with the gospel'), and according to that of Dionysius, and appended tables and arguments in support of his theory; but even in his own time, says William of Malmesbury, he had but few supporters. 
The chronicle contains some fifty or sixty references to Britain and Ireland. Down to 725 these are largely extracted from Bede; the later ones refer mostly to Marianus himself, to Irish monks, and to the ecclesiastical history of East Francia. In its earlier portion the chronicle is a compilation from various sources, and the part that relates to the writer's own time is very brief. John of Worcester adopted Marianus as the basis of his own chronicle, and through this source the work became familiar to English writers, who, indeed, often cite John under the name of Marianus. In Germany the chronicle of Marianus was not so widely known, though Sigebert of Gembloux made extensive use of it. The chief manuscript of Marianus is Vatican City, Biblioteca Apostolica Vaticana, Pal. lat. 830, a fair copy that was almost certainly written for him by Irish hands, and which he very probably revised himself. There were at least three stages in its compilation, one in 1072-3, a second in 1076, and a third in 1082. The second main witness, BL, Cotton MS Nero C.v, a German twelfth-century manuscript, represents a redaction made in Germany shortly after Marianus's death, and was the version used by John of Worcester. The Vatican manuscript was taken by Waitz for his text of book 3 only in the 'Monumenta Germaniae Historica', 5.495-562. Books 1 and 3 were printed at Basel in 1559 from a mutilated manuscript; this is followed in the editions of Pistorius (1601) and of Struvius (1726). 


@@@@@


doc= 18058


Marianus Scottus (d. 1080x83), scribe, was the founder of the Irish monastic community at Regensburg, Bavaria, from which developed the Irish Benedictine congregation in southern Germany, the Schottenkloster. His name in Irish is given in his own hand as 'Muredach macc Robartaig' in the colophon of his copy of the Pauline epistles now in Vienna. The patronymic (which was probably by this time a surname) shows him as of the family of north Donegal who were traditionally guardians of the early seventh-century psalter codex known as the 'Cathach' of St Columba. The case ('cumhdach') of the 'Cathach' was commissioned between 1062 and 1098 by Domnall Mac Robartaig, who was coarb (successor) of Columba at Kells. He and Muiredach seem likely to have been closely related, perhaps brothers, while Domnall's predecessor but one as coarb, Robartach mac Ferdomnaig (died 1057), may conceivably have been their father. 
Marianus left Ireland with a group of companions 'c'.1068, originally intending to go to Rome. According to the 'Vita Mariani Scotti' (composed between 1177 and 1185 by a monk of the Schottenkloster at Regensburg), he resided for about a year at the monastery of Michaelsberg at Bamberg in Bavaria before proceeding to Regensburg in the footsteps of a certain Mercherdach (died 1075), who had settled there as an incluse attached to the cloister of Obermunster 'c'.1040. At Regensburg, Marianus was received by the nuns of the cloister of Niedermunster, on whose behalf he transcribed many sacred books, and rapidly gained a reputation for sanctity. Later, 'c'.1075, he was granted leave by the abbess of Obermunster to move with his companions to a dependency of her monastery, the small church of Weih St Peter on the outskirts of the city, where anchorite cells were specially constructed. About 1077 Marianus was joined at Weih St Peter by Eoin (Johannes), also a known scribe, who in 1083 completed a manuscript (now at Edinburgh) begun by Marianus three years before. From this it is inferred that Marianus's death occurred in or soon after 1080. 9 February is the date given in the Bollandist edition of his life, based on a note in the source manuscript, but this is not corroborated. He was buried at Weih St Peter (site demolished in 1552). 
After Marianus's death the community at Weih St Peter adopted the Benedictine rule and underwent rapid expansion due to an influx of newcomers from Ireland. About 1089 a second Irish foundation was established at St Jakob in Regensburg, and in the course of the twelfth century this became the mother house of a congregation numbering some dozen houses of Irish Benedictines in southern Germany. 
Two manuscripts by Marianus Scottus are extant, one written entirely in his hand, and a second partially so. The one in Vienna (Osterreichische Nationalbibliothek, Cod. lat. 1247) was written by Marianus in the first half of 1079 and contains a copy of the Pauline epistles with copious commentary and other marginalia, including the signature 'Marianus Scottus' which is entered on the verso of the final leaf and glossed in Irish in the form given above. The other codex, formerly in the Benedictine abbey of Fort Augustus and presently housed in the National Library of Scotland, Edinburgh (Rat. 1), consists of eight ascetical treatises of which the first six are in Marianus's hand and the remainder in the hand of Johannes. According to marginalia in a mixture of Irish and Latin, Marianus was writing during the months of June and July 1080. Marianus's hand has also been identified (by Bernhard Bischoff) in occasional marginalia entered in a ninth-century 'Bible' codex from the library of Niedermunster (Munich, Bayerische Staatsbibliothek, Clm 12741). A further manuscript written by him containing the 'Psalms' and excerpts from the Christian fathers is known only from the text of a colophon cited by fifteenth-century Bavarian sources in which the date of writing is given as 1074, which is specified as the seventh year of Marianus's exile. 


@@@@@


doc= 18059


Mariner, William Charles (1791-1853), traveller, was born on 10 September 1791 at Highbury Place, Highbury, Middlesex, the son of Magnus Mariner (1742/3-1823), who had followed a sea-going career, and his wife, Theodosia. At the age of thirteen, living at Wapping, he joined the privateer and whaler 'Port-au-Prince', about to sail to the Pacific Ocean. After an adventurous voyage the ship arrived at the Tonga (or Friendly) Islands in poor condition, hoping to carry out repairs. The crew met with a hostile reception and many of them were massacred. Mariner, however, was taken under the protection of the principal chief, Finau Ulukalala, who bestowed on him the name of one of his deceased sons, Toki Ukamea, and appointed one of his wives to be Mariner's adopted mother. 
Mariner's residence in Tonga, mainly on the island of Vava'u, lasted for four years. During this time he became thoroughly conversant with the language and customs of this Polynesian people and he was on friendly terms with many of the chiefs, especially with Finau's son and successor. Using the guns from the 'Port-au-Prince', and helped by his surviving companions, he took a full and often decisive part in his protector's warlike campaigns against other islands. Eventually times became more peaceful and Toki attained the status of a chief, living on his own cultivated plantations. 
When, towards the end of 1810, the brig 'Favourite', under Captain Fisk, from Port Jackson, arrived in Tongan waters Mariner, now nineteen, went aboard and worked his passage to Macau in China. From there he again worked a passage on the ship 'Cuffnells', on charter to the East India Company, and arrived at Gravesend in June 1811. Mariner undertook a further voyage, to the West Indies, of which no details are known, and returned to England the following year. 
Mariner's account of the voyage on the 'Port-au-Prince', of his life in Tonga, together with the history, customs, and grammar and vocabulary of the language, was written by Dr John Martin, to whom Mariner had recounted his experiences. It was published in 1817 as 'An Account of the Natives of the Tonga Islands'. Other editions followed and there were translations into French and German. The book was well reviewed, particularly by the 'Quarterly Review' (April 1817), and remained for many years the principal account of the Tonga Islands. 
Mariner spent the remainder of his life in business in the City of London and became a stockbroker. He was involved in the exchequer bill affair of 1836-41 when large sums of money in loans were raised on the security of bills later found to have been forgeries. The investigating commission was not able to decide whether Mariner had realized that the bills passing through his hands were forged. He sought to clear his name in the City by publishing a pamphlet, 'Exchequer Bills Forgery: a Statement', in 1843, which ran to two editions. 
In his latter years Mariner lived at Gravesend, the port of departure and of arrival of his early voyages. On 3 May 1818 he had married Margaret Roberts (1796-1871), daughter of Peter Roberts, banker, of Aberystwyth; they had eleven children. Mariner died on 20 October 1853, when he was found drowned in the Grand Surrey Canal at Camberwell. He was buried five days later in Gravesend cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 18060


Marisco, Geoffrey de (b. before 1171, d. 1245), justiciar of Ireland, was a member of a Somerset family which in that county held one of the manors of Huntspill and the manor of Cloud. He was born shortly before 1171. His mother was a sister of John Cumin (or Comyn), archbishop of Dublin; in 1220 she was said to be on the point of death. Marisco's elder brother, William, was granted Lundy island, which had previously belonged to the knights templar, by Richard I in 1194. William was a naval administrator in King John's service but supported the rebels in the civil war of 1215-17; he is last mentioned in 1229-30. His son Jordan who received land in Ireland through his uncle, Geoffrey, was dead by October 1234. 
Geoffrey de Marisco is first mentioned in 1192 in an 'inspeximus' (a charter confirming earlier grants) made to him by his uncle, John Cumin, of Holywood, Wicklow, which his brother Walter had previously held. His other lands in Ireland included a manor at Knockainy in Limerick, near which, at Any (now Hospital), he founded a preceptory for knights of St John before 1215. In 1226 he was granted a fair at this manor, and also at Adare on the Maigue, which belonged to him from an early stage. After his outlawry in 1238 both manors escheated to the crown. Knockainy was for some time retained by the king, but Adare soon passed to the Fitzgeralds of Offaly. He also held Killorglin in Kerry. 
In 1200 Marisco was with the king at Ledbury, Gloucestershire, and received a grant of 'Katherain' (probably Knockainy) in exchange for other lands in Ireland, together with 20 marks, to fortify a house there for himself. In 1208 he defended William (I) Marshal's position in Leinster against King John's machinations and defeated the justiciar, Meiler fitz Henry, at Thurles, Tipperary. He was pardoned for this and in 1210 accompanied King John in his campaign in Ireland against Hugh de Lacy. In the same year he led an expedition into Connacht with Thomas fitz Maurice Fitzgerald (died 1213/14) and the English of Munster supported by O Briain. In 1212 he joined the other English magnates in Ireland in protesting his loyalty to John in the face of Pope Innocent III's threat to absolve the king's subjects from their allegiance. In 1213 Marisco, who was possibly 'custos' (deputy justiciar) at the time, was defeated with the English of Meath at Fircall, Offaly, by Cormac O Maoil Sechlainn. In the summer of 1215 he was with the king at Marlborough and on 6 July was appointed justiciar of Ireland, giving two of his sons as pledges for his behaviour. He built a castle at Killaloe, Clare, in 1217 and forced the people to accept an English bishop, Robert Travers, who was also his nephew. 
In 1218 Marisco was ordered to raise money to enable the king to pay Louis, the son of the French king, the sum promised to him, and to pay the papal tribute. He was ordered in 1219 to pay the revenues of the crown into the exchequer at Dublin, and to present himself before the king, leaving Ireland in the care of Henry of London, archbishop of Dublin. Having already taken the cross he received a safe conduct to make a pilgrimage to the Holy Land and travelled to England. There in March 1220 he entered into an agreement with the king at Oxford, in the presence of the council, with reference to the discharge of his office, pledging himself to pay the royal revenues into the exchequer, and to appoint faithful constables for the king's castles, and delivering one of his sons to be kept as a hostage by the king. On his return to Ireland he was commanded to resume the demesne lands that he had alienated without warrant. Complaints were made against him to the king by the citizens of Dublin, and in July 1221 the king wrote to the council in Ireland, declaring that he had received no money from that country since he came to the throne and that Marisco, who had while in England made a fine with him to satisfy defaults, had not obeyed his wishes. Henry therefore desired that he should give up his office. Marisco resigned the justiciarship on 4 October, was thanked for his faithful services, quitclaimed of 1080 marks, part of the fine made with the king, and received a letter of protection during the king's minority, and the wardship of the heir of John of Clahull. Marisco had given some crown escheats to his friends and ignored some royal mandates. The cantred of Ossures, Kerry, for instance, was given to his son Robert. These Kerry dealings cost him his job in 1221. 
In 1224 Marisco, who had been holding a parley with Aed O Conchobhair, joined the justiciar William (II) Marshal and Walter de Lacy in besieging Trim, which was defended by supporters of the rebellious Hugh de Lacy. In November and December of the same year he acted as 'custos' in the Marshal's absence and carried on war with Aed O Neill in support of Aed O Conchobhair, the son of Cathal, who had been ousted from the kingship of Connacht. On 25 June 1226 he was reappointed justiciar and being then in England received on 4 July a grant of $580 a year, to be paid out of the Irish exchequer as salary. English policy towards Connacht had changed with the revival of de Burgh fortunes and Marisco attempted to capture Aed O Conchobhair. This action was resented by many of the English lords in Ireland and Marisco wrote to the king to complain in particular of Theobald Walter, his own son-in-law, who, he claimed, had garrisoned Dublin Castle against the king. Aed O Conchobhair captured Marisco's son, William, near Athlone and returned him in exchange for his own son and daughter, who were being kept hostage by the English. Aed was killed in the following year in Marisco's house, although whether or not with the justiciar's connivance is not clear. At this time Marisco also built castles at Rindown and Ballyleague, Roscommon, on the Shannon. In his energetic attempts to dispossess the Irish he set the tone for his successors during Henry III's reign. He resigned the justiciarship in February 1228 and with Walter de Lacy and the justiciar Richard de Burgh inflicted a severe defeat on the Irish of Connacht. 
Marisco was with Richard Marshal on the Curragh on 1 April 1234 when the latter was fatally wounded by a group of magnates possibly acting on Henry III's behalf. Marisco was suspected of betraying Marshal but this is unlikely. Both he and his son William were gaoled until September 1234 and were each fined $2000. In the spring of the following year, 1235, Henry Clement, a messenger of the Irish justiciar, Maurice Fitzgerald (died 1257), was murdered in Westminster, almost certainly by a party led by William de Marisco and probably in revenge for the slaying of Marshal. After the murder Geoffrey de Marisco fled to the hospital of St John in Clerkenwell. He was allowed to leave on 9 June 1235 and in November of that year one of those imprisoned after the murder, Walter Comyn, who had lands in Offaly and who was probably a kinsman of Marisco, was delivered to him, having found pledges. Marisco's lands were restored to him on 3 August 1235. In the same year, however, he was excommunicated by Hubert de Burgh, brother of Richard and bishop of Limerick, for keeping Kilmallock from the see. Marisco had enfeoffed his son William of Kilmallock and Hubert de Burgh had unlawfully taken it as an escheat because William had fled to Lundy island after Clement's death and had been outlawed. 
In 1238 an attempt was made to assassinate Henry III and suspicion fell on William and Geoffrey de Marisco. Geoffrey was also in trouble because he had not paid the instalments of his fine, and, as he had no lands in England, the Irish justiciar was ordered to distrain his lands there. Some time between then and 1242 he fled to Scotland where he was sheltered by Walter Comyn. In 1244 he was forced to leave Scotland, possibly as part of the agreement reached in that year between Henry III and Alexander II. He died in France in the following year. 
Geoffrey de Marisco married three times. The name of his first wife is not known. William de Marisco was a child of this marriage. In 1224 William was taken into king's service as a member of the household. Some time before then he married Matilda, niece of Henry, archbishop of Dublin, whose marriage portion included the castle of Coonagh. Following the murder of Clement he travelled to Lundy island which was evacuated by William, son of Jordan de Marisco. Jordan was Geoffrey de Marisco's first cousin, and both Jordan and his son William held land in Ireland. This William had been on the Curragh with his great-uncle Geoffrey and recovered his Irish land only in 1237. William son of Geoffrey held out in Lundy island until 1242 and used it as a base for piratical attacks on shipping between England and Ireland, sometimes in collaboration with the Scottish crown. In June 1242 he was captured and was executed at the Tower of London on 25 July 1245. His wife, Matilda, was kept at Gloucester until 1243 and succeeded in 1247 in recovering her marriage portion from the archbishop of Dublin. The other children of Geoffrey de Marisco's first marriage included Walter and Thomas and possibly John, who married Mabel, the daughter of Hamo de Valognes and a granddaughter of Richard de Burgh. One daughter, possibly called Joan, married Theobald Walter, while a second, whose name is not known, married Hugh Tyrel. 
Marisco's second wife was Eva, the daughter and heir of Robert of Bermingham, to whom Richard fitz Gilbert, earl of Pembroke (Strongbow), had granted Offaly. She had married first, in 1193, Gerald fitz Maurice Fitzgerald, who died in 1204. Their son, Maurice Fitzgerald (d. 1257), came of age in 1215, but did not retrieve Offaly from Marisco until the latter's disgrace in 1234. Eva married second Geoffrey fitz Robert, seneschal of Leinster, who was dead by 1211. She married Marisco between that date and 1217 and died before 1226. Their son Robert, who in 1240 was called the brother of Maurice Fitzgerald, joined his outlaw brother William de Marisco on Lundy island and was dead by 1240. Marisco's third wife was Alice, the widow of Roger Pipard and sister of Walter and Hugh de Lacy. This marriage had taken place by 1232. 


@@@@@


doc= 18061


Marsh, Richard (d. 1226), administrator and bishop of Durham, was of unknown origins. The fact that he was styled 'magister' indicates that he attended a university, but it is not known where. He first appears in royal records in 1196/7, when he accounted for the issues of the vacant bishopric of Durham on behalf of the appointed custodians, Gilbert fitz Reinfrey and Richard Brewer. In that same year he also paid into the treasury two large sums on behalf of Archbishop Hubert Walter. It appears, therefore, that he was already developing the expertise in financial administration that would characterize his later career. Under King John, Marsh became first a chamber clerk (by 1207), and then, from 1209, senior chancery clerk, with occasional custody of the great seal. He continued as clerk of the chamber, however, until 29 October 1214, when he was appointed chancellor. Yet even as chancellor Marsh continued to be closely involved with both the chamber and the exchequer until 1217, when he left the court to become bishop of Durham. Although Marsh remained titular chancellor until his death in 1226, from November 1218 it was Ralph de Neville who, as keeper of the new king's seal, performed the day-to-day functions of the chancellor's office. 
Like most of John's clerical administrators, Marsh remained at the king's side throughout the interdict, and was rewarded for his loyalty with a series of ecclesiastical positions and promotions. In 1209 he became canon of Exeter and rector of Bampton, Oxfordshire; in 1212 he was appointed to the vicarage at Kempsey, Worcestershire. By November 1211 he was archdeacon of Northumberland, and in February 1213 he became archdeacon of Richmond, offices he held concurrently until his appointment as bishop of Durham in 1217. 
There is no doubt of Marsh's influence with King John. Along with William Brewer, Robert of Thornham, and Reginald of Cornhill, he was named specifically as one of the 'evil counsellors' who encouraged John's exactions from the Cistercian order in 1210. He was named again among the king's most influential advisers in 1211. During Michaelmas term 1212, when rumours of incipient rebellion reached the king, it was Marsh whom John sent to supervise the exchequer. During this same year he also served as sheriff of Somerset and Dorset, yet another sign of the trust the king reposed in him. Years later a monk of St Albans reported a dream in which King John appeared before him, lamenting the sins that Richard Marsh had encouraged him to commit against the church during the interdict. 
When the interdict was finally lifted, Archbishop Stephen Langton threatened Marsh with suspension from his ecclesiastical benefices. In August 1213 Marsh went personally to Rome to explain himself to the pope, and also to negotiate on the king's behalf the final terms for ending the interdict. He succeeded on both counts. In February 1214 he left Rome with letters of special papal protection for all his ecclesiastical benefices, and with the terms for ending the interdict substantially modified in the king's favour. 
Upon his return from Rome Marsh quickly resumed his administrative duties at court. He went first to Poitou, where he assisted in organizing John's military campaign of 1214. During this time, between April and June 1214, John attempted to have him elected bishop of Winchester in succession to Peter des Roches, whom the king hoped to postulate to York. Nothing came of this scheme, however, and by June 1214 Marsh was back in England, advising on the munitioning of castles, and compelling monastic houses to seal blank charters surrendering their claims to compensation for their losses during the interdict. Marsh was also active during these years in pressing the king's candidates upon monastic electors, most famously in the disputed election of Hugh of Northwold to the abbacy of Bury St Edmunds. In October 1214 John appointed Marsh chancellor, official confirmation of the position he had already attained as one of the principal men upon whom the king relied in governing England. 
Marsh remained a loyal supporter of King John throughout the 'Magna Carta' rebellion. In August 1215 he was in Poitou, attempting to raise troops for John's service. In September he went on another mission to Rome, where he secured the suspension of Archbishop Langton. After John's death, Marsh continued as chancellor in the new regency government, and in this capacity sealed the November 1217 version of 'Magna Carta'. By this date, however, he had already become bishop of Durham. Appointed in May 1217 by the legate Guala, with the support of Pope Honorius III ('r'. 1216-27), Marsh was consecrated at Gloucester on 2 July 1217 by Archbishop Walter de Gray of York. From that date on he spent most of his time in his northern diocese. Marsh remained in close touch with the royal government, however, acting as a diplomatic intermediary with the king of Scotland and serving, from December 1218 to April 1219, as justice on eyre in Yorkshire and Northumberland. He remained, at least formally, a member of the royal council, and he continued to insist upon his dignity as chancellor, angrily rejecting Ralph de Neville's claims to be officially the vice-chancellor. 
As bishop of Durham, Marsh was engaged in almost constant conflict, first with Philip of Oldcotes, the wartime custodian of the vacant bishopric, and then with the prior and convent of Durham over the proper division of revenues between priory and bishop. Marsh's methods in pursuing these conflicts were brutal. Oldcotes's estates were attacked, his houses burnt, and his men imprisoned. The monks of Durham accused Marsh before the pope of bloodshed, adultery, simony, robbery, and sacrilege, and complained to the king that he was violating their rights under 'Magna Carta'. The pope ordered the bishops of Salisbury and Ely to investigate the charges against him, but Marsh appealed to Rome, and after great expense to all parties the case was remanded to England for a hearing at London. It was on his journey south to attend this hearing that Marsh died in his sleep, without warning, at Peterborough Abbey on 1 May 1226, leaving behind him a heavy burden of indebtedness upon both priory and bishopric, and a personal reputation for heavy drinking. His heir was his nephew Adam Marsh, subsequently a notable theologian, to whom he bequeathed his library. 


@@@@@


doc= 18062


Markaunt, Thomas (c.1382-1439), benefactor, was the son of John Markaunt and his wife, Cassandria. Markaunt's name, prefixed 'm' ('magister'), is found in the records of Corpus Christi College, Cambridge, in accounts datable to 1413/14 and sporadically thereafter. From 1437 to 1439 he is regularly listed in an order of seniority placing him immediately below the master. Fellowship at Corpus entailed being in priest's orders, but the degree of BTh (found in later histories) is unsubstantiated. 
Markaunt served the university as senior proctor during the year 1417, as is known from his citation in 1418, by name and office, in a petition of complaint made by the mayor and commonalty of Cambridge against the university. A paper of crude verses had been affixed to the mayoral gate by unruly scholars, and Markaunt was involved in the university's defence and counter-complaints arising out of that and other incidents. He subsequently added all the relevant documents to the compendium of texts of university records (mainly statutes and privileges), which he had gathered and indexed for his personal reference during his term of office. The resulting volume, usually known as 'Markaunt's Book', is not unique of its kind, but is of exceptional interest as the earliest relating to the university to have survived, predating existing series of registers. Markaunt was one of four witnesses appearing for the university at the 'Barnwell process' of 14 October 1430, his age at the time given as forty-eight years. 
The death of Markaunt 'nuper consortis et confratris Collegii Corporis Christi' (Corpus Christi College, Cambridge, MS 232, fol. 17'r') is recorded as 19 November 1439. His will, made on 4 November, is largely quoted in the deed of acceptance of his legacy by the college of 1 August 1440, endorsing the conditions set out by the testator for the future management of the books of his bequest. These were to be kept separately as a lending library for the use of the master and fellows. Detailed rules governed the choice of custodians, the order of the borrowers' selection, and the prayers they then recited. The scheme had similarities to those for contemporary (cash) loan chests, and within the college operated in parallel with one such recent endowment. A full inventory of the seventy-six books by number, title, and identifying incipit, with a valuation list roughly classified by subject, accompany the copy of the deed of agreement prefacing the register of borrowers proper. Markaunt's library seems to have been largely dispersed soon after the borrowing register was discontinued in 1517. Five volumes remain in the college, subsumed into Archbishop Parker's manuscript collection. Another survival, strayed from the college before Parker's time, is 'Markaunt's Book', now after many vicissitudes in the university archives. Although misunderstanding of its purpose subsequently won for its compiler an unfounded reputation as an antiquary, modern scholarship still remains lastingly indebted to Markaunt for his transcripts and the records of his library. 


@@@@@


doc= 18063


Markham, Francis (1565-1627), soldier, was born on 25 July 1565, the second son of Robert Markham, landowner, of Cotham, Nottinghamshire, and Mary, daughter of Sir Francis Leake. He was a page in the service of the earl of Pembroke before spending ten years at Winchester College. He briefly studied under the famous Dutch Calvinist theologian Adrian de Saravia before being sent to Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1582. He quarrelled with a tutor, however, and in 1583 made his first trip to the Netherlands, where he served as a gentleman volunteer in an English regiment. His father did not approve of his abandoning university and cut off his allowance. In 1587 they were reconciled, but Robert Markham allowed his son to return to the Dutch wars in the royal expedition sent to attempt to relieve Sluys. Markham then returned to England and in 1588 entered Staple's Inn, from which he moved in February 1589 to Gray's Inn, where his father had been a member. 
In his memoirs Francis claimed that he had to leave his studies because of lack of funds, but it was also the case that only a year after being admitted to Gray's Inn he was one of seventeen gentlemen who were 'put out of the fellowship... for their abuse in outrageous manner' at about two or three o'clock on the morning of 4 February 1590 (Fletcher, 87). His father's patron, the earl of Shrewsbury, obtained for him a place in Sir Robert Sidney's garrison in Flushing. He later moved to Germany, serving a season in the army of Christian of Anhalt, a militant Calvinist, before returning -- perhaps initially home, but certainly to the Netherlands, where he stayed with the Dutch Anglophile humanist Carolus Clusius in Leiden in early 1594. This was 'en route' for Heidelberg, where -- presumably to satisfy his parents -- he went to study civil law. But Markham enjoyed law no more in Heidelberg than in London and returned home that summer. 
Markham now joined the household of the earl of Shrewsbury, with an annual pension of $20, but in 1599 he went back to the wars, as a captain in the army led to Ireland by the earl of Essex. His association with Essex 'crossed' his career, as he later recalled (Markham, 36). He bought a home, meaning to settle down, yet instead he went back to the Netherlands and served in the Dutch army in 1602-3. The death of the queen induced him to try for a place at court, but the involvement of his cousin Sir Griffin Markham in a Catholic plot against James I disgraced the family. Shortly afterwards he was imprisoned for fifteen weeks for debt, securing release only through the good offices of old military friends such as Sir Francis Vere, Robert, Lord Sidney, and another old Essex man, the earl of Rutland, whose son, Lord Ros, Markham tutored on a trip through France. On 3 January 1609 he married Mary Lovel ('b'. 1594, died in or after 1616). They had at least two children. Markham may have fought in the Julich-Cleves War of 1610 but finally settled in Nottingham on his appointment in 1612 as muster-master of that city. 
Markham was clearly committed to the international protestant cause -- he chose carefully whom he fought for, and he had a strong interest in military affairs. As a writer he was a greater stylist, though much less prolific, than his more celebrated sibling, Gervase Markham (1568?-1637). The main source for his life is the 'Genealogy or petigree of Markham' that he composed some time between 1601 and 1622, which includes a brief autobiographical memoir. In addition, material can be gleaned from his two books 'Five Decades of Epistles of Warre' (1622), dedicated to Prince Charles, and 'The Booke of Honour, or, Five Decads of Epistles of Honour' (1625), dedicated to him as king. Both are in the form of five collections, each of ten epistles on subjects relating to war and honour, each epistle being dedicated to a nobleman or bishop. The prose style is lucid and elegant, if a touch florid, though both books are somewhat derivative, revealing (if nothing else) their author's acquaintance with a range of classical and Renaissance literature. However, they are also sprinkled with observations drawn from Markham's personal experience. 'Epistles of Warre' contains the greater number of these, and partly as a result, is the more original and interesting work for, as he observed in the epistle dedicatory, 'War hath been ever my Mistrese' (sig. A3'r'). Markham died intestate in 1627. 


@@@@@


doc= 18064


Markham, Frederick (1805-1855), army officer, youngest son of Admiral John Markham (1761-1827) and his wife, Maria ('nee' Rice), and grandson of William Markham, archbishop of York, was born at his father's house, Ades, in Chailey parish, near Lewes, Sussex, on 16 August 1805. He went to Westminster School, where he was a cricketer and oarsman, and acted Syrus in the 'Adelphi', the Westminster play of 1823. He was expelled for a boating scrape in 1824, and on 13 May of that year obtained an ensigncy by purchase in the 32nd regiment, in which he became lieutenant in 1825, captain in 1829, major in 1839, and lieutenant-colonel in 1842, buying all his steps. When the 32nd was in Dublin in 1830 Markham was second to Captain John Rowland Smyth (died 1873), then of the regiment, in a fatal duel with Standish O'Grady, a barrister, arising out of a fracas in Nassau Street, Dublin, on 17 March. Smyth and Markham were tried for their lives, and each sentenced to a year's imprisonment in Kilmainham gaol. Judge Vandeleur assured them that the sentence implied no reflection on their conduct in the affair. 
Markham subsequently served with his regiment in Canada, and received three wounds when in command of the light company covering the advance in the unsuccessful attack on the rebels at St Denis in November 1837, during the insurrection in Lower Canada. He went out in command of the regiment to India, commanding the 2nd infantry brigade at the first and second sieges of Multan during the Punjab campaign of 1848-9 (he was wounded on 10 September 1848). He commanded the division at Suraj Kund, when the enemy's position was stormed and seven guns taken, commanded the Bengal column at the storming of Multan on 2 January 1849, and was present at the surrender of the city on 22 January and the capture of the fort of Chiniot on 2 February. After joining Lord Gough's army with his brigade on 20 February, he was present with it at the victory of Gujrat. He was made CB and afterwards aide-de-camp to the queen, and attained the rank of colonel in 1850. 
Markham, a wiry, active man, was all his life an ardent sportsman. When at Peshawar in April 1852 he made a long shooting expedition in the Himalayas in company with Sir Edward Campbell, bt, an officer of the 60th rifles on the governor-general's staff. They visited Kashmir and Tibet, penetrating as far as Ladakh and bringing back trophies of the skulls and bones of the great 'Ovis ammon', the burrell, gerow, ibex, and musk deer. Markham published a narrative of the journey, 'Shooting in the Himalayas: a Journal of Sporting Adventures in Ladak, Tibet, and Cashmere' (1854). 
Markham returned to Britain on leave, and in March 1854 was sent back to India as adjutant-general of the queen's troops. In November he was promoted major-general and appointed to the Peshawar division, but when within two days' journey of his command was recalled for a command in the Crimea. On 30 July 1855 he was appointed to the 2nd division of the army before Sevastopol, with the local rank of lieutenant-general. He commanded the division at the attack on the Redan on 8 September 1855. He was just able to witness the fall of Sevastopol before his health, which had suffered much by his hurried journey from India, broke down. He returned home and, apparently unmarried, died in London, at Limmer's Hotel, on 21 December 1855. He was buried in the family vault at Morland, near Penrith. 


@@@@@


doc= 18065


Markham, Gervase (1568?-1637), author, was probably born at Cotham, Nottinghamshire, one of five sons and three daughters of Robert Markham (1536-1606), member of parliament and former high sheriff, and Mary Leake ('b'. 1538, died in or before 1597). Gervase had two elder brothers, one of whom, Francis Markham (1565-1627), was the writer of an autobiography. The Markhams were well-connected country gentry: Gervase's father, Robert, had been brought up by the Babington family, who were first cousins, and another first cousin was Sir John Harington. 
Gervase's elder brother Francis was educated at Winchester and Cambridge, and it is probable that something similar was true of Gervase. Indeed, he may well be one of the two students simply called Markham who entered King's College, Cambridge, at Easter 1583. But by 1584 a Jarvis Markham is mentioned in a letter as a retainer of the earl of Rutland at Belvoir Castle, 4 miles from the Markhams' seat at Cotham. Markham's movements for the next ten years are unclear, but for part of the time at least he was serving with his brothers in the army in Ireland. 
By 1593 Markham seems to have been settled in London, since it was in this year that he registered his first books for publication. One was a poem (now lost) entitled 'Thyrsis and Daphne'; the other was 'A Discource of Horsmanshippe', a prose tract full of practical advice based on Markham's experience of horses. These two publications were a foretaste of Markham's career to come, in which an astonishing variety of literary publications -- poetry, drama, and prose -- is combined with an equally astonishing variety of non-literary works on topics such as horsemanship, veterinary medicine, husbandry, domestic economy, and even military training. 
Throughout the rest of the 1590s Markham wrote a stream of poems strongly identified with the faction of the earl of Essex. Among them are 'The Most Honorable Tragedy of Richard Grinvile, Knight' (1595), a poem dedicated to Lord Mountjoy, and including a sonnet dedicated to Southampton. In 1596 Markham's 'Poem of Poems', an adaptation of the 'Song of Solomon' into eclogue form, was dedicated to Elizabeth, daughter of Philip Sidney. 'Devoreux, or, Vertue's Tears' (1597), a translation from the French of Madame Genevieve Petau Maulette, has been described as 'almost pure Essex propaganda' (Poynter, 11); it is a lament for the death in battle of Walter Devereux, brother of the earl of Essex, and is dedicated to his sisters Dorothy, countess of Northumberland, and Penelope, Lady Rich. 'Tears of the Beloved, or, The Lamentation of St John' (1600) and 'Mary Magdalen's Lamentations for the Loss of her Master' (1601) complete the sequence of Markham's early poetic publications. Markham's closeness to Southampton, with whom he went on the Islands voyage in 1596, has led Robert Gittings and others to speculate he may be the Rival Poet of Shakespeare's 'Sonnets'. Several extracts from 'Grinvile' and 'Devoreux' appeared in 'England's Parnassus' (1600), edited by Robert Allott, who had himself written a dedicatory poem for 'Devoreux'. One 24-line passage from 'Devoreux', beginning 'I walkt alongst a stream', was misattributed in Allott's collection to Christopher Marlowe, and long had a place in the Marlowe canon. Not until 1947 was Markham given his due credit for these widely admired lines. 
Probably also dating from this early phase of creativity, and similarly linked to radical protestantism, is Markham's prose completion of Philip Sidney's 'Arcadia'. Volume 1 of this project was published in 1607 and volume 2, 'The Second and Last Part of the First Book of the English Arcadia', followed in 1613. Also during this period, Markham seems to have been writing for the theatre, as evidenced by a 1596 record of a payment by Henslowe to 'marcum'. It has been argued that this is for an early version of 'The Dumb Knight', a play which eventually saw print in 1608 in a version modified by Lewis Machin. In addition, Markham in 1595 published a new edition of 'The Boke of St Albans' by Juliana Barnes, a collection of domestic advice and recipes first printed in 1486 that foreshadows his own later work. 'A Health to the Gentlemanly Profession of Servingmen' (1598), yet another product of Markham's indefatigable pen, celebrated the importance of gentleman retainers of great lords. By 1601 Markham had already published eight books of various sorts, not to mention various reprintings; however, in that year his publishing career was interrupted, and he did not print another new work for six years. 
Essex's fall was a disaster for all his supporters, and Markham seems to have reacted by leaving London. On 23 February 1601, two days before Essex's execution, Markham married Mary Gelsthorp of Epperstone, Nottinghamshire, at Newark. For some years they seem to have lived quietly in the country. 'Yet did I for nine years follow the plow', commented Markham later, as a tenant farmer on the estate of relatives in Huntingdonshire, and perhaps also on the estate of his cousin Sir John Harington near Bath (Poynter, 18). In 1606 Markham's father died, and the estate passed to his eldest son, Robert, 'a fatal destroyer and unthrift of that eminent family' according to one observer, although the family had been struggling with debts since at least 1595 (ibid., 17). Robert died three years later in 1609, by which time most of the family wealth and property was gone. 
By then Gervase Markham had started to resume the two threads of his publishing career. On the literary side, he began with 'The Most Famous History of Mervine' (1607), a translation from a medieval French story, and followed this with poems including 'Rodomonth's Infernall' (1607), translated from Ariosto, and 'The Famous Whore' (1609). On the practical side, he wrote a series of books returning to the subject of horses, starting with 'Cavelarice' (1607). Partly through his own productivity, and partly through the sharp practice of publishers repeatedly reissuing his work in different forms, it came to pass that five different books on the subject of horses, all of them by Markham, and some of them repeating one another's material, were on the market simultaneously. On 14 July 1617 Markham was forced to sign an unprecedented agreement with the Stationers' Company: 'I... do promise hereafter never to write any more book or books to be printed of the deseases or Cures of any Cattle, as Horse, Oxe, Cowe, Sheepe, Swine, Goates etc.' (Poynter, 23). Instead, Markham wrote 'Hobson's Horse-Load of Epistles' (1617), a book of sample letters ready to be adapted to the sender's own particular circumstances. Next he turned to the subject of wildfowling, producing 'Hunger's Prevention' (1621), a practical guide to the art of hunting birds. 
In spite of all this, Markham still found time to dust off a tragedy of his entitled 'Herod and Antipas', which had been in existence since at least 1613, but which he now revised with the help of William Sampson. The play was staged at the Red Bull in 1621 and printed the following year. 
In 1622, for no obvious reason other than for money, Gervase Markham undertook to travel on foot from London to Berwick without using bridges, 'boats, Shippe, or other Ingin for water more than an ordinarye Leape staffe or staffe to leape with all neither shoulde swyme any water whatsoever'. For a 55-year-old man, and even given that his colleague and rival Ben Jonson had four years earlier walked to Edinburgh and back, this challenge was frankly bizarre, and many of his acquaintance bet sums of 5 shillings or thereabouts that he would be unable to complete it. None the less, Markham duly set out, and returned later that year bearing a certificate from the mayor of Berwick, only to find that thirty-nine people, many of them actors associated with the Red Bull, refused to pay up. Markham took legal action against them, stating that he had 'groune pore' because of his numerous children and needed the money. The papers, which name numerous actors and where they live, are extant; however, for a long time after their rediscovery in 1910 there was uncertainty about whether the Gervase Markham in question was this man, or his namesake Gervase Markham (1557-1637), or another Gervase Markham entirely. The fact that the list of defaulters includes several actors of Markham's play, and indeed John Trundle, one of his publishers, seems to settle the matter. Less clear, however, is whether Markham succeeded in recovering the money he was owed. 
Markham's last years seem to have been spent in poverty in London. He continued his astonishing productivity, writing on the enrichment of the weald of Kent, on garden design, and -- in a series of monographs including 'The Souldiers Accidence' (1625) -- on military tactics. He also wrote 'Honour in his Perfection' (1624), a prose treatise celebrating the past and current military exploits of four aristocratic protestant families. Markham was buried in St Giles Cripplegate, London, on 3 February 1637. 
Markham's more literary works have never enjoyed a particularly high reputation, although he was noted as a poet as early as 1598 by Francis Meres in his 'Palladis tamia'. For the most part, commentators have sided with Jonson who derided him as 'not of the number of the Faithfull... and but a base fellow' ('Ben Jonson', ed. C. H. Herford, P. Simpson, and E. Simpson, 11 vols., 1925-51, 1.137), while his lengthy poem on Richard Grenville has suffered in comparisons with Tennyson's, which, however, it may have influenced. On the other hand, his factual works include a wealth of detail on many aspects of day-to-day living. For the social historian, or the re-enactor, Gervase Markham's numerous works are indispensable guides to the practicalities of Renaissance life. 


@@@@@


doc= 18066


Markham, Sir Griffin (b. c.1565, d. in or after 1644), army officer and conspirator, was the eldest son of Thomas Markham (1530-1607) of Ollerton, Nottinghamshire, and his wife, Mary Griffin (1540- 'c'.1633), only daughter and heir of Ryce Griffin of Braybrooke and Dingley, Northamptonshire. Thomas Markham was prominent in county society and served as standard bearer in the gentlemen pensioners. Griffin, who seems to have become a Roman Catholic early in life at the prompting of his mother, fought as a volunteer in the Low Countries and France. He was one of those knighted before Rouen by the earl of Essex in 1591, and he was present at the siege of Groningen in 1594. 
Having been imprisoned briefly in the Gatehouse prison, London, during 1596, for reasons still obscure, Markham participated in Essex's expedition to Ireland in 1599, holding a cavalry command in Connaught. As a soldier he was well regarded -- his cousin Sir John Harington acknowledged him versed in both the theoretical and practical aspects of warfare. By 1603, however, Markham was heavily in debt, frustrated in his suit for the reversion of the keeperships of Bestwood and Clipstone parks, held for life by his father, and convinced that he had been opposed at every turn by the Jesuit faction among the English Catholics. He had by this point alienated many influential county neighbours -- the earls of Rutland and Shrewsbury among them -- and as early as 1601 was complaining to Robert Cecil about his lack of preferment in Ireland. He had high hopes of better days under James I, but despite some fair promises made to Markham during his journey south to London in April 1603, the king granted the reversion of Bestwood to the earl of Rutland on 9 June. Dismayed and angry, Markham sought a means of revenge. Collaborating with the unstable appellant priest William Watson, and with Lord Cobham's ambitious younger brother, George Brooke, he hatched a plot by which sympathetic Catholics would foregather secretly, surprise the court at Greenwich on midsummer night, kidnap the as yet uncrowned King James, and hold him prisoner in the Tower of London. The monarch once in their hands, they would demand a pardon, toleration of their religion guaranteed by hostages and strongholds across England, and the removal of counsellors identified with Elizabethan persecution. Both Markham and Brooke, in their subsequent confessions, recalled detailed and precise military planning, involving an inescapable degree of bloodshed: 'Brooke confesseth that the time of the surprise was by Markhams appointment to be on midsomer night both for the execucion and the concealinge of the companies as they came scattred... that Marcam affirmed to him that he had given a plott of Greenewich Howse to Copley. (Bodl. Oxf., MS Carte 205, fol. 120)' He solicited support from his brothers, the twins Charles and Thomas, but like so many others they were at best noncommittal. 
For all the plotters' lengthy discussions about the offices they would hold in their remodelled England, the fantasy was exploded when their hoped-for army failed to materialize. In the new, uncertain politics of Jacobean England, very few Catholics were prepared to commit treason in support of men like Watson or Markham. The plot, known as the Bye in contrast to the Main, a parallel treason involving Cobham and Sir Walter Ralegh, was swiftly betrayed, both to the Jesuits and to the crown. 
Markham fled, and a proclamation was issued for his arrest, describing him as a man with a 'large broad face, of a bleake complexion, a bigge nose, one of his hands is maimed by an hurt in his arme received by the shot of a Bullet' (J. F. Larkin and P. L. Hughes, eds., 'Stuart Royal Proclamations', 1973, 1.43). He was soon arrested, and was committed to the Tower of London on 23 July 1603. Although no complete record of his examinations survives it is clear that he was questioned repeatedly, and that, like Watson, he made a full confession. At his trial in Winchester on 15 November he was inevitably (and correctly) found guilty. However, it is possible that his dignified carriage that day -- one observer states that Markham made 'many men sory for him, and my Lord Cecill weepe aboundantly' (BL, Egerton MS 2877, fol. 175'v') -- and perhaps his fellow conspirator William Clarke's assertion that Markham had been 'over scrupulous' in respect of shedding blood (TNA: PRO, SP 14/3/29), swayed the king towards mercy. Like lords Grey and Cobham he was brought to the scaffold on 9 December, only to have the death sentence commuted by royal command. On 19 January Markham was moved to the Fleet prison, and he was exiled shortly afterwards. But he was never pardoned. His lands in Nottinghamshire and Essex were granted to Sir John Harington in June 1604. 
For the next forty years Markham wandered the continent, seeking employment as a soldier, and attaching himself to the courts of various German princes. Several of his letters survive in English archives, proof of persistent attempts to clear his name. In or before 1595 he had married Anne, daughter of Peter Roos of Laxton. Her husband banished, Anne contracted a bigamous marriage with her manservant, James Sanford. This irregularity was soon common knowledge, and she was forced to perform penance at Paul's Cross in November 1617. Sir Griffin is last glimpsed in Vienna, in the spring of 1644, expressing regret that old age now prevents him fighting for his king. It has been argued by some that his rapid exile was a considered move by the privy council, keen to infiltrate English Catholic forces engaged in the Low Countries. While this might be a possible interpretation of the far from complete evidence, Markham's efforts to secure information may have been taken on his own initiative, keen as he was to recover ground irredeemably lost. 


@@@@@


doc= 18067


Markham, John (d. 1409), justice, came of a family which traced its origins back to the twelfth century and was established at East Markham, near Retford, Nottinghamshire. His father was Robert Markham, who may have been a serjeant-at-law under Edward III, and his mother a daughter of Sir John Caunton. Markham became a king's serjeant in January 1383. He was made a justice of the common pleas on 7 July 1396, and sat on the bench until February 1408. He was chosen as one of the triers of petitions in the two parliaments of 1397, and in those of Henry IV, from 1401 to 1407. From the early 1380s he served as justice of assize and gaol delivery on the northern circuit and was a justice of the peace in Nottinghamshire and elsewhere. He was retained as counsel by Henry, earl of Derby, 1391-5, and also by the dean and chapter of Lincoln between about 1389 and 1396. He received a pension from Durham Priory, 1395-6. In 1395 he bought the manors of Bothamsall and Upton, both near East Markham. 
Markham was a member of the commission whose advice Henry of Lancaster took, in September 1399, as to the manner in which the change of dynasty should be carried out, and who on 29 September received Richard's renunciation of the crown in the Tower of London. His name does not appear on the rolls of parliament among those of the seven commissioners who next day pronounced sentence upon Richard in the name of parliament, but Chief Justice Thirning, in announcing the sentence to Richard on behalf of his fellow commissioners on 10 October, enumerated Markham among them. In Henry IV's reign Markham served as a justice of the peace in the eastern counties, and he retired from the bench in Hilary term 1408. 
With his first wife, Elizabeth, daughter of Sir John and sister and coheir of Sir Hugh Cressy (died 1408), of Hodsock, Markham had a son Robert, ancestor of William Markham, archbishop of York (1777-1807), and a second son John Markham (d. 1479) who was chief justice of the king's bench, 1461-9. By this marriage he acquired the manors of Risegate and Bratott in Lincolnshire and a moiety of the manor of Melton in Yorkshire. At some time after 1403 he married Millicent (died 1419), widow of Sir Nicholas Burdon, and daughter and coheir of Sir Thomas Bekeringe. Markham died on 31 December 1409, and was buried in East Markham church, where his monument still remains with the inscription 'Orate pro anima' 'Johannis Markham' 'justiciarii'. His widow later married Sir William Mering. 


@@@@@


doc= 18068


Markham, Sir John (b. after 1399, d. 1479), justice, was the second son of John Markham (d. 1409) a justice of the common pleas. His mother was Elizabeth, sister and coheir of Hugh Cressy of Hodsock, Nottinghamshire. He followed his father's profession, and in 1438 was called from Gray's Inn to the coif. Retained by the duchy of Lancaster from 1438 to 1444, he was appointed king's serjeant on 1 July 1443, promoted to king's bench on 6 February 1444, and appointed chief justice of that court on 13 May 1461, after the accession of Edward IV had sent Sir John Fortescue into political exile. At Edward's coronation Markham was created a knight of the Bath (along with his nephew), and his standing was even sufficient to secure William Yelverton a knighthood to compensate for missing promotion. He continued to be closely involved with Edward, particularly in putting down rebellion in Gloucestershire in 1464. From 1459 to 1468 he sat regularly as a royal adviser in the Lords. 
John Markham was paid as chief justice of king's bench to Michaelmas 1468, and the warrant appointing Thomas Billing as his successor on 23 January 1469 states that Markham had been discharged 'by his desire and special requeste', on the grounds of 'his grete age and debilite' (Sutton). However, legal and City of London sources agree that Edward IV sacked Markham. The fullest version of what would be the only dismissal of a chief justice in the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries (other than at a change of monarch) is given in the early sixteenth-century great chronicle of London. Markham had presided in the summer of 1468 in a treason trial which could only obtain the conviction of Sir Thomas Cook, a wealthy draper and former lord mayor of London, on the lesser charge of misprision (concealment). With typical anti-Woodville bias the chronicle says that Edward took revenge on the chief justice because his wife's relations had wanted to pay off a family grudge as well as enjoy the spoils of Cook's ruin. Among lawyers memories were different. Fortescue (who was abroad at the time) implies that the issue was the admissibility of information obtained by torture; Thomas More's 'History of King Richard III' states that Markham 'left his office' rather than concur with the condemnation of Thomas Burdet, although that took place in 1477; Chief Justice Thomas Bromley in 1553 identified the case as that of Walter Walker (1460). But confused though they are, the memories do suggest that more than 'age and weakness' was involved. Markham had ten years to live! 
A possible explanation can be conjectured if two other sources are brought in -- trial records which hint that Cook probably was guilty, but that the evidence was not there, and the report of Chief Justice William Hussey that Markham (whom he knew) had told Edward IV that a king could not in person arrest anyone on suspicion of treason. Together these suggest that Markham had found himself having to inform the king not only that the court could not on the evidence secure a verdict of treason from a London jury, but that neither could Edward act by prerogative. The story Fortescue heard would fit with this, on the supposition that there had been argument over the prosecution evidence, which is known to have been obtained from the torture of alleged accomplices. Markham continued in office after the trial and kept up pressure on Cook until the autumn. Nevertheless he had failed in the essential duty of the chief justice, namely to give the crown the judicial outcome it wanted within the limits of due process. Deprived of the king's confidence he felt he had to go, with a face-saving excuse and a decent interval before a successor was appointed. 
The stories of Markham's dismissal made his name a byword for judicial integrity. Sir Nicholas Throgmorton reminded the chief justice presiding at his own treason trial in 1554 of 'the example of your honourable predecessors Justice Markham and others, which did eschew corrupt judgements, judging directly and sincerely after the law and the principles in the same' ('State trials', 1.894). How deserved this reputation was in other matters it is hard to say. Markham had been a puisne in 1452 when king's bench began to develop legal fictions in order to secure business, and as chief justice did not challenge them, but nothing suggests that he took the initiative in this. Contemporary correspondence shows Markham involved in legal manoeuvres, in one case agitating for a fee, and in another applying pressure in support of colleagues, but equally he appears as capable of a blunt morality and always active in promoting compromise, not litigation. A contemporary private note describes him as 'eximi et praeclari' and 'ryghte noble and famous' (Markham, 125-6). 
Markham married Margaret, daughter of Simon Leek of Cotham, Nottinghamshire, granddaughter and heir of Sir John Talbot of Donnington. He lived at Sedgebrook in Lincolnshire and built up a substantial estate in the county and in Rutland. Markham died on 20 March 1479 and was survived by three of his five sons. His heir, Thomas, became insane and his principal executor was his nephew, Sir Robert Markham MP, 'a man of great prowess' who fought for Henry VII at Stoke. 


@@@@@


doc= 18069


Markham, John (1761-1827), naval officer, second son of William Markham (bap. 1719, d. 1807), archbishop of York, and Sarah, daughter of John Goddard, a Rotterdam merchant, was born in Westminster on 13 June 1761. At the age of eight he went to Westminster School where his father was headmaster. In March 1775 he entered the navy on the 'Romney', with Captain George Elphinstone, and in her he made a voyage to Newfoundland; in March 1776 he followed Elphinstone to the 'Perseus', going out to join Lord Howe at New York, from where he sailed for the West Indies in February 1777. During this time he twice acted as prize-master. On a third occasion, in May 1777, during a violent gale, with a sinking ship and a drunken crew, Markham prevented prisoners retaking the prize until her crew were rescued by a passing vessel; some months later in England, Markham found his family in mourning for him, Elphinstone having written that he had been lost with the prize. 
In March 1779 Markham was appointed to the 'Phoenix', and in July he was moved into the 'Roebuck', with Sir Andrew Snape Hamond, in which he returned to North America. Hamond appointed him acting lieutenant, and in May 1780 Admiral Marriot Arbuthnot, who had hoisted his flag on the 'Roebuck' during the siege of Charles Town, gave Markham a commission as the ship's first lieutenant. In April 1781 he was moved into the 'Royal Oak', and in August Admiral Thomas Graves took him as first lieutenant of the 'London', his flagship. In her Markham was present in the battle off Cape Henry on 5 September, and afterwards he went to Jamaica, where, in March 1782, Sir Peter Parker promoted him to command the fireship 'Volcano'. In May Sir George Brydges Rodney moved him to the sloop 'Zebra' and sent him out to cruise off Cape Tiburon. 
On 22 May Markham fell in with a brig flying a French ensign. He chased her, and she hoisted a union jack at the fore; Markham remained suspicious and fired into her. But it then appeared that she was a cartel, and had meant to display a flag of truce. On the complaint of the French lieutenant in command, Markham was tried by court martial and cashiered, but Rodney, after reviewing the evidence, reinstated him, and the king in council, on the report of the Admiralty, completely restored him on 13 November 1782. Indeed on 3 January 1783 he was promoted post captain. 
From 1783 to 1786 Markham commanded the 'Sphynx' in the Mediterranean. He was then on half pay for seven years, when he travelled in France, Sweden, Russia, and North America. In June 1793 he was appointed to the 'Blonde', in which, after a few months' service in the channel, he went out to the West Indies with Sir John Jervis (later earl of St Vincent), and took part in the reduction of Martinique. The 'Blonde' was then sent home with dispatches, and during the summer of 1794 she was attached to the squadron under Admiral George Montagu, or cruising among the Channel Islands and on the French coast. In August Markham was moved into the 'Hannibal', and in May 1795 he was again sent out to the West Indies, where he was met by the news that a younger brother, David, colonel of the 20th regiment, had been killed at Port-au-Prince on 26 March. From here, in common with many others, Markham was invalided; more than a quarter of his ship's company died, and another quarter was committed to hospital. On his return home in 1796 he married (27 November) the Hon. Maria (died 1810), daughter of the late George Rice, politician, and his widow, Baroness Dinevor; they had three sons, including Frederick Markham, army officer, and a daughter. 
In March 1797 Markham commissioned the 'Centaur' at Woolwich, and during the following months he sat on many courts martial arising from the mutiny at the Nore. He did not get to sea until September, and was then employed during a stormy winter on the south coast of Ireland. In May 1798 he sailed to join Lord St Vincent, off Cadiz, from where he was detached with Commodore John Thomas Duckworth whom he supported in the capture of Minorca in November. Between May and August 1799 the 'Centaur' also took part in the vain chase round the Mediterranean of the French fleet under Admiral Bruix, who eventually returned into Brest. When the bulk of his pursuers retired to the Mediterranean station, the 'Centaur' remained in the channel and participated in the blockade of Brest. In 1800 Lord Bridport was relieved of the channel command by Lord St Vincent, with whom Markham shared a political association with Lord Lansdowne. When, in February 1801, St Vincent was appointed first lord of the Admiralty, he selected Markham as one of his colleagues at the board. For the next three years Markham's career was identified with St Vincent's. In November 1801, on the death of Lord Hugh Seymour, he was elected MP for Portsmouth, and became the representative of the Admiralty in the House of Commons. He retired from the Admiralty with St Vincent in May 1804, but returned to it in January 1806 as a colleague of Lord Howick, and afterwards, until March 1807, of Thomas Grenville. He then practically retired from public life, though he continued to sit in parliament for Portsmouth until 1826, with one break from 1818 to 1820. 
Markham became a rear-admiral on 23 April 1804, vice-admiral (25 October 1809), and admiral (12 August 1819). In 1826 his failing health compelled him to retire from public life altogether. He was advised to winter in a milder climate and left England in September, travelling by easy stages to reach Naples in January 1827. There he died (13 February) and was buried (27 February). 


@@@@@


doc= 18070


Markham, Peter (fl. 1757-1758), physician and writer, exposed with some force the abuses in the manufacture of bread during the great scarcity of 1757. Nothing is known of Markham's biography or medical qualifications, though his writings did much to attract the attention of parliament to the subject and some of his suggestions were adopted in the 'Act for the Due Making of Bread' (31 Geo. II c. 29). 
Markham wrote three pamphlets on the adulteration of bread by millers and bakers. His first pamphlet, 'Poison Detected, or, Frightful Truths, and Alarming to the British Metropolis' (1757), published anonymously, dealt with the adulteration of bread but also drew attention to the unwholesome methods of colouring tea and preparing wine and beer. This pamphlet was subsequently counter-attacked by Emmanuel Collins's parody, 'Lying Detected, or, Some of the Most Frightful Untruths that Ever Alarmed the British Metropolis' (1758). Markham's two other works were published under his own name in the pamphlet war that grew out of the bread controversy. It has been argued that Markham may have had genuine concern for the health of the public but his accounts of the abuses in the food industry were in fact 'biased and distorted' (Drummond and Wilbraham, 225). 


@@@@@


doc= 18071


Markham, William (bap. 1719, d. 1807), archbishop of York, was baptized at Kinsale, in the county of Cork, on 9 April 1719, the eldest of the four children of Major William Markham (died 1771) and his wife, Elizabeth (1686-1772), a distant cousin and the daughter of George Markham of Worksop Lodge, Nottinghamshire. His father was an army officer of literary tastes who ran a school to supplement his half pay. The family claimed descent from the Markhams of Cotham. 
After early education at home from his father Markham was admitted to Westminster School as a home boarder on 21 June 1733; there his academic talents were complemented by skills as an oarsman and a boxer. In 1738 he obtained a studentship at Christ Church, Oxford, and matriculated on 6 June 1738. He took the degrees of BA (13 May 1742), MA (28 March 1745), BCL (20 November 1752), and DCL (24 November 1752). He held the college lectureship in rhetoric from 1747 to 1750 and was appointed junior censor the following year. Markham's literary talents and wide-ranging classical scholarship flowered during these years at the house. His 'Judicium paridis', a Latin verse version of Shakespeare's 'Seven Ages of Man', was published in volume 2 of Vincent Bourne's 'Musae Anglicanae' in 1741, while other specimens of his Latin verse appeared in the second volume of 'Carmina quadragesimalia' (1748). 
After ordination and continental travel Markham followed his father's example and took up teaching. In 1753 the headship of Westminster School fell vacant on the retirement of Dr John Nicholl, and Markham's familiarity with the school and his high academic standing secured him the post. There he remained for the next eleven years, taking what the 'Public Advertiser' in 1755 called 'the first Seminary of School Learning in Europe' through its two hundredth anniversary in 1760. Markham established a reputation as one of the most formidable headmasters of the eighteenth century, though more for his managerial than for his pedagogical skills. Teaching was never Markham's first priority but he had an undeniable presence in the classroom. One of his pupils, Jeremy Bentham (Westminster, 1755-60, and himself the son of a Christ Church canon), famously described Markham in the form room as 'an object of adoration' ('Works of Jeremy Bentham', 10.30). Many other members of the later Georgian elite received their schooling at his hands. Without personal wealth or high birth Markham sedulously but never fawningly cultivated the powerful throughout his life. He watched over the interests of former pupils, while many of them tended his. 
Markham meanwhile accumulated church preferments, thanks to the friendly interest extended by that old Westminster, the duke of Newcastle. He was appointed chaplain to George II in 1756, and Bishop Richard Trevor nominated him to the second prebendal stall in Durham Cathedral on 22 June 1759 (installed 20 July). There were murmurings that the headmaster was putting personal interests before those of the school, and indeed by 1763 Markham was angling for a crown appointment. He eventually resigned the headmastership (pleading ill health) on 8 March 1764 but only received a fresh post towards the end of the Grenville ministry when the Rochester deanery fell vacant. Markham was instituted as dean on 20 February 1765 and in the same year was presented by the chapter to the vicarage of Boxley, Kent. His stay at Rochester was brief. The death of David Gregory in September 1767 offered an opening for Markham to return to Christ Church, and he exchanged one deanery for another the following month with the blessing of both Newcastle and Archbishop Secker. Thus began a decade in academic office which saw Markham at his most creative as a teacher and administrator. He brought to Christ Church some of his best former pupils at Westminster and strengthened the historic connection between the two institutions. He had ambitious reform plans for the college which he summarized for Charles Jenkinson: 'My great object is to bring the noblemen and gentlemen commoners to the same attendance on College duties, and the same habits of industry with the inferior members' (11 Jan 1768, BL, Add. MS 38457, fol. 11). Such changes added signally to the college's reputation, along with the institution of public lectures, the addition of new authors to the curriculum in Greek studies and ancient history, and the reform of 'collections' to underpin the programme as a whole. 
It was not long before the ambitious dean enhanced his status further with a bishopric, thanks to the sponsorship of Lord Mansfield. Markham succeeded Edmund Keene as bishop of Chester and was consecrated on 17 February 1771 at the Chapel Royal, Whitehall; he thereupon resigned Boxley and his Durham prebendal stall but retained the Christ Church deanery 'in commendam' until 1777 to supplement the $1000 annual income derived from Chester. Markham became a non-resident prelate with responsibility for a huge diocese despite minimal pastoral experience. He made a visit to Chester every summer and confirmed extensively but otherwise his diocesan duties took their place alongside his other responsibilities. 
Markham's friendship with Lord Mansfield and his pedagogic reputation secured him the post of preceptor to the young prince of Wales and his brother Prince Frederick, bishop of Osnaburg, on 12 April 1771 (Walpole, 'Memoirs', 4.311). After five years in that difficult role Markham left office in May 1776 in the 'nursery revolution' precipitated by the resignation of the boys' governor, Lord Holdernesse. Markham took the side of Cyril Jackson, his sub-preceptor, in his disagreement with Holdernesse. The prince of Wales had got on well with Markham's family and wanted the bishop to remain in post. George III, however, would not make this concession to the wishes of his son, whom he saw as primarily responsible for the affair. The prince remained on very cordial terms with Markham for the rest of his life. 
Compensation from the crown was not long delayed. Markham's appointment to the archbishopric of York was announced on 21 December 1776 (enthroned by proxy 28 January 1777). He was also appointed lord high almoner and sworn of the privy council. Within weeks of having received office Markham, on 21 February 1777, had preached a sermon before the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel in Foreign Parts (in the parish church of St Mary-le-Bow) on the calamities that had overtaken Anglicans in the American colonies, and had argued for deploying the machinery of state to assist the spread of Christianity. The sermon was interpreted by opposition politicians as a bellicose endorsement of the government's coercive policy, and Markham found himself at the centre of a political storm for his alleged high-flown monarchism and veiled threats to dissenters. On 30 May in the House of Lords, Markham replied 'with great warmth' to the attacks made on him by the duke of Grafton and Lord Shelburne for preaching doctrines allegedly subversive of the constitution -- 'pernicious' doctrines, according to Lord Chatham's subsequent denunciation (Cobbett, 'Parl. hist.', 19.327-8, 344-50, 491). Markham received much private support from close friends like Viscount Stormont, who was delighted that his sermon opposed the 'senseless licentious sophistry' of the day 'with all the Powers of Reason enforced by that irresistible Eloquence that Virtue alone bestows' (letter, 21 May 1777, Mansfield muniments, National Register of Archives for Scotland, 0220). Markham derived only limited comfort from this backing. He was enduringly offended by the insults and was one of the four peers who signed the protest against the third reading of the Chatham annuity bill on 2 June 1778 (Rogers, 2.177-8). 
After this incident Markham's conduct in parliament was more circumspect and he rarely spoke in the Lords. He supported Lord North's administration until its fall in 1782, and subsequently that of Pitt the younger, but his defence of Anglican interests was low key and private; he had no wish to draw on himself afresh the public hostility that had undoubtedly damaged his standing. Even so Markham's personal courage was never in doubt. 'En route' for the House of Lords on 2 June 1780 he was attacked by the protestant petitioners and, subsequently hearing of Lord Mansfield's danger, he tore down from a committee room to rescue his friend. His town house in Bloomsbury Square adjoined that of the lord chief justice; in a letter to his son John, Markham offers a graphic description of the attack on Mansfield's property by the Gordon rioters, and of his own narrow escape from the violence of the mob (D. F. Markham, 60-65). 

John Markham, who rose to the rank of admiral of the blue, was the second son of Markham and his wife, Sarah (1738-1814), daughter of John Goddard, a wealthy English merchant of Rotterdam, whom he had married on 16 June 1759 (the settlement was worth $10,000). They had a large family of six boys and seven girls, of whom eleven survived. Markham was known as an affectionate family man and Bishopthorpe had an atmosphere 'of kindness and good-humour' in his time (Warner, 1.295). He put much effort into finding professions or eligible marriage partners for his children. The eldest child, William (died 1 Jan 1815), was appointed private secretary to his father's school contemporary Warren Hastings. This connection inextricably involved the Markham family in the impeachment of the former governor-general before the House of Lords. Markham made no secret of his support for Hastings and once again drew criticism from the whig opposition. On 25 May 1793 he interrupted Burke's cross-examination of defence witnesses to accuse the managers of treating James Peter Auriol, former secretary to the supreme council and a relative of Archbishop Robert Hay Drummond, as no better than a pickpocket. He went on: 'if Robespierre and Marat were in the Managers Box they could not say any thing more inhuman and more against all sentiments of honor and morality' (BL, Add. MS 24243, fol. 56). Markham was highly agitated. His daughter Georgina was dying, and that fact curtailed discussion of his intervention in the House of Commons. The archbishop was undeterred from complaining again about the conduct of the trial; on 24 March 1795 he declared that Hastings had been 'treated not as if he were a gentleman, whose cause is before you, but as if you were trying a horse-stealer' (Bond, 4.lxi). He was one of only three prelates to vote Hastings not guilty on all charges, and his staunch support for Hastings wrecked what little remained of his friendship with Edmund Burke. 
Markham's thirty-year tenure of the York archdiocese was one of modest distinction. To York Minster he gave new velvet coverings for the high altar, pulpit, and archbishop's throne, and he also encouraged repairs at Ripon and Southwell minsters. His visitational activities were restricted by comparison with predecessors like Drummond and Thomas Herring (there were none after 1791), a fair reflection of his pastoral limitations. Respected for his integrity and sense of honour rather than loved by his clergy he took some time to overcome the rumpus caused by his early public criticism of those priests who had joined the associating movement for parliamentary and economical reform. He devoted much energy to securing key positions in the see for his sons; George was appointed dean of York in 1802, Robert held the archdeaconry of York, and Osborn was named chancellor of the diocese in 1795. Such nepotism was conventional in the late Georgian church, Markham had a large family to provide for, and his status as senior archbishop in England after 1783 and through the war years with France was unassailable. He held back from a conspicuous metropolitan role but was uncompromising in his assertion of the rights of the established church. Markham was not an inspired spiritual leader. As one obituarist closely observed: 'His religion was a religion of the mind; practised in all the concerns of life, without austerity, and free from ostentation' ('GM'). 
Markham died at his house in South Audley Street, London, on 3 November 1807, and was buried on the 11th in the north cloister of Westminster Abbey, where a monument was raised to his memory by his grandchildren (he had no fewer than fifty, and three great-grandchildren). His widow died in Mortimer Street, Cavendish Square, London, on 26 January 1814, aged seventy-five, and was buried beside him on 3 February. Throughout his life Markham retained a headmasterly presence that could, to his political opponents, appear overbearing and pompous; to his friends it recalled his father's martial bearing and was well suited to the dignity of the offices he filled. Beneath the surface was a man of strong emotions which occasionally, as in the trial of Warren Hastings, broke through, often in the form of petulance. The elder Richard Burke told his nephew that Markham's 'manner exceeded the matter. Such furious agitation, and bodily convulsion, not producing death were wonderful' ('Correspondence', 7.369). In the 1770s, because of his political allegiances, he was the butt of a number of satirical cartoons. Unfortunately for Markham historians have turned first to Horace Walpole's unflattering view of him: 'a pert, arrogant man', as the 'Memoirs of the Reign of George III' describes him (4.206), that 'warlike metropolitan archbishop Turpin' (Walpole, 'Corr.', 28.313). A much fairer assessment was offered by Samuel Parr, no political ally of Markham's, who singled out inertia for preventing the prelate from making that mark on British public life, either as a scholar or as an archbishop, to which his native abilities entitled him: his 'powers of mind, reach of thought, memory, learning, scholarship, and taste were of the very first order, but he was indolent, and his composition wanted this powerful aiguillon' (D. F. Markham, 66). Apart from his verse, Markham published only sermons. 


@@@@@


doc= 18072


Markland, Abraham (1645-1728), Church of England clergyman, was born on 25 June 1645 in the parish of St Dionis Backchurch, London, the third surviving son of Michael Markland (died 1663), apothecary, and his second wife, Anne Perry (died 1662). He was educated at Merchant Taylors' School from 1658 and elected to a scholarship at St John's College, Oxford, on 14 July 1662. He graduated BA in 1666, became a fellow of the college, and proceeded MA in 1669. While at Oxford he composed his 'Poems on his majesties birth and restoration; his highness Prince Rupert's and his grace the duke of Albemarle's naval victories; the late great pestilence and fire of London' (1667). In 1692 he was admitted to the degrees of bachelor and doctor of divinity at Oxford. 
Markland was ordained into the diocese of Winchester on 2 June 1672 and was appointed rector of Brixton on the Isle of Wight in 1674; he was instituted rector of Easton, Hampshire, in 1677, of Houghton (1678), and of Meonstoke (1684). In July 1679 he was installed as a canon of Winchester Cathedral. In October 1682, with the government of the City of London firmly under tory control, Markland preached a fervently loyalist sermon before the court of aldermen in which he compared London, fallen into degeneracy and contempt for its governors and riven by whig and nonconformist factionalism, directly and unfavourably with the Jerusalem that Christ had wept over. He rejoiced that the City had been miraculously delivered from the hands of those who were resolutely impenitent for the death of Charles I, men who were 'no more concern'd on the Thirtieth of January, than the Jews are on Good-Friday' and who would have treated Charles II the same way as they had his father (A. Markland, 'A Sermon Preached before the Court of Aldermen... Octob. 29 1682', 1683, 27). Markland married Catherine Pitt ('c'.1637-1693), daughter of Edward Pitt and Rachel Morton of Stratfield Saye; their son, George, was born on 18 November 1678, and they also had a daughter, Jane. With his second wife, Elizabeth (died 1734), he had a son, Abraham (died 1705), who died in infancy, and two daughters, Elizabeth and Anne. 
In August 1694 Markland was appointed a master of the hospital of St Cross in Winchester. During his tenure it was alleged that the hospital records had been destroyed and so a new custumal was drawn up and approved by the bishop in 1696. These statutes made the master the recipient of all hospital revenue but he was to finance the provisions made for the thirteen brethren and for the maintenance of the hospital. The brethren were to take oaths of obedience to the master; they were to bequeath all personal possessions to the master and were to be subject to his discipline. This custumal resulted in a legal challenge in the nineteenth century when it was castigated as 'a willfull breach of trust'; the controversy over St Cross was one of the cases which inspired Anthony Trollope's 'The Warden' (1855). Markland died on 29 July 1728 and a memorial to him (as well as his wife and sons George and Abraham) was erected in the choir of St Cross, Winchester. A collection of his sermons preached at Winchester Cathedral was published in 1729. 


@@@@@


doc= 18073


Markland, James Heywood (1788-1864), antiquary, born at Ardwick Green, Manchester, on 7 December 1788, was fourth and youngest son of Robert Markland (died 1828), a check and fustian manufacturer at Manchester, who afterwards succeeded to the estate of Pemberton, near Wigan. His mother was Elizabeth, daughter of Robert Hibbert of Manchester. In his twelfth year he was sent for his education to the house of the headmaster of Chester School, and from the associations of the cathedral buildings he acquired his taste for antiquarian pursuits. He was trained as a solicitor at Manchester, but in 1808 moved to London and practised there. By 1811 he was residing in the Inner Temple, and on 4 April 1814 he was admitted as a student. The same year he was appointed by the West India planters their parliamentary agent. On 24 September 1821 he married at Marylebone church, Charlotte (died 1867), eldest daughter of Sir Francis Freeling; they had a daughter, Elizabeth Jane, who married the Revd Charles R. Conybeare, vicar of Itchen Stoke, Hampshire, in 1853. 
Markland remained in London in practice, being the head partner in the firm of Markland and Wright, until 1839, when he withdrew to Malvern, where he lived until 1841. He then moved to Bath and spent the rest of his days in that city. 
Markland is best-known as a writer on antiquarian subjects and literary history, a staunch churchman, and a collector of fine books. Contemporaries regarded him as a man of high literary taste, refined manners, and lively conversation. His earliest publications, written when he was living in Manchester, were short and anonymous: 'A Few Plain Reasons for Adhering to the Church' (1807), and a biographical note on the poet William Mason for volume 5 of Brydges' 'Censuria literaria' (1807). Shortly after moving to London, in 1809, he was elected fellow of the Society of Antiquaries. He was a member of the select Antiquaries dining club from 1822 to 1834. He contributed several articles to 'Archaeologia' (1815-38) and was director, in charge of publications (1827-9). While director he wrote to the president, Lord Aberdeen, recommending that the society establish a museum of antiquities on the Scottish model. His letter was printed in the 'Gentleman's Magazine' in 1828, but he was disappointed as the society failed to adopt his proposal. In 1816 he was elected fellow of the Royal Society, though he had little interest in science. 
The world of book collecting was more to Markland's taste, and he was elected to the Roxburghe Club at its inaugural dinner in 1812. He edited their publication of the 'Chester Mysteries' (1818), and was treasurer from 1838 until 1845, when he resigned. His father-in-law was a member of the club, as was George Hibbert, about whom he wrote, anonymously, 'A Sketch of the Life and Character of George Hibbert' (1837). He gradually built up an extensive library of books, especially rich in fine bindings, presentation copies, and privately printed works. Various authors acknowledged his help, including John Nichols in volumes 1, 4, and 8 of his 'Literary Anecdotes' (1812-14), Alexander Chalmers for the memoir of Jeremiah Markland in volume 21 of his 'Biographical Dictionary' (1815), and George Ormerod in his 'Cheshire' (1819). 
While resident in Bath, Markland was an active member of both the (Royal) Archaeological Institute and the British Archaeological Association, and contributed to their journals. He gave the opening address at the Somerset Congress of the association in 1856, 'On the history and antiquities of Bath'. He was president of the Literary Club of Bath in 1858 and vice-president of the Somerset Archaeological and Natural History Society from its foundation in 1849 until his death. In the same period 'Notes and Queries' published numerous articles from him on literary history. His most popular writings on religious matters were 'Remarks on Sepulchral Monuments', which was enlarged in 1842 as 'Remarks on English Churches', 'On the Reverence Due to Holy Places' (1845), and 'The Offertory the Best Way of Contributing Money for Christian Purposes' (2nd edn, 1862). In recognition of his services to the Church of England he was awarded the degree of DCL at Oxford University, in 1849. 
Markland was a strong and constant supporter of all church societies; he was entrusted by Mrs Ramsden with the foundation of mission sermons at Cambridge and Oxford, and while resident in Bath three ladies, the Misses Mitford of Somerset Place in that city, selected him for the distribution of $14,000 in charitable works in England and the colonies. He died at his house in Lansdown Crescent, Bath, on 28 December 1864, and was buried in the new Walcot cemetery on 3 January 1865; the first window in Bath Abbey west of the transept was filled with glass in his memory. His library was sold at Sothebys on 11 June 1859 and 29 May 1865. His wife died on 9 October 1867. 


@@@@@


doc= 18074


Markland, Jeremiah (1693-1776), classical scholar, was born on 29 October 1693 at Childwell, Lancashire, one of the twelve children of Ralph Markland, vicar of that parish. He was admitted on the foundation of Christ's Hospital, London, in 1704 and in 1710 proceeded to St Peter's College, Cambridge, with an exhibition of $30 p.a. for seven years. He graduated BA in 1714, proceeded MA in 1717, and was elected fellow and tutor of his college in 1718. In 1714 he contributed to the 'Cambridge Gratulations' and in 1717 he wrote some verses vindicating Addison against Pope's satire. He probably intended to take holy orders but his 'extreme weakness of the lungs' (Chalmers, 21.319) prevented him from pursuing a clerical career. Instead he remained at St Peter's until 1728, when he left to become private tutor to William Strode of Ponsbourne, Hertfordshire. He remained in this position for several years, accompanying Strode abroad to France, Flanders, and the Netherlands before returning to Cambridge in 1733. 
From 1744 to 1752 Markland lived in Uckfield, Sussex, where he supervised the education of the son of his former pupil, William Strode. In 1752 he moved to Milton Court, near Dorking, Surrey, where for the remainder of his life he lived as a semi-recluse, maintaining contact with only a few friends, who included the printer William Bowyer, Strode, and the physician William Heberden. Despite the best efforts of his friends to persuade him he twice declined to compete for the Greek professorship at Cambridge declaring that 'instead of going an hundred miles to take it, I would go two hundred miles the other way to avoid it' (Nichols, 'Lit. anecdotes', 4.278). In 1765 he became involved in a costly court case to defend Martha Rose, the widow with whom he lodged, against the claims on her money and property made by her son. The case was lost, as was Markland's 'whole fortune' that had been 'expended on relieving the distress of the family' (ibid., 290). Although in much straitened circumstances he continued to refuse offers of financial help from his friends until in 1768 Strode persuaded him to accept an annuity of $100. 
Markland was an outstanding classical scholar and was described by John Nichols as 'one of the most learned and penetrating critics of the eighteenth century' (Nichols, 'Lit. anecdotes', 4.272). He first distinguished himself in his 'Epistola critica' (1723); this was followed by an edition of the 'Silvae of Statius', which restored the integrity of a much corrupted text. More controversially, in his 'Remarks on the Epistles of Cicero to Brutus, and on Brutus to Cicero' (1745) he set out to prove that the attribution to Cicero of the four orations was spurious. Not all were convinced by his arguments, which have been subsequently disproved, and he became involved in a long and acrimonious debate with Conyers Middleton and others. In 1761 he published an excellent grammatical tract, 'De Graecorum quinta declinatione imparisyllabica, et inde formata Latinorum tertia'. Probably the most esteemed and elaborate of his critical works was his edition of the 'Euripedes drama supplices mulieres', published anonymously in 1763 and reprinted in 1775. His other writings were either fragments that mainly were destroyed by himself in a spirit of dejection or contributions to other authors' works. Markland's contribution and character were summed up by Peter Elmsley: 'he was very laborious, loved retirement, and spent a long life in the study of the Greek and Latin languages. For modesty, candour, literary honesty and courteousness to other scholars, he is justly considered as the model which ought to be proposed for the imitation of every critic. ('QR', 7, 1812, 442)' In later years Markland suffered increasingly from painful attacks of gout. One such attack, accompanied by a fever, led to his death at Milton Court on 7 July 1776. He was buried in Dorking church, where a brass plaque, with an epitaph composed by his friend William Heberden, was placed on his gravestone. In accordance with his will his books and papers were bequeathed to Martha Rose. 


@@@@@


doc= 18075


Marks, Henry Stacy (1829-1898), artist, was born on 13 September 1829 at 92 Great Portland Street, London, and baptized at the church of All Souls, Langham Place, on 9 October 1829, the fourth child and eldest surviving son of John Isaac Marks and his wife, Elizabeth Pally. His father was a former solicitor who had given up that profession before his birth in order to take over the running of the family coach building business, an unwise decision since under his management the business declined. Although he was baptized into the Church of England, Marks was brought up as a dissenter. Compelled to attend lengthy sermons at Craven Chapel, off Regent Street, during his childhood, he developed a streak of anti-clericalism which later manifested itself in his fondness for preaching bogus sermons. 
Marks was educated at small private schools near Regent's Park and later at Eythorne in Kent, where, to enable him to assist in the carriage-making business, his father sent him to learn to paint crests and coats of arms. In 1845 he began work as a ledger clerk at a warehouse owned by a friend of his father and soon afterwards joined his father's business. To improve his skill as a painter Marks began about 1846 to attend evening classes at J. M. Leigh's art school in Newman Street. After an earlier rejection, Marks enrolled at the Royal Academy Schools in December 1851. Early in the following year his father was forced to sell the carriage works; this left him free to attend the day classes at the academy, but instead his friend P. H. Calderon persuaded Marks to accompany him to Paris to study at the atelier of Francois Edouard Picot. Marks also attended the Ecole des Beaux-Arts, but he returned to England in June 1852, leaving Calderon to continue his studies in Paris. 
Marks first exhibited at the Royal Academy in 1853, showing a scene from Shakespeare's 'Much Ado about Nothing': 'Dogberry Examining Conrad and Borachio'. It was hung under the line next to Holman Hunt's 'Strayed Sheep' and sold to a fellow student for $15. Marks commented: 'I have never enjoyed the sale of any other [work] so much' (Morris and Milner, 61). The works Marks exhibited at the Royal Academy during the 1850s and 1860s were generally either scenes from Shakespeare's plays, for example, 'Bardolph' (exh. RA, 1853) or 'Francis Feeble, Woman's Tailor' (1865; reproduced in Morris and Milner, 63), or historical genre paintings of medieval scenes. Of his Shakespearian scenes, G. C. Williamson remarks that, 'few men were so much at home in Shakespeare as was Marks, and that he knew by heart whole plays' (Bryan, 'Painters', 287). Painting scenes of medieval life allowed Marks to practise a neo-medieval style of painting which tended to give his figures a naive quality, for example, 'Toothache in the Middle Ages' (exh. RA, 1856; reproduced in Marks, 1.53). 
With the failure of his business, John Marks had emigrated to Australia during his son's stay in Paris, and Marks for a time had to support his mother and three younger brothers. His responsibilities increased when on 4 October 1856 he married Helen Drysdale (1829-1892). To supplement his income from painting he took on commissions for wood-drawings for illustrations in 'The Home Circle' books, and was art critic of 'The Spectator'. He carried out porcelain decoration for the Minton works, church decoration for the firm of Clayton and Bell, friezes for theatres, furniture painting for the architect William Burges, and even Christmas cards. His painting 'A Bit of Blue' (1877; Royal Albert Memorial Museum, Exeter), which depicts a porcelain collector examining an addition to his collection, was probably inspired by his earlier work for Minton. The patronage and friendship of the publisher C. E. Mudie and the sale of one of his humorous medieval genre paintings, 'The Franciscan Sculptor and his Model' (exh. RA, 1861), for the handsome sum of 300 guineas, brought Marks greater financial security, although he continued to carry out commissions for decorative work. For example, he designed a frieze for an outside wall of the Albert Hall. Most of his later decorative work, however, was for private houses, including that of the neo-classical painter Sir Lawrence Alma-Tadema. His largest commission for house decoration was from Hugh Lupus Grosvenor, first duke of Westminster; he worked on decorations for Eaton Hall, Cheshire, between 1874 and 1880, painting two canvasses 35 feet long of Chaucer's pilgrims for the saloon, and in 1879 twelve panels of birds for the drawing-room. 
Marks became a member of the St John's Wood Clique when in 1862 he moved with his wife to Hill Road, St John's Wood. The clique was an association of young artists who shared an interest in historical genre painting. Marks's friend P. H. Calderon also became a member, and his brother-in-law Frederick Walker (who did not live in St John's Wood) was associated with the group. Members aimed to improve their work by submitting it to the rigorous and constructive criticism of the group. Their motto, as framed by Calderon, was, 'the better each man's picture, the better for all' (Marks, 1.147). The clique also had a recreational function, and at meetings Marks would entertain the company by preaching bogus sermons and singing comic songs he had composed. He is depicted in Walker's cartoon 'A Vision of the Clique' (1865; reproduced in Marks, 1.90) holding a fool's bauble. Marks was high-spirited but prone to moods of melancholy and misanthropy. His sympathy with, and generosity to, his fellow artists made him very popular in artistic circles. 
Marks had been fond of birds since his childhood, but he did not begin to use them as subjects for painting until the middle of his career. 'The Convent Raven' (1870; Bristol City Art Gallery) is an early bird painting in oils. 'St Francis Preaching to the Birds' (1870), one of his key works, sold for $1155 seven years after Marks sold it to Agnews for $450. His favourite subjects, however, were long-legged birds, particularly storks, cranes, and herons. He also took great delight in parrots and frequently visited the parrot house at London Zoo in order to sketch them. These visits inspired what is probably Marks's most famous painting, 'A Select Committee' (1891; Walker Art Gallery, Liverpool). 'Convocation' (exh. RA, 1878), which depicts a group of adjutant storks, secured his election as Royal Academician following his election as associate in 1871. It won high, though not unqualified, praise from the eminent art critic John Ruskin. His diploma work, 'Science is Measurement', was regarded as 'one of his highest achievements' ('DNB'). Most of Marks's pictures of birds were watercolours, which he exhibited either at the Old Watercolour Society, of which he became associate in 1871 and member in 1883, or at the two 'bird exhibitions' at the Fine Art Society, which he held in 1889 and 1890. The Victoria and Albert Museum has three of his finished watercolour studies of birds and eleven watercolour sketches for larger bird paintings. Although he was interested in parallels between human behaviour and bird behaviour, Marks did not anthropomorphize his avian subjects. Mr Bartlett, the superintendent of London Zoo, for whom Marks had great respect, discouraged him from imputing human characteristics to birds. His higher reputation as a bird painter rather than as a genre painter rests on the fact that his birds tend to display considerably more animation than his human figures. In his later years Marks painted land- and seascapes 'of notable serenity and breadth' of scenes around Southwold and Walberswick in Suffolk ('DNB'). 
Marks's first wife died in 1892. The following year, on 21 December, he married Mary Harriet Kempe (1848-1911), a still-life and genre painter. Marks died on 9 January 1898 at his home, 5 St Edmund's Terrace, Regent's Park, and was buried four days later in Hampstead cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 18076


Markwick, Nathaniel (1664-1735), Church of England clergyman, son of James Markwick of Croydon, was born in April 1664. He was admitted to Merchant Taylors' School in 1677, and matriculated as a commoner at St John's College, Oxford, on 14 July 1682, aged eighteen. He graduated BA in 1686, and proceeded MA in 1690, and BD (under the name of Markwith) on 1 February 1696. After being ordained a priest he was vicar of Westbury, Buckinghamshire, from 1692 to 1694, and of St Mary Magdalen's, Taunton, from 1696 until 1703. He had, in addition, become a prebendary of Bath and Wells on 4 October 1699. From 1703 until his death, on 20 March 1735, he was vicar of East Brent, Somerset. 
Between 1728 and 1734 Markwick published a number of works calculating the date of the apocalyptic destruction of Jerusalem foretold in the 'Old Testament'. The first of these, subsequently extended and supplemented, was 'A Calculation of the LXX Weeks of Daniel, Chapter IX Verse 24' (1728) or 'Stricturae Lucis'. 


@@@@@


doc= 18077


Marlborough, Thomas of (d. 1236), historian, lawyer, and abbot of Evesham, presumably came from Marlborough in Wiltshire. He studied at Paris under Stephen Langton (died 1228), most likely arts, when Richard Poor or Poore (died 1235) was his fellow student: this was probably in the 1180s. He describes John of Tynemouth, Simon of Sywell, and Master Honorius as his 'masters in the schools', and as the common bond between these three is that they were all canonists active at Oxford, he must have also studied there, presumably canon law. It is clear from the chronicle he wrote that he was well versed in law, and had taught at Oxford, before he was professed at Evesham. His teaching must have been in the growing university because there were no grammar schools of importance at Oxford, such as those attached to cathedrals, but the statement that he taught also at Exeter is likely to be the result of a miscopying or mishearing of the text. He was thus no ordinary young novice when he arrived at Evesham to be professed in 1199/1200. By this date, given his previous training and career, he must have been at least in his thirties. Circumstances then arose that were to thrust him into prominence. 
In 1202 the newly appointed Bishop Mauger of Worcester (died 1212) attempted to visit Evesham. From this point until the settlement of the case, Marlborough's activities were taken up with the convent's determined struggle to prove its exemption from the bishop. For its defiance in refusing entry to the bishop, the convent was excommunicated. The monks sought to bring the abbey's case before the archbishop of Canterbury. But the case was too complex for settlement by any other court than the final one and appeal was made to the pope. The main case over the exemption from the diocesan, and the complementary case of the monastery's jurisdiction over the local area known as the Vale, were both fought out at Rome before the masterly Pope Innocent III and his advisers. Marlborough went to Rome to present the abbey's case and during this time he attended the schools at Bologna. In the struggle against the bishop, the abbot and convent attempted to present a united front, although the infamous Abbot Roger Norreis had never been accepted by the monks. He had mercilessly tyrannized over them, keeping them short of food and clothing, calling them 'dogs', acting more like a layman than a priest, and wasting the convent's lands. He was a drunkard and a lecher, and reputed to be a murderer. He was adept at making friends in influential places, which allowed him to be promoted and to survive for so long without censure. It was agreed that any charges against the abbot would not be raised at Rome, though the abbot's treatment of the convent's proctors at Rome was infamous. 
After the triumph in 1205, when the abbey's exemption was declared, and the judgment on jurisdiction over the Vale (1207), the main struggle at Evesham was to control Abbot Roger Norreis and to restore the monastery. In both these matters Marlborough was closely involved, and from 1206 he acted as dean of the Vale. Matters were made more difficult by the interdict on the English church from 1208 to 1214, and, indeed, by the abbey's newly won exemption from any kind of correction by the diocesan. The convent was not finally relieved of the abbot until his deposition in 1213. As dean of the Vale, Marlborough attended the Fourth Lateran Council in Rome with Abbot Randulf, and while they were there the pope approved on 16 February 1216 the constitutions that had been drawn up to specify the properties of the obedientiaries and their rights and privileges -- an attempt to restore the position of the convent after Abbot Norreis's depredations of their lands and revenues. In this remarkable document Marlborough doubtless had a hand. In 1217 he was made sacrist, and a year later he was appointed prior. 
During his time as prior Marlborough completed what has misleadingly been called his chronicle of the abbey. It is in fact a unique account of the lawsuit fought out at Rome, which he prefaced with an abbreviated edition of Prior Dominic's life of St Ecgwine and 'Gesta' of the abbots, written in the early twelfth century, and of the continued 'Gesta' up to the time of Abbot Norreis (1191). The whole of the description of the lawsuit is written with a frankness and verve that makes the work remarkable on those counts alone. His vivid description of the journey to Rome, of the way in which the curia operated, of the pope and the cardinals, of the trials and tribulations of the petitioner, are without parallel at this date. He was observant and perceptive, and could tell a good story. There are small and important details: the advice of the pope to go to study at Bologna (which he did for six months), Marlborough's fainting for joy when the exemption was declared, and many other memorable vignettes. The great speech made by Marlborough nearly ten years later before the legate, Nicolo, bishop of Tusculum (mistakenly identified as Pandulf by earlier historians), prefacing the final fall of Roger Norreis, is memorable. 
Marlborough's subsequent career was taken up with paying off the debts consequent upon the lawsuit and maintaining every aspect of the abbey's rights (perhaps condoning further forgeries). He did, however, submit the convent to archiepiscopal visitation. The continuation of the 'chronicle' includes lives and acts of the abbots and reveals that it was due to him that the customs and revenues were finally written down and approved at the time of the Lateran Council. The biographer is fond of detailing building works: according to him, Marlborough, as sacrist, repaired much of the damage that had been caused to the windows and tombs in the presbytery by the collapse of the tower. He renewed the shrine of St Wigstan, had a reading-desk made for the choir, put a stove in the church at the base of the clock, and had twelve albs made. All this he did in the year before he was appointed prior and much of it was paid for by his careful financial management as sacrist. As prior he brought with him a considerable number of books, including law books, unfortunately not specified. There were also works on natural science, classical authors, sermons, commentaries, and books on grammar and music. He had several books produced (including what is now Bodl. Oxf., MS Rawl. A. 287, to fol. 181'v') and he purchased others. He continued to beautify the church, particularly concentrating on the story of St Ecgwine (Evesham's premier saint) in the stained glass of the presbytery and on his shrine, for which he built a throne. 
On the death of Abbot Randulf, Marlborough was elected abbot on 20 December 1229, confirmed by the pope in 1230, and blessed by the bishop of Coventry, and finally, after the king had had granted possession of the abbey, installed by the bishop at Michaelmas. The period during which the king had had possession was costly, as was the election process, so Marlborough began his abbatiate in debt. However, judicious management enabled him to enhance the dignity and appearance of the church, to construct comfortable quarters for the abbot, and to build his own tomb. He died at Evesham on 12 September 1236 and was buried there. 


@@@@@


doc= 18078


Marlow, William (1740/41-1813), landscape and view painter, was born probably in London or Southwark. He was apprenticed to the marine painter Samuel Scott, in whose London studio in Covent Garden he trained for five years from 1754 to 1759 and from whom he learned to paint carefully observed London scenes and river views in oil and watercolour which, like his teacher's works, clearly show the influence of Canaletto on English topographical painting at the time. Marlow probably also studied at the St Martin's Lane Academy. In the early 1760s he extended his repertoire to include picturesque landscapes which reflect seventeenth-century Dutch influences. He exhibited regularly at the Society of Artists from 1762, showing London scenes and views of east Wales, Twickenham, Worcester, and York which indicate that he was touring the countryside in search of landscape and topographical subjects. In his early years he also showed a number of 'country house portraits' (among them Ludlow Castle in Shropshire and Burton Agnes Hall near Bridlington) and associated views of local scenery, indicating that he was finding patrons among the landed nobility and gentry as well as in London. At an early date in his career he was employed by the duke of Northumberland, who was also a patron of Canaletto and Samuel Scott. Later Marlow 'went on his travels to France and Italy in 1765 by the advice of the late Duchess of Northumberland' according to an obituary notice which appeared soon after his death in January 1813 (Whitley papers, BM); a group of eight Italian paintings of Tivoli, Arriccia, and scenes in the Bay of Naples by him at Alnwick Castle suggests that the duchess was the principal sponsor for his tour of France and Italy. The earliest note of his departure is found on a drawing of an English river scene inscribed 'William Marlow the Author of this Drawing is now studying in Italy -- July 8th 1765' (Sothebys, 1 April 1976, 166); the only other dated record of his absence occurs in Richard Hayward's list of artists in Rome in February 1766. The itinerary he followed through France and Italy is well documented by drawings and paintings, and after his return to London later in 1766 he largely specialized in producing watercolours and paintings of continental subjects which evidently proved popular as grand tour souvenirs. He showed his first such pictures at the Society of Artists in 1767, and the great majority of his 134 paintings and watercolours exhibited with the Society of Artists, the Free Society of Artists, and the Royal Academy from then onwards were of French and Italian subjects together with London views which continued the Canaletto-Scott tradition. He was one of the first English painters to exhibit views of Vesuvius erupting (Society of Artists, 1768) and dramatic alpine mountain scenery (Society of Artists, 1769). 
Marlow's early success is evidenced by the painter Thomas Jones who recorded in his 'Memoirs' for 1769 that when he was beginning his own career Marlow was one of the artists 'in full possession of the landscape business' (Oppe, 20), and later the Royal Academician Edward Garvey recalled to Joseph Farington that when he had first arrived in London in the 1760s he found Richard Wilson and William Marlow especially successful, and that 'Marlow's work captivated him so much that... he thought that as a Young Man he would rather be Marlow than Wilson' (Farington, 'Diary', 14 Feb 1804). In 1782 Marlow was listed among the 'six most eminent landscape painters of our country' by Joseph Pott in his anonymously published 'Essay on Landscape Painting'. Marlow continued to enjoy some critical success until the end of the 1780s, and the large number of views he painted between 1767 and 1790 earned him an income large enough to move from his studio premises in Leicester Fields to the manor house at Twickenham in 1775. His patrons in the 1770s and 1780s included the dukes of Devonshire, Grafton, and Rutland, Frederick Howard, eighth earl of Carlisle, Lord Palmerston, and Horace Walpole, but business seems to have declined later and he resorted to selling his pictures at Christies St James's salerooms. Professionally he achieved recognition by his election to the Society of Artists in 1765, and he became one of its directors in 1768. His loyalty to the society led him to decline to seek membership of the Royal Academy when it was founded in the same year. Towards the end of his career, apparently in an attempt to restore his fading fortunes as an artist who had been overtaken by a new, more accomplished and adventurous generation, Marlow ventured into publishing etchings and prints, but without success. Among his last works was a series of six etchings of Italian coastal scenes (Baiae, Civitavecchia, Naples, and Pozzuoli), and two engraved London views reproducing pictures he had painted in 1792; both sets were issued by his pupil John Curtis in 1795. He virtually retired from painting about 1796 (the year he ceased exhibiting, apart from two pictures shown at the Royal Academy in 1807). 
Very little is known about Marlow's personal circumstances, other than what was reported intermittently by Joseph Farington. In 1808 he recorded that: 'Marlow resides at Twickenham with a man whose name is Curtis. He was a Butcher when Marlow first became acquainted with his wife, who he met at Vauxhall. He has lived more than 20 years with them, & there are now 6 or 7 children, some of them very like Marlow. A strange instance of infatuation. He still applies to painting, but with very little of his former power. (Farington, 'Diary', 28 June 1808)' In 1813 he was told by the painter James Northcote that 'Marlow died possessed of property which brought him in $100 per annum' and that 'He was charitable, so as to expend the whole of his income. He had long given up painting for an amusement more agreeable to Him, the making of Telescopes & other Articles' (ibid., 10 Feb 1813). When he died at Twickenham in early January 1813 aged seventy-two Marlow's estate was valued at less than $1000, and probate was granted to a sister, Eleanor Northorp. His one pupil, the same John Curtis who published his etchings in 1795 and who was part of the artist's Twickenham 'family', painted London views and river scenes on the Thames around Twickenham and Richmond which closely imitated those of his teacher. The Yale Center for British Art, New Haven, Connecticut, and the Victoria and Albert Museum, British Museum, and Tate collection have a number of his works. 


@@@@@


doc= 18079


Marlowe, Christopher (bap. 1564, d. 1593), playwright and poet, was baptized at St George's, Canterbury, on 26 February 1564, the second of the nine children of John Marlowe ('c'.1536-1605), shoemaker, and his wife, Katherine (died 1605), daughter of William Arthur of Dover (died 1575). His father was a native of Ospringe, near Faversham; he had migrated by the late 1550s to Canterbury, where he was apprenticed to an immigrant shoemaker, Gerard Richardson, and where he married in May 1561. The spelling of the family name was fluid: John Marlowe was often called Marley and sometimes Marle, while Christopher appears as Marlowe, Marlow, or Marlo on his title-pages, Marley in his only extant signature, Marlin or Merling in Cambridge University records, and Morley in the coroner's inquest on his death. 
Christopher was the eldest son and, after the death of his sister Mary in 1568, the eldest child of the family. A couple of months after his birth, his father became a freeman of the Shoemakers' Company; he progressed through a series of minor offices to become 'searcher' (inspector) of leather in 1581, and warden of the company in 1589. Though never prosperous, the family typified that aspirant artisan class which nurtured so much of the literary talent of the period, not least that of Marlowe's exact contemporary, the glover's son William Shakespeare. Other future writers growing up in Canterbury at this time were John Lyly and Stephen Gosson. Local records contain many instances of John Marlowe's pugnacity and quarrelsomeness, qualities inherited by his son, who was involved in violent 'affrays' and in other more dangerous confrontations with authority. Nothing is specifically known of Marlowe's boyhood, though it is possible that he is named in a Canterbury court case of 1573, in which a serving girl brought a case of sexual assault against one John Roydon, and mentioned in the course of her evidence that he employed 'a boy named Christopher Mowle' as a waiter or pot boy in his 'victualling house' (Canterbury Cathedral, archives, MS DCc X.10.4, fols. 165'v'-166; Butcher, 1-16). Mowle is conceivably another variant of Marlowe, though the deponent estimates the boy's age as twelve, while Marlowe was then only about nine. 
About Christmas 1578 Marlowe was enrolled as a scholar of King's School, Canterbury. Scholarships worth $4 per annum, paid quarterly in arrears, were provided for 'fifty poor boys... endowed with minds apt for learning'; the earliest payment to Christopher 'Marley' was on Lady day 1579 (Canterbury Cathedral, archives, CAC misc. accounts 40), indicating his admission the previous Christmas. He was then about fourteen, unusually late to be entering the school; he may have been a fee-paying pupil before this. If so, he probably received some financial assistance, possibly from the rich Kentish judge Sir Roger Manwood, MP for Canterbury: an element of gratitude might explain the rather uncharacteristic Latin elegy he wrote on the occasion of Manwood's death in 1592. His first headmaster was John Gresshop. An inventory of Gresshop's library, drawn up on his death in 1580 (Urry, appx 2), offers a glimpse of the intellectual world opening up to the cobbler's son. Among its 350 volumes were editions of Ovid, Petrarch, Chaucer, and Boccaccio; Munster's 'Cosmographia' and More's 'Utopia'; the comedies of Plautus and the Neoplatonic philosophy of Ficino. The inventory hints also at the dangers of these broadened horizons, for on these same shelves was an old theological tract, John Proctour's 'Fal of the Late Arrian' (1549); Marlowe was later accused of owning a 'vile hereticall' manuscript which was, in fact, a transcript of part of Proctour's book. 
Marlowe's documented period at King's lasted for less than two years, for in late 1580 he went up to Corpus Christi College, Cambridge, on a Parker scholarship. The scholarships had been endowed by Archbishop Matthew Parker, a former master of Corpus; one of them was reserved for a King's scholar native to Canterbury. The recipients, it was stipulated, 'shalbe of the best and aptest schollers, well instructed in the gramer, and if it may be such as can make a verse'; they should also be 'so entred into the skill of song that they shall at the first sight solf and sing plaine song' (Wraight and Stern, 63). These indicate Marlowe's accomplishments by this time; the fact that the scholars were intended for holy orders was perhaps less congenial to him. Marlowe's departure for Cambridge did not quite sever his links with his home town or family -- he is recorded in Canterbury at least twice after this -- but it was undoubtedly a decisive moment. 
The first notice of Marlowe at Cambridge occurs in the Corpus Christi 'buttery books' detailing the students' expenditure on food and drink. They show that he spent 1died during the first week of December 1580. As the accounts were reckoned weekly, and 1died was an average spending in the buttery for one day, he perhaps arrived on the last day of the week, Saturday 10 December. He was chambered with three other Parker scholars in a converted 'stoare-house'. A sketch plan of the college dated 'c'.1576 (Corpus Christi College, archives, Misc. MS 138; Roberts, 23) shows that this room was in the north-western corner of what is now Old Court. He matriculated on 17 March 1581. On 7 May he was formally elected to his scholarship, though he had already received his first quarterly allowance on Lady day (25 March); the scholarship entitled him to 1's'. for every week in residence. His academic career proceeded smoothly enough. He graduated BA in March 1584, though with no great distinction: in the 'ordo senioritatis' he was 199th out of 231 candidates (J. Venn, 'Grace Book greekLetterDelta, Containing the Records of the University of Cambridge, 1542-89', 1910, 372-3). 
In the following year, the evidence of the buttery books and scholarship payments suggests that a change had taken place in Marlowe's circumstances. From 1585 his attendance became irregular, and his spending at the buttery conspicuously higher. This implies some paid employment which took him away from Cambridge, and a privy council memorandum of 1587 offers some clues to its nature, but the only certain sighting of him away from Cambridge is almost piquantly parochial. From the will of Katherine Benchkin of Canterbury (CKS, PRC 16/36) it is known that on a Sunday in November 1585 Marlowe was present at her house on Stour Street, together with his father, his maternal uncle Thomas Arthur, and his brother-in-law John Moore. There they witnessed Mrs Benchkin's will; Marlowe himself read it out to the company 'plainely and distincktly'. Discovered in 1939, this document contains Marlowe's only extant signature. The hand is graceful and unpretentious; its similarity to the handwriting of the 'Collier leaf' -- a single-page manuscript of a scene from Marlowe's 'Massacre at Paris' (Washington, DC, Folger Shakespeare Library) -- seems to confirm that this too is holograph. 
There were literary stirrings at Cambridge in the 1580s of which Marlowe was doubtless a part. Two writers later associated with him in London, Robert Greene and Thomas Nashe, were both at the university, as was his future antagonist, Dr Gabriel Harvey. Nashe recalled a throwaway remark about Gabriel's brother, the astrologer-parson Richard Harvey: 'Kit Marloe was wont to say that he was an asse, good for nothing but to preach of the Iron Age' ('Have with You to Saffron-Walden', 1596, sig. N3'v'). 
Although there is no consensus on the chronology and dating of Marlowe's works, some are traditionally associated with his period at Cambridge. An early date for his verse translations of Ovid's 'Amores' (or 'Elegies') is certainly plausible, though there is no direct evidence for it. These translations have a curious publishing history. A selection of them first appeared in an undated edition, 'Epigrams and Elegies' 'by J. D. and C. M.', the epigrams being by John (later Sir John) Davies. According to the title-page this was printed 'at Middleborough' (that is, Middelburg, Netherlands); this is generally thought to be a false imprint, disguising an unlicensed edition printed in England, but the fact that Marlowe and Davies were both separately in the Netherlands in 1592 raises the possibility that it was genuinely printed there. The book was among the 'unsemely' works banned by the archbishop of Canterbury in 1599 (Arber, 'Regs. Stationers', 3.677). A later edition, 'All Ovids Elegies', datable to 1602 or after, contains the full complement of forty-eight poems, including the much anthologized 'In Summers Heate'. Another translation, from Lucan's 'Pharsalia', is less certainly ascribed to Marlowe's university days; it was published in 1600 by Thomas Thorpe, who wrote a preface in memory of the author, 'that pure elementall wit' ('Complete Works', 2.279). No trace remains of Marlowe's translation of Coluthus's 'Helenae raptus', described by the eighteenth-century bibliophile Thomas Coxeter as done 'into English rhime' in 1587 (Bodl. Oxf., MS Malone 131; Bakeless, 2.293-4). 
Marlowe's choice of Latin models -- the risque Ovid and the rebel Lucan -- is suggestive of his mentality at Cambridge. So too, perhaps, is the opening scene of his earliest play, 'Dido Queene of Carthage', a languorous vignette featuring Jupiter and his 'female wanton boy', Ganymede. That Marlowe was homosexual is implied by the informer Baines, who famously quotes him as saying 'all they that love not tobacco and boies were fooles' (BL, Harley MS 6848, fol. 185), and can be inferred from some of his writings, notably 'Edward II': these do not constitute proof, but add up to a convincing probability. 'Dido', also close to its Latin source (Virgil's 'Aeneid'), is generally thought to have been written at Cambridge. The mounting of plays and entertainments was part of university life; they were mostly in Latin, but it is possible 'Dido' was some kind of spin-off from a college production. It was first published in 1594; Nashe is named as joint author, but it is uncertain whether he collaborated with Marlowe on it, or merely edited it for publication. According to the title-page it was performed by the 'Children of Her Majesties Chapel': they are recorded as having been in East Anglia in May 1587, and may possibly have played 'Dido' then (C. Tucker Brooke, 'Life of Marlowe', 1930, 116). 
The last payment of Marlowe's scholarship allowance was on 25 March 1587; as the buttery books are not extant for the period immediately after this there is no way of knowing how long he remained at Cambridge. He received his MA degree in July, not without some difficulty, but had probably moved to London before then. In his last weeks at Cambridge he may have met Thomas Fineux of Hougham, near Dover, who entered Corpus in the Easter term. According to a well-informed contemporary, Simon Aldrich (a native of Canterbury, and from 'c'.1593 a student at Cambridge), young Fineux fell drastically under Marlowe's spell. Aldrich's comments were recorded by the diarist Henry Oxinden in 1641: 'Mr Ald. said that Mr Fineux of Dover was an atheist, & that he would go out at midnight into a wood, & fall down upon his knees, & pray heartily that the Devil would come... He learned all Marlowe by heart, & divers other books. Marlowe made him an atheist. (Washington, DC, Folger Shakespeare Library, MS 750.1)' The influence was perhaps mainly literary -- 'Dr Faustus' springs to mind -- but may also have been the result of their personal acquaintance at Corpus in 1587; the earliest printed allusion to Marlowe's 'atheism' appears in the following year. 
It is at this point of transition, in the summer of 1587, that there is the first indication of Marlowe's involvement, during his time at Cambridge, in certain political 'affaires'. On 29 June, meeting at St James's Palace, the privy council considered the case of a Cambridge student named Christopher 'Morley', who had been the subject of defamatory reports, and whose MA degree, 'which he was to take at this next Commencement', was being called into question. There is little doubt that the Morley due to graduate in mid-1587 was Marlowe; he cannot have been the Christopher Morley of Trinity College who had commenced MA without discernible difficulty in the previous year. The testimonial issued in Marlowe's favour has not survived, but a digest of its contents is found in the council minutes: 'Whereas it was reported that Christopher Morley was determined to have gone beyond the seas to Reames [Rheims] and there to remaine, their Lps thought good to certefie that he had no such intent, but that in all his accions he had behaved himself orderlie and discreetlie, wherebie he had done her Majestie good service, & deserved to be rewarded for his faithfull dealinge. Their Lps request was that the rumor thereof should be allaied by all possible meanes, and that he should be furthered in the degree he was to take at this next Commencement, because it was not Her Majesties pleasure that any imployed as he had been in matters touching the benefit of his country should be defamed by those who are ignorant in th'affaires he went about. (TNA: PRO, PC register Eliz. 6.381b)' This document seems to offer two contradictory accounts of Marlowe's recent behaviour: on the one hand, there are those reports circulating at Cambridge that he is a militant young Catholic intending to defect to the English seminary at Rheims in northern France; on the other hand, there is the council's assertion that he really had 'no such intent', and had been acting on the queen's service for 'the benefit of his country'. One interpretation is that Marlowe had been moving in Catholic circles as a spy or 'intelligencer' for the government, an activity increasingly common in the 1580s, typically (but not exclusively) under the aegis of Sir Francis Walsingham. The document drawn up by the council on Marlowe's behalf is by no means unique: it is a certificate or 'warranty' of the kind often issued by the government to safeguard its agents -- see, for example, the 'certificate of allowance' for the spy John Edge, 9 October 1590 (J. Strype, 'Annals of the Reformation', 1822, 4.30); its wording is very similar to that of the Marlowe memorandum. The latter is vague, no doubt intentionally, as to where, when, and how Marlowe had performed his 'service'. He could have done so at Cambridge itself, where the covert recruitment of graduates to Rheims certainly worried the authorities; but those recorded absences of 1585-7 suggest he also travelled elsewhere on government business, perhaps to France (though probably not, given the council's statement to the contrary, to Rheims itself). Four men later associated with Marlowe -- Richard Baines, Robert Poley, Thomas Watson, and Thomas Walsingham -- were all involved in intelligence work in France during the 1580s, and Marlowe may have first met them in this context. Nicholas Faunt, a 'secretary' of Walsingham's from 'c'.1578 who was both a native of Canterbury and a former student at Corpus, may have employed him; he was on a diplomatic mission to Paris in 1587, at a period when Marlowe was absent from Cambridge. 
Marlowe's status as a government servant or agent is the only possible context for the supposed portrait of him, discovered at Corpus in 1953 during refurbishment of the master's lodge. Its only indisputable link with Marlowe is that the age of the sitter (''Anno Dni' 1585 'Aetatis sua[e]' 21') is correct for him. The circumstances of the discovery suggest that it had been in the college for some time, concealed or forgotten, though it is unlikely to have been there continuously since 1585. The rather dandified figure in the portrait does not look like an impoverished student, but may look like an ambitious young political servant whose 'faithfull dealinge' has brought its rewards. The portrait's motto reads, 'Quod me nutrit me destruit' ('That which feeds me destroys me'); the emblem associated with this motto was a torch 'turning downeward' (S. Daniel, 'A Worthy Tract of Paulus Jovius', 1585, sig. Hvii), an image of doomed brilliance which seems apt for Marlowe. The painting now hangs at Corpus; the college correctly describes it as a 'putative' or 'apocryphal' likeness, but it is hard now to remember that this sardonic young man in a slashed velvet doublet may not be Marlowe at all. 
There are further hints of political dealing in Marlowe's later career, but two red herrings can be conveniently discarded. Mention of a Mr Morley in a letter written at Utrecht in 1587 (Robert Ardern to Lord Burghley, 2 Oct 1587, TNA: PRO, SP 15/30, fol. 85) has led to a mistaken belief that Marlowe was then in the Netherlands on a mission for Burghley. In fact the letter concerns a property dispute in Northumberland, and the man referred to is probably John Morley, who was dealing with properties on Burghley's behalf in 1587 ('Salisbury MSS', 3.277, 287). Nor is Marlowe the 'Mr Marlin' who couriered dispatches from Dieppe in March 1592; this is now known to be a sea captain, William Marlin or Mallyne (Nicholl, 340). 
Marlowe's first theatrical success in London was his thunderous drama of conquest and ambition, 'Tamburlaine the Great', based on the exploits of the fourteenth-century Tartar warlord Timur-i-leng. The exact date is uncertain, but a first run in the summer of 1587 is indicated. According to the title-page of the first edition (1590) it was performed by the Admiral's Men; its eponymous hero certainly suits the declamatory talents of the troupe's lead actor, Edward Alleyn, who would be associated with other Marlowe roles -- Dr Faustus, Barabas in 'The Jew of Malta', and the Duke of Guise in 'Massacre at Paris'. The play's success led to the swift cobbling-up of a sequel, 'The Second Part of the Bloody Conquests of Mighty Tamburlaine'. It was probably during a performance of the latter that an accident occurred, as described in a letter dated 16 November 1587: 'My L. Admyrall his men and players having a devyse in ther playe to tye one of their fellowes to a poste and so to shoote him to death', one of the 'callyvers' (muskets) proved to be loaded; the player 'swerved his peece being charged with bullet, missed the fellowe he aymed at, and killed a chyld and a woman great with chyld forthwith' ('Letters of Philip Gawdy', ed. I. Jeayes, 1906, 23). A scene in act 5, where the governor of Babylon is executed by firing squad, seems to have been the likely occasion. With success came controversy, and early in 1588 Robert Greene, jealous of his position as chief literary lion, complained: 'I have had it in derision for that I could not make my verses jet upon the stage in tragical buskins, every word filling the mouth like the fa-burden of Bow Bell, daring God out of heaven with that atheist Tamburlan. ('Perimedes the Blacke-Smith', in 'Complete Works', ed. A. Grosart, 1881-6, 7.8)' The allusion is to 'Tamburlaine the Great', act 1, scene 2: 'his looks do menace heaven and dare the gods'. 
Greene also speaks of Marlowe 'blaspheming with the mad priest of the sun', possibly referring to the controversial occultist Giordano Bruno; and to 'mad and scoffing poets that have propheticall spirits as bred of Merlins race' (a pun on Marlowe or Marlin is certainly intended). It has been observed that these cryptic notes of blasphemy and magic seem less appropriate to 'Tamburlaine' than to another play, 'Dr Faustus'. The dating of 'Faustus' is an enigma and its textual history a maze. The earliest recorded performance on 30 September 1594, over a year after Marlowe's death, was certainly not the first. The earliest known printed edition (1604) may not have been the first either; the copy had been entered at Stationers' Hall three years previously. A different and longer text was published in 1616. The relationship between these two versions (known as the 'A-text' and 'B-text') is controversial. Some of the material unique to 'B' is probably by Samuel Rowley and William Birde, who were paid $4 for 'adicyones in doctor fostes' in 1602 ('Henslowe's Diary', ed. W. W. Greg, 2 vols., 1904-08, 1.172). 'A', long considered inferior, is now thought closer to Marlowe's original text; some of its structural defects may be the results of censorship (see W. Empson, 'Faustus and the Censors', 1989). Stylistic arguments over the date of composition are unresolved, but the play's monolithic structure and scholarly trappings tend to favour an earlier date, 'c'.1588-9. A sourcebook used by Marlowe was 'The Damnable Life of D. Iohn Faustus', translated from the German by 'P. F., gent', but the date of the lost first edition of this is not known. 
In his acerbic preface to Greene's 'Menaphon' (1589), Thomas Nashe seems to renew the attack on Marlowe when he speaks of certain 'Alcumists of eloquence' who 'mounted on the stage of arrogance, thinke to out-brave better pennes with the swelling bumbast of bragging blanke verse' (sig. A2), but these rivalries must not be taken too seriously. Nashe was certainly more a friend than an enemy: he later defended the memory of 'poore deceassed Kit Marlow' from the slanders of Gabriel Harvey ('Christs Teares', 2nd edn, 1594, 2*1), and recalled Marlowe as one 'that usde me like a frend' ('Have with You to Saffron-Walden', 1596, sig. V2'v'). Other members of this literary group -- the so-called 'university wits' -- who were personally associated with Marlowe were Matthew Roydon and Thomas Watson, both of whom also had connections with government service, and George Peele. Shakespeare was not of this set; his relations with Marlowe are unrecorded except in the form of Marlowe's literary influence on him, though their collaboration on the 'Henry VI' cycle, or some antecedent version of it, remains a possibility. 
In the summer of 1589 Marlowe and Watson were both living, perhaps as room-mates, in Norton Folgate, Shoreditch. On the afternoon of 18 September, in nearby Hog Lane, Marlowe fought William Bradley, son of the landlord of The Bishop inn on Gray's Inn Road, with sword and dagger (TNA: PRO, chancery misc. MS 68/12/362; Eccles, 'Marlowe in London', 9-101). It appears that the real quarrel was between Bradley and Watson, and when Watson appeared on the scene, Bradley called: 'Art thou now come? Then I will have a boute with thee'. In the course of this 'boute' Bradley was killed. Marlowe and Watson were detained by the constable of Norton Folgate, Stephen Wyld, brought before a local JP, and committed to Newgate. At the inquest the following day, the Middlesex coroner recorded a verdict of self-defence. Marlowe was now eligible for bail, and on 1 October he was released, bound on a surety of $40 to appear at the next sessions at Newgate. The surety was provided by 'Richard Kytchine of Clifford's Inn, gentleman, & Humfrey Rowland of East Smithfield, horner': Kitchen was a lawyer, and was perhaps already associated with the theatre owner Philip Henslowe, whom he later represented; Rowland was probably a professional surety lender. During the twelve days he spent in Newgate, Marlowe seems to have met John Poole, a Catholic imprisoned there in 1587 'on suspicion of coigninge'. Among the charges later laid against Marlowe by Richard Baines was 'that he was acquainted with one Poole, a prisoner in Newgate, who hath great skill in mixture of metals, and having learned some things of him, he meant... to coin French crownes, pistolets, and English shillings' (BL, Harley MS 6848). On 3 December Marlowe appeared at the sessions; the judge presiding was Sir Roger Manwood, who may already have known him. This marked the end of the case for Marlowe, though Watson remained in Newgate, awaiting the queen's pardon, until the following February. 
Between his appearance at the Newgate sessions in December 1589 and his arrest in the Netherlands in January 1592, there is virtually no biographical knowledge of Marlowe's movements. The possibility that he acted as a tutor to Arabella Stuart has been aired, further to a letter from her guardian, Elizabeth, countess of Shrewsbury ('Bess of Hardwick'), who wrote to Burghley on 21 September 1592 concerning 'one Morley', who had 'attended on Arbell, and read to her for the space of three year and a half', but had now been dismissed and was 'much discontented'. The countess wrote that she had 'some cause to be doubtful of his forwardness in religion, though I cannot charge him with papistry' (BL, Lansdowne MS 71.2; E. St John Brooks, 'TLS', 27 Feb 1937). Without further evidence the identification with Marlowe is doubtful; he could not have been employed continuously since early 1589, as the countess's wording suggests. 
Other than this, there is only a glimpse of Marlowe in mid-1591, writing plays in a 'chamber' which he shared with the dramatist Thomas Kyd. In the summer of 1593, in a letter of self-justification concerning his relations with Marlowe, Kyd explained: 'My first acquaintance with this Marlowe rose upon his bearing name to serve my Lo: although his Lp never knew his service but in writing for his plaiers, ffor never could my L endure his name or sight when he had heard of his conditions, nor wold in deed the forme of devyne praiers used duelie in his Lps house have quadred wth such reprobates. (Kyd to Sir John Puckering, BL, Harley MS 6849, fol. 218)' This 'Lord' was almost certainly Ferdinando Stanley, Lord Strange, whose company gave the first recorded performance of 'The Jew of Malta' at the Rose Theatre on 26 February 1592. The 'Jew' is Marlowe's most cynical play, a tale of greed and betrayal suggestive of that Machiavellian 'demi-monde' of 'policy' or 'realpolitik', that world of 'climing followers', which was in some measure his own milieu. The 'ghost of Machevil' speaks the prologue, voicing sentiments that would soon be dangerously associated with Marlowe himself: '
I count religion but a childish toy, 

And hold there is no sinne but ignorance. 
(prologue, 14-15)' Whether Marlowe could have been present at the play's opening in February is uncertain, for a month earlier he had been arrested for 'coynage' -- coining money -- in Flushing, or Vlissingen, in the Netherlands, and deported back to England 'to be tryed'. A letter from Sir Robert Sidney, governor of Flushing, to Lord Burghley, dated 26 January 1592, explains something of the circumstances. Sidney had sent, under the escort of his ensign David Lloyd, two prisoners: 'the one named Christofer Marly, by his profession a scholer, and the other Gifford Gilbert a goldsmith, taken heer for coining, and their mony I have sent over to yowr Lo:... A Dutch shilling was uttred [circulated] and else not any peece... Notwithstanding I thowght it fitt to send them over unto yowr Lo: to take theyr trial as yow shal thinck best.(TNA: PRO, SP 84/44, fol. 60; Wernham, 344-5)' The man who had informed on Marlowe and Gilbert was 'one Ri: Baines... their chamber fellow'. This was the spy Richard Baines, who later compiled the notorious 'Note' about Marlowe's blasphemous opinions. Baines also accused Marlowe of 'intent to go to the Ennemy or to Rome'; there was, Sidney noted, 'malice' between them. Coining was accounted treason ('petty' rather than 'high' treason, but none the less punishable by death) and the allegation that Marlowe intended to defect to the Catholic enemy made it doubly so. The fact that he escaped serious punishment -- he was certainly at liberty by May -- suggests there may have been some political dimension to his presence in the Low Countries, and that he could claim, as he had in 1587, that he was working for 'the benefit of his country'. 
Under questioning at Flushing Marlowe named two noble patrons in his favour. As Sidney reported it: 'the scholer sais himself to be very wel known both to the Earle of Northumberland and my Lord Strang'. The latter relationship is confirmed by the theatrical connections mentioned above, and may also have been relevant to Marlowe's presence in Flushing. Lord Strange, of royal blood and Catholic extraction, was a figurehead for English Catholic exiles, chief among them his cousin, Sir William Stanley; the exile group at Brussels, of which Stanley was a leading part, was a target for spies and infiltrators, and possibly Marlowe was one of these. The other patron named was Henry Percy, ninth earl of Northumberland, whose philosophical and scientific pursuits earned him the nickname 'the Wizard Earl'. This places Marlowe with other poets -- Peele, Roydon, George Chapman -- who expressed their praise of 'deep-searching Northumberland' in the early 1590s. The earl was a close friend of Sir Walter Ralegh, with whom Marlowe's name is traditionally associated. Ralegh's poem 'The Nymph's Reply' is an answer to Marlowe's famous lyric 'The Passionate Shepherd', but neither piece can be securely dated. Also part of this circle were the scientists Thomas Harriot and Walter Warner, whom Kyd named as Marlowe's friends, 'such as he conversed withal' (letter to Sir John Puckering, BL, Harley MS 6849, fol. 218). This grouping is sometimes called the 'Durham House set', after Ralegh's town house on the Strand; and sometimes the 'School of Night', after a supposed allusion in Shakespeare's 'Love's Labour's Lost'. 
Two further brushes with the law mark this as a troubled year for Marlowe. On 9 May 1592 Christopher 'Marle' was bound over in the sum of $20 to 'keep the peace' towards Allen Nicholls and Nicholas Helliott, constable and beadle of Holywell Street, Shoreditch (London Guildhall, Middlesex County Records, session roll 309/13). It is not recorded what incident or behaviour occasioned this, but it clearly took place in Shoreditch, where Marlowe had been living in 1589. He was ordered to appear at the next session of the peace, to be held at Finsbury court at the beginning of October, but he does not seem to have done so, probably because he was by then detained on court business in Canterbury following a street fight with a tailor, William Corkine. This took place on 15 September 1592, near the corner of Mercery Lane, in Westgate ward. It may have involved Marlowe's arrest by his father, then acting constable of Westgate; the 'mainprise' of 12died which kept him out of gaol was certainly paid by his father. In a civil suit filed on 25 September, Corkine alleged that Marlowe had assaulted him 'with staff and dagger', causing 'loss and damage' to the value of $5 (Canterbury Cathedral, archives, BACJ/B/S/392; Urry, appx 4). On the following day Marlowe's attorney, John Smith, made a counter-charge at the quarter sessions, claiming that Corkine was the assailant; this indictment was thrown out, however. The case came to court on 2 October but was adjourned for a week; in the interim the litigants seem to have patched up their differences, and no further action was taken. In 1612 a composer named William Corkine, probably the tailor's son, published an 'air' to Marlowe's 'Passionate Shepherd'. 
Two occasional pieces in Latin belong to late 1592. The dedication signed 'C. M.' prefixed to Thomas Watson's 'Amintae gaudia' is almost certainly by Marlowe. It is addressed to Mary, countess of Pembroke; it seeks her patronage for 'this posthumous Amyntas', and was therefore written after 26 September, the date of Watson's funeral. The copy was licensed at Stationers' Hall on 10 November and was published by the end of the year. Another death, that of Sir Roger Manwood on 14 December 1592, occasioned a twelve-line epitaph in Latin hexameters, celebrating the judge as the 'terror of the night prowler' and 'scourge of the profligate'. A seventeenth-century copy, ascribed to Marlowe, survives in the commonplace book of Henry Oxinden (Washington, DC, Folger Shakespeare Library, MS 750.1); another version was written (probably also by Oxinden) in a copy of the 1629 edition of 'Hero and Leander', though this has since disappeared. 

'The Massacre at Paris' was apparently performed by Lord Strange's Men in late January 1593; the entry in Henslowe's diary is difficult to interpret in detail. This lurid account of the St Bartholomew's day massacre in 1572 (an atrocity ingrained in the mind of English protestants, and no doubt in the mind of the young Marlowe in Canterbury, a city which received a large share of Huguenot refugees) is the most topical and overtly political of his plays. A truncated version of it survives in an undated octavo edition of some 1200 lines, but the fragmentary nature of the text is in part a deliberate technique, in which the brevity and rapidity of the scenes create a vivid kind of reportage: this has been likened to the cinematic style of 'jump-cutting'. 

'Edward II', with its sophisticated narrative structure and controlled poetic intensity, is generally considered Marlowe's last play. The first edition (1594) describes it as played by Pembroke's Men, but there is no record of a performance during Marlowe's lifetime. It is the only Marlowe play set in England. Its account of Edward's homosexual infatuation for Piers Gaveston may contain an undertone of comment about James VI of Scotland and the earl of Lennox; the play thus touches obliquely on the question of the succession, and on the pro-Jacobean factions already forming in the early 1590s. Marlowe's interest in the latter is suggested by Thomas Kyd, who wrote: 'he wold pswade wth men of quallitie to goe unto the K of Scotts whether I heare Royden is gon and where if he had livd he told me when I sawe him last he meant to be' (BL, Harley MS 6848, fol. 154). There are glimpses again of a hidden stratum of political activity, faintly reflected in his writings, but no corroboration of Kyd's claim has been discovered. 
Another late work, perhaps Marlowe's last, is the lushly evocative 'Hero and Leander', a narrative poem based on the sixth-century Greek poem by Musaeus. The work, consisting of two sestiads totalling 818 lines, is apparently unfinished. It was one of a clutch of Marlowe manuscripts copyrighted by John Wolfe shortly after the author's death, but the first edition (1598) was published by Edward Blount, with a dedication to Sir Thomas Walsingham, recalling how Marlowe had enjoyed 'the gentle aire of your liking', and how 'in his lifetime you bestowed many favours, entertaining the parts of reckoning and woorth which you found in him' ('Complete Works', 2.430). The wording suggests some warmth of friendship. There is evidence that Marlowe was resident at Walsingham's house at Scadbury, Kent, in the last weeks of his life; he may have written 'Hero' there. Another edition of 1598, dedicated to Walsingham's wife, Lady Audrey, contains a continuation of the poem by Marlowe's friend George Chapman. His comment about Marlowe's 'late desires' ('Hero and Leander', sestiad 3.207-9) has been misinterpreted: the desire that Chapman should 'to light surrender [his] soules darke ofspring' refers to the publishing of Chapman's own poem, 'The Shadow of Night' (1594), not to the writing or publishing of his continuation of 'Hero'. There is no reason to suppose, therefore, that Chapman began his sequel in Marlowe's lifetime. 
The last year of Marlowe's life was clouded by allegations about his controversial religious and political views. The 'locus classicus' of these is the infamous 'Baines note', a signed statement itemizing nineteen instances of Marlowe's atheistic and seditious talk. But this was delivered to the authorities just a few days before Marlowe's death, and was the culmination of other, vaguer charges which had been circulating for some time. 
Late in September 1592, while Marlowe was in Canterbury, there appeared 'Greenes Groatsworth of Witte', a collection of writings by Robert Greene, edited after his death by the printer and playwright Henry Chettle. In a letter to 'those Gentlemen his Quondam acquaintance' who 'spend their wits in making plaies' (sig. E4'v'-F2'v'), Greene addressed Marlowe ('thou famous gracer of Tragedians'). He accused him of having said 'There is no God', and of embracing 'pestilent Machivilian pollicy' and 'diabolicall Atheism'. It seems that Marlowe reacted to this, for later in the year Chettle wrote: 'The letter written to divers play-makers is offensively by one or two of them taken... With neither of them that take offence was I acquainted, and with one of them I care not if I never be' ('Kind-Harts Dreame', 1592, sig. A3'v'). The latter was almost certainly Marlowe (the other being Shakespeare, who had been derided as 'an upstart Crow' in the same passage.) Chettle admired Marlowe (his 'learning I reverence') but wished to be dissociated from him: a taste of attitudes to come. He claimed he had actually toned down the attack: '[I] stroke out what then in conscience I thought he [Greene] had in some displeasure writ: or had it beene true, yet to publish it was intollerable'. This suppressed material may have been more about Marlowe's atheism, or a reference to his homosexuality. 
About the same time a Catholic broadside was circulating, which spoke of 'Sir Walter Rauleys schoole of Atheisme', and of the 'Conjuror that is M[aster] thereof', and of Christ and the 'Bible' being 'jested at' ('A. Philopater', 'An Advertisement', 1592, 18). The 'conjuror' was Marlowe's friend Thomas Harriot, and Marlowe himself was doubtless suspected of involvement -- a suspicion later made explicit by the spy Richard Cholmeley, who asserted that Marlowe 'hath read the Atheist lecture to Sr Walter Raliegh & others' (BL, Harley MS 6848, fol. 191). 
The links, if any, between Marlowe's supposed atheism and the circumstances of his death on 30 May 1593, remain a matter of debate. He was certainly under some kind of government surveillance at the time of his death, having been called before the privy council on 18 May, and ordered to report daily until 'lycensed to the contrary'. Three documents offer some clues to the nature of the council's suspicions about him. The first is the so-called 'Dutch Church Libel', an inflammatory doggerel poem posted on the wall of the Dutch church in Broad Street, London, on the evening of 5 May 1593. It was one of a series of 'placards' advocating violence against immigrant traders, but was deemed by the authorities to 'exceede the rest in lewdness'. The text, which survives in a manuscript copy of 'c'.1600, bears the hallmarks of being written by an admirer of Marlowe: it is signed 'Tamberlaine', and it contains overt reference to what was then probably his latest play ('Weele cutt your throtes, in your temples praying,/ Not paris massacre so much blood did spill'). A council directive of 11 May ('APC', 24.222) ordered the immediate apprehension of suspects, who were to be 'put to the torture in Bridewell' if necessary, and by the following day Marlowe's former room-mate Thomas Kyd was under arrest, 'suspected for that Libell that concerned the State'. In his lodgings was found a three-page transcript from Proctour's 'Fal of the Late Arrian', which he correctly described as 'some fragments of a disputation', but which his interrogators endorsed as 'vile hereticall Conceiptes denyinge the deity of Jhesus Christ or Savior fownd emongest the paprs of Thos Kidd prisoner, wch he affirmeth that he had ffrom Marlowe' (BL, Harley MS 6848, fols. 187-9). Kyd surmised that this document had been 'shuffled' with his own papers 'by some occasion of our wrytinge in one chamber twoe years synce', and said it contained an 'opinion' (Arian or anti-Trinitarian) which Marlowe was known to hold. A third document, almost certainly in the authorities' hands by this time, is an unsigned report detailing the seditious and blasphemous utterances of Richard Cholmeley, spy and provocateur (ibid., fols. 190-91). Among these is Cholmeley's reported belief 'that one Marlowe is able to showe more sounde reasons for atheisme then any devine in Englande is able to geve to prove devenitie'. This was later corroborated by Baines, who said Cholmeley 'confessed that he was perswaded by Marloe's reasons to become an Atheist' (ibid., fols. 185-6). 
The case against Marlowe was probably further strengthened by Kyd. Although his statement of Marlowe's 'monstruous opinions' (BL, Harley MS 6848, fol. 154) was certainly written down after Marlowe's death, it doubtless echoes what Kyd told his interrogators in mid-May: 'It was his custom... to jest at the devine scriptures, gybe at praiers, & stryve in argument to frustrate & confute what hath byn spoke or wrytt by prophets & such holie men'. Among Marlowe's alleged 'jests' was that St John was 'Christs Alexis' and 'that Christ did love him with an extraordinarie love'; this homosexual blasphemy is repeated by Baines, who quotes Marlowe as saying St John was 'bed-fellow to C[hrist] and... used him as the sinners of Sodoma' (BL, Harley MS 6848, fols. 185-6). 
These accumulated allegations and innuendoes resulted in the issuing of a warrant, dated 18 May, directing a messenger of the chamber, Henry Maunder 'to repaire to the house of Mr Tho: Walsingham in Kent, or to anie other place where he shall understand Christofer Marlow to be remayning, and by vertue hereof to apprehend and bring him to the court in his companie. And in case of need to require ayd. ('APC', 24.224)' (The last phrase is conventional and does not indicate special powers.) Maunder found his man (whether at Scadbury or elsewhere), and on 20 May the council clerk noted: 'Christofer Marley of London, gent, being sent for by warrant from their Lps, hath entered his appearance accordinglie for his Indemnitie herein; and is commaunded to give his daily attendaunce on their Lps untill he shalbe lycensed to the contrarie' (ibid., 24.225). He thus remained at liberty, albeit on bail and under watch. Given the treatment meted out to Kyd a week earlier this leniency seems surprising. It suggests, once again, that Marlowe had some kind of protection, or could claim some kind of usefulness if kept at liberty. 
A few days later the most damning of the indictments against him was delivered: the charge sheet compiled by Richard Baines, entitled 'A note containing the opinion of one Christopher Marley concerning his damnable judgment of religion and scorn of Gods word'. It succinctly itemizes Marlowe's heretical views -- 'that the first beginning of Religioun was only to keep men in awe', 'that Christ was a bastard and his mother dishonest', 'that the sacrament... would have bin much better being administred in a tobacco pipe', and so on -- and concludes darkly: 'I think all men in Cristianity ought to indevor that the mouth of so dangerous a member may be stopped'. The 'Note' survives in two manuscripts: one (BL, Harley MS 6848, fols. 185-6) is autograph; the other (ibid., 6853, fols. 307-8) is a scribal copy, endorsed 'Copye of Marloes blasphemyes As sent to her H[ighness]'. The copy has some alterations in the hand of Sir John Puckering, lord keeper of the privy seal, who together with another court official, Lord Buckhurst, played an important role in the investigation of Marlowe and his associates. A contradictory annotation states that the 'Note' was delivered three days before Marlowe's death (that is, 27 May) and that it was delivered 'on Whitsun eve last' (2 June). 
The proportion of truth and invention in the Baines 'Note' is hard to gauge. It can be interpreted as an accurate report of Marlowe's opinions (and even as a precis of that 'atheist lecture' he was supposed to have given); or it can be seen as the final act of an orchestrated campaign of black propaganda against Marlowe and Ralegh. The involvement of another professional snoop, Thomas Drury (younger brother of Sir William Drury of Hawstead, Suffolk), is revealed in a letter to Anthony Bacon, dated 1 August 1593, in which he claims a leading role in the production of the Baines 'Note': 'There was a command layed on me latly to stay on[e] Mr Bayns, which did use to resort unto me, which I did pursue... and got the desired secrett at his hand... Ther was by my only means sett doun unto the Lord Keper [and] the lord of Bucurst the notablyst and vyldist artyckeles of Athemisme ['sic'] that I suppose the lyke was never known or red of in any age. (LPL, Bacon MS 649, fol. 246)' Some support of Drury's claim is found in a letter from Buckhurst to Puckering, dated 8 November 1592, in which Drury's fitness to do some unspecified 'service' is discussed (BL, Harley MS 6995, fol. 137). Drury's previous connection with another figure involved in the case, Richard Cholmeley, is also documented ('APC', 21.119, 291, 354). 
On the evening of Wednesday 30 May 1593 Marlowe was stabbed to death at a house in Deptford Strand, near London. He was about twenty-nine. The circumstances are generally described as a 'tavern brawl', but there is no evidence that the house was a tavern, and since the killing occurred in a private room it can hardly be called a 'brawl' either. The events of that day can be partially reconstructed from the inquest, held on 1 June, by the royal coroner, William Danby, and a jury of sixteen local men (TNA: PRO, C 260/174, no. 27; Hotson, 28-34). At 10 o'clock in the morning Ingram Frizer, Nicholas Skeres, Robert Poley, and Christopher Marlowe met at a house in Deptford Strand belonging to a widow, Eleanor Bull. Rather than the shabby alehouse keeper of legend, Mrs Bull was of an ancient armorial family, the Whitneys of Herefordshire, and was the cousin of the queen's confidante Blanche Parry; her husband, Richard Bull (died 1590), had been under-bailiff of nearby Sayes Court. 
The four men dined together, and in the afternoon walked in the garden; they were in a 'quiet' mood. At six o'clock in the evening they returned to the house, and had supper in a room there. After supper Marlowe lay down on a bed; his companions were seated at the table. There was an argument over the bill: Frizer and Marlowe 'uttered one to the other divers malicious words' because they 'could not agree about the sum of pence, that is, 'le recknynge''. Marlowe, 'moved with anger', leapt from the bed, snatched Frizer's dagger from its sheath, and struck him twice about the head: the wounds (measured at the inquest) were shallow, and were perhaps inflicted with the hilt of the dagger. A struggle ensued: 'and so it befell, in that affray, that the said Ingram, in defence of his life, with the dagger aforesaid of the value of twelve pence, gave the said Christopher a mortal wound above his right eye, of the depth of two inches and of the width of one inch.(TNA: PRO, C 260/174, no. 27; translated in Hotson, 28-34)' From this wound, Marlowe 'then & there instantly died'. The actual cause of death was probably a brain haemorrhage. On the basis of this account the coroner found that Frizer had killed Marlowe in self-defence; on 15 June a writ of 'certiorari' brought the case into Chancery, and on 28 June Frizer received a royal pardon (TNA: PRO, patent rolls 1401). 
The discovery of the inquest by Leslie Hotson in 1925 scotched three centuries of rumour and romance. The earliest independent accounts of the killing proved to have been approximate at best. Thomas Beard ('Theatre of God's Judgement', 1597, 147-8) described it as a street fight: Marlowe died 'in London streetes, as he purposed to stab one whom he ought a grudge unto with his dagger'. Francis Meres ('Palladis tamia', 1598, sig. Oo6) had Marlowe 'stabbed to death by a bawdy serving-man, a rival of his in his lewd love'. The most accurate account was William Vaughan's ('The Golden Grove', 1600, C4'v'-C5), which correctly named the killer ('one Ingram') and the location ('at Detford'). Vaughan had family connections with Mrs Bull's cousin Blanche Parry, and with the earl of Northumberland, and perhaps had privileged information. His statement that it was Frizer who invited Marlowe to Deptford, for a 'feast', may also be correct; the fact that Frizer was a business associate of Marlowe's patron Thomas Walsingham -- the connection is documented from 1593 -- lends credence to this. 
The authenticity of the inquest is not in doubt, but whether it tells the full truth is another matter. The nature of Marlowe's companions raises questions about their reliability as witnesses. Nicholas Skeres was a swindler who, a month previously, had been accused in Star Chamber of 'entrapping young gents' (TNA: PRO, STAC 5/S9/8); in another case he 'combined' with Frizer to 'undermine and deceive' a young heir, Drew Woodliff (Hotson, 69-73). Robert Poley was the Walsingham spy who had infiltrated the Babington conspiracy; contemporary accounts of his cunning and 'knavery' abound (Nicholl, 31-3). Frequently employed on missions abroad, he had recently returned from the Netherlands, and was still nominally 'in Her Majesties service' when present at Deptford (chamber accounts, 12 June 1593, TNA: PRO, E351/542, fol. 182'v'). That the inquest's account depended on these two men -- the only independent witnesses of the fatal 'affray' -- is at the least unsatisfactory. They also brought to the scene certain high-up political connections: Skeres served the earl of Essex, whom he described in Star Chamber as his 'Lord and Master'; Poley reported to Sir Robert Cecil, who correctly described him as 'no fool' (Cecil to Sir Thomas Heneage, 25 May 1592, TNA: PRO, SP 12/242, no. 25). That these links betoken some covert intrigue against Marlowe has yet to be proved, but they add to a sense that something more complex is concealed beneath the story of the 'recknynge'. The involvement of the royal coroner has no sinister connotation, however: he automatically dealt with cases that fell 'within the verge' (that is, a 12-mile radius of the queen), as this one did. 
Marlowe was buried on 1 June 1593 at St Nicholas's, Deptford; the location of the grave is unknown. The publisher Blount, dedicating 'Hero and Leander' to Thomas Walsingham, wrote: 'Wee thinke not our selves discharged of the dutie wee owe to our friend when wee have brought the breathlesse bodie to the earth... albeit the eye there taketh his ever-farwell of that beloved object'. This possibly indicates their presence at the funeral. The entry in the Deptford burial register states that Marlowe was 'slaine by ffrancis ffrezer', an error compounded by a nineteenth-century vicar of St Nicholas's, who misread the surname as 'Archer'; in the century before Hotson's recovery of the inquest Marlowe's assassin was called either Francis Frazer or Francis Archer. 
The earliest epitaph, calling Marlowe 'Marley the Muses darling', is in Peele's 'Honour of the Garter', dedicated to the earl of Northumberland and datable to mid-June 1593. Nashe's 'Unfortunate Traveller', also completed in June but not published until 1594, has a tribute to the dramatist and reputed atheist Pietro Aretino (sig. F3'v'-F4'v') which has been interpreted as referring to Marlowe (who had been compared to 'Aretine' by Gabriel Harvey): 'His pen was sharpe pointed lyke a poinyard; no leafe he wrote on but was lyke a burning glasse to set on fire all his readers... He was no timerous servile flatterer of the commonwealth wherein he lived... His lyfe he contemned in comparison of the libertie of speech.' By contrast, Nashe's comments about 'scripture-scorning' atheists in 'Christs Teares', published in October 1593, suggest his desire to distance himself from the Marlovian taint of irreligion. His 'elegy' on Marlowe, perhaps in Latin, was seen in certain copies of 'Dido' in the eighteenth century, but is now lost. In 'As You Like It' ('c'.1599) Shakespeare calls Marlowe the 'dead shepherd' (III.v), and seems to refer to the circumstances of his death: 'It strikes a man more dead than a great reckoning in a little room' (III. iii; cf. 'infinite riches in a little room'; Marlowe, 'Jew of Malta', I.i). The most beautiful epitaph is Michael Drayton's: '
neat [unadulterated] Marlow... 

Had in him those brave translunary things 

That the first poets had; his raptures were 

All ayre and fire. 
('Of Poets and Poesy', 1627)' However, the anonymous author of the 'Returne from Parnassus' (part 2, 'c'.1601) perhaps summed up his reputation more accurately: 'Wit lent from heaven but vices sent from hell'. 
During the seventeenth century Marlowe's fiery raptures and 'high astounding termes' ('Tamburlaine the Great', prologue, 5) fell swiftly out of fashion. Ben Jonson derided 'the Tamerlanes and Tamer-chams of the late age' which offered nothing but 'scenicall strutting and furious vociferation to warrant them then to the ignorant gapers' ('Discoveries', ed. G. Harrison, 1923, 33), though in his ode to Shakespeare (1623) he coined the famous phrase 'Marlowes mighty line'. The eighteenth century cared little for the line and less for the man. William Hazlitt was among the first to reshape Marlowe in a semi-daemonic Romantic mould: 'There is a lust of power in his writings, a hunger and thirst after unrighteousness, a glow of the imagination, unhallowed by any thing but its own energies' ('Literature of the Age of Elizabeth', 1820, 43). Alfred Tennyson called him the 'morning star' which heralded Shakespeare's 'dazzling sun', while for Algernon Swinburne he was 'the most daring pioneer in all our literature'. The twentieth century discerned in the plays more 'modern' subtexts of irony and dissidence; T. S. Eliot redefined the dominant mode of his plays as 'serious, even savage' farce, rather than tragedy ('The Sacred Wood', 1920, 92). Behind the exalted poetry and the lurid reputation Marlowe remains an elusive, troubled character. One senses a personal flair both magnetic and dangerous; he was, said Kyd, 'intemperate & of a cruel heart'. Learned, sardonic, aggressive, and reckless, Marlowe leaves more questions than answers, and the profoundly questioning temper of his plays suggests that this is as he would have wanted it. 


@@@@@


doc= 18080


Marmion, Sir Philip (d. 1291), baron, was the son of Robert Marmion and Juliana, daughter of Philippe de Vassy. He succeeded to his estates about 1241-3. He married Joan, daughter and coheir of Hugh of Kilpeck, and on 7 February 1244 he performed homage for his wife's share of the Kilpeck estates. In July 1249 he was appointed sheriff of Warwickshire and Leicestershire, and on 6 February 1252 was pardoned for trespasses in that office. Partly as a result of this he became heavily indebted to the crown, and an arrangement was made for paying this off by instalments in 1253. In that year he went with the king to Gascony, and was captured on his return journey with the earl of Warwick and others at Pons in Poitou. From 1258 he was summoned on several occasions to expeditions against Llewelyn. In 1260 he replaced James Audley as a justice on special eyres arranged for the redress of grievances in Bedfordshire and Buckinghamshire. 
A royalist, Marmion was sheriff of Norfolk and Suffolk during 1261-2, and was appointed warden in the counties of Nottingham and Derby in December 1263. He was among the party who submitted evidence on behalf of the king to Louis IX, resulting in the mise of Amiens in January 1264. After Evesham he was granted the lands of Montfortian rebels in seven counties, and on 26 September 1266 he received the king's demesnes of Tamworth and Wigginton for life. This was to bring him into serious conflict with the tenants of both manors. He bought houses in London and, when leasing them, reserved the right to reside there on visits to the capital. In the fourteenth century it was stated that the Marmion manor of Scrivelsby, Lincolnshire, was held by the grand sergeanty of performing the office of king's champion at the coronation, but whether Marmion actually performed that office for Edward I is unknown. He died on or before 5 December 1291. He had four daughters, three with Joan, namely Joan, Mazera, and Maud, and a fourth, another Joan, with his second wife, Mary. The estates were divided between these children. There was also an illegitimate son, Robert. 


@@@@@


doc= 18081


Marmion, Robert (d. 1144), baron and soldier, was the son of Roger Marmion of Lincolnshire. He had succeeded his father by Michaelmas 1129 and the pipe roll of 1130 shows that he owed the sum of $176 13's'. 4died as relief for his father's lands, of which $60 had been paid by that date. He married Milicent, said to be a kinswoman of Queen Adeliza, widow of Henry I. Together Marmion and his wife granted the church of Polesworth and the lordship of Warton to the nuns of Polesworth and the vill of 'Buteyate', Lincolnshire, to Bardney Abbey. Marmion took King Stephen's part in the struggle with the Empress Matilda. In 1140 he appears as castellan of Falaise, where he successfully held out against Geoffrey, count of Anjou. His own castle at Fontenoy-le-Marmion was destroyed as a reprisal. In England he was in contention with William de Beauchamp over the castle and honour of Tamworth, where he had received a grant of free warren from Henry I. 
Marmion faced a more formidable opponent, however, in Ranulf (II), earl of Chester. Here the struggle centred on the town of Coventry. Marmion was no mean figure himself militarily, being described as a warlike man, almost unequalled in his time for ferocity, adroitness, and daring, renowned for his many successes far and wide. At Coventry he expelled the monks and fortified the priory, using its stone buildings as a fortress from which to launch frequent attacks on the earl's castle. He also covered the field between the two with ditches to impede the enemy's forces. It was an act of desecration from which the chroniclers were soon able to draw a moral. The story is told in outline by Henry of Huntingdon, referred to by John of Salisbury, and given detail by the later twelfth-century chronicler, William of Newburgh. When the earl came with a considerable force to relieve the castle, Marmion's forces went out to engage him. During the action he was thrown from his horse into one of his own ditches. As he lay immobilized, with a broken thigh, he was decapitated, in full view of all, by a common soldier of the opposing army. He was apparently the only man killed in the action, 'crushed under the weight of divine judgement' (William of Newburgh, 'Historia rerum Anglicarum', ed. R. Howlett, Rolls Series, 1884, 1.71). This occurred about 16 September 1144. Marmion was buried at Polesworth, in unconsecrated ground as an excommunicate, and was succeeded by his son Robert. His widow, Milicent, married Richard de Camville. 


@@@@@


doc= 18082


Marmion, Robert (d. 1216x18), baron and justice, was the son of Robert Marmion of Tamworth, Staffordshire, and his wife, Elizabeth, the daughter of Hugues, count of Rethel, near Rheims. The death of his father, about October 1181, made the younger Robert a leading baron in the English midlands, with important estates also at Scrivelsby in Lincolnshire and Berwick in Sussex, and at Fontenay-le-Marmion in Normandy (Calvados). Identity of name makes it impossible to tell whether it was father or son who witnessed a number of Henry II's charters in Normandy in the 1170s, but it was probably Robert junior who in January 1178 sat on a judicial assize at Caen. After his father's death he was active in the king's service in England; he is recorded as a justice in the 'curia regis' at Melksham, Wiltshire, on 25 January 1184, while in 1187 he headed a circuit of eyres in the west midlands, during which he also imposed a tallage on the counties visited. Between Easter 1185 and Michaelmas 1189 he was sheriff of Worcestershire. 
In common with many sheriffs Marmion lost his shrievalty at the accession of Richard I, and in 1190 had to promise a fine of $1000. This was subsequently commuted to 700 marks, which he paid in Normandy. In 1191 he was in Wales, paying $300 to the garrison of Carmarthen Castle. But in 1194 he joined Richard I in Normandy, and was still there in 1197, when he swore on the king's behalf to observe the treaty between Richard and the count of Flanders, and in July 1198. At some point he vowed to go on pilgrimage to the Holy Land, but about 1200 gave $500 angevins instead to the Norman abbey of Barbery, of which his father ranked as second founder. Marmion seems to have remained in Normandy during the early years of John's reign; he witnessed one of that king's charters at Caen on 7 August 1203, and on the same day was granted the lands of such of his own men as had joined the French. 
When Normandy was lost in 1204, Marmion returned to England, but his eldest son remained in France, and this, combined with Marmion's obvious determination to retain his position in both realms, seems to have prompted John's mistrust. Although Marmion acted as a justice in the king's court when it sat at Worcester in August 1204, and in 1205 was entrusted with the custody of a royal hostage, thereafter he appears in the record of government only as paying scutages and clearing old debts. The latter may have been achieved by borrowing, for at his death Marmion was indebted to two London Jews, owing at least $170. In 1210 three of his knights went on the king's Irish expedition, but Marmion does not appear to have gone himself. Estranged from John, he subsequently joined the baronial rebels. At about the end of 1215 the king ordered that Tamworth Castle be demolished; the order was not carried out, but at least some of Marmion's lands were confiscated. On 25 September 1216 it was ordered that the manor of Quinton, Gloucestershire, be restored to him, and early in November he was offered a safe conduct to enter into negotiations, but there is no evidence that he accepted it. He died, probably at Scrivelsby, some time before 9 May 1218. 
Robert Marmion married twice, first to Maud de Beauchamp, and second, before about 1200, to Philippa (died in or after 1221), whose surname is unknown. There were children of both marriages, though, confusingly, the eldest son of each was named Robert. In the provision that he made for his sons Marmion showed himself determined to keep his cross-channel lordship in being. The elder Robert remained in Normandy after 1204. The younger Robert came to England with his brother William, who became a secular clerk. Their father provided for both his younger sons, giving lands by charter to Robert in Lincolnshire, Gloucestershire, and Sussex, and in Lincolnshire and Sussex to William, whom he also presented to two Warwickshire churches during the civil war. There can be little doubt that these grants were intended to shape arrangements subsequently made for the Marmion inheritance, when on 15 May 1218 the younger Robert (who had also been a rebel against John, and was captured at the battle of Lincoln) promised $500 for Tamworth and his father's lands, to be held until England and Normandy were reunited. If his elder brother Robert came into Henry III's allegiance, the lands were to pass to him, except for those that their father had already granted to the younger Robert and to William. In the event the elder Robert did return to England, and for a while reunited almost all his father's Anglo-Norman lordship. 


@@@@@


doc= 18083


Marmion, Shackerley (1603-1639), playwright and poet, was born in the village of Aynho in Northamptonshire on 21 January 1603, the eldest of four children of Shackerley Marmion (1575-1642) and his wife, Mary, 'nee' Lukyn (died 1632). The family estate at Aynho had been secured by the playwright's great-grandfather Rowland Shackerley, who died in 1565. Shackerley Marmion senior was the eldest son of Thomas Marmion of Lincoln's Inn, who died in 1583 but who in 1577 had married Mary, the youngest daughter of Rowland Shackerley of Aynho. He married Mary, the daughter of Bartrobe Lukyn, a London gentleman, on 16 June 1600 at the church of St Dunstan-in-the-West (Nichols, 'Collectanea', 5.518). He evidently encountered financial difficulties and mortgaged part of his estate to Sir Thomas Penyston of Stanton in Buckinghamshire; in 1615 he sold his remaining interest in the estate at Aynho to Richard Cartwright of London. By 22 June 1616 the family had moved to Adderbury in Oxfordshire and thereafter there is no further reference to them there. A reference appears in the parish records of the church of St Bartholomew in Smithfield of the burial in 1632 of Mary Marmion, presumed to be the playwright's mother, and there is a further record of the burial of a Shackerley Marmion in the register of the church of St Margaret's, Westminster, dated 5 September 1642. 
Marmion was educated at Thame School under the tutelage of Richard Butcher and proceeded thereafter to Wadham College, Oxford, as a commoner, in 1618. His caution money was received on 28 April 1618 and he matriculated on 6 February 1621; he obtained his BA on 1 March 1622 and proceeded to his MA on 7 July 1624. There is no record of Marmion's activities between the years 1625 and 1629, although it is thought that following graduation, and as an impoverished member of the gentry, his father sent him into the Netherlands, where he may have become part of a troop commanded by Sir Sigismund Alexander, identified by Marion Jones as Sir Alexander Zinzan. 
Marmion was back in England by 11 July 1629 and living in the parish of St Giles-in-the-Fields, in the highway of St Giles, since on that date he is alleged to have attacked a certain Edward Moore, wounding him in the head. He was released on bail of $80, $20 having been put up by his father, a further $20 by one Richard Browne, and a further $40 by Marmion himself, and ordered to appear on the following 1 September. Nothing more is heard of the case but it had evidently been resolved satisfactorily by December 1631, the date when Marmion's first play, 'Hollands Leaguer', was performed by the newly constituted Prince Charles's Men at the Salisbury Court theatre. Marmion took the title of his play from a celebrated event involving the siege of a brothel run by the notorious Southwark prostitute Elizabeth Holland; the siege had become the subject of popular ballads and an anti-Catholic prose account by Nicholas Goodman. The play was entered in the Stationers' register on 26 January 1632 by John Grove and was printed by John Beale, but only after the master of the revels, Sir Henry Herbert, had demanded certain 'alterations'. In addition to the heavy influence of the writings of Ben Jonson that play reveals an awareness of the conflict between platonic and profane love, which had also been the subject of the court masques 'Love's Triumph through Callipolis' and 'Chloridia', both of which were performed at court in January and February 1631. 
Marmion's second play, 'A Fine Companion', was performed at the Salisbury Court theatre in 1633 by the Prince's Men and also received a royal performance at Whitehall before Charles I and his queen. The play took its title from a well-known dance (printed by Playford in 1652) and appeared in the same year that Charles I reissued James I's declaration of sports, which had been originally formulated in 1618; its emphasis on festivity indicates a degree of sympathy with Charles's championing of such 'sports'. The play was entered in the Stationers' register on 15 June 1633 by the bookseller Richard Meighen and was printed in quarto shortly afterwards by Augustine Mathewes, with a dedicatory epistle to Sir Ralph Dutton, Marmion's third cousin and a distant relative of Sir Christopher Hatton, Elizabeth I's 'dancing chancellor'. Such was Marmion's burgeoning reputation that Richard Meighen solicited from him a poem dedicated to the actor Joseph Taylor, who had performed in John Fletcher's 'The Faithful Shepherdess' before the king and queen on twelfth night 1633, and which Meighen printed as part of the quarto that he published in 1634. 
Although Marmion's third play, 'The Antiquary', was not entered in the Stationers' register until 11 March 1639 and was not printed by Felix Kingston in quarto until 1641 it is almost certain that it was performed some time during 1635-6. All that is known about its performance is that it was acted by Queen Henrietta's Men at the Cockpit theatre. Like Marmion's two previous plays it incorporates an actual historical event, the closure in 1629 of an antiquarian library, presumed to be that of Sir Robert Cotton (K. Sharpe, 'Sir Robert Cotton, 1586-1631', 1979). It is thought to have been revived twice in 1718 to celebrate the revival of the Society of Antiquaries (Dodsley, 'A Selection of English Plays', 1780). In its borrowings from various of Shakespeare's plays and poems, as well as from the works of Petronius and Virgil, and from books of 'characters', such as Overbury's 'Characters', John Earle's 'Microcosmographie', or Wye Saltonstall's 'Picturae loquentes', it is possible that Marmion was burlesquing the earlier texts that his audience could not have failed to recognize. In each of Marmion's plays there is an opposition between romantic and profane love, and this is sometimes aligned with the opposition between youth and age. Characters are driven by Jonsonian 'humours' and in each case idiosyncrasies are corrected through the celebratory power of comedy. Threats to the well-being of society are overcome by ingenuity but in the end all that is potentially harmful is rehabilitated within a social order that is shown to be capable of dynamically recharging itself. Marmion aligns the 'turbulenta prima, tranquilla ultima' ('turbulent beginning, tranquil conclusion') definition of the structure of comedy derived from his friend Thomas Heywood with Ben Jonson's Ciceronian definition: 'Imitatio vitae, speculum consuetudinis, imago veritatis' ('Imitation of life, mirror of manners, image of truth'). 
In addition to Marmion's three known plays his name was associated with a fourth play, 'The Sodder'd Citizen', the manuscript for which was brought to the British Museum by its owner, Lieutenant-Colonel E. G. Troyte-Bullock, in 1932. The first mention of Marmion's association with the play was in 1653 in an entry in the Stationers' register under the name of the publisher Humphrey Moseley. The play was acted between 1631 and 25 January 1632, the latter being the date when the actor Richard Sharpe, who had delivered both the prologue and the epilogue in performance, died. It is now generally thought that the author of this play was the highwayman-poet John Clavell, whose name, alongside the date, 1633, appears on the manuscript (Clavell). 
Marmion also contributed occasional poems to Mathewe Walbancke's 'Annalia Dubrensia, or, Celebration of Captain Dover's Cotswold Games' (1636), Thomas Heywood's 'The Phoenix of these Late Times, or, The Life of Mr. Henry Welby, Esq.' (1637), 'A true description of his majesties royall ship, built in this year 1637 at Wooll-witch in Kent' (1637), and 'Pleasant Dialogues and Dramas' (1637), and a memorial poem to a collection commemorating the achievement of the dramatist and poet Ben Jonson, who died in 1637, 'Jonsonus virbius' (1638). As well as occasional poetry Marmion published a long allegorical poem, 'The Legend of Cupid and Psyche, or, Cupid and his Mistress' (1637), based on Apuleius's 'The Golden Ass'. The poem was entered in the Stationers' register on 24 June 1637 by John Okes and the quarto was subsequently printed by Nicholas and John Okes, with prefatory verses by Richard Brome, Francis Tuckyr, Thomas Nabbes, and Thomas Heywood, who had treated this theme in his masque 'Love's Mistress, or, The Queen's Masque' (1636); it was dedicated to Charles Lewis, prince elector and count palatine of the Rhine. It is thought that a second edition of the poem may have appeared in 1638 (Maxwell, 278ff.). In January 1639 Marmion joined Sir John Suckling's expedition against the Scots. He contracted a cold at Selby in Yorkshire and returned to London, where he died later that month. He was buried in the church of St Bartholomew in Smithfield. 
With the exception of 'The Antiquary' (1641) all of Marmion's plays and his poetry were published during his lifetime. Dodsley's 'A Selection of Old English Plays' (1780) and Sir Walter Scott's 'Ancient British Drama' (1810) both contain editions of 'The Antiquary', while W. H. Logan and J. Maidment produced a complete but poorly edited edition of the plays in 1875. In the twentieth century 'A Fine Companion' was edited in 1979 by Richard Sonnenshine, and A. J. Nearing published an edition of 'The Legend of Cupid and Psyche' in 1944. There have been three significant research theses on Marmion: Sue Maxwell (Yale University, 1941), Marion Jones (University of Oxford, 1956), and John Drakakis (University of Leeds, 1988), the last of which contains a complete old-spelling edition of the plays and a full textual analysis. 


@@@@@


doc= 18084


Marnock, Robert (1800-1889), landscape gardener, was born on 12 March 1800, at Kintore, Aberdeenshire, the son of Peter Marnock, a farmer. He is first recorded as a gardener at Bretton Hall, Yorkshire, and while there he won the competition to design the Sheffield Botanic Garden, which he laid out in 1834; he was also appointed its first curator. While at Sheffield he was involved in the publication of a number of gardening magazines: from 1836 to 1842 he edited the monthly 'Floricultural Magazine', and for several years, beginning in 1845, he edited the weekly 'United Gardeners' and Land Stewards' Journal'. With Richard Deakin, he wrote the first volume of 'Florigraphia Britannica, or, Engravings and Descriptions of the Flowering Plants and Ferns of Britain' (1837). On 17 October 1838, at the Independent Chapel, Welford, Northampton, he married Anne (1810/11-1885), daughter of Benjamin Hobson, dissenting minister. They had two daughters and a son. 
In 1840 Marnock won a second competition to design the garden of the Royal Botanic Society in Regent's Park. The design kept 'the number of walks to a minimum', left 'the central mass of the garden an open lawn' and screened 'the specialist gardens behind shrubberies and an elevated rockwork; the garden was bisected by a straight walk leading to the great conservatory, thus imposing an axis of symmetry' (Elliott, 40). It led to the recognition of Marnock as one of the leading landscape gardeners of the day. During much of his time at Regent's Park he was aided by the Irishman William Robinson, most of whose early work after his arrival in England was carried out under Marnock's aegis. As curator of the garden, Marnock also successfully managed the exhibitions at the Royal Botanic Society's gardens. He relinquished his post there in 1862, after which date he practised as a landscape gardener. 
Marnock's style was that usually described as 'natural' or 'picturesque', while his work was sound and severely economical. The maxims of his approach are expressed in extracts from letters compiled by Mungo Temple in 1870. Among the practices Marnock objected to were 'The dotting of trees and shrubs on lawns like sentinels... or placing anything on a lawn at all which in any way interrupted the view or defaced the space', 'formal avenues, where they could easily be dispensed with', and 'roads to the dwelling house, taking long out-of-the-way turns, where they could be concealed and the distance shortened' (Elliott, 168). As a general principle, he sought the easy, unimpeded movement of the eye over the scene ahead. His chief designs are those at Greenlands, Henley-on-Thames, made for the Rt Hon. W. H. Smith; at Hampstead, for Sir Spencer Wells; at Possingworth, Sussex, for Lewis Huth; at Blythwood, near Taplow, for George Hanbury; at Brambletye, near East Grinstead, for Donald Larnach; at Leigh Place, near Tonbridge, for Samuel Morley, and at Weston Park, Sheffield; Park Place, Henley; Taplow Court; Eynsham Hall; Sopley Park; and Montague House, Whitehall. His work for Prince Demidov at San Donato, near Florence, in 1852, added greatly to his reputation, and to the increasing taste for English gardening on the continent. His last public work was the Alexandra Park at Hastings, laid out in 1878. He retired in 1879, leaving his business to Joseph Weston, although he continued to give professional advice on landscape gardening until the spring of 1889, in which year he designed his last private garden, that of Sir Henry Peck at Rousdon, near Lyme Regis. 
Marnock spent the last summers of his long life in Aberdeenshire with his two daughters, rambling over the high mountains in search of wild flowers. He died at his home, 1B Oxford and Cambridge Mansions, Marylebone Road, London, on 15 November 1889. In accordance with his wishes his body, after a religious service, was cremated at Woking, and his ashes were deposited in his wife's grave at Kensal Green cemetery on 20 November. 


@@@@@


doc= 18085


Marochetti, (Pietro) Carlo Giovanni Battista, Baron Marochetti in the nobility of Sardinia (1805-1867), sculptor, was born on 14 January 1805 in Turin, the son of Vincenzo (Vincent) Marochetti ('b'. 'c'.1768), a former priest who had served as secretary-general to the provisional republican Piedmontese government and was professor of eloquence at Turin University and under-prefect of Chivasso, and his wife, whose maiden surname was Isola. With the waning of Napoleonic influence in the area Vincenzo Marochetti moved with his family to France, where he practised as an advocate in the Paris court of cassation. Carlo Marochetti was educated at the Lycee Napoleon and went on to study sculpture at the Ecole des Beaux-Arts under Francois-Joseph Bosio. His one attempt at the 'prix de Rome' of the Ecole was rewarded only with an honourable mention, but since his mother was resident in Rome, having returned to Italy about 1814, he was enabled, without state assistance, to pass lengthy periods there between 1822 and 1827. In Rome his contacts were with other French students, such as Francois-Joseph Duret and Antoine Etex. He is also reported to have spent time in the studio of Bertel Thorvaldsen, the celebrated Danish sculptor. For all his neo-classical training, Marochetti increasingly identified, after the July Revolution of 1830, with the Romantic school of sculpture, pursuing on the one hand a colourful historicism, and on the other, sartorial realism in contemporary portraiture, accompanied sometimes by a lively textured treatment of surfaces. 
Following his move back to Paris, Marochetti married in 1835 Camille de Maussion (died 1893); they had two sons and a daughter. Two major commissions were given to him by the new constitutional monarchy, a relief of the battle of Jemappes for the Arc de Triomphe de l'Etoile, and a colossal group, 'The Elevation of Mary Magdalene', for the high altar of the church of La Madeleine in Paris. Completion of the latter was delayed by work on a monument which would win for Marochetti a contested celebrity as a creator of lively equestrian statues. This was the historical portrait of Emanuele Filiberto of Savoy (1528-1580), fully armed, in the act of sheathing his sword while reining in his charger. Marochetti made a gift of this statue to his birthplace, but before its erection in the piazza San Carlo in Turin it was temporarily exhibited in the courtyard of the Louvre in 1838. The support of Louis-Philippe and his family which this privilege denoted was further demonstrated when Marochetti was asked to execute an equestrian statue of Ferdinand, duke of Orleans, after the duke's accidental death in 1842. One version stood between 1844 and 1848 in the Louvre courtyard. Marochetti was also an early contributor to the wave of commemorative sculpture, which this period witnessed, to great men of the nation in the places of their birth. 
Tireless in his search for new arenas for public statuary, Marochetti in 1840 was simultaneously attempting to secure a commission in Glasgow for a monument to the duke of Wellington, and also preparing models for the tomb of Napoleon I for the church of Les Invalides in Paris. He was ultimately successful in his bid for the Glasgow statue, which would be inaugurated in 1844, but the commission of one who was seen as both unqualified and foreign as the sculptor of so national a memorial as Napoleon's tomb inspired a storm of protest in France. Relieved of the tomb memorial, Marochetti was appeased with another related commission for an equestrian statue of the emperor for the esplanade of the Invalides. This statue, though modelled by Marochetti, remained at his country house at Vaux-sur-Seine, outside Paris, until the commission was finally annulled by the government of Napoleon III in 1853. 
Following the abdication of Louis-Philippe in 1848, Marochetti remained briefly in France. Having been mayor of Vaux since 1846, he now campaigned for election as its deputy to the new republican national assembly. When this and other projects failed he moved permanently to London late in 1848. He already had influential contacts in Britain. In 1849 he met Queen Victoria and Prince Albert for the first time, impressing the queen, who found him 'very agreeable, gentlemanlike and unassuming' (Queen Victoria, journal, 1 July 1848, Royal Archives, Windsor). Quite soon he established his reputation with the plaster equestrian statue of Richard I, which stood outside the western entrance to the Crystal Palace in 1851. A group of supporters campaigned for the statue's erection in bronze 'on some conspicuous site in the metropolis' ('Proposal for the Erection of the Statue of Richard Coeur de Lion by Baron Marochetti, 23 May 1853'). Prince Albert was responsible for the decision to place it outside the Palace of Westminster, where it has stood since 1860. 
Despite the support of the royal couple and John Ruskin, Marochetti met with a chauvinistic reaction to his admittedly far-reaching ambitions. Hoping to circumvent competition for the tomb of the duke of Wellington, in 1859 he exhibited a seated figure of a 'Winged Victory', part of his proposed monument, in the garden of Apsley House, London, overlooking Rotten Row, and tried to muster royal support for his scheme. In this he failed, as he did also in a project of the early 1860s for a series of statues in St Margaret's churchyard, Westminster, commemorating a triumvirate of great engineers. These statues were later erected in different locations (that of Isambard Kingdom Brunel on the Victoria Embankment, George Stephenson at Euston Station, and Joseph Locke in Locke Park, Barnsley, Yorkshire). A colossal statue of Sir Robert Peel in Parliament Square was also later removed, to be replaced by a smaller figure by Matthew Noble. As a reporter for 'The Athenaeum' observed, Marochetti appeared to be aiming at hegemony in the heartlands of Westminster ('Fine art gossip', 29 June 1861, 867). Despite these reverses, his vast studio and foundry in the mews behind his home, 34 Onslow Square, South Kensington, were always full of work in progress. The two forms which dominated his production in these years were equestrian statues (Queen Victoria and Prince Albert for Glasgow, Viscount Combermere for Chester, Sir Mark Cubbon for Bangalore, India) and monumental mourning seraphim, deployed in individual or group commemorations (the monument to the lords Melbourne in St Paul's Cathedral, London; the monument to British soldiers killed in the Crimea, known as the Scutari obelisk, in Haydarpasa cemetery, Turkey; and the Cawnpore memorial in Cawnpore, India). While living in England, Marochetti produced important monuments for Italy (those of Carlo Alberto of Savoy for Turin, and Gioacchino Rossini for Pesaro) and for France (the tomb of the comtesse de Lariboisiere for the Hopital Lariboisiere in Paris). 
Marochetti followed in the footsteps of the sculptor John Gibson in his promotion of sculptural polychromy. His most spectacular excursion in this line was a coloured marble statuette of Queen Victoria as 'Queen of Peace', exhibited in the Bayswater studios of the society photographer Camille Silvy in 1862 (lost; photograph, National Portrait Gallery, London). 
On the death of Prince Albert in 1861, Queen Victoria chose Marochetti to execute the private monument to the prince and herself for the Royal Mausoleum at Frogmore, in Windsor Great Park. This tomb, with its four kneeling bronze angels, is one of his finest achievements. He seems to have had less success with the seated figure of the prince, designed as centrepiece for the national memorial for Kensington Gardens in London. His second model had just been completed when he himself died, and the queen deemed the portrait figure unworthy of the monument. A new statue was commissioned from the Irish sculptor John Henry Foley. 
Marochetti died suddenly at Passy, near Paris, on 29 December 1867 and was buried in the cemetery of Vaux-sur-Seine. The elder of his two sons, Maurizio (Maurice) Marochetti, entered the Italian diplomatic service but also practised as a sculptor. 


@@@@@


doc= 18086


Marrable, Frederick (bap. 1819, d. 1872), architect, was baptized on 19 January 1819, the son of Sir Thomas Smith Marrable, secretary of the board of green cloth to George IV and William IV, and his wife, Charlotte. He was articled to the architect Edward Blore, and on the expiration of his time studied abroad. On his return he established a small private practice from an office in Lancaster Place, next to Waterloo Bridge, London, but his career did not flourish until 1856, when he was appointed superintending architect to the newly established Metropolitan Board of Works. This difficult office involved the settling of compensation claims, especially in connection with the building of new streets, and the writing of innumerable reports, and through it he gained the esteem of his profession. The main improvements carried out under his superintendency were Garrick Street (1857-61), Southwark Street (1857-64), and Burdett Road (1858-62), which served as part of an improved approach to Victoria Park from Limehouse; he also prepared an unexecuted design for Holborn Viaduct, eventually built in 1864-9 by the city corporation, designed and built the offices of the Metropolitan Board of Works in Spring Gardens, near Trafalgar Square (1860; dem.), but resigned his post in 1861 on the grounds that he was grossly underpaid (the board responded by offering to increase his salary by $200 to $1000, but he refused to reconsider). He was succeeded by George Vulliamy, but continued to work privately for the board on compensation cases. On 2 September 1856 he married the painter Madeline Cockburn (1833-1916) ['see 'Marrable, Madeline Frances Jane]; the couple had two children. 
Marrable's most important surviving building is the Garrick Club, Garrick Street (1860), a competent essay in the Italian Renaissance manner, which he also employed in the board's offices and in Archbishop Tenison's School in Leicester Square (1869; dem.). He also designed the church of St Peter, Deptford (1866-70), and that of St Mary Magdalen, St Leonards, Sussex (1852; enlarged 1872). Marrable resided at 28 Avenue Road, Regent's Park, and on 22 June 1872 went to Witley in Surrey to inspect the buildings of the Bethlehem Hospital for Convalescents. While thus engaged he was taken ill, and died almost immediately. 


@@@@@


doc= 18087


Marras, Giacinto (1810-1883), singer, was born on 6 July 1810 at Naples, the son of the Cavaliere Giovanni Marras and his wife, Maria Biliotti, a famous Florentine beauty. His father was court painter to the grand duke of Tuscany and the sultan of Turkey, and was himself a son of the Roman poet Angelica Mosca. In 1820 Giacinto entered the preparatory school of the Real Collegio di Musica at Naples. Shortly afterwards, probably on account of his success in the soprano part of Bellini's first opera, 'Adelson e Salvini', performed in the college theatre, for which he was chosen by the composer because of the beauty of his voice, he was elected to a free scholarship at the college, where his masters for composition and singing were Niccolo Zingarelli and Girolamo Crescentini, and Bellini and Michael Costa were sub-professors. While studying in Naples he sang in and wrote music for the city's churches. 
On leaving the college Marras made a professional tour through Italy, and in 1835 he was invited by the marquess of Anglesey and the duke of Devonshire to visit England. He was immediately engaged for most of the important concerts, including those of the Philharmonic Society and the Ancient Concerts. In 1842 he made a concert tour of Russia, and he had such success at St Petersburg that Tsar Nicholas offered him the post of director of court music, which he declined. He later sang in Vienna, Naples, and Paris. 
In 1846 Marras settled permanently in England, and he was naturalized on 12 January 1850. In 1855 he turned down an offer of the principal professorship of singing at the Royal Academy of Music, and was later elected an honorary fellow. About 1860 he started his Apres-midis Musicales at his house at 10 Hyde Park Gate. Between 1870 and 1873 he made a successful tour through India, and in 1879 he went to Cannes and Nice, where he made his last public appearances. In 1883 he left Cannes for Monte Carlo for change of air, after a severe attack of bronchitis, and died at the Hotel de Londres, Monte Carlo, on 8 May 1883. He was buried at Cannes in the protestant cemetery, close to the memorial to the duke of Albany. He had married his pupil Lilla Stephenson, daughter of a major in the 6th dragoon guards, and they had one daughter, later Madame Schulz, who became a singer. 
During his long career Marras made many operatic tours with performers including Fanny Tacchinardi-Persiani, Jeanne Castellan, and Jan Pischek, and he sang the leading tenor parts in most of the Italian operas then in vogue. He was equally at home in oratorio and chamber music. As a teacher of singing he was much in demand, and among his pupils were the duchess of Cambridge, Princess Mary of Cambridge, and the grand duchess of Mecklenburg-Strelitz. He composed more than a hundred songs, mainly in Italian. His 'Lezioni di canto' (1849) and 'Elementi vocali' (1850) were important contributions to the art of singing, for which the king of Naples sent Marras a gold medal. Marras also composed an opera, 'Sardanapalus'. Though never publicly performed, it met with considerable success when given privately at Lord Dudley's house, Witley Court. 


@@@@@


doc= 18088


Marrat, William (1772-1852), topographer and teacher of mathematics, was born on 6 April 1772 at Sibsey, Lincolnshire, the son of John and Jane Marrat. Self-taught, he acquired a broad knowledge of literature and science, as well as French and German, and his writing on mechanics demonstrates a familiarity with continental mathematics. 
For some years Marrat followed the trade of a printer and publisher at Boston, Lincolnshire. At other times he taught mathematics, both in Lincolnshire, and in New York, where he lived from 1817 to 1821. For most of his adult life he contributed articles to the popular press. His attempts to establish similar journals on his own behalf, however, met with little success; while in America he published the 'Scientific Journal', which ran for only nine issues in 1818; the magazine which he and Pishey Thompson had edited from Boston, Lincolnshire, 'The Enquirer, or, Literary, Mathematical, and Philosophical Repository', was issued only during 1811-12. Marrat also wrote on the topography of his native county. His 'History of Lincolnshire', written during 1814-16, was stopped after three volumes covering Holland and much of Kesteven, Marrat alleged, through Sir Joseph Banks's refusal to allow access to his papers, but his 'Historical Description of Stamford' appeared in 1816. 
On his return to England Marrat settled at Copperas Hill, Liverpool, where he published lunar tables, compiled tide tables for the port, and wrote his 'Elements of Mechanical Philosophy' (1825). From 1833 to 1836 he taught mathematics in a school at Exeter, but on the death of his wife (whose identity is not known), he returned to Liverpool where his son, Frederick Price Marrat, was a conchologist at the Liverpool Museum. He died at his son's house, 15 White Mill Street, on 26 March 1852, and was buried at the city's necropolis. 


@@@@@


doc= 18089


Marre, John (d. 1408), prior of Doncaster and theologian, was born in the village of Marr, near Doncaster. He was traditionally thought to have entered the Carmelite order in Doncaster, but as this house was not founded until 1351, he must have joined the order in York and undertaken his early studies there, for he was ordained subdeacon in York on 18 December 1350, deacon on 11 June 1351, and priest on 17 December 1351. He completed his theology at Oxford, incepting as a doctor of theology and lecturing there. On 26 February 1377 he was one of the commissioners appointed by the king to settle a dispute in the university. Later he returned to Doncaster, where he was prior until his death on 18 March 1408. He was buried in the choir with the epitaph: 'Jesus Christ have mercy on br. John Marre; whose body is buried in this tomb' (BL, Harley MS 3838, fol. 88). During his period at Oxford Marre was a noted theologian opposed to Wyclif, against whose beliefs he wrote a set of 'determinationes'. In addition to his lectures on the 'Sentences', Bale records a work by Marre on the epigrams of Martial, and a compendium of extracts from other authors with an index, all now lost. 


@@@@@


doc= 18090


Marriott, Charles (1811-1858), Church of England clergyman and college teacher, was born at the rectory, Church Lawford, near Rugby, on 24 August 1811, the third of the five children of the rector of the parish, John Marriott (1780-1825), and his wife, Mary Ann (died 1821), the daughter of Thomas and Ann Harris. His father also held the curacy of Broadclyst in Devon, and, on account of his mother's poor health, the family mainly lived there during Marriott's youth. Charles received his elementary education at the village school. Both his parents died while Marriott was still a boy, and he was privately educated at Rugby by his aunts and a private tutor in Shropshire. He was a day pupil at Rugby School in 1825, but his delicate health led to his rapid removal. In March 1829 Marriott entered at Exeter College, Oxford, and in the autumn won an open scholarship at Balliol. George Moberly, afterwards bishop of Salisbury, was his college tutor, and exercised great influence over him. In his undergraduate years Marriott showed great ability and application, and when in Michaelmas term 1832 he took a first class in classics and a second in mathematics, there was some surprise that he had missed a double first. At Easter 1833 he was elected a fellow of Oriel, was ordained deacon, and was at once appointed mathematical lecturer, and afterwards tutor of the college. He took his MA in 1835. 
At Oriel Marriott fell under the influence of John Henry Newman, and became his devoted disciple. In February 1839, after spending the winter in southern Europe, he became principal of the Diocesan Theological College at Chichester, at the invitation of Bishop William Otter, and was ordained priest on 19 May, Whitsunday. Although the numbers of students were small, the college was one of the first residential exercises in priestly formation in the Church of England. After two years' conscientious work ill health obliged Marriott to resign: he returned to Oriel and was appointed subdean and later dean of the college, taking his BD in 1848. On Newman's advice he declined Bishop George Augustus Selwyn's invitation to accompany him to New Zealand (1841), though they were to maintain a warm correspondence; his poor health similarly prevented him from joining Newman's community at Littlemore. 
Marriott remained a close friend of Newman during the latter's years of increasing alienation from the Church of England, though his confidence in his own position does not appear to have wavered. On Newman's secession in 1845 Marriott to a great extent took Newman's place in Oxford, and increasingly became one of E. B. Pusey's most valuable allies. He had been prominent in the organization of Pusey's defence when the latter was suspended from preaching in 1843; later Pusey sought Marriott's advice on the controversial developments of the late 1840s, including the building of St Saviour's, Leeds, and Priscilla Lydia Sellon's early attempt to establish an Anglican sisterhood. Marriott also provided Pusey with some of the historical information that formed part of his controversial writings. There was, moreover, no doubt about Marriott's unshaken loyalty to the university. He became the correspondent, confessor, and spiritual adviser of many within it, especially young men, and was influential in keeping a large number of Newman's followers in the Church of England in the late 1840s and early 1850s. In 1850 Marriott was appointed vicar of the university church of St Mary the Virgin, which was in the gift of his college. A convinced celibate, he threw himself with his usual thoroughness into his parochial work. When cholera and smallpox broke out in 1854, he fearlessly visited sufferers and caught the latter disease himself. His sermons were always effective, though he was no orator, and it was in personal contact that he made his most profound mark. Edward King, later bishop of Lincoln, wrote: 'If I have any good in me, I owe it to Charles Marriott' (Burgon, 372). 
Marriott had an abiding interest in education. He supported Henry Stevens, rector of Bradfield, Berkshire, and his newly founded Bradfield College, and made unsuccessful efforts to establish a hall for poor students in Oxford. He acquired possession of Newman's buildings at Littlemore 'partly because I did not wish that he should be embarrassed with them, and that any of his new friends should be led to urge him to put a Roman colony there, which would be no good to them and a great annoyance to us' (Charles Marriott to Fitzherbert Marriott, [12 April] 1846, Marriott MSS). The buildings were used to house a printing press for religious works, a scheme that caused Marriott endless worry and expenditure, though he grew into the administrative and commercial side of publishing. He also threw himself into a commercial scheme at Oxford, named the Universal Purveyor, an attempt to regulate the quality and price of daily essentials. It was started for the most benevolent purposes, but was quite out of his experience, and became a fruitful source of anxiety. Marriott was at the same time a member of the hebdomadal council, and 'took a considerable part in working the new constitution of the university' (Church, 91). The variety and pressure of his work damaged his health: on 29 June 1855 he suffered a stroke, which left him partially paralysed and hampered his speech. On 23 August he was moved to Bradfield, where he lived with the curate, his devoted brother John, for three years. He died there on 15 September 1858, and was buried in a vault under the south transept of Bradfield parish church on 20 September. 
Marriott's reputation was out of all proportion to the number of works published under his name; but much of his most valuable work appeared without acknowledgement of his authorship. In 1843 he published 'Sermons Preached before the University and in other Places', in 1849 'Reflections in a Lent Reading of the Epistle to the Romans', and in 1850 'Sermons Preached in Bradfield Church, Oriel College Chapel, and other Places'. Besides numerous single sermons, lectures, and pamphlets, he also published 'Hints to Devotion' (1848). After his death his brother John edited his 'Lectures on the Epistle to the Romans' (1859), which had been delivered at St Mary's during the last two years of his incumbency; they were the only results of what was intended to be the great work of his life, a commentary on the epistle to the 'Romans', which was to be his contribution to a commentary on the 'Bible' projected by Pusey but never completed. From 1841 to the time of his stroke, Marriott edited the 'Library of the Fathers' in conjunction with Pusey and Keble. It was Marriott who undertook most of the work: Pusey, in the advertisement to the thirty-ninth volume, while paying a graceful tribute to his departed friend, frankly admitted that 'upon Charles Marriott's editorial labours 'The Library of the Fathers' had, for some years, wholly depended' (p. iii). In 1852 Marriott also edited, as part of a series of the original texts of the fathers, Theodoret's 'Interpretatio in omnes B. Pauli epistolas', and in May 1855 he became the first editor of the 'Literary Churchman', in the first seven numbers of which he wrote at least sixteen articles. He edited, for the use of Chichester students, 'Canons of the Apostles' (1841) in Greek, with the English version and notes of John Johnson of Cranbrook; 'Analecta Christiana' (1844-8), patristic readings intended for the use of Bishop Selwyn's ministerial candidates; and four of St Augustine's shorter treatises (1848). 


@@@@@


doc= 18091


Marriott, Sir James (1730-1803), judge and politician, was born on 29 October 1730, probably at Twinstead Hall, Essex, the son of Benjamin Marriott, a Hatton Garden attorney, and his wife, Esther (died 1771), daughter of Abraham Chambers of Twinstead. He entered Trinity Hall, Cambridge, on 17 June 1746, was elected a scholar on 27 October 1747, and graduated LLB on 17 June 1751. In November 1755 he altered his intended profession from the church to the law 'for family reasons' (Marriott to the duke of Newcastle, BL, Add. MS 32860, fol. 465). His mother's second husband, Everard Sayer, had been a prominent civilian lawyer. Marriott took his LLD on 25 March 1757 and entered the College of Advocates on 3 November. He published two pamphlets on topical controversies over neutrals' rights but it was neither his legal talents nor the very slender literary accomplishments exemplified by his contributions to the university's verses on several public occasions that secured him advancement. 
In 1754 Marriott was employed to arrange the library of the university's chancellor, Thomas Pelham-Holles, first duke of Newcastle, and proclaimed himself his 'most devoted dependant' (15 Feb 1755, BL, Add. MS 32852, fol. 495), zealously furthering his patron's interests in Cambridge, where he became a fellow of his college in 1756, and in Suffolk. 
In 1760 Marriott wooed the nineteen-year-old Hester Salusbury (later Mrs Thrale) but found her indifferent and her father hostile. Devoted to his mother, he never married but was more persevering and promiscuous in his political pursuits. Marriott was an indefatigable, insatiable, and indiscriminate suitor for patronage and although he was made receiver of land tax for Suffolk, he was disappointed by Newcastle's tardiness in finding him a seat in the House of Commons and when George III became king he shamelessly sought the favour of the king's new ministers while trying unsuccessfully to avoid alienating the Pelhams. His election as master of Trinity Hall (June 1764) owed more to college politics than ministerial favour but on 9 October he was made king's advocate by John Montagu, fourth earl of Sandwich, secretary of state, albeit only 'because it absolutely now goes a-begging' ('Jenkinson Papers', 299). He served as vice-chancellor of the university in 1767, but was disappointed in his hopes of augmenting by public subscription a legacy of $500 which Walter Titley had left at the vice-chancellor's disposal, in order to erect an amphitheatre for concerts and lectures to his own designs. 
Still avid for preferment, Marriott put himself forward in 1768 for the vacant professorship of modern history but Thomas Gray was preferred and despite his importunities (which drove one prime minister, Augustus Fitzroy, third duke of Grafton, to distraction), he obtained nothing more until October 1778, when he was knighted (9 October) and appointed judge in Admiralty (12 October). 
As king's advocate Marriott had shown himself capable of effective legal argument, but as a judge he did not enhance the standing of his court despite the opportunities presented by two wars. Described in his youth as 'gay and volatile' (Coote, 125), he never acquired the discretion needed for judicial office and his courtroom manner was said rather to resemble 'the jocular effusions of the president of a festive meeting' (ibid.) than a judge. He was also prone to intemperate outbursts, notably against the American colonists and eminent jurists. Roscoe's verdict that he did 'not leave a single judgment of historical value' (p. 37) is severe, but there is little reason to regret that the only collected reports of his court are those he himself began publishing in retirement. A more valuable undertaking was his compilation of the forms and practice of the court, 'Formulare instrumentarum' (1802); freely drawn on by American writers, it was a major influence on American admiralty law. 
In 1781 Marriott finally achieved his ambition of becoming MP for Sudbury in Suffolk, not far from Twinstead. He was initially a supporter of North's ministry and wrote a pamphlet in defence of British conduct towards the Americans, but he proved very maladroit and earned a footnote in history when, to the great merriment of the Commons, he solemnly rebutted the colonists' claim to 'no taxation without representation' by arguing that they were 'represented by the members for Kent, since in the charters of the thirteen provinces they are declared to be 'part and parcel of the manor of Greenwich'' ('The Parliamentary History of England from the Earliest Times to 1803', vol. 22, col. 1184). In keeping with his past record he deserted North on the fall of his administration and attached himself to William Petty, second earl of Shelburne, voting for the peace and Fox's 'India Bill'. He did not seek re-election in 1784 but was returned for Sudbury in 1796 in a rather questionable manner when, having initially supported the sitting member, John Coxe Hippisley, and argued against a contest, he allowed several influential citizens to persuade him to stand himself, Hippisley withdrawing in disgust. A silent supporter of William Pitt the younger, he hoped in 1801 to be able to resign his seat in favour of a relative of his friend Charles Jenkinson, first earl of Liverpool, but in the event retained it until the dissolution in 1802. 
After quarrelling with the fellows, Marriott seldom visited his college, though he did present it with a bust of Lord Mansfield, whom he greatly admired. In 1786 he successfully evaded a second term as university vice-chancellor on the plea that judicial office exempted him. He was treasurer of Doctors' Commons in 1780 and in the 1790s he sat on the board of longitude. In 1793 he drafted a bill to remove some anomalies in prize law, but towards the end of the century his inability to cope with the court's heavy wartime workload led to memorials seeking his removal. When he resigned on 26 October 1798 with a pension of $2000 p.a., the king wrote that his replacement by Sir William Scott was 'highly advantageous to the credit of the court of admiralty' (George III, 'Later Corr.', 3.147). Marriott made many alterations to Twinstead Hall, where he died peacefully on 21 March 1803, and rebuilt the church, where he was buried on 29 March. 


@@@@@


doc= 18092


Marriott, William (d. 1653), reputed gourmand and lawyer, was the son of John Marriott of Ashton, Northamptonshire. He is known variously as John (the name given him in the pamphlets which made him notorious) and Ben (the name under which he appears in the anecdotes retailed in Will Oldys's commonplace book in 1718). But it was as William Marriott, gentleman, that he was admitted to Gray's Inn on 3 August 1605. He was called to the bar there six years later, on 8 November 1611, and at the time of his death in 1653 was its eldest member. 
Marriott was thrust into the public limelight in 1652 with the publication of a pamphlet entitled 'The great eater of Graye's Inn, or, The life of Mr. Marriot the cormorant, wherein is set forth all the exploits and actions by him performed, with many pleasant stories of his travells into Kent and other places'. The author was listed only as 'G. F., gent.', but is now generally accepted to be George Fidge, writer of many titillating pamphlets. The forty-page work is highly entertaining and wholly libellous. Grotesque accounts of how Marriott devoured a meal for twenty men, voided a worm, and consumed dogs and monkeys baked in pies are all colourfully related. Outlandish recipes, claiming to be Marriott's own, form the latter section of the pamphlet. These recipes were reprinted separately in the same year under the title 'The English Mountebank, or, A Physical Dispensatory'. Its purported author was J. Marriott himself. These, and the charge that Marriott knew 'better how to handle a chin of beef than a cause', provoked his friends to rise to his defence. 'A letter to Mr. Marriot from a friend of his, wherein his name is redeemed from that detraction G. F., gent., hath endeavoured to fasten upon him by a scandalous and defamatory libel' was published 'for the friends of Mr. Marriott' in 1652. It deplored the 'libel of lies, scandal and defamation' of the previous works, and lauded Marriott as the 'most ancient' member of Gray's Inn whose forty-seven years' experience, abilities, and knowledge of the law were widely reputed. 
This rebuttal was not sufficient to save Marriott's name from infamy. Charles Cotton's 'Poems on Several Occasions' (1689) include two on Marriott, entitled 'The Greater Eater of Gray's Inn' and 'On Marriott'. Both revile the man and celebrate his death. Recording further Marriott lore, Oldys relates in his commonplace book how the infant Marriott 'sucked his Mother and a half dozen Nurses Dry' and how, at the age of fifteen, he 'could Master a Turkey at a Meal' (BL, Add. MS 4245, fol. 97'r'). Such tales made Marriott's name synonymous with gluttony, and John Dunton mentioned in his 'Life and Errors' (1705) how the brisk New England air made him eat 'like a second Marriott' (Dunton, 90). The motivation for Fidge's original attack on Marriott is lost, though it is possible that he had either pecuniary gain or revenge for some ill deed in mind. There is little to suggest that the tales of Marriott had any foundation in fact. In spite of this, the pamphlet endured and was reprinted in a limited edition in 1871 'for subscribers only'. Marriott's burial in London on 25 November 1653 is recorded in Richard Smyth's 'Obituary'. He died unmarried and, according to George Fidge, penniless. 


@@@@@


doc= 18093


Marriott, John (1780-1825), poet and Church of England clergyman, born at Cotesbach Hall, Cotesbach, near Lutterworth, Leicestershire, and baptized at Cotesbach church on 11 September 1780, was the third and youngest son of Robert Marriott DCL (died 1808), rector of Cotesbach and Gilmorton, and his wife, Elizabeth (died 1819), daughter and only child of George Stow of Walthamstow, Essex. He entered Rugby School at midsummer 1788, and matriculated from Christ Church, Oxford, on 10 October 1798. He was one of two who achieved first-class honours in classics in the first honours school in 1802, and was awarded a BA and a studentship at Christ Church. In 1806 he proceeded MA. He was ordained priest in the Church of England on 22 December 1805. His feelings about Oxford, and a clue to his reason for leaving, are contained in a manuscript 'Sonnet Composed under the Shadow of Joe Pullen, a Tree in Headington Hill' of 1806 (Bodl. Oxf., MS top. Oxon. e. 364, fol. 120). 
Marriott went to Dalkeith, Scotland, in 1804 to become tutor to George Henry, Lord Scott, brother of the fifth duke of Buccleuch. By 1805 he was describing himself as 'half a Scotchman' (Sharpe, 236). Robert Southey, meeting him then, was impressed by his ability to 'tell by the track what horse has past ('sic') and how long ago', 'as in a savage country' ('Southey's Common-place Book', 530). Marriott's naturalization is testified to by his neighbour Sir Walter Scott, who dedicated the introduction to the second canto of 'Marmion' (1808) to his friend, celebrating their enjoyment of hunting and poetry. Intervals 'between each merry chase' were free from dullness: '
For we had fair resource in store, 

In Classic and in Gothic lore; 

We marked each memorable scene, 

And held poetic talk between. 

' Although Marriott disapproved of the introductory epistles he realized that his name stood 'a fair chance of riding down to posterity on the back of one of them' (Sharpe, 308). 
Marriott's other claim to posterity's attention lies in his own writing. Fired by the enthusiasm in Scott's circle for ballads, he contributed three poems to the fourth volume of the 'Minstrelsy of the Scottish Border': 'The Feast of Spurs', 'On a Visit Paid to the Ruins of Melrose Abbey', and 'Archie Armstrong's Aith'. Southey describes in his 'Common-Place Book' an evening in 1805 with Scott and Marriott reciting ballads. He did not realize that a 'deplorably bad business upon Purlin Jane' (p. 530) was Marriott's 'Pearlin Jean', in which a jilted girl's ghost takes revenge. This poem and others on Scottish subjects, and several letters by Marriott, are published in 'Letters from and to Charles Kirkpatrick Sharpe'. 
Marriott's tribute to Scott is his poem 'The Poet Released from the Law', which appeared in the 'Edinburgh Annual Register, 1809' (1811), 652-3. Composed in 1806, the poem concludes: '
Oh may it be my lot to wander near, 

Some strains of his enchanting minstrelsy to hear! 

' That wish, and his intention to marry Mary Scott, of the Buccleuch family, and set up house with his pupil was foiled early in 1807 by a pulmonary disorder, which forced him to resign his post and retreat to Penzance. On 28 April 1807 he became rector of Church Lawford and Newnham Chapelry in Warwickshire, a benefice in the gift of the Buccleuch family. On 19 April 1808 he married Mary Anne Harris (died 1821), daughter of a Rugby solicitor, Thomas Harris, and his wife, Ann Harrison. Her poor health caused them to move to Devon, where Marriott served as curate of St James, Exeter, St Lawrence, Exeter, and Broadclyst. During this time Marriott wrote several hymns, including 'Thou whose almighty word', 'A saint, O would that I could claim', and 'When Christ our human form did bear'. He also turned to secular verse, and wrote his best known poem, the gently satirical 'Devonshire Lane', which describes the narrowness and bumpiness of marriage. It is printed in several places, including Joanna Baillie's 'Collection of Poems' (1823) and William Everitt's 'Devonshire Scenery' (1884), which also contains 'A Devonshire Sketch'. The poems' merits are wit, humour, and intelligence, rather than metrical ingenuity or originality. A volume of Marriott's autograph poems is held by Exeter Central Library. 
Marriott collected and published his sermons in 1818, and after his death his sons John and Charles edited another volume in 1838. His sympathies were with the low-church party. In the summer of 1824, being diagnosed with 'ossification of the brain' ('GM', 1825), Marriott moved to London for medical treatment. He died there on 31 March 1825 and was interred in the burial-ground of St Giles-in-the-Fields adjacent to Old St Pancras Church. Marriott had five children: John, Thomas, Charles Marriott (1811-1858), George, and Mary Ann. 


@@@@@


doc= 18094


Marriott, Wharton Booth (1823-1871), schoolmaster, seventh son of George Wharton Marriott (1777/8-1833), barrister and magistrate at the Westminster police court, and his wife, Selina Anne, only child of Revd Fitzherbert Adams of Charwelton, Northamptonshire, and rector of Ulcombe, Kent, was born at 32 Queen Square, Bloomsbury, London, on 7 November 1823. Following the death of his father, friends paid for his education at Eton College, 1838-43. He was a scholar of Trinity College, Oxford, from 1843 to 1846, and an officer of the Union Society after taking a second in classics in 1847. He graduated BCL in 1851, MA in 1856, and BD in 1870. He was elected a Petrean fellow of Exeter College on 30 June 1846, but vacated his fellowship by marrying, on 22 April 1851, at Bletchingley, Surrey, Julia, youngest daughter of his godfather William Soltau of Clapham. 
Marriott was ordained in 1849 by Bishop Wilberforce and intended to serve in Little Brickhill, Buckinghamshire, but instead took up an appointment as assistant master at Eton in 1850. He never held any benefice, but was a preacher by licence from the bishop in the diocese of Oxford. In 1853 he became a housemaster. He also found time for ministerial work among the poor, holding mission services on a Thames barge for those who would not go into a church. Marriott was on the board of guardians and worked for the Society for Improving the Dwellings of the Poor. 
Marriott was influenced by his cousin, Charles Marriott, a fellow of Oriel and vicar of St Mary's and a leader in the Oxford Movement, but was not himself a party man. In 1865 the ritual controversy led him to the question of ecclesiastical ceremony and vestments. He published his opinions in 'Vestiarium Christianum: the origin and gradual development of the dress of holy ministry in the church' (1868) and other works. In 1857-9 he wrote a series of letters on the eucharist in the 'Clerical Journal', and his correspondence with a friend, Revd Thomas Thellusson Carter, rector of Clewer, originating from the declaration issued in Oxford in 1866, was published in two parts, 1868-9. 
Marriott enjoyed the study of language and the 'Bible'. He planned and partly prepared a critical concordance to the 'New Testament' in 1863. This was later set aside in favour of his antiquarian researches. He edited selections from Ovid and was a contributor to Smith's 'Dictionary of Christian Antiquities'. On 30 May 1857 he was elected a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries, and a member of the council in 1871. After his resignation from Eton in 1860 due to ill health, Marriott became absorbed in his literary work and in preaching in his neighbouring church. He became select preacher in Oxford in 1868 and Grinfield lecturer on the 'Septuagint' in 1871. Marriott delivered only one of these lectures, and, before he was able to take up his appointment as Bampton lecturer, died at Eton College on 16 December 1871. His funeral was conducted on 21 December by the dean of Windsor. His wife died in April of the following year. 


@@@@@


doc= 18095


Marrowe, George (fl. 1437), alchemist and Augustinian canon, is known only from a single tract preserved in two later transcripts, made from an 'anceynte booke written in parchment' which survive among the Ashmole manuscripts at the Bodleian Library. The earlier of these, in Bodleian, MS Ashmole 1423, was made in 1596 by Thomas Mountford, a London doctor and collector of alchemical manuscripts. The second, made in 1600 and found in MS Ashmole 1406 in Bodleian Library, is probably in the hand of another London doctor, Simon Forman (died 1611), who had read and written his name into Mountford's text in 1598. The heading of Marrowe's treatise, which is dated 1437, states that he was a canon of Nostell Priory in Yorkshire. Monastic libraries were the traditional repositories of alchemical learning. Marrowe's tract is a record of alchemical practice, comprising sixty-two recipes, forty-seven in English, eleven in Latin, two in German, and one each in French and Italian, all making frequent use of the symbolic alphabet of the Hermetic vocabulary. 
Later in the fifteenth century, probably after 1480, another monk, described only as Brandon, wrote a verse coda to the treatise, claiming that Marrowe had bestowed his receipts on him and setting him on a par with Lully (a mythologized Ramon Lull) and George Ripley. In fact, it is likely that Ripley, a fellow Augustinian from another Yorkshire house, Bridlington Priory, knew Marrowe personally; and it is possible that the title of one of Ripley's most famous works, 'Medulla alchemiae' ('The marrow of alchemy'), was a deliberate play on words. 


@@@@@


doc= 18096


Marryat, Florence (1833-1899), novelist, was born at Brighton, Sussex, on 9 July 1833 (and was baptized at St Nicholas's Church, Brighton, on 21 August 1833), the youngest of eleven children of the novelist and naval officer Captain Frederick Marryat (1792-1848) and his wife, Catherine (1791?-1883), daughter of Sir Stephen Shairp of Houston, Linlithgowshire. She was educated at home and developed a love of reading, which she always maintained. Although her parents legally separated when she was an infant and her childhood was divided between them, she remained particularly devoted to her father and to his memory, reverting to his name professionally and naming her oldest son after him. On 13 June 1854 she married, at Penang, Malaya, Thomas Ross Church (1831-1926), a career officer in the Madras staff corps of the British army in India; with him she travelled over nearly the whole of India, before returning to England in 1860. Marryat and Church had children (seven of whom survived to adulthood) but divorced in 1879. On 5 June 1879 she married her second husband, Colonel Francis Lean (1832?-1902), an officer in the Royal Marine light infantry. Both Church and Lean survived her, though she mentioned neither in her will. 
Marryat wrote her first novel, 'Love's Conflict' (1865), to distract her mind while nursing her children with scarlet fever. Between then and the year of her death she published over seventy-five novels, primarily popular romances for women, many of which were translated into German, French, Swedish, Flemish, and Russian. Her books were popular in the United States, though she received few American royalties because the lack of international copyright laws allowed American publishers to pirate her work freely. Because she was a popular contributor to the subscription-based lending libraries, many of her novels were published in the three-volume format prescribed by the libraries. While most of her heroines superficially conform to Victorian feminine paradigms, she advocated that women should be capable of earning their own livings within the context of femininity; her heroines are often strong-minded, independent working women -- actresses, writers, teachers, nurses, and, in one instance, even an estate manager. 
Between 1872 and 1876 Marryat edited the monthly periodical 'London Society', which featured engravings and light literature aimed at the middle and upper classes. In 1872 she published in two volumes the 'Life and Letters of Captain Marryat'; while it does not present a complete portrait of her father, the memoir does give details of their family life. A convert to Roman Catholicism, in her later years, she was attracted to spiritualism, a fascination sanctioned by her spiritual director, Father Dalgairns of the Brompton Oratory in London. 'There is No Death' (1891) gives a detailed account of the various mediums with whom she came in contact and of the seances she attended. 'The Risen Dead' (1893) and 'The Spirit World' (1894), as well as several of her novels, deal with the subject. Other non-fiction works include 'Tom Tiddler's Ground' (1886), an account of her travels in the United States, and 'Gup' (1868), sketches of garrison life in India. 
A woman of varied accomplishments, Marryat added to the roles of author and novelist those of playwright, comedy actress, operatic singer, lecturer, and entertainer; she also managed a school of journalism. On the advice of her doctors following a lengthy illness, she became an actress, performing in a drama that she had written entitled 'Her World Against a Lie', produced in London in 1881. At about this time she began to state her year of birth as 1838. Marryat died at St John's Wood, London, where she lived, on 27 October 1899, aged sixty-six, leaving her assets to two of her children and to a close male companion. She was buried at Kensal Green cemetery in London. 


@@@@@


doc= 18097


Marryat, Frederick (1792-1848), naval officer and novelist, was born at Catherine Court, Tower Hill, London, on 10 July 1792. Of Huguenot descent, he was the second son of Joseph Marryat (1757-1824) of Wimbledon, who was MP for Horsham and later for Sandwich, chairman of Lloyd's, and colonial agent for the island of Grenada, and grandson of Thomas Marryat. Frederick's mother, Charlotte (died 1854), daughter of Frederick Geyer of Boston, Massachusetts, was of German origin; one of the first women to be admitted a fellow of the Horticultural Society of London, Charlotte Marryat had a notable garden at Wimbledon House. 
Marryat received his early education at private schools, one of which was at Ponder's End, Middlesex. His boisterous temperament brought him into repeated trouble and several times he ran away, always with the intention of escaping to sea. At last, in September 1806, his father got him entered on board the frigate 'Imperieuse', commanded by Lord Cochrane. The service of the 'Imperieuse' was exceptionally active and brilliant, not only in its almost daily episodes of cutting out coasting vessels or privateers, storming batteries, and destroying telegraph stations, but also in the defence of the castle of Trinidad, near Rosas on the east coast of Spain, in November 1808, and in the attack on the French fleet in Basque Roads in April 1809. The daring and judgement of Cochrane were subsequently reproduced in Captain Savage of the 'Diomede' in 'Peter Simple' and Captain M -- -- in 'The King's Own'. In June the 'Imperieuse' sailed with the fleet on the Walcheren expedition, from which, in October, Marryat was invalided with fever. Before leaving the vessel he had formed friendships with William Napier and Houston Stewart which lasted life long. In 1810 he served in the 'Centaur', flagship of Sir Samuel Hood in the Mediterranean, and in 1811 was in the 'Aeolus' in the West Indies and on the coast of North America. He was afterwards in the 'Spartan' (Captain E. P. Brenton) on the same station, and was sent home in the sloop 'Indian' in September 1812. 
On 26 December 1812 Marryat was promoted to the rank of lieutenant, and in January 1813 was again sent out to the West Indies in the sloop 'Espiegle'. From her he was invalided in April, and though in 1814 he returned to the coast of North America as lieutenant of the frigate 'Newcastle', and assisted in the capture of several enemy merchant ships and privateers, his health gave way, and he went home in the spring of 1815. On 13 June he was made commander. 
In January 1819 Marryat married Catherine (1791?-1883), second daughter of Sir Stephen Shairp of Houston, Linlithgowshire, for many years consul-general in Russia. They had four sons and seven daughters before they separated in 1843. Marryat outlived all of his sons except the youngest, Frank, favourably known as the author of 'Borneo and the Indian Archipelago' (1848) and 'Mountains and Molehills, or, Recollections of a Burnt Journal' (1855), who died aged twenty-eight in 1855. Three of his daughters -- most successfully Florence Marryat -- were novelists. 
In June 1820 Marryat was appointed to the sloop 'Beaver', which was employed on the St Helena station until the death of Napoleon, when he came home in the 'Rosario' with dispatches. The 'Rosario' was afterwards employed in the channel for the prevention of smuggling, and was paid off in February 1822. Marryat's pamphlet published in 1822 attacking impressment injured his career and earned him the hostility of the duke of Clarence (later William IV). 
In March 1823 Marryat commissioned the 'Larne' for service in the East Indies, where he took an active part in the First Anglo-Burmese War. From May to September 1824 he was senior naval officer at Rangoon, and was officially thanked for his able and gallant co-operation with the troops. He was the first Royal Navy officer to use a steamship in wartime. The very sickly state of his ship obliged him to go to Penang, but by the end of December he was back at Rangoon, and in February 1825 he had the naval command of an expedition up the Bassein River, which occupied Bassein and seized the enemy magazines. In April 1825 he was appointed captain of the 'Tees', in which in early 1826 he returned to England, and on 26 December 1826 he was nominated a CB. In November 1828 he was appointed to the 'Ariadne', which he commanded at the Azores or at Madeira until November 1830, when he hot-headedly resigned on the nominal grounds of 'private affairs'. 
Marryat was known hitherto as a distinguished naval officer. He was made a CB because of his conduct in Burma. Having in 1818 sought recognition from the Royal Humane Society, Marryat was awarded the society's honorary medallion in 1821 for his design for a lifeboat and for his gallantry in saving life at sea. In addition he held certificates of having saved upwards of a dozen people by jumping overboard to help them, often endangering his own life. He was also elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1819, having been proposed by his schoolfriend Charles Babbage, mainly in recognition of his adaptation of Sir Home Popham's signalling system to a code for the mercantile marine (1817). This earned him a large and regular income and, some years later (19 June 1833), membership of the Legion d'honneur. 
In the meantime, while still in the 'Ariadne', Marryat wrote and in 1829 published a three-volume novel, 'The Naval Officer, or, Scenes and Adventures in the Life of Frank Mildmay', for which he received immediate payment of $400. The vivid and lifelike narrative of naval adventure, much of which he had experienced, took the public by storm: the book was a literary and financial success. He had already written 'The King's Own' (published in 1830), and, having settled down to his new profession of literature, he rapidly produced 'Newton Forster' (1832); 'Peter Simple' and 'Jacob Faithful' (both 1834); 'The Pacha of many Tales' (1835); 'Mr. Midshipman Easy', 'Japhet in Search of a Father', 'The Pirate and the Three Cutters' (all 1836); 'Snarleyyow, or, The Dog Fiend' (1837); 'The Phantom Ship' (1839); 'Poor Jack' (1840); 'Joseph Rushbrook, or, The Poacher' (1841); 'Percival Keene' (1842); 'The Privateer's Man' (1846); and 'Valerie', published, after his death, in 1849. 
But novel-writing was not Marryat's only literary work. From 1832 to 1835 he edited the liberal/radical journal the 'Metropolitan Magazine', and kept up a close connection with it for a year longer. In it most of his best novels first appeared: 'Newton Forster', 'Peter Simple', 'Jacob Faithful', 'Midshipman Easy', and 'Japhet', and, besides these, many miscellaneous articles afterwards published collectively as 'Olla Podrida' (1840). In 1836 he lived abroad, principally at Brussels, where he was popular as he spoke French fluently and was full of humorous stories. He spent 1837 and 1838 in Canada and the United States, his impressions of which he published as 'A Diary in America, with Remarks on its Institutions' (1839). 
After his return from America at the beginning of 1839 Marryat lived mainly in London or Wimbledon until his marriage broke down in 1843; he finally settled at Langham, in Norfolk, on a small farm that had been his for thirteen years but had brought in little rent. Notwithstanding a patrimony in excess of half a million pounds and the large sums he made by his novels, he seems to have been permanently short of money, owing partly to the ruin of his West Indian property, and partly to his own extravagance and carelessness. When in need of ready cash he drew cartoons, which were made into etchings by his friend George Cruikshank. When the readiness with which he had poured out novels of sea life at the rate of as many as three a year began to fail, he found a new source of profit in his popular books for children. He devoted himself chiefly to these during his last eight years. The series opened with 'Masterman Ready, or, The Wreck of the Pacific' (1841) and continued with 'Narrative of the travels and adventures of Monsieur Violet in California, Sonora, and western Texas' (1843), 'The Settlers in Canada' (1844), 'The Mission, or, Scenes in Africa' (1845), 'The Children of the New Forest' (1847), and 'The Little Savage' (1848-9, probably finished by Frank Marryat). 
The work told on Marryat's health, which was never very strong. He imagined that a change of occupation and scene might re-establish it, and in July 1847 applied for service afloat. The Admiralty's refusal to entertain his application so angered him that he broke a blood-vessel of the lungs. For six months he was seriously ill, and was barely recovering when the news of the death of his eldest son, Frederick, lost on the 'Avenger' on 20 December 1847, gave him a shock that proved fatal. He died at Langham on 9 August 1848. 
As a writer Marryat has been variously judged. He wrote quickly and often carelessly and was complained at by the critics, but his position as a story-teller was assured. He drew the material of his stories from his professional experience and knowledge: the terrible shipwreck, for instance, in 'The King's Own' is a coloured version of the loss of the 'Droits de l'homme', while 'Frank Mildmay' was avowedly autobiographical. Marryat made his sailors live, and in this and his robust sense of fun and humour lay the secret of his success, for, with the exception perhaps of 'The King's Own', his plots were poor, relying on lost heirs and other artificial narrative devices. His children's stories have held their place and several have been filmed. He also published several caricatures, both political and social. 


@@@@@


doc= 18098


Marryat, Thomas (1730-1792), physician, born in London, was descended from a Huguenot family and was educated for the Presbyterian ministry. He possessed great natural talents, a brilliant memory, and a love for literature. His appearance was, to say the least, plain, but his wit, though frequently coarse, was irresistible. From 1747 until 1749 he belonged to a poetical club which met at the Robin Hood, Butcher Row, the Strand, every Wednesday at five in the afternoon, and seldom parted until five the next morning. Among its members were Dr Richard Brookes, Moses Browne, Stephen Duck, Martin Madan, and Thomas Madox. Each member brought a piece of poetry, which was corrected and, if approved, thrown into the treasury from which the wants of the 'Gentleman's Magazine' and other periodicals were supplied. A supper and trials of wit followed; Marryat, whom Brookes nicknamed 'Sal Volatile', frequently kept the table amused, though he was never known to laugh himself. 
In 1754 Marryat was ordained a minister at Southwold, Suffolk. He married Sarah, the daughter of John Davy of Southwold; their first son, Joseph, father of the novelist Frederick Marryat, was born there on 8 October 1757. Marryat published his 'Medical Aphorisms' in 1756 or 1757. This was followed by his 'Therapeutics, a New Practice of Physic', published in Latin in 1758. It was re-titled 'The Art of Healing' for a pocket edition. Marryat gave up the ministry in 1760, but there is no evidence to support the claim that he studied medicine at Edinburgh University. It is said that for a while he sought practice in London, and that in 1762 he made a tour of continental medical schools, and subsequently visited America, obtaining practice where he could. 
On his return to the British Isles in 1766 Marryat resided for several years in co. Antrim and the northern parts of Ireland. Here he set aside two hours every day to non-paying patients, allowing him to test his medicines on them; in this he tended to administer enormous doses of drastic medicines regardless of the patient's constitution. For dysentery his favourite prescription was paper boiled in milk. The poor, however, maintained a high regard for his skills as a doctor. In February 1774 Marryat moved to Shrewsbury, but finally settled in Bristol about 1785. Here he delivered a course of lectures on therapeutics which was well attended. He also published a book called 'The Philosophy of Masons' (1790), a work that contained views which managed to offend even his best friends. Although his good fortune in restoring to health some patients who had been given up by other doctors gained him a reputation that quickly enabled him to achieve a good lifestyle, his improvident habits eventually reduced him to poverty. When Marryat found his friends deserting him, he fixed a note on the window of The Bush coffee-room, enquiring 'if any one remembered that there was such a person as Thomas Marryat' and reminding them that he 'still lived, or rather existed, in Horfield Road' (Marryat, xi). Despite his distress, however, he persistently refused assistance from his relatives. In 1791 he published a new edition of his 'Sentimental Fables for the Ladies'. Dedicated to Hannah More they had originally been published in Ireland. 
Marryat's manners were disagreeably blunt, and towards the end of his life he became morose; but he is represented as a man of integrity and of genuine kindness, especially to the poor. He died in Bristol on 29 May 1792, and was buried in the ground belonging to the Presbyterian chapel in Lewin's Mead, Brunswick Square, Bristol. 


@@@@@


doc= 18099


Marsden, John Buxton (1803-1870), ecclesiastical historian, was born at Liverpool. He was admitted sizar of St John's College, Cambridge, in April 1823 and he graduated BA in 1827 and MA in 1830. He was ordained in 1827 to the curacy of Burslem, Staffordshire, from where he moved to that of Harrow, Middlesex. There he married, on 10 April 1833, Elizabeth Evans, the daughter of the Revd B. Evans of Harrow. Subsequently, from 1833 to 1844, he held the rectory of Lower Tooting, Surrey, and from 1844 to 1851 he was vicar of Great Missenden, Buckinghamshire. In 1851 he became perpetual curate of St Peter, Dale End, Birmingham, where he remained until his death. 
Marsden was a liberal-minded evangelical: in 1847-8 he protested against the treatment of the broad-church Renn Dickson Hampden, who was attacked by Tractarians and evangelicals alike on his appointment to the see of Hereford. Marsden also edited the 'Christian Observer' from 1859 to 1869, and wrote three important works of church history, 'The history of the early puritans, from the Reformation to the opening of the civil war in 1642' (1850); 'The History of the Later Puritans, from the Opening of the Civil War to 1662' (1852); and the 'History of Christian Churches and Sects from the Earliest Ages of Christianity' (1856). He also wrote memoirs of several clergymen and published sermons and lectures. 
For five years before his death ill health incapacitated Marsden; he died on 16 June 1870 at 37 Highfield Road, Edgbaston, Birmingham. Two of his sons, Charles Bateman Marsden and John Frank Marsden, followed in their father's footsteps, also becoming clergymen. 


@@@@@


doc= 18100


Marsden, John Howard (1803-1891), antiquary, eldest son of William Marsden, curate of St George's Chapel, Wigan, and afterwards vicar of Eccles, was born at Wigan on 7 May 1803 and was admitted on 6 August 1817 into Manchester grammar school, where he was head scholar in 1822. He was an exhibitioner from the school to St John's College, Cambridge, where he was elected a scholar in 1822 on the Somerset foundation. In 1823 he won the Bell university scholarship. He graduated BA in 1826 and proceeded MA in 1829 and BD in 1836. In 1829 he gained the Seatonian prize, the subject of the prize poem being 'The Finding of Moses' (2nd edn, 1830). He was select preacher to the university in 1834, 1837, and 1847; was Hulsean lecturer on divinity in 1843 and 1844; and was from 1851 to 1865 the first Disney professor of archaeology, with the sole duty of giving one lecture a year. He published his first two lectures in 1852. 
In 1840 he married Caroline, elder daughter of William Moore, prebendary of Lincoln, and in the same year he was presented by his college to the rectory of Great Oakley, Essex, which he held until 1889, when he resigned it on account of old age. He also held for some years the rural deanery of Harwich. Having been elected canon residentiary of Manchester in 1858, he became rural dean of the deanery of Eccles, and he was one of the chaplains of James Prince Lee, first bishop of Manchester. Marsden died at his residence, Grey Friars, Colchester, on 24 January 1891, a very wealthy man. 
Marsden published various sermons and works on a wider range of other subjects. His first work was 'The Sacred Tree: a Tale of Hindostan' (1840). He then published on Sir Thomas More's 'Philomorus' (1842) and in 1844 and 1845 published his own Hulsean lectures. He wrote a history of the Gentlemen's Society at Spalding (1849) and 'College Life in the Reign of James I' (1851), derived from the autobiography of Sir Symonds D'Ewes. His article on classical works at Felix Hall appeared in 'Transactions of the Essex Archaeological Society' (1863), and he concluded with a memoir of William Martin Leake (1864) and 'Fasciculus' (1869), a collection of comic verses. 


@@@@@


doc= 18101


Marsden, Samuel (1765-1838), missionary and farmer, was born on 25 June 1765 at Bagley, near Farsley, Yorkshire, the eldest of the five surviving children of Thomas Marsden, butcher, and his wife, Bathsheba Brown. He went to school at Farsley, and subsequently worked for his uncle John Marsden, a blacksmith at Horsforth. His reputation as a lay preacher drew the attention of the evangelical Elland Society, which sought to train poor men for the ministry of the Church of England. Under the society's sponsorship he attended Hull grammar school, where he was taught by Joseph Milner and came into contact with William Wilberforce. In 1790 the society sent him to Magdalene College, Cambridge, but he cut short his university studies to respond to the call of the evangelical leader Charles Simeon for service in overseas missions. On 1 January 1793 he accepted the appointment of assistant to Richard Johnson, chaplain of New South Wales. On 14 March he wrote to Elizabeth (1772-1835), daughter of Thomas Fristan of Hull, inviting her to 'take up your Cross' (Mitchell Library, A1677, vol. 3, fols. 1-4) and share in his missionary labours. They married at Holy Trinity Church, Hull, on 21 April; a month later, on 26 May, Samuel was ordained at Exeter. In July they sailed for Australia. 
The Marsdens arrived to find Johnson, the senior chaplain, deep in conflict with the acting lieutenant-governor of New South Wales, Major Francis Grose, over the priorities urged by the secular and the religious authorities. The secular authorities were predominantly concerned with the maintenance of discipline among the convicts and were heavily influenced by the opportunities for material advancement available in the colony; these imperatives sat uneasily with the chaplains' religious mission to the convicts and settlers. Marsden was soon drawn into the materialism of the colony, making his home at Parramatta, some 14 miles west of Sydney, and acquiring a farm of considerable proportions: he sent the first commercial cargo of wool to England in 1811, and made important contributions in sheep-breeding and the marketing of wool. More importantly, in 1795 Governor Hunter, who had replaced Grose, made the chaplains magistrates. They saw their civil power as a means of 'bringing the inhabitants... under some proper government and subordination' (Yarwood, 50-51), but in the convict colony their moral and spiritual influence was undermined by their identification with the establishment of judges, gaolers, and floggers. Johnson left for England in 1800, worn out in mind and body, while Marsden acquired a reputation for severity as a magistrate, which he deserved in the light of his frequent recourse to flogging. He had come to doubt the possibility of reclaiming the souls of convicts, and believed that rigorous discipline was the only way to maintain morality in the penal colony. 
Marsden's evangelistic instincts were thus frustrated among the convicts and met with no greater success among the Australian Aborigines, and so he turned his energies to the Pacific islanders, and particularly the Maori of New Zealand, through the London Missionary Society (LMS) and the Church Missionary Society (CMS). In 1804 he became the agent for LMS operations in the Pacific. A prolonged visit to England in 1807-9 laid the foundations for a mission to the Maori, while also drawing attention to the state of the church in New South Wales and recruiting additional chaplains. He was encouraged by the CMS to establish a mission at the Bay of Islands in northern New Zealand, and he drew together a group of settlers to prepare the ground for the missionaries. The setting up of the mission was delayed by administrative and financial differences and government prohibition until 1814, when Marsden bought his own ship, the 'Active'; in December of that year he made the first of his seven voyages to New Zealand, and he preached his first sermon at Rangihoua on Christmas day 1814. He negotiated secure conditions for the missionaries, and made the first purchase of land for the mission. On subsequent trips he continued to preach, to explore, and to encourage the settlement and economic development of the islands. He also fostered missionary work among the South Sea islanders. On his last visit to New Zealand in 1837 he was greeted with veneration by both Maori and settlers. 
In Australia itself Marsden's reputation was less gilded. His material success cast doubt on the sincerity of his missionary ventures; the rift between him and Lachlan Macquarie, governor of New South Wales from 1810 to 1821, over everything from the evangelization of the Aborigines to convict and emancipation policy placed Marsden in the position of a 'de facto' leader of the illiberal opposition. Censured by the colonial secretary for his conviction of Ann Rumsby in the face of the evidence, suspended from the bench for refusing to sit with Henry Douglass, a political opponent, and passed over for the position of archdeacon in 1824, Marsden remained unpopular with Macquarie's successor, Brisbane, although under Darling he received some official appointments and encouragement in his missionary work. 
Elizabeth Marsden died in 1835, after twenty years of poor health and bearing ten children (the first on board the ship which brought them to Australia in 1794). Marsden's own health broke down in 1837, and he died on 12 May 1838 at St Matthew's parsonage, Windsor, New South Wales, where he had gone for a rest. He was buried in the churchyard of St John's, Parramatta. 


@@@@@


doc= 18102


Marsden, William (1754-1836), orientalist and numismatist, was born on 16 November 1754 at Verval, co. Wicklow, Ireland, the tenth of the sixteen children of John Marsden (1715-1801), shipping merchant and banker, and his second wife, Eleanor Bagnall (died 1804). John Marsden retired from 'extensive mercantile and shipping concerns' in 1764, and became one of the first directors of the National Bank of Ireland after helping to establish it in 1783. William underwent a conventional classical education at schools in Dublin, with the intention that he should enter Trinity College to read for a career in the church. But in 1770 he followed the recommendation of his eldest brother, John, already a writer in East India Company service at Fort Marlborough in Sumatra, to join him there. Though not yet sixteen, Marsden successfully petitioned the East India Company for a Fort Marlborough writership for himself, and he left Dublin on 9 December 1770 and England on 27 December 1770 'en route' to Sumatra. On his arrival on 30 May 1771 he was appointed to the secretary's office before rising to sub-secretary in November 1773 and assuming the full responsibilities of secretary to the company's government in Sumatra in January 1774, though without formal appointment until October 1776. Marsden enjoyed the company of his brother, particularly in performances in the theatre which John Marsden had built at Fort Marlborough (until it burnt down in January 1774). 
From early 1778 Marsden began to reconsider following 'the plan commonly adopted, of remaining in the Company's service until the annual savings from the emoluments of office should accumulate to what is termed a fortune -- that is, such a sum as, when invested in English securities, would permit the owner to enjoy the conveniencies of life, without further exertion on his part.' He was attracted instead, through reading accounts published of Captain James Cook's 'Endeavour' voyage, to the prospect of joining the milieu of scientific and learned meetings in London. In April 1779 he resigned his East India Company position, and he left Sumatra on 6 July, arriving in England on 24 December with slender resources. Literary pursuits, and attendance at theatre, parliament, and the law courts occupied his time. On 1 March 1780 Thomas Forrest, navigator of the eastern seas, introduced him to Sir Joseph Banks at Banks's house in Soho Square, where Marsden records meeting Daniel Solander, Nevil Maskelyne, Alexander Dalrymple, James Rennell, Charles Blagden, William Herschel, Joseph Planta, and others. He was invited to dine at the Royal Society Club, and to attend Royal Society meetings that month, and he became a regular participant in Banks's Soho Square breakfasts. In 1782 Marsden fortuitously declined a proposal to serve as secretary to Admiral Sir Hyde Parker, about to sail in the ill-fated 'Cato', wrecked on Madagascar, the Maldives, or the Malabar coast. In the following year he published his 'History of Sumatra', on which, inspired by the company at Soho Square, he had been working for two years while lodging at Caroline Street, Bedford Square. The 'History' -- drawn from his own records of Fort Marlborough, and especially the Redjang people, and dedicated to the establishment of 'facts, rather than systems... to things as they exist, rather than to display the powers of creative imagination' (Marsden, 373) -- established Marsden's reputation as both a talented writer and a scholar of zoology, botany, linguistics, and geography. Marsden 'gradually ceased to look forward to obtaining an official appointment': he withdrew from the East India Company formally in 1783, and two years later set up with his brother John an East India agency which continued until John's death in 1786. Marsden was elected a fellow of the Royal Society on 23 January 1783 and of the Society of Antiquaries in December 1785. He was a founding member of the Royal Irish Academy in 1785, and received an honorary DCL at Oxford in June 1786. Elected a member of the Royal Society Club on 2 August 1787, he became treasurer the following year, a position he held until 1804. He declined a suggestion to stand for parliament, and continued the private study of oriental languages, receiving through Banks's influence the oriental vocabularies compiled and submitted by ships' officers after their voyages. 
In February 1795 the cartographer James Rennell brought to Marsden Earl Spencer's offer of the second secretaryship of the Admiralty, which he eventually accepted, as much for the amiable society of Admiralty board members and staff as for the satisfaction of duty done. Unlike first secretary Sir Evan Nepean, Marsden survived the changes of ministry in 1801 and 1804. Pressed by Henry Addington, Marsden deferred retirement in that year to accept the first secretaryship of the Admiralty at a salary of $4000 a year, a position he retained until 1807. He records in his posthumously published autobiography that it fell to him in October 1805 to wake Lord Barham, as first lord of the Admiralty, with the news of victory at Trafalgar and the death of Nelson. 
Marsden was elected to the Literary Club in 1799, and to the treasurership of the Royal Society in November 1802, presiding at meetings also of the Royal Society Club in Banks's absence. He developed his considerable collection of oriental coins by the purchase in September 1805 of the Kufic coin collection of Sir Robert Ainslie: this and a common interest in oriental languages and literature brought him increasingly into contact with Sir Charles Wilkins, later librarian of the East India Company. In 1805 Marsden sought a baronetcy without success, and again, on the change of ministry in March 1807, he sought to retire from the Admiralty on grounds of ill health. Eventually insistent on retirement, he ceased to officiate in the Admiralty on 24 June 1807, and on 22 August the same year married Elizabeth Wilkins (died in or after 1860), daughter of Sir Charles, the latter having for some time assisted him in the arrangement of his coin collection. 
At the anniversary meeting in November 1810 Marsden relinquished the treasurership and vice-presidency of the Royal Society. Earlier that year he had bought the country house of Edge Grove, Aldenham, Hertfordshire, and moved his books from Wimpole Street to the country in 1812. His married years were his most productive in terms of writing and publication, as he built on the standing he had achieved with his 'History of Sumatra' (2nd edn, 1783; 3rd edn, 1784) and 'A Catalogue of Dictionaries, Vocabularies, Grammars and Alphabets', privately printed in 1796. In 1812 he published 'A Dictionary of the Malayan Language', a project he began in 1786 but for which he had found little time with his subsequent appointments. Though not the first such study, Marsden's dictionary was distinctive for its focus on the Malay-English section -- the 'essential part of the work' -- at 371 pages, and in his use of 'examples of phrases and sentences... as they have occurred in the writings of the natives' (Jones, 1.xii). In 1818 he produced 'The Travels of Marco Polo', a translation from the Italian, and in 1823 and 1825 the two volumes of 'Numismata orientalia illustrata' from his own coin collection. In 1827 he had printed a catalogue of his library, as 'Bibliotheca Marsdeniana philologica et orientalis, a catalogue of works and manuscripts collected with a view to the general comparison of languages and to the study of oriental literature'. He added to this 'Nakhoda Muda, Memoirs of a Malayan Family', issued for the Oriental Translation Fund in 1830, and in 1834 a volume of miscellaneous 'Works' comprising three tracts, one on the Polynesian languages, one on a conventional roman alphabet for oriental languages, and, in a return to the subject of lexicography, 'Thoughts on the composition of a national English dictionary'. Besides this he contributed papers to academic society journals, most notably 'The era of the Mahometans' for the 'Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society' in 1788, and a piece on the language and Indian origin of gypsies for 'Archaeologia'. 
After moving to Edge Grove, Marsden leased a house at 50 Queen Anne Street from 1825 in order to have a London residence again. He was present at the founding of the Raleigh Club in 1827, and of the Royal Geographical Society in May 1830. As a gesture to the government he publicly forwent his Admiralty pension of $1500 a year from 1831, on the grounds that he had accumulated enough wealth for the remainder of his life. Marsden presented his collection of over 3400 oriental coins to the British Museum on 12 July 1834, and, on the premiss that the British Museum already possessed duplicates of many of the books he owned, his library of books and manuscripts to King's College, London, on 30 January 1835. Marsden's library is now shared by the libraries of King's College and the School of Oriental and African Studies in the University of London. 
Marsden had suffered from apoplexy in 1833, and died of an attack on 6 October 1836. He was buried in Kensal Green cemetery. He was survived by his wife; there were no children of the marriage. Elizabeth subsequently remarried; her second husband was the numismatist Lieutenant-Colonel William Martin Leake. In 1838 she edited and published 'A brief memoir of the life and writings of the late William Marsden, D.C.L., F.R.S., &c. &c., written by himself'. Orientalist, numismatist, and antiquary, Marsden had developed the means to be a successful private scholar, as well as an effective public servant. He valued the society of which he found himself a part more for the stimulus and the intellectual quality of the company it afforded him, and he contributed in turn. Self-indulgent in his ambitions, he was conscientious in pursuit of them. 


@@@@@


doc= 18103


Marsden, William (1796-1867), surgeon, the eldest of the eight children of David and Elizabeth Marsden, was born in Sheffield in August 1796 and baptized on 18 September 1796 at the church of St Peter and St Paul, Sheffield. After spending his early years in Sheffield he travelled to London and entered St Bartholomew's Hospital, where he was influenced by John Abernethy. While at St Bartholomew's, Marsden also served an apprenticeship to Mr Dale, a surgeon practising at Holborn Hill. Marsden also studied anatomy under Joshua Brookes. He obtained the membership of the Royal College of Surgeons on 27 April 1827. 
Later in that year Marsden's inability to obtain admission to a hospital for an eighteen-year-old girl, whom he found on the steps of St Andrew's churchyard, gravely ill from malnourishment and disease, turned his attention to the question of hospital relief. Treatment was then granted only to those who could obtain a governor's letter or produce other evidence of being known to the subscribers to these institutions -- a situation which allowed subscribers to exercise considerable patronage. Marsden sought to rectify this situation by establishing in 1828 a small dispensary in Greville Street, Hatton Garden, to which the poor were admitted without such regulation. This institution at first met with great opposition, but in 1832 its value became widely recognized because, out of all the London hospitals, only Marsden's received cholera patients. 
In 1843 the hospital was moved to Gray's Inn Road, to a site which was afterwards purchased through the generosity of wealthy friends; on it was built the Royal Free Hospital, of which Marsden became the senior surgeon. In 1838 he obtained the degree of MD from the University of Erlangen and in 1840 a handsome testimonial was presented to him by the duke of Cambridge on behalf of subscribers, in recognition of his work for the poor. 
Marsden married twice and had one surviving child, a son, Alexander Edwin Marsden, from his first marriage (on 29 January 1820), to Elizabeth Ann (died 1846). His second wife was Elizabeth, daughter of Francis Abbott, a solicitor. In 1851 Marsden opened a small house in Cannon Row, Westminster, for the reception of cancer patients. Within ten years the institution was moved to Brompton, where it later became the Royal Marsden Hospital. Marsden enjoyed a large practice, and throughout his life was a follower of Abernethy, and used his methods. Considered an acute observer by his contemporaries he employed a broad range of approaches to treatment. A busy clinician, he published only one text, 'Symptoms and treatment of malignant diarrhoea, better known by the name of Asiatic or malignant cholera' (1834). He died of bronchitis at the Star and Garter Hotel, Richmond, Surrey, on 16 January 1867, and was buried in Norwood cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 18104


Marsh, Alphonso (bap. 1627, d. 1681), musician and composer, baptized at St Margaret's, Westminster, on 28 January 1627, was the son of Robert Marsh, one of the royal musicians to Charles I. Alphonso Marsh was married twice; his first wife, Mary Cheston, whom he married on 8 February 1648, was probably the mother of his two children, Elizabeth and Alphonso ['see below']. His second wife, Rebecca, outlived him. Following his father into royal service as a musician, Marsh was appointed to the king's musick in the voices and lutes on 20 June 1660 in the place of a deceased singer for $40 per year plus livery costs. Marsh's salary fell in the middle of the salary range for royal musicians. As a member of the Chapel Royal he sometimes accompanied the king on progress, for example joining the royal household in Oxford when it escaped the plague in 1665-6. Samuel Pepys was not impressed with Marsh's voice; after an evening outing on 19 August 1661 Pepys commented that his 'voice is quite lost'. However, the condition of Marsh's voice was probably affected by the alcohol Pepys had been buying during the evening (Pepys, 2.158). 
Marsh is a good example of two features of the king's musick: dynasties and problems with payment. The Marshes were not the only family that provided the royal household with several generations of musicians; others included the Laniers, the Bassanos, and the Strongs. Alphonso also experienced the Restoration court's inability to pay its servants in a timely manner. In his will, Marsh left his widow, Rebecca, two-thirds of his court arrears and his son one-third. Three years after her husband's death, Rebecca Marsh was still owed $10 from his arrears. 
Marsh experienced some opposition to his status as a royal musician. In November 1668 he obtained a warrant to arrest several local musicians who had assaulted him and defamed the special status royal musicians enjoyed. These privileges included exemption from the subsidy assigned in 1662. Marsh also was a member of the Corporation for Regulating the Art and Science of Music, a guild begun by royal musicians in the early seventeenth century to regulate the performance and teaching of music in the capital. However, the corporation closed in 1679 because it could not force local musicians to adhere to its regulations and was unable to collect dues from members, many of whom suffered from the crown's inability to pay its servants on time. 
Marsh wrote music for several theatrical productions: Sir William Davenant's 'Law Against Lovers' (1662), John Dryden's 'An Evening's Love' (1668), part 1 of Dryden's 'The Conquest of Granada' (1673), and Thomas Duffett's 'The Spanish Rogue' (1673). He was also a regular contributor to John Playford's musical publications, including his series 'Choice Ayres, Songs, & Dialogues' in the 1670s and books such as 'The Treasury of Musick' (1669). Some material also survives in manuscript form (BL, Harley MS 1911 and TNA: PRO, LC9/195-200). Marsh was buried at St Margaret's, Westminster, on 2 May 1681. 
Marsh's son, 


@@@@@


doc= 18105


Alphonso Marsh (1648-1692), was also a royal musician and composer and performed alongside his father for many years. A tenor, the younger Marsh, who was married to Cicilia (died 1690/91), was sworn on 25 April 1676 into Charles II's service and had to be readmitted into the royal household after taking the oath of allegiance to William and Mary in July 1689. Father and son performed on stage together in Crowne's masque 'Calisto' at Whitehall in 1675, the father receiving $10 and the son, who performed Africa in the prologue, $5, sizeable payments compared with their salaries. Alphonso the younger also contributed songs to John Playford's series 'Choice Ayres, Songs, & Dialogues'. Marsh died on 5 April 1692 and was buried in the west cloister of Westminster Abbey. 


@@@@@


doc= 18106


Charles Marsh (1735-1812), the only son of Charles Marsh, a London bookseller. He was admitted to Westminster School in 1748. He was elected to Trinity College, Cambridge, where he matriculated in 1753, and graduated BA in 1757 as senior classical medallist. He became a fellow of his college in 1758, proceeding MA in 1760. He was subsequently a clerk in the war office. On 15 January 1784 he was elected fellow of the Society of Antiquaries, and the following May he gave a Latin dissertation to the society entitled 'On the elegant ornamental cameos of the Barberini vase', which was printed in 'Archaeologia' (8.316-20). In 1811 he published a translation of John Milton's 'L'allegro'. He possessed a valuable library of old books. After many years' employment in the war office he retired, on a pension of $1000 a year. He lived at Rodnor House, Twickenham, and died, unmarried, either there or in Piccadilly, London, on 21 January 1812. He was buried in Westminster Abbey. 


@@@@@


doc= 18107


Marsh, Charles (c.1774-1835), barrister and politician, was born in Norwich, a younger son of Edward Marsh, manufacturer and merchant, of St Saviour's, Norwich, and his wife, Catherine. He was educated at Norwich grammar school under Dr Forster. On 5 October 1792 he was admitted pensioner of St John's College, Cambridge. He resided for four terms but did not graduate. He became a student of Lincoln's Inn on 26 September 1791 and was called to the bar on 3 July 1797. He married Mary Hale, daughter of Thomas Lewin of Bexley, Kent. They had one son, Hippisley Marsh (1808-1884), who became a colonel in the Bengal army. 
In 1804 Marsh obtained an Indian judicial appointment through the intervention of Sir John Coxe Hippisley and went to Madras, where he practised with great success. He returned to England in 1809 and was elected MP for East Retford in 1812. It was said that he tricked his way into parliament, falsely representing himself to the electors as the whig candidate. Once there, he was a consistent supporter of Catholic relief and an opponent of attempts to impose Christianity in India. On 1 July 1813 he spoke in a committee of the house in support of the amendment moved by Sir Thomas Sutton on a clause in the 'East India Bill' providing further facilities for people to go out to India for religious purposes. His speech, which occupies thirty-two columns of Hansard's 'Parliamentary Debates' ('Hansard 1', 26, 1813, 1018), was described by a contemporary as 'one of the most pointed and vigorous philippics in any language' ('Quarterly Review', 70.290). During his first session he voted as a Wellesleyite. Subsequently he was a supporter of the government. In parliament and elsewhere he was critical of Sir George Barlow in Madras and of General Gore, the governor of Upper Canada. He contested Sudbury unsuccessfully in 1818 and Petersfield in 1831. He was known to be in great financial difficulties in the 1820s. He died in 1835. 
Marsh was a contributor to 'The Cabinet: by a Society of Gentlemen' (3 vols., 1795). He also wrote several pamphlets, including 'An Appeal to the Public Spirit of Great Britain' (1803). This revised version of an earlier pamphlet supporting the political actions of William Windham was prepared with Windham's help. Marsh's speech on the 'East India Bill' was printed in pamphlet form and also in volume 2 of 'The Pamphleteer' in 1813. The famous 'Letters of Vetus' in 'The Times' (1812) were wrongly ascribed to him. In fact they were written by Edward Sterling, father of John Sterling (1806-1844). Two lively volumes of gossip, 'The Clubs of London', are thought to be his work. He frequently contributed to the 'New Monthly Magazine'. 
The lawyer and MP is not to be confused with 


@@@@@


doc= 18108


Marsh, Francis (1627-1693), Church of Ireland archbishop of Dublin, the son of Henry Marsh of Edgeworth, Gloucestershire, was born in or near Gloucester on 23 October 1627. He was admitted as a pensioner at Emmanuel College, Cambridge, on 22 April 1642, and graduated BA in 1647 and MA in 1650. On 14 October 1651 he was elected a fellow of Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge, and held the office of 'praelector rhetoricus' for 1651-2. Though learned in Greek and known for his studies in Stoic philosophy, his royalist sympathies stood in the way of his further preferment. In February 1653 he obtained four months' leave of absence to travel to Ireland, possibly in order to take orders from one of the Irish bishops then in Dublin (perhaps John Leslie, bishop of Raphoe). On returning to Caius College he was again 'praelector rhetoricus' in 1654-7, and remained in residence until April 1660. 
Marsh's residence at Cambridge seemed assured by the king's letter of 8 October 1660, requesting the continuance of his fellowship, but he decided to return to Ireland on the advice of his patron, Jeremy Taylor. Shortly after the latter's accession to the sees of Down and Connor (January 1661), Marsh was appointed as dean of Connor (8 February 1661), having been ordained by Taylor on 27 January 1661. By 1 June 1661 he had, however, resigned this deanery, having, through the earl of Clarendon's influence, been moved to Armagh, where he was elected dean on 19 June 1661 -- holding at the same time the rectorship of Clonfeacle. Three years later, again thanks to Clarendon, he was made archdeacon of Dromore. At the end of 1667 (elected 28 October, consecrated at Clonmel 22 December) he succeeded William Fuller as bishop of Limerick, Ardfert, and Aghadoe. He was translated on 10 January 1673 to Kilmore and Ardagh, and on 14 February 1682 was made archbishop of Dublin, holding 'in commendam' the treasurership of St Patrick's and the prebend of Desertmore in St Fin Barre's, Cork. 
It was in Marsh's palace that the privy council assembled on 12 February 1687, when Tyrconnell was sworn in as lord deputy. Early in 1689, feeling his position unsafe, owing to his opposition to the administration of Tyrconnell, Marsh returned to England, having attempted to appoint William King, then dean of St Patrick's, to act as his commissary. King declined the commission as not legally executed, and prevailed upon the chapters of Christ Church and St Patrick's to elect Anthony Dopping, then bishop of Meath, as administrator of the spiritualities. Marsh, who favoured the transfer of the crown to William of Orange, was included in the act of attainder passed by James's Dublin parliament in June 1689, his name being placed in the first list for forfeiture of life and estate. He returned to Dublin after the battle of the Boyne, but was not present at the thanksgiving service in St Patrick's on 6 July 1690, excusing his absence on the ground of age and infirmity, though in the same year he published his only work: 'An Address Given into the Late King James, by the Titular Archbishop of Dublin' (1690). In his last years he repaired and enlarged the archiepiscopal palace of St Sepulchre's at his own cost. He died there of apoplexy on 16 November 1693, and was buried on 18 November in Christ Church, Dublin, Dopping preaching the funeral sermon. Marsh had married Mary, youngest daughter of Jeremy Taylor, and they had four children: Francis, Jeremiah, Barbara, and Mary, the second son succeeding him as treasurer of St Patrick's and afterwards becoming dean of Down. He was apparently not related to Narcissus Marsh, his successor in the see of Dublin. His will, dated 24 October 1693 and proved on 20 November 1693, left all his property to his wife and children. 


@@@@@


doc= 18109


Marsh, George (c.1515-1555), clergyman and protestant martyr, was born at Dean, Lancashire, probably the son of George Marsh of Dean. He became a farmer, and married when he was about twenty-five years old. Upon the death of his wife, and having made arrangements for the care of his children, he went to study at Cambridge, where he matriculated at Christ's College in 1551 and petitioned for a degree. He probably converted to protestantism while at Cambridge, and was ordained a deacon by Nicholas Ridley, bishop of London, in 1552. Early in 1553 Marsh became the curate for both of the livings (Church Langton, Leicestershire, and All Hallows, Bread Street, London) held by Laurence Saunders, a clear indication that Marsh's career was being fostered by zealous protestants in the Edwardian church. Marsh appears to have remained at Cambridge for the next few years and from this base he conducted preaching forays into his native Lancashire; he may very well have done so in the company of Saunders, who is known to have preached in the area in 1552 or early 1553. 
Marsh's missionary efforts seem to have made an impression: the earl of Derby later claimed that he had heard of Marsh while in London and had resolved to arrest him either in London or Lancashire, while (as letters printed by Foxe reveal) Marsh had become one of the leaders of the tiny minority of protestants in Lancashire. Among his converts were Geoffrey Hurst, a nail maker from Shakerley, Lancashire, who was married to Marsh's sister Alice. (Only Queen Mary's death prevented Hurst from meeting the same grisly end as his brother-in-law.) At the beginning of 1554 Marsh returned to Lancashire. He later claimed that he had returned in order to visit his family and friends before going into exile in Germany or Denmark. In fact his activities were less innocuous than this would suggest; he was charged with having preached heresy publicly in Dean, Eccles, Bolton, Bury, and other Lancashire parishes in January and February 1554. Marsh did not deny this charge but merely claimed that what he had preached had been orthodox doctrine under Edward VI. 
In early March 1554, while staying at his mother's house, Marsh was informed that the servants of a local JP were searching for him. His family advised him to flee, but Marsh was afraid that his flight would discredit his previous preaching and undermine his missionary work. A few days later, after anxious soul-searching and prayer, Marsh surrendered to the authorities and was sent to the earl of Derby. Marsh was interrogated about his religious beliefs but initially declined to answer questions about the sacrament, claiming that his accusers sought his death by asking him such questions. Marsh was held in the earl's custody, and was examined again by Derby on Palm Sunday. On being informed by a cleric who had questioned Marsh that the prisoner could be brought to conform, Derby had Marsh held in less rigorous conditions. But Marsh was conscience-stricken by his lack of 'boldness' and resisted further efforts to persuade him to recant. These efforts were intensive -- throughout Marsh's ordeal the authorities sought his submission, not his death. Marsh was asked to endorse articles that Edward Crome, the celebrated evangelical preacher, had subscribed to in one of his recantations; Marsh refused to sign them, even when they were reduced to only four articles covering the sacrament and confession. 
After Easter, Derby abandoned his attempts to convert Marsh and had his prisoner taken to Lancaster Castle, where he was brought before the quarter sessions. Marsh was held in Lancaster, in secular custody, for nearly a year (probably because the authorities did not want to put him on trial in a spiritual court until statutes against heresy were enacted by parliament). During this time Marsh had many visitors, both priests trying to convert him and sympathizers offering him money and encouragement. Together with Thomas Warberton, a fellow prisoner who would later join the English protestant exiles at Aarau, Marsh read every day from the prayer book and the 'Bible' to townspeople gathered outside the window of his cell. Bishop George Coates of Chester upbraided the gaoler for the lax conditions of Marsh's imprisonment and ordered that he be more strictly confined. In March 1555 Marsh was transferred to Chester, where he was repeatedly examined by Bishop Coates. During these examinations Marsh remained obdurate in his refusal to renounce his beliefs. At Marsh's condemnation the vicar-general of the diocese twice interrupted Coates, while the bishop was passing sentence on Marsh, in futile efforts to give him a final chance to recant and save his life. 
On 24 April 1555 Marsh was taken outside the walls of Chester and, after refusing the offer of a royal pardon if he would recant, he was burnt in the adjacent district of Spital Boughton. According to Foxe's informant the people were impressed by Marsh's stoicism and acclaimed him as a martyr. In response Bishop Coates preached a sermon in Chester Cathedral denouncing Marsh as a heretic who met his deserved end and was eternally damned. 


@@@@@


doc= 18110


Marsh, Sir Henry, first baronet (1790-1860), physician, was born at Loughrea, co. Galway, son of Robert Marsh, rector of Killinane, co. Galway, and Sophia, daughter of William Wolseley, rector of Tullycorbet, co. Monaghan. Marsh's mother was a granddaughter of Sir Thomas Molyneux, physician and patriot. His paternal ancestry consisted of a long line of Anglican divines, the most celebrated being Dr Francis Marsh, originally from Gloucestershire, who was archbishop of Dublin from 1682 to 1693. Marsh was educated locally in Loughrea and then entered the University of Dublin as a pensioner in 1807; he graduated BA in 1812 and went on to study for holy orders. However, he came under the influence of the 'Walkerites', a sect named after the Revd John Walker, a fellow of Trinity College, Dublin, and separated from the Anglican communion. 
On 9 March 1813 Marsh was indentured to his relative, Philip Crampton (1777-1858), then one of the surgeons at the Meath Hospital, Dublin. In 1818 Marsh received a dissecting wound, which resulted in the amputation of the forefinger of his right hand and the abandonment of surgery as a career. Later in the same year he graduated in medicine from the University of Dublin and obtained the licence of the King and Queen's College of Physicians in Ireland. He spent the next two years studying on the continent, chiefly in Paris. 
In 1820 Marsh was appointed assistant physician to Dr Steevens' Hospital, Dublin. In the following year he was one of the founders of the Pitt Street Hospital for Diseases of Children, and in 1824 he helped to establish the Park Street school of medicine, where he lectured on the principles and practice of medicine. In 1828 he was appointed professor of medicine at the Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland, but he resigned his chair in 1832 because of the demands of his expanding private practice. In 1837 he was appointed physician-in-ordinary to the queen in Ireland, and he was created a baronet on 13 March 1839. He was elected a fellow of the King and Queen's College of Physicians in the following October. He served as president of the college for three sessions: 1841-2, 1845-6, and 1857-8. 
Marsh acquired all the trappings of a successful Dublin medical practice -- a house in Merrion Square, a seat in the country, and a baronetcy. Contemporaries attributed his success to his determination, energy, and intelligence, rather than to any originality on his part, still less to his contributions to the medical journals of the day. The relative paucity of his publications was a matter of contemporary comment. In 1820 Marsh had married Anne, daughter of Thomas Crowe, Ennis, co. Clare, and widow of William Arthur; their only child, Henry Marsh, was born on 3 April 1821, and she died on 2 November 1846. Marsh was married a second time, on 28 August 1856, to Mary Henrietta, daughter of the Revd Robert Jelly, and widow of Thomas Kemmis, of Shane House, Queen's county (later co. Laois). 
Marsh died suddenly at his house in Merrion Square on 1 December 1860 and was buried in Mount Jerome cemetery, Dublin. After his death a memorial fund was launched. It was decided to commission a full-length marble figure by John H. Foley (1818-1874), Ireland's leading nineteenth-century sculptor, and to place it in the main hall of the King and Queen's College of Physicians in Kildare Street, Dublin. The inauguration took place on 9 November 1866. Sir Dominic Corrigan, the chairman of the organizing committee, eulogized Marsh's contribution to medicine and his commitment to the dignity and propriety of the profession. Its members were indebted to Marsh, he said, for his exemplary tact and courtesy, and his humanity and charity. According to Corrigan these qualities were 'exhibited in the profession in Dublin to a degree not excelled throughout Europe'. 
Marsh's personal estate and effects amounted to $18,520 10's'. 7died His son Henry, then a major in the 3rd regiment of dragoon guards, succeeded to the title, to most of the personal estate, and to property in co. Kilkenny, which had a net annual value of $819 9's'. 5died He died unmarried and without issue on 27 May 1868 and the baronetcy became extinct. 


@@@@@


doc= 18111


Marsh, Herbert (1757-1839), bishop of Peterborough and biblical critic, was born at Faversham, Kent, on 10 December 1757 and baptized there on 3 January 1758, the eldest son of Richard Marsh (1727-1778), vicar of Faversham and a minor canon of Canterbury, and his wife, Elizabeth Frend, the daughter of a stonemason. There followed another son, Richard, who became a Fleet Street printer, and a daughter, who married a lawyer. 
Marsh's paternal grandfather, Richard Marsh (1670/71-1732), initiated a clerical family tradition: having been admitted a sizar at St John's College, Cambridge, in 1688, he obtained a fellowship in 1696 and became vicar at St Margaret Atcliffe, Kent, in 1700. As chaplain to Edward Villiers, first earl of Jersey, Richard Marsh was committed to the revolutionary settlement of 1689. Opposed to Newtonian physics, which he regarded as a hubristic alternative to Mosaic cosmology, he advocated that reason and learning should be subordinate to revelation. He believed that only a learned clergy of the established church could maintain the mystery of religion and uphold the need for good works inspired by grace, against the threats posed by religious enthusiasm, deism and Socinianism. Apart from his anti-Newtonianism, Richard Marsh's ideas re-emerged in the mature thought of his grandson. 
Herbert Marsh was educated at Faversham grammar school and then, from 1770, at the King's School, Canterbury, in company with his cousin William Frend, whose later unitarian and republican views were at odds with Marsh's own. He was admitted a king's scholar on 4 March 1771. His headmaster, Osmund Beauvoir, was an accomplished modern linguist who had assisted Archbishop William Wake in his negotiations at the Sorbonne over a possible union between the Gallican church and the Church of England. Marsh went up to St John's College, Cambridge, on 19 October 1775 and was admitted a foundress scholar on 7 November. He chose as his tutor a fellow undergraduate, Thomas Jones (1756-1807), of Trinity College. Marsh did not share his tutor's unitarian leanings yet defended freedom of thought. He greatly admired Jones's interest in natural theology, although he later subordinated it to biblical revelation. Besides, Marsh's current interests were mathematics and physics; his theological interests developed later (from 1790). In 1779 he graduated BA as second wrangler and second Smith's prizeman; he proceeded MA in 1782 and BD in July 1792. He was admitted foundress fellow of his college on 23 March 1779 and was ordained deacon by the bishop of Ely on 16 May 1780. For the next five years he fulfilled his college teaching obligations. At the general election in 1784 he canvassed for the new prime minister, William Pitt the younger, for one of the Cambridge University seats; he was an admirer of Pitt throughout his life. 
In 1785 Marsh received permission to travel to Egypt and Arabia. After passing through Belgium and the Netherlands, in 1786 he consulted the eminent biblical scholar Johann David Michaelis in Gottingen about learning Arabic. While wintering in Leipzig, where he lodged in the Burgstrasse and read the 'Koran', his lifelong asthmatic condition worsened. He was confined to bed for the best part of the next three years, but was able to visit Christoph Martin Wieland in Weimar, a writer whom he held in awe. During his illness he became fascinated with Enlightenment authors, although his reading of Hermann Samuel Reimarus's writings shook his faith in biblical inspiration. As a partial antidote Marsh began translating Johann Gottfried Eichhorn's 'Einleitung in das alte Testaments', but his hopes for publication were crushed by Dr Thomas Kipling's advice that Cambridge University Press would not sanction the work. Kipling regarded Eichhorn's comparative criticism of biblical books with other Semitic texts as too controversial. Instead Marsh was commissioned to translate the fourth edition of Michaelis's 'Einleitung in die gottlichen Schriften des neuen Bundes', his introduction to the 'New Testament'. Sensing a change in the intellectual climate in England, he feared the odium of heresy even for translating the less controversial work. He added extensive notes to Michaelis's text that primed his readers in continental biblical criticism. 
With improving health, Marsh returned to England in 1793 to take his delayed BD examination. His two qualifying sermons registered a reconstructed orthodoxy: one defended Mosaic authorship of the 'Pentateuch' and the other urged rigorous theological education for ordinands in the Church of England. However, during William Frend's university trial in May 1794 for sedition, Marsh was politically compromised for helping his cousin by refusing to give evidence against him in court. He returned to Leipzig under a cloud. Stung by the criticism, he published a thorough refutation of George Travis's defence against Edward Gibbon of the authenticity of '1 John' 5: 7, entitled 'Letters to Archdeacon Travis, in Vindication of one of the Translators' Notes to Michaelis's Introduction' (1795). Marsh was not defending the unitarian interpretation of the text suggested by Gibbon but was attacking the slipshod theology current in England and evident in Travis's 'Letters to Edward Gibbon'. 
Marsh's greatest work, however, arose from his notes on Michaelis. In 1795, dissatisfied with Michaelis's account, he began investigating the sources of the synoptic gospels, publishing in 1801 a sophisticated hypothesis that argued for their historical reliability. His 'Dissertation on the Origin and Composition of the Three First Canonical Gospels' rigorously developed Eichhorn's theory that the first three gospels shared a common source (now lost) and was taken up by both Eichhorn and Paulus. In conservative wartime Britain, however, Marsh's hypothesis aroused fear and engendered a counter-hypothesis of 'detached narratives' that maintained the integrity of authorship of each gospel, which was successively developed by John Randolph, George Gleig, Daniel Veysie, and Connop Thirlwall. Although Marsh rejected the argument that 'Mark' was the first of the three gospels to have been written, he anticipated the 'two-document' hypothesis, whereby 'Mark' and the lost document were the sources for 'Matthew' and 'Luke'. 
In 1797 changing events shifted Marsh's interests to politics. German Anglophilia was replaced by hostility on account of Pitt's maritime blockade of continental Europe. Together with his expatriate democrat friend James Macdonald, Marsh lamented the new German mood. When in 1797-8 the 'Allgemeine Literatur Zeitung' printed essays attacking British politics and culture, Marsh was anxious to reply. In March 1798 he published anonymously articles in the 'Allgemeine Literatur Zeitung' and the 'Neue Teutsche Merkur'. The disillusioned Anglophile Johann Wilhelm von Archenholtz responded with invective in his journal 'Minerva', arousing Marsh to write openly in the July edition of the 'Allgemeine Literatur Zeitung'. He had by now lost interest in theology and entered the lists as a political-historical writer. The result was his 'Historische Uebersicht der Politik England und Frankreichs' (1799), in which he argued that France not Britain was the aggressor in the current war. The 'Allgemeine Literatur Zeitung' in 1799 reported that Marsh had proved his case, and Friedrich von Gentz's influential 'Historische Journal' followed suit. Flushed with success, Marsh translated the 'Historische Uebersicht' into French and English. In Britain only the Foxite whig William Belsham wrote a rebuff, to which Marsh replied with conclusive satisfaction. 
By May 1799 Marsh was engaged to marry Marianne Emilie Charlotte (1774-1844), the daughter of a Leipzig merchant, John Lecarriere. Soon afterwards he rented rooms near the Neumarkt, Leipzig, in preparation for his bride. Seeking financial independence to free him from his college fellowship so that he could marry, he attempted to enter commerce. He proposed a smoked herring industry based in Stornoway, on the Hebridean Isle of Lewis, and manned by Dutch prisoners of war, which would supply the German market hit by Pitt's maritime blockade. He subsequently offered his services to the board of agriculture as an overseas adviser. But, unable to leave Marianne, he refused both a place on Lord Elgin's expedition to Istanbul and the reportedly strenuous post of director of the Weimar Belvedere Academy. Instead in 1802 he pressed in turn to deputize for the aged regius professor of history at Cambridge, to become royal historiographer for England (though based in Leipzig), and for a consulship at Leipzig. While awaiting news from London, Marsh was elected fellow of the Royal Society on 8 January 1801 and held office as junior bursar of St John's from 21 March 1801 to 20 March 1802. 
In 1800, through the influence of Pitt's adviser George Tomline, Marsh had been interviewed by Pitt and offered a $500 pension from the secret-service fund. Hoping for more substantial preferment or a title that might carry weight in the German principalities, Marsh delayed, then accepted. The pension was established under Henry Addington only in 1803 and withdrawn by Lord Liverpool on the accession of George IV in 1820, in view of Marsh's then substantially larger income. In 1806 he began canvassing covertly for election to the Lady Margaret professorship of divinity at Cambridge. In the event he was elected without opposition in 1807 and was awarded a DD by mandate the following year. Finally released from his college fellowship, he married Marianne by special licence at Harwich on 1 July 1807. 
Until returning to Britain in 1800 Marsh, despite his trinitarian allegiance, had been unconcerned about matters of Christian doctrine. Furthermore in 1798 he thought that political views alone divided Anglican churchmen from dissenters. Between 1800 and 1805 his alarm at the fragile balance of church and state increasingly focused on the supposedly doubtful loyalty of the evangelicals in the Church of England and their non-denominational co-operation with dissent. In accord with family tradition and a growing high-church mood, Marsh responded to recent evangelical challenges by preaching in 1805 four 'strongly anti-Calvinist' sermons which attacked the doctrine of double predestination, which he believed was conducive to antinomianism. In expounding the 'Thirty-Nine Articles', he appealed to the authority of 'the 'Bible' alone', not to tradition or to the church fathers. He astutely cultivated politically sympathetic patrons, principally the Hardwicke family in Cambridgeshire, for which his Bene't Street house in Cambridge was targeted by an angry mob in March 1810. 
Marsh's attempts to build a political base were eclipsed by the Bible Society controversy that broke out in Cambridge in 1811. His public opposition to the society -- an interdenominational and evangelically led society that distributed bibles at home and abroad -- had been preceded by a successful campaign to promote Church of England educational provision for the poor. This came in response to the opening by Joseph Lancaster of a non-denominational school in Cambridge in 1808 and the gathering momentum of the Royal Lancastrian Society. Alarmed, Marsh used a charity schools sermon at St Paul's Cathedral, London, on 13 June 1811 to appeal for a parallel society to be founded that would be guided by the principles of the established church. In October he met with the Hackney phalanx to plan the scheme. Marsh's sermon proved the catalyst for the formation that year of the National Society for Promoting the Education of the Poor in the Principles of the Established Church. The society mushroomed with support from Anglican churchmen of all persuasions, and Marsh was delighted at the way in which it united the church. But he misinterpreted this support as opposition to non-denominational enterprises. Thus, when undergraduates proposed forming a Bible Society auxiliary in Cambridge, Marsh industriously opposed them with a personally distributed 'Address to the Members of the Senate of the University of Cambridge' (1811). But his strategy was defeated when the Bible Society group won the support of the evangelical William Farish, professor of chemistry, Lord Hardwicke, who agreed to chair the meeting, and the university chancellor, the duke of Gloucester, who agreed to preside over the society. The Bible Society meeting, swept by a prevailing apocalyptic mood, was a massive success, and Marsh conceded defeat. 
Marsh's principal objection to the Bible Society lay in his insistence that the 'Book of Common Prayer' should be distributed together with the 'Bible'. In his subsequent 'Inquiry into the consequences of neglecting to give the Prayer Book with the Bible... with... other important matter relative to the British and Foreign Bible Society' (1812), he depicted the consequences of such neglect as a possible repetition of the civil war, in which the evangelicals and dissenters were presented as new puritans who fostered undisciplined interpretation of the 'Bible'. He warned that disestablishment and perpetual conflict between warring sects could follow. He still sought to win back the evangelicals in the church, but was not mollified when William Wilberforce instituted an evangelical Prayer Book and Homily Society. He wanted evangelicals to forsake the Bible Society for the Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge (SPCK). 
Marsh regarded the overseas distribution of bibles in a different light, however. In countries where there was no established church he supported 'Bible' distribution by Roman Catholics or evangelicals, and he personally subscribed to the work of the Baptist Society in India and the London Missionary Society in Africa. But in his 'History of the Translations which have been made of the Scriptures' (1812) he successfully challenged the Bible Society's inflated claims about the extent of its work abroad. Although he failed to win back leading evangelicals such as Isaac Milner, there were positive achievements. He had pressurized many evangelicals into protesting their loyalty to the establishment, helped galvanize the SPCK, and inspired a movement for Anglican education of the poor. He also rebuffed the Roman Catholic congratulations offered by Father Peter Gandolphy in his 'Comparative View of the Churches of England and Rome' (1814), which became a standard work of anti-Catholic apologetics. Reprinted in 1816, 1841, and 1852, the book delivered him from any suspicion of popery. 
Marsh began his first series of professorial lectures in 1809 and, hoping to reach a wider audience, he broke with tradition by writing the lectures in English rather than Latin and by lecturing in the church of Great St Mary rather than the divinity schools. He intended to lecture in three-year cycles but, because of the Bible Society dispute, the need to pursue his own research, and episcopal duties from 1816 onwards, he lectured only in 1809-10, 1813, 1816, 1822, and 1823. While he published thirty-six lectures, he delivered lectures on only three of the seven branches of divinity he planned to cover. He privately printed an abstract of the fourth branch for his Peterborough clergy in 1820 and a 46-page 'History of interpretation' in 1828. Thereafter his interest waned, due to his ill health and episcopal duties. Besides, he felt a new sense of beleaguerment by the repeal of the 'Test Act' in 1828 and the achievement of Catholic emancipation in 1829, which was reflected in his 'Charge to his Clergy' of 1831. 
The lectures as published covered the topics of biblical criticism, interpretation, authenticity, and credibility, and the evidences of Christianity. The content was bibliocentric and expressed characteristic themes from the latitudinarian tradition of the eighteenth century. Marsh was keen to echo the protestant reformers' abandonment of church tradition in favour of reason and learning instructed by scripture. This meant a rigorously grammatical interpretation which, he argued, only the learned clergy of an established church could provide. Public response to his lectures was generally favourable. Some Unitarians were disappointed, as they had hoped that Marsh's earlier refutation of Travis had indicated his rejection of trinitarian dogma. Evangelicals rejoiced that Marsh had abandoned the uncommitted divinity of his Michaelis notes for a clearly apologetic purpose, even if they regretted his intellectualist emphasis. From America, the New England biblical critic John Stevens Buckminster sent students to Marsh on the strength of reading his lectures. In contrast, Bishop John Hobart of New York felt that a few lectures were no substitute for the comprehensive training that could be provided by dedicated theological colleges. Marsh did not seek to restructure the training of ordinands in Cambridge, although he considerably raised current learning standards. He certainly stirred controversy by calling for a revision of the Authorized Version of the 'Bible'. But on the whole, while in his lectures he introduced his audiences to new critical methods, he deliberately shielded them from knowledge of more radical higher criticism, such as that of Eichhorn or Paulus. In opting for a safe and gentle introduction to his subject, he little prepared his audience for the coming onslaughts of higher criticism. Instead he cautiously married a digest of biblical criticism to the 'evidence-writing' of Hanoverian theology. His Michaelis notes in this respect were ahead of his 'Lectures' both in discussing new critical methods and in facing awkward challenges. 
Marsh's learning and his loyalty to the religious and political establishment were rewarded with preferment. On 13 July 1816 he was nominated bishop of Llandaff and on 25 August was consecrated in Lambeth Palace chapel by Archbishop William Howley. As the junior bishop, Marsh was chaplain to the House of Lords and so resided in Delahaye Street, London, until 1819, during which time he incurred debts of $4000. Despite the inadequate stipend that accompanied his appointment, he attended to his diocese with vigour. To expedite improvements in building stock and church fabric, he revived the office of rural dean. Seeking an effective clergy, he made facility in the Welsh language a condition for institution, and formulated eighty-seven doctrinal questions for prospective candidates in his diocese. In February 1817 he was elected a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries. 
On 8 April 1819 Marsh was elected bishop of Peterborough. Aware of a phalanx of evangelical clergy in his bishopric, he made clear that he would brook no irregularities, such as hymn singing. Nor would he sanction unnecessary non-residence or neglected glebe houses. He also promoted double rather than single services and revived the office of rural dean in his new diocese, subdividing existing deaneries for greater efficiency. A significant if modest amount of repair work was completed by 1823 and double services increased over the following decade. Setting an example of dedication, Marsh frequently preached charity sermons and conducted confirmations between triennial visitations. He regarded his examination for curates as a legitimate exercise of episcopal power, a view recently reinforced by the 1817 'Consolidation Act'. His eighty-seven questions, nicknamed 'Cobwebs to catch Calvinists', were designed to 'exhibit a connected View of God's dealings with Man under the New Covenant' and excluded Calvinist doctrines of election and eternal security. Instead they emphasized baptismal regeneration, a synergistic doctrine of grace, the need for good works following justification, and the error of unitarianism. In 1821 and 1822 frustrated evangelical incumbents, whose curate appointees had been excluded by Marsh's examination, unsuccessfully petitioned the House of Lords in protest. Their petitions did, however, arouse misgivings in the upper house about Marsh's methods. Both he and his opponents went to print. Sydney Smith's satirical attack on 'Persecuting bishops' in the 'Edinburgh Review' damaged Marsh's reputation, even though conservative journals defended him. Marsh made some concessions by reducing the number of questions from eighty-seven to thirty-six, by licensing at least five evangelical curates in Peterborough in the early 1820s, and by nurturing others. His intervention on behalf of one evangelical curate, Samuel Paris, however, was defeated in the court of arches and at the king's bench in 1824. Such failures underlined the limits of episcopal power, though Marsh's examination was itself legal. Indeed, some bishops, such as William Magee of Dublin in 1822 and Henry Philpotts in 1841, instituted rigorous examinations despite the odium Marsh suffered. 
Marsh's relations with the county were as mixed as those with the diocese, for political interests often shaped relationships. He was a focus for tory loyalty in Northamptonshire, while Lord Fitzwilliam led the whig interest. The relationship between the two men varied from businesslike politeness to outright hostility, with clashes over the leasing of episcopal land, the rights of which Marsh tenaciously defended. Even a joint project to build a national school in Peterborough in 1823 nearly foundered on Fitzwilliam's suspicion. But Marsh learned tact. In a conflict about a Catholic claims petition in 1825, he carefully explained his position. In 1832, when Fitzwilliam tried to engineer the purchase of a glebe farm, Marsh negotiated firmly but with legal correctness. He had learned his lesson. Though his many commitments continually encroached on his private life, he and his wife maintained a solicitous friendship with the poet John Clare from 1819 to 1835. 
From 1835 Marsh was senile and bedridden. While he lay on his deathbed in 1839 the diocese was run by his wife, his elder son, and the diocesan registrar, John Gates. The trio clashed with the third Earl Fitzwilliam over property transfers and voting interests. Although Fitzwilliam was forced to apologize for insulting Marianne Marsh, it was an unfortunate end to Marsh's episcopate. 
Marsh died on 1 May 1839 in Peterborough and was buried in the eastern chapel of his cathedral on the 8th. He had been patriotic, gregarious, and industrious. Although combative in public, he was uniformly gracious in private, even with opponents. If self-promoting, he was courageous and loyally devoted to the established church. He was survived by his widow, who died in Peterborough in 1844, and by his sons Herbert Charles Marsh (1808-1851), whom he appointed vicar of Barnack in 1832 and who died insane, and George Henry Marsh (1814-1896), who became vicar of Great Snoring. 


@@@@@


doc= 18112


Marsh, James (1794-1846), chemist, was born in Woolwich on 1 September 1794. Little is known of his early life and education; in 1815 he married Mary Watkins in Erith. By 1822 he occupied the post of practical chemist at the Royal Arsenal, Woolwich -- a very junior position. In 1829 he became, for 15's'. per week, assistant for the chemical lectures that Michael Faraday delivered at the Royal Military Academy, Woolwich. The limited surviving evidence suggests that he and Faraday enjoyed a good working relationship. Marsh held both these positions until his death, and also acted as a consulting engineer to the New Gas Works, Woolwich. 
In the 1820s Marsh assisted Peter Barlow, who taught mathematics at the academy, with his work on electromagnetism, including the invention of Barlow's wheel. In 1822 Marsh himself improved Andre-Marie Ampere's electromagnetic rotating cylinder. This innovation led Marsh to devise a portable electromagnetic apparatus for which he received, in 1823, the large silver medal of the Society of Arts together with 30 guineas. He and Barlow continued their work on electromagnetism in 1824 and 1825 when they investigated the induction of magnetism in rotating metals. However, in this research they had been anticipated by Dominique Francois Jean Arago. 
In November 1833 Marsh was asked to analyse some coffee which a George Bodle of Plumstead had drunk just before his death. Marsh found arsenic present -- as he testified to the inquest jury, which returned a verdict of wilful murder against Bodle's grandson John Bodle. Though acquitted (on non-forensic grounds) at his trial, Bodle later admitted the crime. The case turned Marsh's attention towards the problem of detecting arsenic. By 1836 he had developed a method of combusting arsenic such that it was unmistakably deposited on cold porcelain. For this extremely sensitive test he received the large gold medal of the Society of Arts that year. He continued improving the test in the ensuing years, and in 1840 it came to widespread public notice during the trial of Marie Lafarge for the murder of her husband. The original forensic examination found no trace of arsenic in his body, but the court asked for a new test. The body was exhumed and was found, using Marsh's test, to contain arsenic. This evidence convicted Lafarge, who was sentenced to life imprisonment. The case caused a sensation on both sides of the channel and ensured that Marsh's name became a familiar one to the public. 
In 1837 Marsh invented a percussion cap for naval guns for which he won the silver medal of the Society of Arts and was rewarded financially by the Admiralty. Marsh died at Beresford Street, Woolwich, on 21 June 1846, leaving two married daughters and a widow unprovided for; in late 1847 the Ordnance office awarded his widow an annual pension of $20. 


@@@@@


doc= 18113


Marsh, John (1752-1828), musician and writer, was born on 31 May 1752 at Dorking, Surrey, the first of the five children of Henry Marsh (1713-1772), captain in the Royal Navy, and his wife, Mary 
(Molly; 1715x20-1759)
, probably the daughter of Edward Tyler, a dissenting tradesman of Dorking. The loss of eleven days after the introduction of the Gregorian calendar in August 1752 resulted in John Marsh's celebrating his birthday on 11 June. In 1757 Marsh's father was posted to one of the royal yachts at Greenwich, where in 1759 young John started his education at Greenwich Academy. Five years later Captain Marsh was sent to Portsmouth, a move that led to Marsh's being sent to complete his education at Bishop's Waltham school. In 1765 he commenced a diary, subsequently transferred to a series of journals, that would prove the foundation of his principal claim to fame. These journals, or 'History of my private life', as Marsh entitled his work, were assiduously maintained until a few weeks before his death. Running to thirty-seven volumes and a total of 6704 pages, the journals are now housed in the Huntington Library, San Marino, California, USA, which purchased them at auction in 1990. The previously known version in the University of Cambridge Library is a much-abridged adaptation by Marsh's youngest son, Edward Garrard Marsh. 
Today the journals are of value not only for the details they provide of Marsh's own life, but for the vivid account of life in the cathedral cities of southern England in which he lived and worked. From them we learn that Marsh incurred parental displeasure by resisting attempts to persuade him to follow his father into the Royal Navy. Instead in 1768 he became articled to a solicitor in Romsey, Hampshire, completing his legal training at the Inner Temple in London in 1773-4. While Marsh was in Romsey he developed the early interest in music formerly discouraged by his father, teaching himself to play several instruments, inaugurating a series of subscription concerts, and making his first attempts at composition. Returning from London, where he took every advantage to experience the vibrant musical life of the capital, Marsh set up as a lawyer in Romsey. On 15 November 1774 he married Elizabeth Catherine Brown (1756/7-1819), daughter of a Salisbury apothecary, Henry Brown, and his wife, Dorothea. Their first son, John (died 1832) was born the following year. He was followed by four other sons, and a daughter, of whom only Edward Garrard and Henry reached adulthood. 
Feeling restricted by the small-town atmosphere of Romsey, Marsh moved his family to Salisbury in 1776, entering into a legal partnership. He rapidly became fully involved in the thriving musical life of the city, playing in the subscription concerts and annual festival. This fresh stimulus was conclusive in deciding where Marsh's true interests lay. During the next seven years he was more likely to be found composing symphonies or anthems than attending to legal matters. After inheriting a large family estate in Kent and removing his family to Nethersole House near Barham, in 1783, Marsh unsurprisingly gave little time to the legal profession. He was now offered the management of the ailing Canterbury concerts, which immediately benefited from his organizational skill and ability to work with the sometimes uneasy mixture of professional and amateur players who performed in eighteenth-century provincial orchestras. However, Marsh soon found the expense of running a large country house too great. Nethersole was sold and, after a short interregnum in Canterbury, the family moved to a house in North Pallant, Chichester, Sussex, in April 1787. This remained his home for the last forty years of his life. As at Canterbury, Marsh found concert life in Chichester in a poor state following a schism. Here too he was offered management of the subscription concerts, skilfully reconciling the warring parties into a management committee while retaining overall control of repertory and the financial affairs of the orchestra. The orchestra, utilizing the services of the wind and brass players of the local Sussex militia, was expanded in size, enabling Marsh to programme a judicious combination of the ancient (primarily Corelli) and modern styles. Many of his own symphonies and other orchestral works were introduced into the repertory, along with those of J. C. Bach and Haydn. Marsh's success in reviving concert life in Chichester is reflected in a report in the 'Sussex Weekly Advertiser' of 14 April 1804, at the end of the 1803/4 season: 'The concert, as usual, was distinguished for the excellence of selection, under the influence of its leader and director, J. Marsh, Esq., an amateur of fortune, whose compositions and skill have long since obtained him the highest estimation'. The Chichester concert continued in a flourishing state until 1813, when after twenty-five years Marsh finally stepped down from the directorship. 
While music forms the principal thread running through John Marsh's life, it was by no means the only interest of the lively mind revealed in his writings. A lifelong interest in astronomy was stimulated by a meeting with William Herschel in Bath and led to his publishing two books on the subject. His other literary works included a satirical novel, 'A Tour through some of the Southern Counties of England, by Peregrine Project and Timothy Type' (1804). As a gentleman with a reasonably comfortable income from the Kentish estate retained after he moved to Chichester, Marsh was an inveterate traveller whose reaction to the death of his wife in 1819 was to undertake a tour to Scotland involving a round journey of some 1440 miles. His observations on musical life in London, to which he was a frequent visitor, are among the most valuable of the period. A staunch Anglican who in 1822 became involved with a society concerned with the conversion of the Jews, Marsh's faith did not preclude withering criticism of some of the clerics with whom he came into contact. In his later years Marsh turned increasingly to charitable work, being involved with the first Lancastrian schools to be established in Chichester and the anti-slavery movement. In accord with the times in which he lived, Marsh reveals little of his own emotions in his journals, but the picture that emerges is of a man of great energy, considerable leadership qualities, and an innate kindness which was not to be imposed upon. A natural family man, his consideration for his frequently ailing wife is one of many endearing traits to emerge from his writings. 
The catalogue of John Marsh's musical compositions, many of them now lost, is substantial. It includes over fifty symphonies and other orchestral works, nearly thirty chamber works, organ music, a large number of services and anthems, and secular vocal works. He died at his home in North Pallant, Chichester, on 31 October 1828 after a short illness, and was buried at All Saints, West Pallant, on 7 November. 


@@@@@


doc= 18114


Marsh, John Fitchett (1818-1880), promoter of municipal libraries and antiquary, was the son of a solicitor of Wigan, Lancashire, John Marsh, and his wife, Ann. He was born at Wigan on 24 October 1818, and was educated at Warrington grammar school under the Revd T. Vere Bayne. On the death of his father he came under the care of his uncle John Fitchett (1776-1838), whom he afterwards succeeded in his business as a solicitor. On the incorporation of Warrington in 1847 he was appointed town clerk, and held that office until 1858. 
Marsh was instrumental in establishing the Warrington School of Art and the public museum and library. In 1847 he proposed the amalgamation of the Warrington Town Library (founded in 1760) with the Warrington Natural History Society (1838) and the vesting of both in the corporation. This was accomplished in 1848, and Warrington thereby acquired Britain's first municipally funded library. Marsh wrote several articles of local antiquarian interest for the Historic Society of Lancashire and Cheshire and other learned societies, but it is for his pioneering role in the establishment of the first municipal library that he deserves to be remembered. 
Marsh retired in 1873 to Hardwick House, Chepstow, Monmouthshire. There he began collecting materials for a history of the castles of Monmouthshire. He had hardly completed that of the first (Chepstow), when he died, unmarried, at Hardwick House, on 22 June 1880. His 'Annals of Chepstow Castle' was edited by Sir John Maclean and printed at Exeter in 1883. 


@@@@@


doc= 18115


Marsh, Narcissus (1638-1713), Church of Ireland archbishop of Armagh, was born on 20 December 1638 at Hannington, near Highworth, Wiltshire, the son of William Marsh, who owned an estate worth $60 p.a., and Grace Colburn. He was the youngest of his family, with two brothers and two sisters. He was educated in a series of five local schools and noted in his diary that 'in all of which schools I was never so much as once whipt or beaten'. At sixteen he was entered as a commoner at Magdalen Hall in Oxford. He studied 'Old philosophy, Mathematics and Oriental languages', graduated BA (1658), was elected to a Wiltshire fellowship in Exeter College (1658), and proceeded MA (1660), BD (1667), and DD (1671), being incorporated at Cambridge in 1678. As an undergraduate he reported that he kept 'an entire fast every week, from Thursday, six o'clock at night, until Saturday, eleven at noon, for which God's name be praised', though possibly only during Lent. 
Marsh was under age when ordained priest by the bishop of Oxford in March 1662 and, troubled, noted 'The Lord forgive us both, but then I knew no better but it might be legally done'. Appointed chaplain to Seth Ward, bishop of Exeter, who offered him the living of Swindon, he discovered he was expected to marry a daughter of a friend of the bishop. He was horrified, as he had no intention of ever marrying. Ward, furious, demanded his resignation as his chaplain. Marsh thanked God 'for delivering me out of the snare which they laid for me' and returned to Oxford. In 1664 he delivered his first sermon, at St Mary's, Oxford, and in 1665 was made proproctor of the university. He learned to play the bass viol and reported that 'after the Fire of London, I constantly kept a weekly consort (of instrumental musick and sometimes vocal) in my chamber on Wednesday in the afternoon, and then on Thursday, as long as I lived in Oxford'. He worked even harder at his studies but felt guilty over his recreation -- 'Yet O Lord I beseech Thee to forgive me this loss of time and vain conversation.' 
In 1665 Marsh was appointed chaplain to Lord Chancellor Hyde who advised him to continue with his studies. At this period 'he had many advantageous offers for marriage', 'one who had $800, to her portion, another $1500, another $2400 and another of meaner fortune than either, but all very desirable (I might rather have said beautiful lovely persons)'. He was not tempted by these offers and also refused appointment as domestic chaplain to the lord keeper, Orlando Bridgeman, in order to continue his studies. Instead he was interrupted by agreeing to the request of the vice-chancellor, Dr Fell, to revise the notes and supervise the printing of Belsamon's and Zonaras's 'Comments on the Canons of the Greek Councils' (1672), a monumental task which took almost a year. He had earlier gained some experience of this type of work when he revised Du Trieu's 'Logick' (1662), which he later had published for the benefit of Dublin University students as 'Institutio logicae in usum juventutis academicae Dubliniensis' (1679). He also wrote an 'Essay touching the sympathy between lute or viol strings', printed by Robert Plot in his 'Natural History of Oxfordshire' (1676). In 1673 Fell and the chancellor, the duke of Ormond, appointed him principal of St Alban Hall. His success in this position, and his administrative and organizational abilities, encouraged Ormond and Fell, now bishop of Oxford, to suggest his appointment as provost of Trinity College, Dublin. 
Marsh was invested as provost on 24 January 1679. He recorded in his diary his 'finding this place very troublesome partly by reason of the multitude of business and impertinent visits the Provost is obliged to, and partly by reason of the ill education the young Scholars have before they come to College, whereby they are both rude and ignorant; I was quickly weary of 340 young men and boys in this lewd and debauch'd town; and the more so because I had no time to follow my allways dearly beloved studies.' Despite his complaint he oversaw some important changes in the college, including the building of a new hall and chapel. He reorganized the library, improving the classification, shelving, and numbering of books, revising the regulations, and demanding greater accountability from the junior fellow annually appointed as librarian, but he was unable to change the statutes which entitled only the provost and fellows to study there unattended.Marsh discovered that under the statutes thirty of the seventy scholars chosen each year had to be natives, and that while these scholars could speak Irish they could not read or write it. He employed, at his own expense, a former Catholic priest, Paul Higgins, to teach Irish and to preach in Irish once a month. The lectures and sermons, which he attended, were a great success but were severely criticized for promoting the Irish language, among others by the primate, who drew attention to an act of parliament to abolish the language. Marsh ignored these warnings and continued with his work. 
Marsh's next project at Trinity College was the preparation for printing of Bishop William Bedell's Irish translation of the 'Old Testament'. With the help of a number of associates he prepared the transcripts which they then sent to Robert Boyle in London. Marsh gives an interesting description of their work: 'when a quantity of sheets was transcribed, I got Dr Sall, Mr Higgins, Mr Mullen and some gentlemen well skilled in Irish to compare the transcript with the original copy, then to render the Irish into English, whilst I had the Polyglott 'Bible' before me, to observe whether it came up to the original [Hebrew] and where any doubt did arise, after a debate, and their agreement upon a more proper expression, twas written in the margin, and left to Mr Boyle to advise with Mr Reilly thereupon. But I think very few alterations were made in the impression. ('Christian Examiner')' The Irish translation of the 'Old Testament' was printed in London in 1685. Marsh's interest in the Irish language, which had led him at one time to attempt the publication of an Irish grammar, was mainly with a purpose to propagate the reformed religion through the language of the majority in Ireland. 
On 6 May 1683 Marsh was consecrated bishop of Ferns and Leighlin, with the rectory of Killeban 'in commendam'. Before he took up his appointment he became a member of the newly formed Dublin Philosophical Society and contributed a paper, 'An introductory essay to the doctrine of sounds, containing some proposals for the improvement of acousticks', published in 'Philosophical Transactions' (1684). Although the Oxford Philosophical Society thought the article of 'great consequence', a later assessment notes few original conclusions but points to Marsh's use of new words -- 'diacoustics' to describe the study of refracted sound and 'catacoustics' for that of reflected sound, and his being the first scientific writer to use the word 'microphone' (Hoppen). Marsh was also interested in comets and scientific instruments, and invented a lamp to enlighten a large hall or church. To William Molyneux, who had invented the Dublin hygroscope for indicating moisture in the air, he suggested substituting a lute string for the more fragile whipcord Molyneux was using. He tried to discover a more reliable and logical method of insect classification, incorporating classification by follicles and aurelias. Some years later he was made a vice-president of the Dublin Philosophical Society. 
Marsh did not stay long in his diocese. Following the accession of James II he was subjected to threats by disorderly soldiery and, after briefly staying in Trinity College, fled to England. In 1690 he preached before Queen Mary at Whitehall and before the University of Oxford. Bishop Lloyd of St Asaph appointed him vicar of Gresford, Denbighshire, and he was made a canon of St Asaph. He noted the hospitality and financial assistance he received in England, and in return assisted many of his fellow clergymen. In his diary Marsh recorded: 'my time for many days have been in hard study, especially in knotty Algebra, to divert melancholy thoughts these sad calamitous times wherein I am forced to live from home; and do hear almost every day of the murther of some [or] other Protestant, yet my heart and hope is always steadfastly fixed on the Lord my God and I trust it shall never be moved.' He gives vivid accounts of his dreams, illustrating his fear of the pope and the Catholic church. In August 1690 he returned to Ireland and was promoted archbishop of Cashel in February 1691. 
As archbishop Marsh forbade preaching in private houses, warned clergy not to praise the dead overmuch, and laid down that every incumbent should preach every Sunday. He worked extremely hard in his diocese and recorded long, difficult journeys to visit and inspect his clergy and parishes. If he was distressed at the consecration of William Fitzgerald as bishop of Clonfert, glad he did not participate and noting 'may I never be concerned in bringing unworthy men into the Church', he was obviously pleased at the consecration a few weeks later of Nathaniel Foy, who would prove an influential bishop of Waterford and Lismore. 
Marsh was translated to Dublin in 1694 and enthroned on 26 May. On six occasions between 1699 and 1711 he served as one of the lords justices -- effective governors in the absence of the lord lieutenant. To this involvement in 'worldly business', which he hated, was added his service in the House of Lords, including membership of the committee for religion and grievances, and chairmanship of the committee for temporary acts. He appears to have taken a leading part in the drafting of legislation in 1697 including the 'Banishment Act', directed against Catholic bishops and regular clergy, the act against intermarriage of protestants and Catholics, and the act confirming the treaty of Limerick. He was unsympathetic towards the Limerick articles, fearing 'the effect of the unhappy conditions that (I know not how or why) have been granted to a rebellious people that were not able to defend themselves'. 
In 1703 Thomas Emlyn, removed by his fellow Presbyterians from his ministry for unitarian views, was charged with publishing a blasphemous book; Marsh sat on the bench at the trial. Emlyn was sentenced to a year's imprisonment with the condition he not be released until he had paid a $1000 fine. When, after two years, his friends secured the reduction of the fine to $70, Marsh demanded a shilling in the pound of the original fine as queen's almoner, though he was eventually persuaded to a reduction to $20. He personally instituted a case against a Mr Fleming, Presbyterian minister at Drogheda, but the case was withdrawn due to the then government's sympathetic policy to dissenters. In contrast to his treatment of Catholics and Presbyterians he was sympathetic towards Huguenots, some of whom had been given permission to worship in the lady chapel in St Patrick's Cathedral, on condition they were bound by the discipline and canons of the Church of Ireland. Yet Marsh approved and praised the alternative discipline, with a much more liberal interpretation of conformity, which the French congregation prepared and submitted to him. 
When at Trinity College, Marsh wrote to his friend Dr Thomas Smith that the booksellers' shops were furnished with nothing but 'new Triffles and Pamphlets and not well with them'. He noted the lack of a library for the public in the capital and that 'twas this and this consideration alone that at first mov'd me to think of building a library in some other Place (than in the College) for publick use, where all might have free access, seeing they cannot have it in the college. ('Christian Examiner', 764)' Almost twenty years later he had the opportunity, building his library in the grounds of the palace of St Sepulchre, which he held as archbishop. Designed by the surveyor-general of Ireland, Sir William Robinson, it was influenced by the design of the Bodleian Library and was furnished with dark oak bookcases each with carved and lettered gable topped by a mitre. Four main collections were obtained, the most important being the library of nearly 10,000 books of Edward Stillingfleet, bishop of Worcester, which Marsh bought for his library in 1705 for $2500. He donated his own books, reflecting his special interest in books in Arabic, Syriac, Hebrew, Russian, and oriental languages, but bequeathed his oriental manuscripts to the Bodleian. The first librarian at Marsh's Library, a Huguenot refugee, Dr Elias Bouhereau, donated his books, mainly relating to France, on his appointment in 1701, and in 1745 John Stearne, bishop of Clogher, bequeathed his collection to Marsh's Library. 
In February 1703 Marsh was promoted to the Irish primacy. In Armagh he repaired the cathedral and rebuilt churches at his own expense. He bought in impropriated tithes and restored them to the church, and instituted and largely endowed the almshouses for the widows of clergymen in the Armagh diocese. He also contributed large sums of money to the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel. He died on 2 November 1713 and was buried four days later in the churchyard of St Patrick's Cathedral, Dublin, adjoining his library. The large monument erected to him, the work of Grinling Gibbons, was damaged by the weather, and in 1728 the governors and guardians of the library decided to move it inside the cathedral. 
Marsh's contemporaries took a fairly sympathetic view of him. Archbishop William King thought Marsh 'though an excellent person and a scholar is yet too modest and unacquainted with the world' (McCarthy, 21), while the bishop of Oxford described him as a man of 'learning, virtue, gravity and diligence' ('Church of Ireland Gazette', 9 Dec 1927, 714). The exception was Jonathan Swift, who blamed Marsh for his having to produce his 'penitential letter' for his lack of promotion in the church and, unfairly, for removing him from the management of the petition for first fruits for the church just short of success. Swift, a member of the lower house of convocation, unsuccessfully opposed the act setting up Marsh's Library on the grounds that laymen on the library's governing board might become a majority and have authority over the precentor or treasurer of St Patrick's, to one of which posts that of librarian was to be annexed. About 1710 Swift wrote a spiteful 'Character of Primate Marsh': 'Doing good is his pleasure; and as no man consults another in his pleasures, neither does he in this... without all passions but fear, to which of all others he hath the least temptation, having nothing to get or to lose; no posterity, relation, or friend to be solicitous about; and placed by his station above the reach of fortune or envy.... He is the first of the human race, that with great advantages of learning, piety and station ever escaped being a great man. (McCarthy, 26)' Whatever Marsh's failings he was, in great contrast to many of his contemporaries, an exemplary prelate, pious, and sincere -- if not effective -- as a reformer. He is remembered for his generosity in building the first public library in Ireland, one of the few eighteenth-century buildings in Dublin still used for its original purpose. 


@@@@@


doc= 18116


Marsh, William (1775-1864), Church of England clergyman, third son of Colonel Sir Charles Marsh (died 'c'.1805) of Reading and his wife, Catherine ('c'.1745-1824), daughter of John Case of Bath, was born on 20 July 1775 in Reading, and until the age of eleven or twelve was educated under Dr Valpy in the grammar school there. His intention was to enter the army, but when he was eighteen the sudden death in his presence of a young man in a ballroom deeply shocked him, and under the influence of the Hon. and Revd William Cadogan he became an evangelical. He matriculated from St Edmund Hall, Oxford, on 10 October 1797, and started his studies the following year, graduating BA in 1801, MA in 1807, and BD and DD in 1839. 
At Christmas 1800 Marsh was ordained to the curacy of St Lawrence, Reading, and was soon known as an impressive evangelical preacher. In 1801 Thomas Stonor gave him the chapelry of Nettlebed in Oxfordshire. His father presented him to the united livings of Basildon and Ashampstead in Berkshire in 1802, soon after which he resigned Nettlebed, but retained the curacy of St Lawrence, which he served without pay for many years. On 27 November 1806 he married Maria Chowne (1776-1833), the youngest child and only daughter of John Tilson and his wife, Maria ('nee' Lushington), of Watlington Park, Oxfordshire. They had five children. The Revd Charles Simeon paid a first visit to Basildon in 1807, and was from that time a friend and correspondent of Marsh. In 1809, with the consent of his bishop, Marsh was appointed as perpetual curate of St James's Chapel, Brighton, but the vicar of St Nicholas's, Brighton, Dr R. C. Carr, afterwards bishop of Worcester, refused his assent to this arrangement, and after some months Marsh resigned. Simeon presented him to St Peter's, Colchester, in 1814. His attention was early drawn by Simeon to the subject of biblical prophecy and the conversion of the Jews, and in 1818 he went with him to the Netherlands to inquire into the condition of the Dutch Jewish community. His continuing interest in this subject led him to publish several works on eschatological themes in later years. 'A Few Plain Thoughts on Prophecy' (1840) was particularly well received. Marsh's evangelical influence extended to the family of his wife's brother James Tilson, and through them for a time to Jane Austen. 
Ill health obliged Marsh in early 1829 to leave Colchester, and in October, after some months in Guernsey, where he ministered to the English church, he accepted the rectory of St Thomas's, Birmingham. In spite of the restless and riotous times during which he arrived he soon won the respect of what was initially an undisciplined congregation. The excitement and expectations of these years gave a certain topicality to his frequent sermons on the second coming, from which he came to be known as Millennial Marsh. However, his ministry in Birmingham was overshadowed by the death of his wife on 24 July 1833. Early in 1837 Marsh was appointed principal official and commissary of the royal peculiar of the deanery of Bridgnorth. In 1839, finally leaving Birmingham, he became incumbent of St Mary's, Leamington Spa. On 21 April 1840 he married Lady Louisa, third and youngest daughter of Charles, first Earl Cadogan, and his wife, Mary Churchill. After a year of growing blindness from cataract, he was successfully operated on in November 1840. His second wife died in August 1843, and on 3 March 1848 he married the Hon. Louisa Horatia Powys (died 1871), seventh daughter of Thomas, first Baron Lilford, and his wife, Mary Mann. From 1848 he was an honorary canon of Worcester, and in 1851 went to live with his daughter Matilda, whose husband, Frederick Chalmers, was the rector of Beckenham, Kent. In 1860 he accepted the rectory of Beddington, Surrey, where he was assisted by two younger curates. Few men preached a greater number of sermons, and many of these were later published. His conciliatory manners gained him friends among all denominations. On 24 August 1864 he died in the rectory at Beddington and was buried in Beddington on 2 September. 




@@@@@


doc= 18117


Marsh, Anne (bap. 1791, d. 1874), novelist, was born at her father's estate, Linley Wood, Staffordshire, and baptized at Newcastle under Lyme, Staffordshire, on 9 January 1791, the third daughter and fourth child of James Caldwell (died 1838), lawyer and recorder of Newcastle under Lyme, and deputy lieutenant of Staffordshire, and his wife, Elizabeth, daughter of Thomas Stamford of Derby. On 30 July 1817, at St James's, Audley, Staffordshire, she married Arthur Cuthbert Marsh (died 1849), of Eastbury Lodge, Hertfordshire, son of William Marsh, senior partner in the London bank Marsh & Co. of Berners Street. The bank was ruined in 1824 as a result of the depredations of a junior partner, Henry Fauntleroy, who was subsequently hanged for forgery. Anne and Arthur Marsh had eight children: two sons, both of whom died young, and six daughters. Given that her first book was not published until ten years after the collapse of Marsh & Co., there is probably no foundation for the commonly held belief that she turned to authorship in order to help support her large family and, for the same reason, had to redouble her literary efforts after her husband's death in December 1849. Her mother had been an heiress. 
The publication of Marsh's first volume of fiction, 'Two Old Men's Tales' ('The Deformed' and 'The Admiral's Daughter', 1834), was arranged by Harriet Martineau, an old friend. Marsh had read 'The Admiral's Daughter' to her one night after dinner, and Martineau had been moved to tears by the penitential miseries and sacrifices of its adulterous heroine. Marsh's husband, fearing that the book might injure their daughters' marriage prospects if it attracted unfavourable criticism, insisted that it be published anonymously. 'The Admiral's Daughter' became perhaps her best-loved story. Her second book, 'Tales of the Woods and Fields' (1836), was a sequel to the first, comprising further tales by the 'two old men'; she continued to refer to herself as 'the Old Man' for long afterwards. Eight years elapsed before her first and most popular full-length novels began to appear: 'The Triumphs of Time' (1844), 'Mount Sorel' (1845), 'Father Darcy' (1846), 'Emilia Wyndham', her best-known novel (1846), 'Norman's Bridge' (1847), and 'Angela' (1848). At least twelve more novels followed, not counting two -- 'Adelaide Lindsay' (1850) and 'Heathside Farm' (1863) -- which were described as having been 'edited' by her but were probably her own work, and one -- 'The Longwoods of the Grange' (1853) -- described as by 'the author of 'Adelaide Lindsay''. She also published a further volume of shorter tales, 'Chronicles of Dartmoor' (1866); two translations from the French; a two-volume historical work, 'The Protestant Reformation in France' (1847); and probably two stories for children, again described as by 'the author of 'Adelaide Lindsay''. Five anonymously published novels by Julia Stretton were mistakenly attributed to Marsh in both the 'Cambridge' and the 'New Cambridge Bibliography of English Literature'. 
At the peak of her reputation Marsh was hailed by the 'London Weekly Chronicle' as 'the best lady novelist of the day' (Allibone, 'Dict.'). In 'Modern novelists -- great and small', an article in 'Blackwood's Edinburgh Magazine' (May 1855), Margaret Oliphant grouped her with Catherine Gore and Frances Trollope as 'the respectable elder sisters of the literary corporation', contrasting 'the goodness that lies in her old-fashioned moral' with the passionate rebelliousness given free rein in the novels of Charlotte Bronte, Elizabeth Gaskell, and other younger writers. After her death 'The Athenaeum' (17 October 1874, 513) remarked that 'No writer had greater power than she of compelling tears'. Her explicit didacticism was extreme even by early Victorian standards, and her heroines, of whom Emilia Wyndham was the best-known, were seemingly devoid of sexual desires, living only for self-sacrifice. She protested vehemently at the demeaning view of married women presented in the 'Punch' series 'Mrs. Caudle's Curtain Lectures', branding the anonymous author (Douglas Jerrold) a 'vulgar penny-a-liner' and suggesting that 'Punch' might, for a change, try teaching husbands to 'correct themselves as well as their wives' ('Emilia Wyndham', chap. 4, chap. 57). 
Little information seems to have survived about Marsh's private life, or about her character and appearance. From their childhood she and her siblings were on intimate terms with the children of other notable Staffordshire families, including the Wedgwoods. Her sister (Margaret) Emma was the first wife of Dr Henry Holland, a relative of the Wedgwoods and cousin of Elizabeth Gaskell. Holland later became Queen Victoria's physician, and he and his family remained part of Marsh's social circle after her sister's death in 1834. In February 1838 Harriet Martineau quoted a mutual friend's report that Marsh was 'sadly excited and restless', with an 'uncontrollable' nervous disorder which Martineau evidently attributed to excessive self-absorption ('Harriet Martineau's Letters', 11). Many years later, in February 1860, Martineau complained to the same correspondent, Fanny Wedgwood, that Marsh had never learned 'self-knowledge or modesty' (ibid., 186). 
By this time Marsh had succeeded to her father's estate, Linley Wood, following the death of her brother James Stamford Caldwell on 17 November 1858, but was involved in litigation to have her three unmarried daughters, Eliza Louisa, Georgina Amelia, and Rosamond Jane, recognized as the reversionary heirs to the estate in preference to the heir-at-law, Henry Thurston Holland, her sister Emma's son (who later became a tory cabinet minister and was created Viscount Knutsford). On 18 May 1860, after the case was decided in her daughters' favour, she changed her surname to Marsh-Caldwell by royal licence. She died at Linley Wood on 5 October 1874. 


@@@@@


doc= 18118


Marshal, Andrew (1742-1813), physician and anatomist, born at Park Hill, Fife, was the son of John Marshal, a farmer with a numerous family living near Newburgh. He lived for some time with his maternal grandfather who taught him to read before he attended first Mr Taylor's school at Newburgh, in 1750, and then Abernethy School in 1752. At first he intended to become a farmer, but when he was about sixteen he decided to become a minister among the Seceders, a body to which his father belonged, and which had separated from the established kirk in 1732. With a view to accomplishing this Marshal studied Latin and logic. He also published an essay on ambition, and one on composition in the 'British Magazine'. Unfortunately for Marshal the latter article offended members of his sect and he was excommunicated. For some time subsequently he led a desultory life, without any stable employment. He was for four years tutor in a family on Islay, 'striving to instruct unmanageable children' (Marshal, vi). He then carried on his studies both at Edinburgh and Glasgow while supporting himself by teaching private pupils, and in 1774 travelled abroad for about a year with Lord Balgonie, the eldest son of the earl of Leven and Melville. He translated from the Latin the first three books of Robert Simson's 'Elements of the Conic Sections' (1775), and gave some attention to Greek, Latin, trigonometry, logic, metaphysics, and theology. At last, when thirty-five years old, he decided to concentrate on medicine, and in 1777 went to London to continue his studies, although he was invited to become a candidate for the professorship of logic and rhetoric at the University of St Andrews. 
In London, Marshal attended the lectures of William Cruikshank and of John and William Hunter in Windmill Street. In 1778 he was, through the interest of Lord Leven, appointed surgeon to the 83rd or Glasgow regiment, which he accompanied to Jersey. Here he remained until 1783, when the regiment was disbanded. He performed his duties with great zeal and ability, and with a rigid probity that occasionally involved him in disputes with his commanding officers. In 1782 he graduated MD at Edinburgh, with an inaugural dissertation, 'De militum salute tuenda'. In the next year he settled in London, on the suggestion and with the support of David Pitcairn, who was at that time physician to St Bartholomew's Hospital. He at first intended to practise surgery, and was admitted to the Company of Surgeons in January 1784; but he afterwards became a licentiate of the Royal College of Physicians (September 1788). 
For the first seventeen or eighteen years of Marshal's life in London he was known almost exclusively as a successful teacher of anatomy. His anatomical school was in Thavies Inn, Holborn, where he settled in 1785, and built a dissecting room. It was at first intended that the lectures should form part of a scheme (suggested by Pitcairn) for establishing a kind of school of physic and surgery for the pupils of St Bartholomew's Hospital, but this plan, to Marshal's disappointment, did not materialize and led to a cooling in his friendship with Pitcairn. Marshal then lectured on his own account. Both his appearance and his voice were against him, but he was knowledgeable of his subject and the content of his lectures was excellent, and 'the whole was given with a constant reference to the infinite wisdom of the contrivance exhibited in the structure, so as to form the finest system of natural theology'. In April 1786 Marshal quarrelled with John Hunter about a paper of Marshal's on hydrophobia. This dispirited Marshal to such an extent that he published nothing more. 
In 1800 Marshal gave up his lectures on account of his health, and devoted himself entirely to medical practice, which he had before neglected. He died, after a painful illness, at his home at Bartlett's Buildings, Holborn, on 4 April 1813. He was unmarried. He was always of an unsocial temperament, and in his later years was very much alone. He left behind him numerous papers and memorandum books which were entrusted to the care of Solomon Sawrey, who had been his assistant in preparing his lectures. He had also a valuable anatomical museum, of which a detailed catalogue raisonne was being prepared at the time of his death. The only papers that were found to be fit for publication were edited by Sawrey with the title, 'The morbid anatomy of the brain, in mania and hydrophobia; with the pathology of these two diseases' (1815). 


@@@@@


doc= 18119


Anselm Marshal (d. 1245) who was never admitted to the earldom of Pembroke. All five Marshal brothers died without legitimate children and their massive inheritance was subsequently divided between the representatives of their five sisters and coheiresses. Among the families which benefited, then or later, were those of Bigod, Clare, Ferrers, Mortimer, Bohun, Cantilupe, Valence, and Hastings. 


@@@@@


doc= 18120


Marshal, Ebenezer (d. 1813), historian and Church of Scotland minister, was licensed as a preacher by the presbytery of Edinburgh on 30 October 1776, and ordained on 3 April 1782 as chaplain to the Scottish regiment in the Dutch service. On 22 November 1782 he was presented to the living of Cockpen in the presbytery of Dalkeith, Edinburghshire. On 29 December 1784 he married Christian Goodsman (died 1824); they had two children, Archibald, who later became an accountant in Edinburgh, and Susan Gloag. 
In later years Marshal published 'The History of the Union of Scotland and England' and 'An Abridgment of the Acts of Parliament Relating to the Church of Scotland' (both 1799), followed by 'A Treatise on the British Constitution' (1812). He also contributed an account of the parish of Cockpen to the first edition of Sir John Sinclair's 'Statistical Account of Scotland' (1791-9). Marshal died at Cockpen on 19 May 1813 and was survived by his wife, who died on 13 August 1824. 


@@@@@


doc= 18121


Gilbert Marshal, seventh earl of Pembroke (d. 1241), was permitted to succeed to the earldom of Pembroke. Although in the years 1234-5 Gilbert received many marks of royal favour and held important posts in Wales, he was never fully trusted and there was much in his behaviour to antagonize the king. When Llewelyn died in April 1240 Gilbert and his brother 


@@@@@


doc= 18122


Marshal, John (d. 1165), marshal, son of Gilbert, marshal of Henry I, first appears in records when, with his father, he successfully defended the family's right to the marshalcy against rivals at some time in Henry I's reign. This plea occurred before 1130, as John was recorded in that year's pipe roll as paying for succession to his father's lands and office. He features by name as master marshal in the 'Constitutio domus regis', drawn up for Stephen in the early part of his reign, and he seems to have joined King Stephen soon after Henry I's death. He appears constantly in the king's charters between 1136 and 1138, and accompanied the king on his Norman tour of 1137. But there is no trace of him in Stephen's charters after the outbreak of rebellion in the west country. The annals of Winchester say that in 1138 he garrisoned the Wiltshire castles of Marlborough and Ludgershall, which he appears to have had at farm or in fee from Stephen. The king certainly came to regard him as a rebel, because John of Worcester notes that Stephen was conducting a siege of Marlborough when disturbed in September 1139 by news that the empress and Robert of Gloucester had landed in Sussex. In March 1140 a rogue mercenary, Robert fitz Hubert, was captured by John Marshal. The 'Gesta Stephani' says that John Marshal was at this time a member of Gloucester's party, while John of Worcester believed that he was a supporter of the king. It may well be, then, that it was in his own interest that John was working, beginning to define a sphere of lordship in north Wiltshire and the Kennet valley. 
After the capture of Stephen at Lincoln in February 1141, John appears unequivocally in the empress's following, at Oxford in July and at the siege of Winchester in August and September. He seems to have been that John 'supporter of the empress' who, according to the continuator of John of Worcester's chronicle, was detached with a force to prevent the relief of Winchester. He was trapped at Wherwell Abbey which was set on fire around him. The verse biography of his son says that this incident cost him an eye, but is otherwise unreliable on the details. He remained firmly committed to the empress's cause after 1141; his brother, William Giffard, became the empress's chancellor. But his chief preoccupation seems to have been the extension of his power in Berkshire, where the abbey of Abingdon recorded him as one of its chief oppressors, and in Wiltshire, where he came into conflict with Patrick of Salisbury. In 1141 John acted with Patrick's elder brother, William of Salisbury, in the keeping of Wiltshire, but he had fallen out with the Salisbury family by 1145. The 'Histoire de Guillaume le Marechal' preserves a number of stories deriving from this period of private warfare in Wiltshire between two Angevin supporters. However, it cannot disguise John Marshal's ultimate defeat, and the fact that he was forced to come to an agreement with Earl Patrick by which he divorced his first wife, Adelina (who later married an Oxfordshire landowner, Stephen Gay), and married the earl's sister, Sybil. John continued to support the Angevin party, appearing with Henry fitz Empress at Devizes in 1147 or 1149. 
In 1152 it was the siege of John's forward post of Newbury in Berkshire that provoked the final crisis of Stephen's reign. Under pretext of negotiation, the Marshal (who was not in the castle) surrendered his son William to the king as hostage, but then abused the truce by running provisions and men into Newbury. When informed by the king's messenger that his son's death would follow from this, he is credited with the remark that he still had the hammers and anvil to make more and better sons. As it happened the humane king refused to execute William, and held him at court until the general peace was made the next year. 
John Marshal remained prominent at Henry II's court in the first year or so of the new king's reign and was allowed to keep most of his gains from Stephen's reign, but it seems that he lost Ludgershall Castle. It probably reflects the general decline in his fortunes that he lost Marlborough Castle in 1158. In 1163 John Marshal was in disgrace; he had indiscreetly disclosed his belief that one of the prophecies of Merlin referred to Henry II and that the king would die before he could return to England. In 1164 John was involved in the persecution of Becket. He had been deprived of the manor of South Mundham in 1162, when the archbishop reclaimed all lands held of him at fee farm. When his suit to regain the manor failed in the archiepiscopal court, he appealed to the king, alleging unfair treatment. Henry II heard the case at the Council of Northampton in October 1164, and although John's case failed, grounds were found to turn the plea against Becket. John Marshal died in 1165, some time before Michaelmas. He was succeeded initially by his eldest sons, Gilbert and John, but the former died before Michaelmas 1166, leaving the entire estate and office of marshal to John, who was succeeded in turn (after 1194) by his younger brother William Marshal, later earl of Pembroke. The youngest of John Marshal's sons, Henry Marshal, later became bishop of Exeter. 


@@@@@


doc= 18123


Marshal, Sir John (d. 1235), baron and justice, of Hingham (or Hockering), was on the evidence of one of his charters to Walsingham Priory an illegitimate son of John Marshal of Hampstead Marshall ('c'.1145-1194), the elder brother of William Marshal the elder, earl of Pembroke. His mother was probably Alice de Colleville, wife of a Sussex landowner, William de Colleville. This John is therefore one of the few instances where both parents of a child born of an adulterous aristocratic relationship can be discovered. John Marshal was acknowledged by his father and brought up in his household, and after 1194 in the household of his uncle. He was with his uncle in Flanders in 1197 and in Normandy in 1198. But John's success at court may not have been entirely his uncle's doing. His father had been seneschal of King John while the latter was count of Mortain, and may have died while doing him military service. This would account for the fact that the bastard John Marshal was able to survive untroubled his uncle's fall from grace in 1205 and continue to accumulate grants and favour. As castellan of Falaise in 1203 Marshal fought the French advance into Normandy. He retired to England early in 1204. His uncle sent him to Leinster in April 1204 to act as his seneschal for Ireland; he is to be found active there in 1205 and he may have still been there to greet Earl William on his arrival in February 1207. 
John Marshal returned with the earl when summoned by King John in autumn 1207, receiving a royal grant of the marshalcy of Ireland and land there. Seemingly untouched by his uncle's disgrace, he stayed with the royal court, and was a banneret in the king's army that sailed to Ireland in 1210. With suspicious ease he resumed the role of Earl William's lieutenant when his uncle returned to England and royal favour in May 1213. It may be that his independent presence at the royal court had been useful to his uncle for intelligence and partisan purposes. He was one of the royalist barons at Runnymede in June 1215, and in its unhappy aftermath had the keeping of several key shires (Somerset, Dorset, and Worcestershire), within the area where his uncle was powerful. In September 1215 he was one of John's ambassadors to Rome, and was back in England before the new year. He then attended the king on his northern campaign, and was at his deathbed at Newark in October 1216. In March 1217 John Marshal's position in the west country was enhanced by a grant of the keeping of Devizes Castle. Here he established himself as a dominant regional castellan, and, in partnership with Earl William (I) Longespee of Salisbury, subjected a wide area of Wiltshire to forced exactions. In May 1217 he was one of his uncle's bannerets at the battle of Lincoln, and acted as his uncle's emissary to summon the Anglo-French besiegers of the castle to surrender. With Philip d'Aubigny, Marshal was a leader in the decisive sea battle off Sandwich. 
John Marshal accumulated great rewards from victory. In November 1217 he became chief justice of the forests, a post he held until February 1221. In 1217-18 he had custody of the earldom of Devon and the Isle of Wight. In 1218 he was a justice on eyre in the north midlands. Following his uncle's death in May 1219 he entered into an even closer political partnership with the younger Earl William Marshal, his cousin. Just after his father's death the new Earl William used Sir John's seal until he could have his own dies cut, and acknowledged him as 'my beloved cousin': when William died, John Marshal was to be his chief executor. The Irish interests of Earl William (II) Marshal kept John Marshal frequently engaged in Ireland as a justice both for the king and his cousin. In 1223-4 he had the keeping of the Lacy lordship of Ulster. Elsewhere, he was an ambassador to France in the summer of 1225, and confronted the papal nuncio Otto on the king's behalf in January 1226. In June 1230 he was commissioner in an assize of arms for Norfolk and Suffolk. After Earl William (II)'s death in 1231 he was appointed as castellan to keep Pembrokeshire until the succession of Richard Marshal was confirmed; the succession ended his active link with the Marshal affinity, although he acted frequently in his capacity as executor for Earl William (II). He did not support the rebellion of Richard Marshal in 1233-4, and was at the royal court in 1234-5. 
John Marshal had died between February and 27 June 1235, when his elder son, John, did homage for the manor of Haselbury, Somerset, which was held in chief. John Marshal made a significant number of donations to monastic houses: to Luffield Priory, near his Northamptonshire seat of Norton, and to Walsingham Priory, near his other estate centres in Norfolk. Like his uncle he was also a patron of the templars. He had married his wife, Aline de Ryes, heir of the East Anglian barony of Hingham or Hockering in 1200. She survived him, holding the Ryes lands until 1267, when she died in her nineties. Their elder son, John Marshal, married Margaret, sister and heir of Thomas, earl of Warwick, who died in June 1242, and was briefly earl of Warwick before his own death in October 1242. He was succeeded by his younger brother, William Marshal of Norton, who participated in the baronial rebellion on the Montfortian side and died in 1265, during the fighting. William was succeeded by his son John Marshal, who succeeded his grandmother in the barony of Hockering two years later, came of age in 1278, and died in 1282. The family became extinct in the male line in 1316, with the death of John's grandson, John, whose father, William Marshal of Norton, had been killed at Bannockburn two years earlier. 


@@@@@


doc= 18124


Marshal, Richard, sixth earl of Pembroke (d. 1234), magnate and courtier, lord of Leinster, Longueville, and Orbec, was born in the early 1190s, the second son of William (I) Marshal, earl of Pembroke and Striguil, regent of England, and Isabel de Clare, daughter and eventual heir of Richard de Clare (Strongbow) and his wife, Eva, daughter of Diarmait Mac Murchadha, king of Leinster. First mentioned in 1203, Richard Marshal occasionally appeared in the background of the great events of King John's reign in which his father participated. In 1207, when relations between the king and Earl William were deteriorating and the earl wished to visit his Irish lands, King John, who already held the earl's eldest son, William (II) Marshal, as a hostage, demanded Richard as a second surety for his father's behaviour. Except for a short interval Richard remained in royal custody until 1212. In 1214 he accompanied King John on the disastrous Poitevin expedition and nearly died from sickness there. He is not known to have participated in the baronial wars of 1215-17; indeed, at his father's death in May 1219 he was at the court of King Philip Augustus of France, where he was probably preparing to inherit the Marshal lands in Normandy. 
After the death of Richard's mother, Isabel, in 1220, her eldest son, William (II) Marshal, ceded these Norman lands to his brother Richard. After paying a heavy relief to Philip Augustus, Richard Marshal thus became the lord of the Norman honours of Longueville-sur-Scie and Orbec, and until 1231 he was primarily a French nobleman. In November 1226, for instance, after the sudden death of Louis VIII, the regency council of France wrote to him and ten other leading Norman nobles, appealing to them to aid the accession and coronation of the young Louis IX. One English annalist said that Richard was the marshal of the French royal army, another that he learned the skills of warfare in French battles. Moreover, about 1222 Richard married Gervaise (died 'c'.1239), daughter and heir of Alain de Dinan (died 1198), one of the greatest nobles of Brittany; Gervaise was also the widow of Juhel de Mayenne, the greatest nobleman in Maine, and of another great Breton noble, Geoffroi, vicomte de Rohan. Such a match raised Richard to an important position in Brittany, and in May 1225 he was present at a great gathering of the Breton nobles with their duke, Pierre Mauclerc, at Nantes. 
Yet at the same time Richard Marshal continued to hold his mother's manor of Long Crendon, Buckinghamshire, and he successfully claimed the manors of Ringwood, Hampshire, and Burton Latimer, Northamptonshire, to which Gervaise de Dinan had long-standing claims. To hold lands in England and France simultaneously was a mark of royal favour to his family, which Richard exploited to secure privileges in England for Norman merchants. However, continuing Anglo-French hostility created political difficulties at times for Richard and embarrassed his elder brother, William (II) Marshal. During the Anglo-French war of 1224-7 Richard's English manors were taken into royal hands for a while. Fresh problems arose when Henry III landed in Brittany in May 1230 and occupied Richard's castle of Dinan. Richard appears to have had some initial involvement in the English expedition, but he earned the hostility of Henry III because he did not renounce his allegiance to the king of France. 
When William (II) Marshal died in England at Easter 1231, Richard Marshal was at the Norman exchequer in Rouen, and Henry III at first prevented his succession to the Marshal lands, warning the port bailiffs to refuse him entry into England. In view of Richard's French fealty, this was a natural precaution; but according to Wendover, when he came to England to seek his inheritance, Hubert de Burgh, the justiciar, encouraged King Henry to spurn his offer of homage and to order him to leave England at once. Undaunted, the Marshal roused his family's followers in Ireland and Pembrokeshire into revolt, so forcing the king to accept his succession. This story should be treated with some caution. Certainly the king felt constrained to justify his confiscation of the Marshal lands in a letter to the barons of Ireland; but in the same letter he accepted that Richard Marshal was the rightful heir of William (II) Marshal. The good offices of the priory of Notley and the earl of Chester secured a safe conduct for Richard Marshal to come to the king in late June, and the king invested him as earl of Pembroke and lord of Leinster early in August. From then until his death Richard Marshal was at the heart of English politics. 
In November 1232 the Marshal was one of four earls assigned to guard the now disgraced Hubert de Burgh at Devizes Castle. The king also conferred the manor and hundred of Awre, Gloucestershire, upon the Marshal. Yet the harmony between the king and the Marshal was short-lived. Richard put up some resistance to providing sufficient dower for his brother's widow, Eleanor, the king's sister; he eventually agreed to pay her the crippling sum of $400 a year for her dower rights in Ireland and south Wales, but by June 1233 he was defaulting on payments. By then the king had fallen under the influence of the bishop of Winchester, Peter des Roches, and his kinsman Peter de Rivallis. From Christmas 1232 these so-called 'Poitevins' and the new justiciar, Stephen of Seagrave, seemed to be monopolizing the distribution of royal patronage, and among the officials they ousted was William of Rowden, Richard Marshal's deputy marshal at court. Throughout the spring of 1233 tensions were rising between the Poitevins and members of the Marshal's affinity, particularly Gilbert Basset and his brothers and Richard Siward; and the Marshal was drawn, probably against his will, into armed protest and eventually a calamitous revolt. Some English chroniclers chose to portray Richard Marshal, hitherto a French nobleman, as a champion of English liberties against the king's foreign counsellors. Yet the revolt was not a struggle between the 'natural-born' barons and 'alien' favourites of Henry III, nor was it a constitutional dispute, although the king's disregard of the rule of law served to stoke the rebellion. Rather, it was a factional conflict over patronage and access to the king, and the descent into war was a startling indication of the mistrust that had built up at court against the king's advisers. 
By mid-June Gilbert Basset was in arms against the king. On 9 July Richard Marshal, Basset, and Richard Siward are said to have retired in anger from the royal court because the king had denied justice to Basset and Siward. There are conflicting accounts of what happened next. Wendover claimed that before 1 August the Marshal fled to Wales, warned by his sister, the countess of Cornwall, that his enemies were plotting to have him arrested at court; he rebelled and the king ordered the destruction of his property and formally 'defied' him (renounced the ties of lordship). More likely, the Marshal was not yet prepared to lead an open revolt. He attempted to organize an armed gathering at Gilbert Basset's manor of Wycombe, Buckinghamshire, in early August, but most sympathizers recoiled from the brink of revolt, leaving the Marshal isolated outside the Welsh marches. In mid-August, when the king was still so unaware of this simmering discontent that he was preparing to go to Ireland, the Marshal's more ardent followers seized the castles of Hay and Ewyas Lacy, and Basset and Siward renounced their homage to the king. In reply Henry III turned upon the Marshal, confiscating his English manors and besieging his castle at Usk. The Marshal had no choice but to make terms, giving pledges for faithful service on 8 September. 
The first phase of the conflict was over, although the Marshal was by now at war with Morgan ap Hywel of Caerleon, his family's traditional enemy. A settlement with the king and court might have been within reach, but the Bassets and Siward remained outlawed, raiding the estates of the bishop of Winchester with particular glee -- and possibly with the Marshal's connivance. Meanwhile, no doubt mistrusting the intentions of the king and his counsellors and lacking active support from the English baronage, the Marshal negotiated an alliance with Llywelyn ab Iorwerth, reversing his family's former hostility to the Welsh prince. In early October, perhaps to appease his still outlawed followers and fearful of royal support for Morgan, the Marshal launched a campaign to seize Glamorgan. In response King Henry ordered the confiscation of all the Marshal's English castles and manors on 18 October, and their destruction ten days later. As open war erupted along the marches, the daring rescue of Hubert de Burgh from Devizes on 29 October by Siward and the Bassets served only to deepen King Henry's fury. Henry, who by then had certainly 'defied' the Marshal, gathered an army at Hereford and invaded the Marshal lands in south Wales. 
The desperate rebels successfully held the royalists at bay, though they could not hope for victory. On the evening of 11 November the Marshal's Welshmen surprised the royal forces at Grosmont, Herefordshire, and succeeded, it was said, in stealing 500 packhorses, the Marshal refusing to attack the king himself. Although Richard narrowly escaped capture during a bloody skirmish outside Monmouth on 25 November, another ambush against the royal army on 26 December prevented further royal advances. Early in January 1234 the Marshal and Llywelyn devastated Shropshire and even burnt part of Shrewsbury; but the next month some of their allies were repulsed with heavy loss from Carmarthen. From Welsh bases, meanwhile, Siward and the Bassets continued to plunder their enemies' manors in England with impunity until May. King Henry's fury knew no bounds, and he demanded that the Marshal should come to him with a rope round his neck to plead for mercy. But the two sides had in reality reached a stalemate; and the English and Welsh bishops, who had already tried to intervene in the autumn of 1233, now stepped into the breach. In February 1234, led by Edmund of Abingdon, archbishop-elect of Canterbury, the bishops told the king that only the removal of the bishop of Winchester and his allies from his counsels would end the crisis. The king eventually yielded, and a truce with Richard Marshal and Llywelyn was arranged late in March; this heralded the fall from grace of the Poitevins and Seagrave in April. 
Meanwhile, however, war had broken out in Ireland between the Marshal's brothers and the partisans of the king, including the justiciar of Ireland, Maurice Fitzgerald, the Lacys, and Richard de Burgh. So Richard Marshal crossed to Ireland in February or March to retrieve the situation. There disaster overtook him. On 1 April 1234 he met his enemies in open battle in the Curragh, a plain near Kildare; he was defeated and captured, and died from his wounds in his castle at Kilkenny on 16 April, while the victors divided his lands. Such are the bare details recorded in the Irish sources; but, owing to the popularity of the Marshal and the cause with which he was associated, the English and Welsh chroniclers retold his death as a heroic epic, and it is impossible to separate the truth of the affair from the literary motifs which immediately became attached to the event. Richard Marshal, it was said, was tricked into attending a parley on the Curragh by Geoffrey Marsh, who was secretly in league with Fitzgerald; but the royalists came not to confer but to fight, while Marsh and all the Marshal's Irish knights deserted their lord. Richard could have escaped, but he preferred to fight and 'die with honour for the sake of justice' ('Flores historiarum', 3, 84) than to turn tail upon his enemies. He had a mere 15 faithful marcher knights whereas his enemies numbered 140: he fought on until almost alone, when he was mortally wounded from behind, taken prisoner, and borne stricken to his castle. An inept or treacherous surgeon caused the wound to fester, and he died. He was buried at Kilkenny, either in the Dominican convent founded by his brother or, less probably, the Franciscan convent. 
The news of Richard Marshal's death shocked the English court and compounded the disgrace of the Poitevins. Henry III was reported to have bemoaned his passing like David mourning Saul and Jonathan; and the story soon spread that the Poitevins had forged the royal letters that had provoked the Irish war. But the king's true attitude is more clearly revealed in the gratitude he expressed to the Marshal's killers for their resistance to the earl, and in the heavy pledges and ransoms which he took from the Marshal's Irish supporters, including Geoffrey Marsh, who was nothing more than a convenient scapegoat for the chroniclers. 
Richard Marshal was held in almost universal esteem by contemporary writers, not only for his courage in arms but also for his refinement and erudition, as his friendship with Robert Grosseteste demonstrates. Matthew Paris called him 'the flower of knighthood in our times' (Paris, 'Chron'., 3.289). In part the Marshal was singled out for such repeated praise because he seemed to be the 'native-born' champion whom contemporary writers keenly pitted against the hated 'aliens', notwithstanding the Marshal's own French career and connections. Yet his violent death in an essentially factional struggle should not obscure his undoubted abilities, which reminded contemporaries forcefully of his great father; it was Richard Marshal's misfortune that events were simply too much for him. He was also a benefactor of a number of religious houses in Normandy, Brittany, England, and Ireland. 
Richard Marshal died childless, but his brother Gilbert Marshal ['see under 'Marshal, William (II), fifth earl of Pembroke] was permitted to inherit the earldom of Pembroke and the other Marshal lands in England, the Welsh marches, and Ireland. The family never recovered its lands in Normandy, which Louis IX had seized on Richard's death. 


