@@@@@


doc= 18125


Walter Marshal, eighth earl of Pembroke (d. 1245), were quick to resume hostilities in south-west Wales. Walter recaptured Cardigan, lost to the Welsh in 1231, but Gilbert's scheme to force Maelgwn Fychan to hold southern Ceredigion as his vassal was soon frustrated by the king. In June 1241 Gilbert was killed in a riding accident at an unlicensed tournament at Dunstable. After some delay Walter was admitted to the earldom. He served in the army which went to Gascony in 1242, but although his Pembrokeshire tenants were active in the Welsh war which broke out in 1244, Walter does not seem to have taken part in person. He had fallen ill by July 1245 at Goodrich and died on 24 November, to be followed about a month later by his younger brother 


@@@@@


doc= 18126


Marshal, William (I), fourth earl of Pembroke (c.1146-1219), soldier and administrator, was the son of John Marshal (d. 1165) and Sybil ('fl'. 'c'.1146- 'c'.1156), daughter of Walter of Salisbury. He is one of the few medieval laymen to be the subject of a biography, 'L'histoire de Guillaume le Marechal'. The biography (here referred to as the 'History') is in fact an extended poem of over 19,000 lines in rhyming couplets. It was commissioned by William (II) Marshal, the eldest son of the Marshal, and the old Marshal's executor, John (II) of Earley. It is believed that it was written by an expatriate Tourangeau layman, called John, probably in the southern march of Wales at some time in the years 1225-6, before August of the latter year. The writer worked from the memoirs of those who had been witnesses of the Marshal's life, from the recollections of those to whom the Marshal had told stories of his early days, and also from documents in the Marshal family archive. The biography is naturally the principal source for much of what follows here. 
William was born the fourth son of John Marshal, the second son by his second wife, whom John had married 'c'.1145 in order to conciliate Patrick, earl of Salisbury, with whom he was engaged in a local war in Wiltshire. The evidence of the 'History' indicates that William was born late in 1146 or early in 1147. In 1152, at the age of five or six, William was offered as hostage by his father, who needed a pledge for a truce with King Stephen, who was blockading John's new castle at Newbury, and who expected the truce to be used to negotiate its surrender. John Marshal, reckless of his son's life, used the truce to provision the castle instead. When challenged that his son would die as a result, he is said to have uttered the notorious response that he did not care about the child, since he still had the anvils and hammers to produce even finer ones. The king made several attempts to convince the indifferent garrison that he would execute the boy, but did not in the end permit it. William seems to have remained at court, more as the king's ward than a captive, until perhaps as late as the settlement of November 1153. He next appears as assenting, with his elder brothers, to his father's grant of the manor of Nettlecombe to Hugh de Ralegh in 1156. 
It must have been two or three years after this that William was fostered into the household of William de Tancarville, chamberlain of Normandy, who was his mother's cousin. He remained as a squire in the chamberlain's household in Normandy until 1166. Little is known of his training or adolescence, although it is clear from later evidence that he was not put to learn his letters. The only story surviving of this period in his life is that his nickname at Tancarville was Gaste-viande (the Glutton), it being said that when there was nothing to eat, he slept, although the chamberlain predicted great things for him none the less. 
In 1166, just after his father's death, William was knighted, when he was twenty or thereabouts. His father's testament left him no share of the family lands, which ultimately came to his elder full brother, John Marshal (died 1194). The chronology of the 'History' is confused at this point, but it seems that after his knighting he became involved in a brief frontier war between Henry II and the counts of Flanders, Ponthieu, and Boulogne, which led to an invasion of the Pays de Caux. The Tancarville household was in garrison at the castle of Neufchatel-en-Bray, and William found himself in the rare position for a medieval knight of commencing his career in a pitched battle. Apart from a rebuke from his master for being too forward in action: 'Get back, William, don't be such a hothead, let the knights through!' ('History', ll. 872-4), he distinguished himself in the skirmish. Unfortunately he lost his horse in the cut and thrust of a street fight in the suburbs of Neufchatel, and failed to take advantage of the opportunity to seize the ransoms that would have retrieved the situation. This was ironically pointed out to him by the earl of Essex, who, at the victory banquet, asked him loudly for various items of saddlery and harness, which he could not produce -- but of which he could have had his pick, had he fought professionally, rather than boyishly, in the manner of a knight of the romance. 
William was confronted immediately after the battle by the problem of the obvious reluctance of William de Tancarville to offer him further maintenance in his household, forcing him to sell his clothes in order to buy a horse to ride. The chamberlain gave him a reprieve when he decided to lead his household to a tournament in Maine, and it was at this point that William Marshal (as he was known long before he inherited the office of royal marshal on his brother's death in 1194 -- for William and his other brothers Marshal was a surname rather than, or as well as, an occupational title) found his true calling. By the account of the 'History', the Marshal distinguished himself by capturing a prominent courtier of the king of Scots among others. With the proceeds of his success and the permission of William de Tancarville he threw himself into the tournament circuit for over a year. Late in 1167 or early in 1168 he amicably severed his connection with Tancarville, crossed to England, and took service with his uncle, Earl Patrick of Salisbury. He accompanied the earl to Poitou, where Patrick was given responsibility for the province jointly with Queen Eleanor. William was present at the earl's assassination by a member of the Lusignan family early in April 1168, and was himself cornered by Lusignan soldiers against a hedge, wounded in the thigh by a slash from behind, and captured. He had to undergo a period of uncomfortable captivity, ill from his wound and half-starved by his uncourtly captors. He was eventually released when Queen Eleanor paid his ransom, following which she took him into her retinue. 
In 1170, following the coronation of Henry, the Young King, in June, William Marshal was transferred into the boy's household to act as his tutor in arms. He was rapidly established as a favourite and infected the boy with his own love of the tournament. He was given responsibility for the organization of the Young King's retinue, and would seem indeed to have acted as his marshal ('History' gives a wealth of detail about his life on the tournament circuit in the twelfth century, and is indeed the best source for the early history of the tournament). William Marshal is named by Hoveden as one of those who joined the rebellion of the Young King against his father in April 1173. The 'History' asserts that his hero knighted the Young King in the early days of the campaign, but there is some confusion here, for it is known that Henry II himself delivered arms to his son immediately before the boy's coronation in 1170. But the Marshal was certainly with the Young King throughout the period of the rebellion. He was still at his lord's side in October 1174, when he attested the agreement between Henry II and his sons. His attendance on the Young King was constant until 1182. 
The result of this relationship, together with the rewards of the tournament circuit, was that the Marshal obtained sufficient wealth to maintain his own household knights, and had the resources to raise his own banner at the great tournament of Lagny-sur-Marne in 1180. However, success bred enemies in the Young King's court, and a cabal of William's colleagues succeeded in opening up a gulf between Henry and the Marshal. The principal accusation against him seems to have been that he showed contempt for the Young King in promoting his own interests on the tourney field. A further accusation against him of adultery with Queen Margaret, the younger Henry's wife, would seem to have had little foundation other than in subsequent unsavoury gossip. The two men parted company late in 1182, and an attempt by the Marshal to get redress against his accuser before the Old King at Caen at Christmas 1182 was dismissed. Following this the Marshal went into exile, first making a pilgrimage to the relics of the 'three holy kings' in Cologne, and later (apparently) taking service with the count of Flanders, from whom he accepted a large money fee in the city of St Omer. 
Increasing difficulties between the Young King and his father in Poitou seem to have persuaded the younger king to take the Marshal back into his service at some time after February 1183, when he began to feel let down by his household. However, the Marshal returned only to witness the last illness and death of his young master (on 11 June near Limoges). The Marshal was at the deathbed and was charged near the end to take the Young King's cloak to Jerusalem to fulfil the vow the king had taken to go to the Holy Land. There were some initial difficulties in accomplishing this. He was seized as security for the payment of their wages by a company of the Young King's mercenaries, and only obtained release with difficulty. After attending the younger Henry's corpse on its troubled journey to burial at Rouen, the Marshal received the permission of Henry II to discharge the obligation laid upon him, and with some financial support from the Old King departed for Jerusalem, after taking leave of his own family in England. 
William Marshal was in the kingdom of Jerusalem from early 1184 for nearly two years. On his return to Normandy (probably by March 1186) he was received into the royal household. He began to accumulate some of the rewards that went with office. He had a grant of the wardship of the lordship and heir of William of Lancaster soon after his return, and of the royal estate of Cartmel, before July 1188. The Marshal served with distinction in the campaigns against Philip Augustus of France late in 1188, and played a leading part in the last months of the reign of Henry II, as one of the commanders of the royal household guard. He was nowhere more prominent than in the escape of the Old King from Le Mans on 12 June 1189, and was in command of the party that acted as rearguard in the king's flight to Angers. In the course of the action he encountered Richard, the king's son, who was leading the pursuit. Richard was alone and unsupported, having ridden lightly armed ahead of his troops. He is said to have begged the Marshal to spare him, as to kill him would be dishonourable. The Marshal shouted, 'Indeed I won't, let the Devil kill you, I shall not be the one to do it', and shifted his lance to kill Richard's horse beneath him ('History', ll. 8837-49). After this escape, and a fortnight in garrison at Alencon, the Marshal was recalled to the king in time to witness the conference at Azay and the king's death at Chinon on 6 July 1189. During 1188-9 he was offered marriage first to the heiress of Chateauroux (Berry) and then to the heiress of the honour of Striguil in return for giving up the wardship of the Lancaster lands. He is represented as remonstrating with the seneschal of Anjou that he should open the treasury to give alms to the poor, and as taking responsibility for properly arraying the dead king and escorting him to burial at Fontevrault, but the role the 'History' assigns him may have been retrospectively prominent. 
None the less, there is no doubt that the heir to the throne, Count Richard of Poitou, was determined to bring William Marshal forward in public affairs on his accession, despite their encounter on the retreat from Le Mans some weeks earlier. The Marshal was confirmed in his possession of Striguil (Chepstow), the honour of the late earl Richard de Clare (Strongbow) (d. 1176) in England and Wales. He married Clare's daughter, Isabel de Clare (1171x6-1220), probably in August following his arrival in London late in July 1189, on what appears to have been a confidential mission to Queen Eleanor, Richard's mother, then at Winchester. In addition to Striguil, by right of his wife the Marshal received half of the Giffard honour of Longueville in Normandy and some Giffard manors (including Caversham) in England. He shared the Giffard lands with the earl of Hertford, who also had a claim to the Giffard inheritance. As well as this, the Marshal's wife brought a claim to the lordship of Leinster, conquered by her father in 1170-71. To consolidate his power in the southern march William Marshal was granted the shrievalty of Gloucester and the keeping of the Forest of Dean. 
The Marshal was in constant attendance on the new king from the time of Richard's coronation (in which he carried the sceptre) on 13 September 1189, to his departure on crusade in July 1190. His elder brother, John Marshal, shared in his success, having grants of office and lands. Henry Marshal, a younger brother, was given the deanery of York. So prominent did the Marshal group now appear at court that there is evidence of hostility to it in the actions of Geoffrey Plantagenet, the archbishop of York, and William de Longchamp, the chancellor. The latter acted in the spring of 1190 to remove the shrievalty of York from John (II) Marshal for alleged incompetence, and at the same time moved unsuccessfully to blockade the Marshal's castle of Gloucester, for unknown reasons. William Marshal's star continued to rise, however, for he was made one of the four men appointed by King Richard to monitor William de Longchamp's conduct as justiciar. In October 1191 the Marshal and his fellows co-operated with Count John, the king's brother, in his campaign to remove Longchamp from power, and the Marshal supported the substitution of Walter de Coutances, archbishop of Rouen, as the new justiciar. There was a period of stability when power was balanced between Count John and the justiciars, but that ended in December 1192, when news reached England of King Richard's capture and imprisonment in Germany. The Marshal and his fellows were forced into reluctant confrontation with the count in March 1193. John finally withdrew from England in the summer, and in February 1194, with the king's return imminent, the justiciars acted to confiscate the count's lands in England. 
In March 1194 the king returned, and at the same time John Marshal died at Marlborough without a legitimate heir (perhaps resisting the justiciars at Marlborough in John's interests, for he was the count's sometime seneschal). This brought William Marshal the family inheritance and completed his landed power base in the west country and southern march. Without waiting to attend his brother's funeral the Marshal joined the royal household on its way to confront John's loyalists at Nottingham, and he played a part in the successful siege of the castle there. However, relations between the Marshal and King Richard were not entirely even. The Marshal refused to do homage to the king for his lands in Ireland, saying that Count John was still his overlord for Leinster. Although the king accepted his reasons, at least one onlooker (William de Longchamp) was brave enough to voice the conclusion that the Marshal was keeping his bridges open to John, as the heir presumptive, saying: 'Here you are planting vines!' ('History', ll. 10312-26). The Marshal carried a sword of state at King Richard's solemn crown-wearing at Winchester on 17 April 1194. 
Thereafter William Marshal was closely engaged with the royal court until the very end of the reign, spending much of the period between 1194 and 1199 campaigning in Normandy and elsewhere in northern France. However, he had other tasks. In the early summer of 1197 he was entrusted with negotiations for an alliance between King Richard and the counts of Flanders and Boulogne. In August 1197 he returned to Flanders with Count Baldwin (his lord for a fee in St Omer) and apparently played a prominent part in the action outside Arras in which King Philip was trapped and forced to surrender on terms. He remained very much a military man, and the 'History' has much to say of his campaigns and achievements at this time. For instance, it recalls the active part he played in the taking of the castle of Milly-sur-Therain, near Beauvais, in 1198, when he climbed a scaling-ladder and defended a section of wall: at that time he was over fifty years of age, but age was not enough to stop him flattening the constable of Milly as he met him on the wall walk. But he did need to sit down on the man's unconscious body, to catch his breath. 
While King Richard was dying on 6 April 1199 the Marshal was at Vaudreuil, acting as a ducal justice. There he heard the news of the king's danger, receiving a writ directing him to take charge of the tower of Rouen and secure the city. He heard of the king's death three days later while on the point of going to bed. He crossed the city in the night to discuss the succession with Archbishop Hubert Walter. He declared himself a supporter of Count John for the succession, rather than the king's nephew, Arthur of Brittany, 'since the son is indisputably closer in the line of inheritance than the nephew is'. Despite the archbishop's warning, 'that you will never come to regret anything you did as much as what you're doing now' ('History', ll. 11900-6), the Marshal was sent to England with the archbishop to bring his fellow magnates to support John. He then returned to Normandy and joined John's household as it prepared to make the crossing. Immediately before John's coronation (27 May 1199) the Marshal's loyalty was rewarded by investiture as earl of Pembroke. Along with investiture went a promise of Pembrokeshire itself, which the Marshal's late father-in-law had lost to the king in 1154, and which the king still withheld. He had secured the marcher lordship from which he took his title by 1201. It is clear that the Marshal visited the march himself to claim Pembroke late in 1200 or early in 1201. There is strong evidence that, while in west Wales, the Marshal made the crossing to Ireland to visit Leinster and take the homage of his men there, leaving his knight, Geoffrey fitz Robert, behind him as seneschal. He also received once more the shrievalty of Gloucester (lost in 1194) and the keeping of Gloucester and Bristol castles, thus consolidating his power in the south-west of England. He secured for his bastard nephew, John Marshal, son of the late John Marshal (died 1194), the barony of Hockering in Norfolk, and the lordship of Ryes in Normandy. 
William Marshal maintained the place at the royal court he had held under Richard in John's first years, and certainly found little cause at this time to regret his choice in 1199, whatever the archbishop is alleged to have warned. He had reached a peak of personal influence and power by 1201, being very close to the new king's counsels. But his career slowly became tainted by the king's failure to maintain his position in northern France. The Marshal had been detailed from 1201 onwards to protect Upper Normandy, but his efforts were increasingly compromised by the king's political misjudgements. At the end of 1203 the Marshal led an unsuccessful attempt to relieve the garrison of the border castle of Chateau Gaillard, when his energy was defeated by a failure of river-borne and land forces to link up, and his force was decisively defeated by the French commander, Guillaume des Barres. In December 1203 the Marshal accompanied the king on his departure from Normandy for England, after which the duchy fell rapidly to the French invaders. 
The loss of Normandy was a serious matter for William Marshal. It had been the theatre for many of his greatest achievements over the past thirty years, and he plainly loved the place. King Philip's conquest of the duchy involved William in serious losses of land, which he was not prepared to let go without more of a struggle than the king was making. When King John sent him and the earl of Leicester to negotiate with the French king in May 1204, the Marshal took the opportunity to open private negotiations about his continued possession of his Norman lands. He and the earl of Leicester paid for a year's grace before they met King Philip's condition of homage for the continued enjoyment of their Norman lands. King John seems to have understood the Marshal's predicament, and was willing to be as obliging as he could to his old ally. In the summer of 1204 he allowed the Marshal to get away with some sharp practice over the Dorset lands of the count of Meulan, which he claimed. He also allowed the Marshal to seek compensation in the southern march of Wales. He granted the Marshal the lordship of Castle Goodrich, and licensed, and perhaps even funded, the Marshal's campaign to recover Cilgerran in Ceredigion from the princes of Deheubarth, which he achieved in December 1204. 
In spring 1205, however, Normandy was still on the Marshal's mind, and he took advantage of another embassy to do homage to King Philip. From the evidence of the 'History', King John seems to have been sympathetic to the Marshal's wish to do homage, but was less than pleased when he heard that Philip had prevailed on the Marshal to do liege homage for his Norman lands, obliging the Marshal to do military service to him when in France. This led to a public rift between King John and the Marshal on his return to the English court, for the Marshal refused to accompany him to campaign in Poitou. The king accused him of treason and demanded that the magnates present pass judgment on him, but, remarkably, they refused, perhaps impressed by the Marshal's harangue that they 'Be on alert against the king: what he thinks to do with me, he will do to each and every one of you, or even more, if he gets the upper hand over you' ('History', ll. 13171-4). The king then attempted to get one of his household knights to challenge the Marshal, but (despite the Marshal's being now nearly sixty) they all refused. None the less, despite this narrow escape, the Marshal had misjudged the situation, and King John decided that he had gone as far as he wished to go in helping the earl of Pembroke recover his losses. The king as a consequence demanded the Marshal's eldest son as a hostage for his faith, and the flood of favours to the earl dried to a trickle. The Marshal was still at court and in November was detailed with other earls to escort King William of Scots from the border south to York. He remained at court nearly until John's departure to Poitou in June 1206, but did not return when the king came back to England in September. 
From 1206 to 1213 the Marshal spent a biblical seven years in the political wilderness. This would seem to have been (initially) a matter of his own choice, rather than the result of the king's expelling him from court. The king was still well disposed enough towards the Marshal to repay a debt incurred before his departure on campaign. He was even prepared to humour for a while the Marshal's request that he be allowed to cross the sea to his Irish estates, and licences to depart were issued both to him and his principal followers in February 1207. However, he had second thoughts about having a man of the Marshal's prestige trampling about in the lordship of Ireland, which the king seems to have regarded as his own private garden. Messages were sent to the Marshal asking him to hand over his second son, Richard, as hostage for his good behaviour, and also intimating that the king would rather he did not go. But the Marshal was by now determined, and, despite the king's hints, sailed to Ireland with his wife and military household. The king immediately retaliated by relieving the Marshal of his responsibilities in Gloucestershire and the Forest of Dean. The fortress of Cardigan was also taken from him and given to a royal warden. 
The Marshal was almost immediately drawn into conflict with King John's justiciar, Meiler Fitz Henry, a veteran of the old days of conquest in the 1170s and a willing tool in the king's hand to reduce marcher influence in Ireland. William had already sent his nephew, John Marshal, ahead of him in 1204 to try to assert his interests in Leinster against Meiler, who had laid claim to the region of Offaly. Now he took up the struggle himself. The Marshal would seem to have been the motivating power behind a party of Meiler's enemies, calling itself 'the barons of Leinster and Meath', who petitioned the king that Offaly be restored to the lord of Leinster. This the king refused, and demonstrated that he had been told by Meiler who was to blame by promptly recalling the Marshal to England. About 29 September 1207 the Marshal returned to meet the king with only a small escort, leaving his interests in Leinster in the hands of his wife and his household knights. He seems to have expected the worst when he left, and was not disappointed. In the meantime a meeting with the king, Meiler, and a number of Irish barons at Woodstock in October 1207 went singularly badly for the Marshal: many of his former supporters promptly defected to the king with little pressure. 
Meiler's kinsmen and followers, and a number of the Marshal's own tenants in Leinster, began a military campaign against him in his absence. This was reinforced in January 1208 by Meiler himself, whom the king sent off to Ireland armed with letters of recall to the Marshal's men. Fortunately for the Marshal his military household was up to the challenge, and happy to defy the king. His party negotiated for support with the Lacy family; between them Meiler's men and the rebel knights of Leinster were crushed, and Meiler himself was captured. The countess, William's wife, was more or less left in control of Ireland. Recognizing the inevitable, the king came to terms with the Marshal and restored Leinster to him on new terms, but returned Offaly. Meiler himself was offered as sacrifice to the Marshal, and was in the end disinherited. But the Marshal was certainly no longer required at court, and was allowed (and maybe even encouraged) to leave for Ireland once more. His two elder sons remained hostage in England for his behaviour. 
The Marshal lived in Ireland in isolation from his former habitat of the court for several years, and amused himself in a reorganization of his lordship there and in some campaigning against the native Irish. He included in his hostilities the native Irish bishop of Ferns, a Cistercian called Ailbe O Maelmuaid, who was a friend and intimate of King John from the days when the latter had been count of Mortain. Bishop Ailbe was doubtless persecuted because he had been an ally of Meiler Fitz Henry. The treatment of the bishop of Ferns brought the Marshal under the church's ban by 1216. The only occasion on which the Marshal came into direct contact with the king in his six years' exile from court was in 1210, when he came under suspicion for sheltering the king's enemy, William (III) de Briouze. Briouze had taken refuge in Ireland after falling into disgrace at court, and was briefly entertained by the Marshal in Leinster, before being passed on to his relatives, the Lacy family. The Marshal protested his innocence, crossing over to Pembroke to appear before the king, who was preparing an expedition against the Lacys. He escaped with only a few harsh words and the loss of the fortress of Dunamase, and was sent back across the Irish Sea. 
In August 1212 a thaw in relations between the Marshal and the king began, when the Marshal made ostentatious demonstrations of loyalty in Ireland while John was under threat of a baronial conspiracy. The king had perhaps originally suspected the Marshal's involvement, for he had placed his fleet on alert against threats coming from the Marshal's lands, but the king was eventually reassured. The Marshal's elder sons were released into the custody of his friends. Eventually, in May 1213, the Marshal was recalled to the court, where his renowned loyalty was suddenly in demand once more. He was restored to his former position of dominance in south Wales: Cardigan was returned, and the lordships of Carmarthen, Gower, and Haverford added to his responsibilities. He was left virtually justiciar of the march. 
Following the disaster of Bouvines in 1214 the Marshal was more than ever in demand as mainstay for the royalist cause against the emerging rebel baronial party. The Marshal was chief lay negotiator for the king at London in January and at Oxford in February 1215. When war came despite his efforts, he was sent off to secure the march against the rebels who had allied there with Prince Llywelyn of Gwynedd. Following the king's defeat William Marshal resumed his role of middle man in negotiations with the barons. He may have been assisted -- rather than hindered -- in this by the defection of his eldest son, William (II) Marshal, to the baronial party at some time in May or June 1215. Far from being a blow to the Marshal, this may have been a deliberate move of father and son (who were devoted to each other) to make sure they had a foot in whichever camp ultimately won; the Worcester annals provide evidence that there was some contemporary suspicion of their motives. This was the sort of game the elder Marshal had already played with his elder brother, John, in 1190-94. For John Marshal had been close to the then Count John, while the Marshal had favoured King Richard. 
When the crisis came in July 1215 and open war broke out, the Marshal was once again sent off to secure the march and contain the Welsh. Here he stayed while London and the south-east of England fell to the baronial insurgents and Louis of France, in spring 1216. The king's sudden death in October 1216 somewhat retrieved the situation for the loyalist party, and led to the Marshal's greatest political challenge. The Marshal was appointed by King John's last testament as one of a council of thirteen executors to assist the king's sons in the recovery of their inheritance. The assertion by the 'History' that the Marshal was appointed by the king as protector and regent for his son on his deathbed is patently incorrect. However, the Marshal's subsequent actions excuse the mistake. He did indeed start to act the part of regent. He took responsibility for the staging of John's funeral at Worcester Cathedral; convened a council at Gloucester for early November to ratify the arrangements for a protectorship; and took responsibility for the boy king, Henry III, who was brought to Gloucester from Devizes. The only potential rival for the position of loyalist leader was Ranulf (III), earl of Chester, and when Ranulf arrived at Gloucester he made it perfectly clear that he would rather that the Marshal took the lead at that time. The evidence of papal correspondence shows that Earl Ranulf later changed his mind, and was agitating for the Marshal to accept him as coadjutor-regent in the weeks before the battle of Lincoln sanctified the Marshal's rule. 
The Marshal and his royal charge left for Tewkesbury on 2 or 3 November 1216, and thence to another great council at Bristol. At this point his title was decided as 'guardian ['rector'] of the king and the kingdom', a title he first used on 12 November. All royal acts were carried out in his name, and his own seal affixed to chancery writs. He associated with himself the papal legate, Cardinal Guala Bicchieri, who lent his rule not just moral authority, but some legitimacy, England being a papal fief at this time. The Marshal presided over a political stalemate in England until May 1217, but he had the satisfaction of seeing a growing number of barons returning to their allegiance, including his own son, William (II) Marshal, who rejoined him in February. In May 1217 the Marshal led the loyalist column that took first Mountsorrel Castle, Leicestershire, and then moved on to relieve the siege of Lincoln Castle. On 20 May 1217 the Marshal took the field in person, first haranguing his small force and then leading it to the attack against the rebel force at Lincoln, which was commanded by his own first cousin, the count of Perche. He rode into battle with his son, leading the main royalist column that forced an entry into the city through its north gate, while an outflanking force distracted the Anglo-French force by reinforcing the loyalists in the castle. So keen for battle was he that as he was beginning to move his column a page noticed and reminded him that he had not put his helm on. The Marshal (aged about seventy-two) engaged in personal combat in the streets of Lincoln, still able to use his weight and skill as a horseman to force himself deep into the enemy ranks. In the fighting under the west towers of the cathedral he was able to knock from his horse with a sword-stroke Robert of Ropsley, a rebel, who had himself just unseated the earl of Salisbury. There the Marshal witnessed with regret the killing of the count of Perche by a sword splintering through the eyehole of his helm. He supervised the rounding-up of the defeated rebels, and then concentrated his armies on the south-east. 
It now became the Marshal's chief concern to get Louis of France out of the country with as much decency and haste as possible. The naval defeat of the relieving French force off Sandwich in August proved conclusive. Louis was persuaded to leave London and return to France in return for a general amnesty and an indemnity of 10,000 marks. In later days the Marshal was much condemned for these easy terms, when the French invaders were apparently at the mercy of the loyalists. Maybe the personal embarrassment of having his liege lord's son at his mercy played its part in his policy, but equally well he may have calculated that England needed peace at this time more than anything else. 
William Marshal held power for nineteen months after the departure of Louis from England. His regime had some successes: the exchequer was re-established and the machinery of the eyre set in motion again. Peace returned to the marches of Wales and an accommodation was reached with Prince Llywelyn of Gwynedd at Worcester in March 1218. The Marshal took full advantage of his opportunities for patronage by furthering his men's interests, most particularly those of his eldest son, who was heavily subsidized out of royal revenues. Mortality caught up with him in January 1219, when he became suddenly ill at Westminster. The symptoms of his last illness suggest a bowel cancer, though this can only be a matter of inference. He was in bed until mid-February, but a remission allowed him to resume the business of government. On 7 March he rode to the Tower of London, but soon fell ill once more. Suspecting his death was upon him, he had himself rowed up the Thames to the former Giffard manor of Caversham in the modern county of Berkshire, opposite Reading, which had become one of his chief residences over the years. He reached his home after three days on the river, and there for a while he carried on in his role of regent; the king was brought to Reading with his tutor, the bishop of Winchester. At a council held in his sick-chamber on 8 and 9 April 1219 he relinquished power to the legate, snubbing the pretensions of Bishop Peter des Roches of Winchester. 
The Marshal's biography dwells on the events at his deathbed with great detail. A testament was drawn up the day after the Marshal's resignation of power in his own household council, and although a text no longer exists its provisions can be reconstructed. His eldest son, William (II), received the earldom and the bulk of the lands in England, Wales, and Ireland. Richard, his second son, received the Norman lands and the Giffard manors in England. His third son, Gilbert, was a clerk. Walter, the fourth son, received his father's acquisitions: Goodrich Castle and several other English manors. The fifth son, Anselm, was left a large cash legacy, at his father's council's urging. There were other legacies to abbeys and chapter churches in his advocacy, and he left his body to be buried at the New Temple Church in London. He left as his executors David, abbot of Bristol, and his household bannerets, John of Earley and Henry fitz Gerold. The elder Marshal was over a month dying after that, and before the end he was received by the master of the Temple into his order. None the less he was earl of Pembroke to the end, distributing robes from his wardrobe to his household the day before his death, despite the suggestion of a household clerk that he sell them and distribute the cash in alms to the poor. He died in his crowded death-chamber at about midday on 14 May 1219, his head supported by his eldest son, and in possession of a plenary indulgence for his sins. 
The Marshal's body was laid that afternoon in the chapel of Caversham manor, where it was presumably embalmed. The next day it was taken to Reading Abbey, and lay the night in a side chapel he had financed, in neighbourly fashion. On what must have been 16 May it was borne by wagon to Staines to meet an escort of earls and barons, who accompanied it to Westminster Abbey. At every halt a mass was said, and the funeral exequies were performed, probably on 18 or 19 May, at the New Temple, where the body was laid under a military effigy (one of the first of its type) in the nave. The effigy currently identified as the Marshal's (restored in the nineteenth century, and damaged by a German bomb in the Second World War) has been thought to be his since at least 1661, when the Dutch traveller Schellinks viewed and described it. The corpse did not rest entirely peacefully beneath it. Bishop Ailbe of Ferns (a sometime follower of Count John, later persecuted by the Marshal) caused a scandal by refusing to lift his excommunication from the dead Marshal when brought to the tomb by the king. His curse was said to be responsible for the poor state of the corpse when it was exhumed in the mid-thirteenth century to accommodate building alterations. It was also supposed to account for the extinction of the Marshal line in 1245. 
The Marshal's immediate posthumous reputation was not as shining as the sponsors of the 'History' had perhaps hoped to establish. Matthew Paris in the next political generation repeated views of him as a figure of some ambiguity, too easy on the French and too harsh to the church. The discovery of a text of the 'History' by Paul Meyer in the sale of the Savile Library in 1861, and its subsequent edition and publication by him, has projected William Marshal into the foreground of modern interpretation of the medieval noble mentality. Modern interpreters have tended to find what they themselves expected. Meyer himself, and Sidney Painter, fulfilled the expectations of the Marshal's executors and saw him as the chivalric hero of his day: taking up the description of him attributed by the 'History' to King Philip of France, 'the best knight in all the world'. But the Marshal was only one of several contemporaries who were regarded in that light: Guillamme des Barres the elder, and Robert de Breteuil, earl of Leicester (died 1204), were quite as prominent as warriors and statesmen. Georges Duby dispelled the mythology of the Marshal as a hero of chivalry, but went too far in stressing his physical, animal nature at the expense of his undoubted gifts as a courtier. 
In fact the Marshal was a military captain of some international repute, and a physically accomplished sportsman and warrior. Principally he was a courtier, and trained to be such from boyhood. He cultivated and practised carefully the deferential and affable behaviour necessary for survival in the retinues of greater men. He was in his mid-forties before he was placed into any situation where a broader political judgement was needed. As one of Richard's appointees to oversee William de Longchamp in 1190-94 he demonstrated an eagerness to offend neither the king nor Count John which showed him to be a political trimmer at heart -- compelled by early training to avoid offending anyone powerful -- and a self-serving trimmer he always remained. Trimming was behaviour that might be mistaken for sagacity, but in his case it was really no more than caution masking incomprehension. The only thing his vision comprehended was the direction of his own interests, and these he could pursue ruthlessly, and sometimes recklessly as can be seen in his complaints of poor reward to Henry II in 1188. It is unlikely that anyone took him seriously as a political figure of any great weight (as opposed to a military captain) until the reign of John, who (ironically in view of the verdict of the 'History' on him) vigorously promoted the Marshal's political fortunes. It was consistent misjudgement in pursuing his own interests that brought the Marshal down in 1205, and his tired decision to retreat into self-imposed exile in Ireland in 1207 should have been the end of his active career. But King John's own difficulties, the Marshal's undeserved reputation for political wisdom, and his deserved reputation for military success, pulled him out of retirement. His luck was that he was the ideal man for the moment in 1216, and his greater luck was that the moment was not so prolonged as to reveal his political weaknesses. Perhaps, too, by this time his great age made it easier for him to command obedience and respect. 
William Marshal was very successful as an estate owner and regional magnate. He could be as charming and affable to social inferiors who were of use to him, as to his superiors. There is no doubt that, if let be, behind the courtier and opportunist was a well-disposed and kindly man. However, the Marshal followed his father and the spirit of his age in being remorselessly vengeful to lesser men who opposed his local ambitions, as was seen both in Leinster and south Wales. His closeness to the king between 1189 and 1205 made his service very attractive to the politically mobile class of lesser bannerets and county knights. He created one of the first recognizable regional political affinities, basing his power in the south-west of England and southern march of Wales. This affinity in turn enhanced his position at court. King John made great use of the Marshal's local power base in his difficulties with rebels. The Marshal's ecclesiastical patronage was conventional for a magnate of his day. He was a generous patron of the regular orders: he greatly favoured the templars; he founded an Augustinian priory at Cartmel about 1189, and the Cistercian houses of Duiske and Tintern Parva in Leinster in the first decade of the thirteenth century. He was survived by his wife, Isabel, for less than a year: she died at Chepstow in February 1220, and was buried at Tintern Abbey. They left five sons: William (II), Richard Marshal, Gilbert Marshal, Walter Marshal, and Anselm Marshal ['see under 'Marshal, William (II)], successive earls of Pembroke. They also had five daughters: Matilda, who married successively Hugh Bigod, earl of Norfolk, and William (IV) de Warenne, earl of Surrey, Isabel, who married successively Gilbert de Clare, earl of Gloucester and Hertford, and Richard, first earl of Cornwall; Sybil, who married William de Ferrers, earl of Derby; Eve, who married William (V) de Briouze; and Joan, who married Warin de Munchensi. 


@@@@@


doc= 18127


Marshal, William (II), fifth earl of Pembroke (c.1190-1231), magnate, was born in Normandy, the eldest son of William (I) Marshal, earl of Pembroke and regent of England ('c'.1146-1219), and his wife Isabel de Clare (d. 1220). In 1205 King John, unworthily doubting the elder William's loyalty, demanded his eldest son as a hostage, and a hostage he remained until 1212, by which time the king was in urgent need of the Marshal's support. 
In the great crisis of his reign King John enjoyed the unswerving loyalty of the elder William, but his son aligned himself with the baronial opposition, possibly as a family insurance policy, and appeared in arms with the barons at Stamford in February 1215; he was later one of the twenty-five barons appointed to enforce the terms of 'Magna Carta' ['see also 'Enforcers of Magna Carta]. These proved unacceptable to both sides, and in the civil war that followed the younger William joined Prince Louis of France and was appointed marshal of his army. Though active in the field on the barons' behalf, he avoided any hostile confrontation with his father. Denied possession of Marlborough, once held by his paternal grandfather, John Marshal, by Louis he changed sides, capturing Winchester and Southampton for the royalists and Marlborough for himself, and fought in the decisive battle of Lincoln on 20 May 1217. 
On his father's death in 1219 Marshal succeeded him as earl of Pembroke and marshal of England, and on his mother's death in 1220 succeeded to the lordships of Leinster and Netherwent. The Clare lands in Normandy passed by agreement to his younger brother Richard Marshal. A major problem faced by the government during the minority of Henry III was regaining for the crown or their rightful owners castles seized and retained by royalists during the civil war. Among the castles held by the earl were Fotheringhay and Marlborough. The return of Fotheringhay to John the Scot, earl of Huntingdon, was desirable to promote good relations with Scotland. The Marshal ignored orders to surrender Fotheringhay in 1219 and 1220 until events in Wales forced his hand. The peace of Worcester in 1218 had established Llywelyn ab Iorwerth as the king's bailiff, during his minority, of Cardigan and Carmarthen. Llywelyn promised to restore to marcher lords lands they had lost since 1215, but when in 1220 he stripped Rhys Gryg (one of the lords of the Welsh principality of Deheubarth) of two lordships, he disposed of them as he pleased. Then, alleging that the Marshal's tenants, with help from Leinster, had attacked their Welsh neighbours, he launched a savage attack on Pembrokeshire, capturing Narberth and Wiston castles and burning the town of Haverfordwest. To buy peace, the men of Pembroke were forced to promise not to repair the captured castles and to surrender lands to be held by Llywelyn on the king's behalf. William now demanded that the justiciar, Hubert de Burgh, should release his men from their obligations and assure them that Llywelyn had acted without royal authority. The answer was a new demand to surrender Fotheringhay. Eventually receiving the desired letters from the justiciar, the Marshal quietly gave up the castle. 
In 1214 the marriage arranged in 1203 between the younger William Marshal and Alice, daughter of Baldwin de Bethune, count of Aumale, finally took place; but Alice soon died, probably in 1216. In 1221 the justiciar and the papal legate, Pandulf, in order to avoid the Marshal's making a foreign match and to attach him to the justiciar's party, proposed that he should marry Eleanor (1215?-1275), the younger sister of Henry III. The marriage took place on 23 April 1224 and the Marshal surrendered Marlborough, a small price for a royal bride. Up to 1226 the Marshal remained a close ally of Hubert de Burgh. 
In March 1223 Llywelyn suddenly attacked and captured the castles of Kinnerley and Whittington in Shropshire, and was consequently caught on the wrong foot by William Marshal, who attacked him in south-west Wales. A truce between the two was due to end on Easter Sunday (23 April). On 15 April the Marshal landed near St David's with an army from Leinster, and on Easter Monday, with a nice observance of the rules worthy of his father, attacked and took Cardigan. Two days later he took Carmarthen. Llywelyn sent an army south under his son Gruffudd, who burned Kidwelly and awaited attack. The Marshal appears to have had the better of the ensuing battle, before proceeding to strengthen the defences of Carmarthen and starting to build the immensely strong castle of Cilgerran. Attempts to reconcile the Marshal and Llywelyn having failed, the justiciar sent a large force of cavalry to the Marshal's help, enabling him to consolidate his gains, which included the castle and lordship of Kidwelly. Wisely, the Marshal secured two Welsh allies, Rhys Mechyll and Cynan ap Hywel, grandsons of the Lord Rhys of Deheubarth. Southern Ceredigion was overrun and given to Cynan. In September the justiciar with a large army occupied the lordship of Montgomery and established a castle on a new site. Llywelyn made peace in October, surrendering Kinnerley and Whittington, ceding Montgomery to the king, and accepting the 'fait accompli' in the south-west. It was conceded that Welsh lords should regain lands they had held lawfully. Cynan ap Hywel ultimately surrendered southern Ceredigion to Maelgwn ap Rhys, and was compensated by the Marshal with the commote of Ystlwyf (Oysterlow) and the eastern commote of Emlyn. The earl retained the western commote as his lordship of Cilgerran, while in November 1223 he was granted the custody of Cardigan and Carmarthen. In south-west Wales the Marshal had effectively restored the 'status quo' of 1215, and enabled the lords of Cemais, St Clears, Laugharne, Llansteffan, and Kidwelly to resume possession. 
Following his successes in south-west Wales in 1223, William Marshal's attention switched to Ireland in 1224. The immediate occasion lay in the claim of Hugh de Lacy to the lordship of Ulster, of which he had been deprived by King John in 1210. Failing to negotiate its restoration, Lacy returned to Ireland late in 1223 to seize it by force, supported by his half-brother William and by many of the tenants of Mide, though not by his brother Walter, lord of Mide. William Marshal was appointed justiciar of Ireland on 2 May 1224, and crossed to Waterford in June. Basing himself on Dublin he besieged Trim, the principal castle of Mide, and sent a force to relieve Carrickfergus. Hugh de Lacy's alliance with the O Neills was countered by alliance with the Irish lords of Connacht, Thomond, and Desmond. Trim fell in August, and Hugh was eventually forced to submit, Walter de Lacy regaining control of Mide. Surprisingly, Hugh was generously treated and was restored in Ulster in 1226. 
Another awkward issue for William Marshal in Ireland lay in the de Burgh claim to Connacht. This had originated in the gift of Connacht which Prince John, as lord of Ireland, had made in the 1190s to William de Burgh, the brother of Hubert de Burgh, the future justiciar of England. However, in 1215 John as king made simultaneous grants of Connacht to Cathal O Conchobhair and William de Burgh's son Richard. Cathal was succeeded in possession of Connacht by his son Aedh, who aided the Marshal during the Lacy rebellion. A plan to support Richard de Burgh's claim against Aedh was strongly opposed by the Marshal, who was consequently replaced as justiciar by Geoffrey Marsh in June 1226. He had to return to Ireland in 1227 to persuade his tenants of Leinster to surrender royal castles to Marsh. He continued to support Aedh O Conchobhair, and lost the custody of Cardigan and Carmarthen as a further mark of the justiciar's displeasure. 
In 1228, apparently considering that it was now time to compel Llywelyn to make good his promises of restoring march lands taken in 1215, Hubert de Burgh led a large army into the commote of Ceri. The Marshal was among the earls summoned to the army, but nothing is known of his part in a campaign which was a miserable failure, memorable only for the capture by the Welsh of William (V) de Briouze, and for the nickname, Hubert's Folly, which was given to a new castle started by the justiciar but abandoned within a month. A French campaign based on Brittany, aimed at recovering lost Angevin lands, was planned for 1229, but had to be postponed for a year. With twenty knights the Marshal sailed on the expedition in May 1230. Henry III received little save promises from the fickle lords of Poitou on a march from Nantes to Bordeaux and back. The Marshal, who conducted raids into Normandy and Anjou, was one of the few to come out of the campaign with any credit. 
While he was a prisoner of Llywelyn in 1228-9, William de Briouze had started a love affair with Llywelyn's wife Joan. In 1230, while visiting Llywelyn's court, Briouze's adultery was discovered and he was hanged, leaving no male heir to the Briouze marcher lordships. Their custody was entrusted to William Marshal, who, still overseas, deputed the task to his steward of Netherwent. Then in November 1230 Gilbert de Clare, lord of Glamorgan, died in Brittany, leaving his eight-year-old son Richard as his heir. The justiciar undertook the care of the Clare lordships. Finally, William Marshal returned to England for the wedding of his widowed sister, Isabella, to Richard of Cornwall (1209-1272), but died suddenly on 6 April 1231 in London. He had been the master of a huge accumulation of lordships in southern England and Ireland, as well as in south Wales and the Welsh march. Within a year the three most powerful marcher lords of south Wales had died, giving Llywelyn an opportunity which he promptly seized. 
William (II) Marshal was buried on 15 April beside his father in the Temple Church. Undoubtedly a good administrator and soldier (he was a notable builder of castles, responsible for Carlow in Leinster, and for Cilgerran and much of Chepstow on the Welsh march), he did not display the statesmanship of his father. Nevertheless, his successful campaign of 1223 secured for the south-western marches a period of comparative security which lasted until the late 1250s. In Pembrokeshire he granted three charters to Haverfordwest. Leinster, where he continued his father's work, bringing in new settlers, founding boroughs and new castles, and fostering religious houses, enjoyed a period of stability and peace under his rule. 
Because there were no children of William (II) Marshal's marriage to Eleanor, his heir was his brother Richard, who was killed in 1234 when in rebellion against Henry III. As part of the subsequent reconciliation between king and rebels, Richard's brother and heir 


@@@@@


doc= 18128


Marshall, Arthur Milnes (1852-1893), zoologist, was born on 8 June 1852 at 54 New Hall Street, Birmingham, the second son of William Prime Marshall, secretary of the Institution of Civil Engineers, and his wife, Laura ('nee' Stark). He went to school in Birmingham where in 1870 he sat and passed the examinations for the London University (external) BA degree. The following year he entered St John's College, Cambridge, to read for the natural science tripos. As a boy he had shared his father's enthusiasm for natural history; as an undergraduate he pursued this interest through laboratory courses, learning the techniques which were beginning to transform biology into a more experimentally based discipline. He attended the courses of Michael Foster, Trinity College's new praelector of physiology, whose elementary biology classes closely resembled T. H. Huxley's courses in London, introducing students to 'type' specimens, emphasizing the relationships between species and groups of animals. Foster actively encouraged senior students to embark upon experimental research and Marshall took advantage of this by joining a distinguished group of enthusiastic and talented young biologists who were to establish an impressive reputation for Foster's laboratory. 
In 1874 Marshall was placed in the senior position of the first-class list of the natural science tripos. Shortly after graduating he secured a place at Cambridge University's research table at the new Stazione Zoologica at Naples, accompanying the brilliant embryologist Francis Balfour (1851-1882), who had graduated the previous year. Balfour had become a protege of Foster, who had encouraged his interest in embryology and had assisted him to publish research papers while still an undergraduate. Balfour in turn encouraged Marshall. The two continued to work closely together on their return from Naples in the summer of 1875. In the autumn of that year Marshall assisted Balfour in teaching laboratory courses in embryology and animal morphology. Marshall was elected fellow of St John's College in 1877. 
In the 1870s there were still few career opportunities in experimental research, even for those who showed Marshall's promise. Consequently, in 1877, he left Cambridge to train as a medical doctor at St Bartholomew's Hospital, London. However, in 1879, before he had begun to practise as a doctor, he was appointed to the newly created chair of zoology at Owens College, Manchester. Although he completed his medical training by taking the Cambridge MB degree the following year, he was able to devote his whole time in Manchester to teaching and research in zoology. 
Owens College had been founded in 1851 under the terms of the will of a wealthy local hatter, John Owen. After a fairly dismal start, the college had been transformed during the 1860s into the nucleus of a science-based university on the German model, largely through the efforts and energy of its charismatic professor of chemistry, Henry Enfield Roscoe. Teaching in zoology had been part of the duties of the professor of natural history, W. C. Williamson, but in 1877 the college council decided to divide Williamson's chair. Williamson was asked to continue to teach botany, a subject for which he had established a distinguished reputation, and Marshall was invited to teach zoology with the assistance of a demonstrator, Marcus Hartog. The college authorities clearly hoped that a zoologist with Marshall's background in experimental research would establish in Manchester a biological research school to complement Roscoe's highly successful chemistry department. 
Marshall had begun his research career at Cambridge with investigations on the vertebrate nervous system. He had been educated in the Darwinian tradition of comparative embryology and at Owens College he continued to investigate the development of the nervous system, concentrating particularly on cranial morphology. His published research papers were considered influential and in 1885 he was elected fellow of the Royal Society. His address to the British Association for the Advancement of Science in 1890 as president of the biological section provided an outline of contemporary theories in embryology. 
In Manchester most of Marshall's time and energy as professor of zoology were devoted to teaching and administration. He organized lecture and laboratory courses and assisted in the development of the zoology collections of the Manchester Museum. He was highly regarded as a teacher -- he was able to communicate enthusiasm for zoology, capturing the attention and imagination of his students. His textbook, 'The Frog', first published in 1882, became a popular introduction to elementary zoology, running into five editions during Marshall's lifetime. He produced two further textbooks, a junior course on practical zoology (1887) and one on vertebrate embryology (1893), both of which proved popular. However, although Marshall conducted a number of original investigations as professor, his laboratory did not become a major centre for zoological research during the 1880s. Most of his students were studying for medical degrees and very few availed themselves of the opportunities it offered for original research. 
Marshall was a gifted administrator and played an important role in the development of Owens College into the Victoria University, established by royal charter in 1882 with Owens its sole constituent college. Marshall served first as secretary and later as chairman of its board of studies, establishing regulations for the university's degrees. He was secretary of the extension movement, which encouraged lecturers to give popular courses on their subjects to the general public. He also played a prominent role in Manchester life, as an active member of the Literary and Philosophical Society and as president of the Manchester Microscopical Society for many years. 
Marshall's main recreation was mountain climbing. His enthusiasm had been temporarily dimmed by the death of Balfour in a climbing accident in the Swiss Alps in 1882, but while professor in Manchester he spent part of many winter vacations climbing in Wales or the Lake District and most summers included a visit to the Swiss Alps. On 31 December 1893 he was climbing with a party of friends on Scafell in the English Lake District when a rock gave way beneath him and he fell. He died instantly. His death aged only forty-one shocked colleagues, who mourned the loss of such a promising academic. Marshall never married. 


@@@@@


doc= 18129


Marshall, Benjamin (1768-1835), painter and racing journalist, was born on 8 November 1768 at Seagrave, Leicestershire, the only surviving son of eight children born to Charles Marshall and his wife, Elizabeth (died 1772). Benjamin Marshall married Mary Saunders (died 1827) of Ratby on 12 November 1789 and is recorded as being a schoolmaster in the will of his brother-in-law, dated 1791. However, he must have already shown a talent for portraiture for in the same year, on the recommendation of William Pochin of Barkby Hall, MP for the county, he was apprenticed to the portrait painter Lemuel Francis Abbott. 
It is said that Ben Marshall (as he was known) was so impressed by Sawrey Gilpin's life-size painting 'Death of a Fox', exhibited at the Royal Academy in 1793, that he decided to change from portraiture to sporting subjects ('Sporting Magazine', Aug 1835, 298). By 1795 the Marshalls were living in London at Beaumont Street, Marylebone, their elder son, Charles, having been born the previous year. Soon after their arrival Marshall met William Taplin, the author of 'The Gentleman's Stable Directory', and this was to be a turning point in his career. Taplin not only commissioned a portrait of himself, but also paintings of several of his horses. These were hung in Taplin's newly erected purpose-built 'equestrian repository' in the Edgware Road, where they would have been seen by the many fashionable and influential subscribers to his equestrian services. Marshall's portrait of Taplin was engraved for the February 1796 issue of the 'Sporting Magazine' and in August of the same year his first horse portrait appeared, 'A Son of Erasmus', whose owner is recorded as a Taplin subscriber. Both these works were engraved by John Scott and the working relationship between them developed into a lifelong friendship which, as both admitted, did much to enhance their respective talents. Marshall's connection with the 'Sporting Magazine' continued throughout his life. Sixty of his paintings were engraved as illustrations between 1796 and 1833, and from 1821 to 1833 under the name Observator he became their southern racing correspondent. The 'Sporting Magazine' also records in 1796 that on the completion of three paintings for George III, Marshall was granted an audience of almost an hour with the king and 'all the princesses' ('Sporting Magazine', Aug 1796, 255). 
Marshall's early works owe much to both George Stubbs and Gilpin, for example 'Diamond with Dennis Fitzpatrick up' (1799, exh. at RA, 1800; Yale U. CBA) and 'Grey Arab Stallion and Mare' (FM Cam.). However, they already show the individuality that in the first years of the nineteenth century was to develop into his own very personal style. This change is best represented in the series of six paintings of horses commissioned by George, prince of Wales, probably executed between 1801 and 1803. These, unlike the three painted for George III, remain in the Royal Collection. 
Joseph Farington recorded in his 'Diary' of 28 March 1804 that 'Bourgeois spoke of Marshall a horse painter as having extraordinary ability and that Gilpin had said that in managing his backgrounds he had done that which Stubbs and himself never could venture upon'. This ability to capture the vagaries of the British climate and landscape together with the depth of character in his portraits of all those connected with the sporting world raise Marshall well above the range of the average sporting artist. However, he made no attempt to be elected to the Royal Academy and exhibited there only intermittently between 1800 and 1819. The Marshalls remained at Beaumont Street until 1810, Marshall painting both sporting subjects and portraits including the celebrated boxers John Jackson, John Gully, and James Belcher (Tate collection) and, most strikingly, Marshall's Leicestershire friend Daniel Lambert, the celebrated fat man, who had exhibited himself at a shilling a visit in London during summer 1806 (exh. RA, 1807; Leicester Museums and Art Galleries). 
Prompted by Ben's great love of racing, the Marshalls moved to near Newmarket in 1812. There, Marshall 'could study the second animal in creation... in all his grandeur, beauty and variety' ('Sporting Magazine', Sept 1826, 318), adding the much quoted adage that 'a man would give me fifty guineas for painting his horse who thought ten too much to pay for the best portrait of a wife' ('Sporting Magazine', Jan 1828, 172). His absence from London did not lessen his success and for the next seven years he produced some of the finest sporting paintings of the first quarter of the nineteenth century and arguably the best studies of jockeys ever painted. In September 1819, while he was travelling to his patron Lord Sondes at Rockingham Castle, the mail coach overturned and both Marshall's legs were broken, his head badly cut, and his back injured. He made a remarkable recovery, and the 'Sporting Magazine' reported in October 1820 that he 'had built himself a new painting room at Newmarket and was busily employed' ('Sporting Magazine', Oct 1820, 42). That his abilities were not impaired is shown by the striking portrait 'Thomas Hilton and his Hound Glory' of 1822 (Royal Museum and Art Gallery, Canterbury, Kent). 
In 1825, aged fifty-seven, Marshall returned to London, purchasing a house in Hackney Road but keeping on his house in East Anglia. His succinct and descriptive racing journalism was still signed 'Observator, Norfolk'. One of his reasons for returning was to promote his younger son Lambert (born in November 1809 and named after Marshall's old friend Daniel Lambert who had died suddenly in June the same year) as his successor as sporting artist and illustrator for the 'Sporting Magazine'. Sadly, Lambert had little more than schoolboy talent: the earlier works are almost entirely by his father and there are few that do not have some assistance. It is not surprising that not a single painting attributed to him dates from after Marshall's death. 
Although there appears to have been no fall in demand for Marshall's paintings or writing, the effects of his coaching accident were gradually lessening his mobility and hence output. In 1834, when the dress of the youngest of his three daughters, Elizabeth ('b'. 1812), caught fire, he was unable to move out of his chair to assist her and was forced to watch her burn to death. This tragedy, compounded with the death of his wife in 1827, hastened his own end and he died on 24 July 1835 at his home in London Terrace, Hackney Road, London. He was buried with his wife and daughter at St Matthew's, Bethnal Green. Marshall's effects were valued at only $200. There was no studio sale of his unsold paintings and studies, and although the 'Gentleman's Magazine' noted the death of 'the celebrated artist Ben Marshall' ('GM', 2nd ser., 4, 1835, 531), he was soon forgotten. He left little mark on the next generation of sporting painters, for despite the fact that John Ferneley was apprenticed to him and Abraham Cooper had lessons with him, his broad style of painting and somewhat bucolic approach to his subjects had little appeal to the Victorians and it was not until early in the twentieth century that he began again to be appreciated. 
Marshall is not widely represented in British public collections, where his portraits are more numerous than his sporting subjects. For a broader view of his work one has to turn to private collections. Many of his paintings were exported to the USA in the first half of the twentieth century and are now represented in a number of galleries there, most notably at the Yale Center for British Art at New Haven, Connecticut, which holds the best portrait of the artist. 


@@@@@


doc= 18130


Marshall, Charles (1637-1698), Quaker preacher and apothecary, was born at Bristol in June 1637. He noted in his short journal that his 'education and bringing up was after the strictest manner of religion', his parents 'being such as feared the Lord' (Marshall, sig. d1'r'). He went on to recount how at the age of five or six he started to read the 'Bible', and that at about eleven or twelve years he accompanied his mother to meetings of Independents and Baptists. As he grew older he wrote of his spiritual state, 'I became like the solitary Desart, and mourned like a Dove without a Mate' (ibid., sig. d2'r'). About 1654 he joined a group of people who met weekly for fasting and prayer. John Audland and John Camm attended one of these meetings, and Marshall describes how he was convinced by the former's 'powerful Ministry' and became a Quaker (ibid., sig. d4'r'). 
On 6 May 1662 Marshall married Hannah, daughter of Edward Prince, an ironmonger of Bristol. She too became a Quaker, and in 1664 they were convicted under the 'Act for Banishment' for attending Quaker meetings and committed to prison, along with 217 others. In 1668 they settled at Tytherington, Wiltshire. They had a number of children: two sons, Beulah and Charles, and two daughters, Sarah, who became the wife of Richard Scott, and another who married 'Ja: Honour'. 
Marshall appears to have been an apothecary and published a number of medical works. In 1670 he wrote 'A Plain and Candid Relation of the Nature, Use, and Dose of Several Approved Medicines', in which he described a number of his preparations such as 'Spiritus Sedativus' and 'Expulsive Cordial' that were to be sold at his house near Castlegate in Bristol (pp. 10, 13). This was published again in 1681, with changes and additions, under a similar title. It contained some general guidelines for the preservation of health, and was written while Marshall was living in London at the Golden Bull, Winchester Street. Letters of recommendation for his medicines, subscribed by Richard Snead with a few lines from William Penn, were printed as a broadside in 1681. 
In 1670, Marshall later wrote, he 'faithfully gave up Liberty, Estate and Relations' and began preaching in Bristol and the surrounding areas (Marshall, sig. e3'r'). He went on to describe how he 'received' a 'Commission from God' to travel through the nation (ibid., sig. e3'r'), writing that 'the Word of the Lord was as a Fire in my Bones, to run through the Land' (ibid., sig. f5'v'). In the space of two years he held 400 meetings in most parts of England, returning home only twice -- once through illness, and once owing to the death of a favourite child. Through his work he noted that 'Thousands received the Word of Life, and many were added to the Church in divers places' (ibid., sig. f6'v'). 
Marshall recounted that during his travels he was not persecuted at all and 'no Man was suffered to lay Hands on me, to stop my Way' (Marshall, sig. f6'r'). However, some years later, in December 1674, while at prayer in a meeting at Claverham, Somerset, he was injured when justices violently dragged him through the gallery rail; he was later fined for non-attendance at church. 
On his return to Bristol, Marshall worked hard to counteract the divisions made by the Quaker separatists John Story and John Wilkinson, whom he believed were trying to oppose 'Order and Discipline' by 'endeavouring to lay waste the Quarterly, Monthly, Yearly, and Women's-Meetings, by opposing the settled methods thereof; calling them, 'Forms' and 'an Idol'' (Marshall, sig. f7'v'). He took part with George Fox in a large meeting at Bristol in 1677 at the house of William Rogers, another separatist. George Whitehead noted that Marshall 'Zealously often Testified against the Spirit of 'Division' and 'Separation', and against 'Treacherous Apostates' and 'Sowers of Discord'' (ibid., sig. b2'v'). 
Marshall lost much property by distraints for tithes, and in 1682 or 1683 was prosecuted by the vicar of Tytherington and committed to the Fleet prison, where he remained for two years. During his incarceration he wrote 'A Tender Visitation in the Love of God' (1684), addressed to his parish neighbours and the inhabitants of Wiltshire, Gloucester, and Bristol. Once released and back in Winchester Street, London, he tended the sick 'and was frequently concerned with some in the Government, on behalf of his suffering People' (Marshall, sig. i3'r'). He appears to have become a very important leading Friend, as in 1697 he was a chief signatory along with William Penn, Leonard Fell, and others to the postscript to an epistle of John Bellers regarding Bellers's proposals for a college of industry. 
A number of testimonies to Marshall's good character exist. George Whitehead called him 'a Loving and Tender hearted Man' who 'was truly Tender and Zealous of the Glory of God' (Marshall, sig. b2'r'). His wife, Hannah, wrote that 'He was a Lover of the Poor, and a Friend to the Rich, often putting the latter, at their well-furnished Tables, in mind of the former'. She added that he visited the poor, 'supplying the Sick, with Advice and Physick; the Hungry, with Bread; and the Naked with Clothes' (ibid., sig. c6'v'). 
Marshall was the author of many works, chiefly epistles containing warnings and reproofs, twenty-six of which are included in his posthumous collection of works, 'Sion's Travellers Comforted' (1704). This also contains his journal, a preface by William Penn, and testimonies by his wife and other Friends. Works included in it are 'The Way of Life Revealed, and the Way of Death Discovered' (1674) and 'The Trumpet of the Lord' (1675); the former tract contained a discussion of the fall of man together with the Quaker idea of salvation, via the inner light, which Marshall described as 'a measure of the divine fullness', which was 'communicated to, and placed in all immortal souls' (p. 14). Along with Thomas Camm, Marshall also edited 'The Memory of the Righteous Revived' (1689), a collection of writings and testimonies concerning the Quakers John Camm and John Audland. 
Marshall's last journey was to Bristol at the beginning of 1698. On his return to London he fell ill and was moved to the house of John Padley, near the riverside at Southwark, where after four months he died of a fever and consumption on 15 November 1698, aged sixty-one. The Quaker digest registers state that he was buried at Chequer Alley, London, two days later. The esteem in which he was held can be seen from a letter from John Tomkins to Sir John Rodes, dated 18 November 1698, concerning his funeral, in which it was noted that 'it's thought to be the greatest appearance of Friends at his burial... as of any yet, exceeding in number either G.F's, S.C. or F.S. [George Fox, Stephen Crisp, Francis Stamper]' ('Large gatherings of Friends', 8). Marshall left a will in which he bequeathed estates in Pennsylvania to his son Beulah, his shares in mines in Cumberland to his other son, Charles, and his property at Tytherington and Bromhill to his wife, who survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 18131


Marshall, Charles (1806-1890), scene-painter, was born on 31 December 1806 at 1 Cumberland Street, St Pancras, London, and baptized in St Pancras on 24 May 1807, the son of Nathan Marshall, butcher (died 1848), and his wife, Mary, 'nee' Randall (died 1852). He studied oil painting under John Wilson, and at the age of twenty-two received a gold medal from the Society of Arts. He became a pupil of Gaetano Marinari, scene-painter at Drury Lane Theatre, and subsequently became one of the most prominent and successful scene-painters of the day. Marshall was employed by a number of London theatre managers, including Robert William Elliston at Drury Lane and David Osbaldiston at the Surrey Theatre. Under William Macready at Covent Garden and Drury Lane he designed scenery for many plays including 'The Tempest', 'As You Like It', 'Coriolanus', 'Virginius', and the first productions of Lord Lytton's plays. On the death of William Grieve in 1844, Marshall became scene-painter to the opera at Her Majesty's Theatre, London, and contributed much to Benjamin Lumley's revival of the ballet. That year he married on 15 February Anna Maria (died 1883), daughter of James Kittermaster MD, of Meriden, Warwickshire. 
Marshall is credited with introducing limelight on the stage. He originated and developed transformation scenes. In general his scenery depended more on illusion than on solid pictorial effects as practised by Clarkson Stanfield and others. In common with the other leading theatre scene-painters of the day, including Stanfield, David Roberts, Thomas Grieve, William Grieve, and William Telbin, he energetically involved himself in the production and exhibition of panoramas. At the Surrey Theatre in 1829, for instance, he exhibited a 'Grand Moving Panorama' with a view of Constantinople as part of the performance, and at the Victoria Theatre in 1834 a moving panorama of the burning of the houses of parliament, completed and displayed within a week of the event. His 'Kineorama', a moving panorama of a trip from Constantinople to Cairo, which opened in London at 121 Pall Mall in March 1841, maximized the use of dioramic effects. The premises caught fire on 20 July during a performance. His most ambitious panoramas were those performed in exhibition halls rather than in theatres. His 'Tour through Europe' was performed at the Linwood Gallery in Leicester Square in 1851; and his 'Life and Exploits of Napoleon Bonaparte' at the Regent Gallery, 69 Quadrant, in 1853. Both panoramas toured the provinces. Scene-painters misleadingly called their moving panoramas dioramas. Marshall provided James Wyld at the Great Globe in Leicester Square with a 'Grand Moving Diorama of a Tour from Blackwall to Balaclava' in 1856, and a 'Diorama of Russia' in 1856-7. In 1842 he designed 'A General Representation of the City of Hamburg', the scenic element in a pyrotechnic display at Vauxhall Gardens; and in 1844 he painted the scenery at the Glaciarium, a skating rink at 8 Grafton Street East, Tottenham Court Road. 
Marshall retired in 1858. Since 1828 he had regularly exhibited landscape paintings at the Royal Academy, the British Institution, and the Society (later Royal Society) of British Artists, and landscape painting now became his principal preoccupation. He died at his home, 7 Lewisham Road, Highgate Road, London, on 8 March 1890, and was buried at Highgate cemetery. He left three children; of these two sons, Charles James Kittermaster Marshall and Roberto Angelo Kittermaster Marshall, also became artists. 


@@@@@


doc= 18132


Charles Ward Marshall (1808-1876), singer, achieved some success as a tenor on the London stage about 1835, under the assumed name of Manvers. In 1842 he turned his attention to concert and oratorio singing, which brought him greater acclaim, but some six or eight years afterwards he withdrew from public life. He died at Islington on 22 February 1876. 


@@@@@


doc= 18133


Marshall, Edward (1597/8-1675), sculptor and master mason, was apprenticed to John Clerke under the auspices of the Masons' Company of London; he became free of the company in 1627, a liveryman in 1630-31, and served as warden in 1642-3 and 1646-7, and as master in 1649-50. On 26 June 1627 he married Anna ('bap'. 1604, died 1673), almost certainly the daughter of the sculptor Isaac James, at the church of St Martin-in-the-Fields, Westminster, where their son Joshua ['see below'] was baptized the following year; they had a further eight sons and five daughters. By 1629 Marshall had moved to the parish of St Dunstan-in-the-West in the City of London and he remained there for the rest of his life. 
Professionally, Marshall first emerges as a maker of church monuments. His signature appears on the finely detailed brass of Sir Edward Filmer (died 1629) and his wife at East Sutton, Kent, and in 1643-4 he was paid by the churchwardens of his own parish of St Dunstan's for 'altering the inscripcons in Brasse upon Div[e]rs grave stones' (churchwardens' accounts, City of London, Guildhall Library, MS 2986/3, fol. 651; J. Page-Phillips, 'Palimpsests: the Backs of Monumental Brasses', 1980, 1.22, 76). Numerous other monumental brasses have been attributed to him; however, he was probably more prolific as a sculptor of memorials in stone and marble for in this field he is known to have signed at least eight works while two others are documented as his and over thirty more can confidently be assigned to him. They come in a variety of shapes and sizes and tend to show strongly the influence of Nicholas Stone the elder who was roughly ten years his senior and whose career followed a similar path to his own. The memorial to Henry Curwen, for example, at Amersham, Buckinghamshire, which bears Marshall's signature and the date 1638, shows the deceased in his shroud, like Stone's famous effigy of John Donne, but he is flanked by two angels holding open doors, a device derived from another of Stone's monuments, that of Anne, Lady Cutt (died 1632), at Swavesey in Cambridgeshire. 
From the 1650s onwards a second phase of Marshall's career, as a mason-contractor, is traceable, though he remained active as a sculptor. Under the architect John Webb he built the portico at The Vyne, Hampshire (1654), and carried out work at Northumberland House in the Strand, London (1655-7), and Gunnersbury House, Middlesex (1658). At Aynho Park, Northamptonshire, he appears to have worked to his own designs on the rebuilding campaign that began in the 1660s. He was appointed master mason in the re-established office of works at the Restoration and he retired from the post in 1673. Following the death of his first wife in 1673 he married Margaret, 'nee' White, the widow of Henry Parker of Barnet. He died at the age of seventy-seven on 10 December 1675 in the parish of St Dunstan-in-the-West, and was buried there four days later. His family monument is in the church. 




@@@@@


doc= 18134


Marshall, Emma (1828-1899), novelist, was born on 29 September 1828 at Northrepps Hill House, near Cromer, Norfolk, the youngest of the eight children of Simon Martin (1774-1839) and his wife, Hannah Ransome, a Quaker. Although a partner in Gurney & Co., a Quaker family bank based in Norwich, Simon Martin was not a member of the Society of Friends, in which denomination the Martin children were apparently brought up. During her happy (although rather solitary) childhood, Emma Martin was educated by a governess in the family home in Norwich. She later depicted her early youth in 'The Dawn of Life' (1867), in which she relived the pain of her father's death when she was ten years old. The family subsequently moved to Thorpe, a village on the outskirts of the city, and Emma Martin was sent to a boarding-school where she received 'a sound education of the old-fashioned kind' (Marshall, 29). A keen musician, she afterwards took organ lessons with Zachariah Buck, the cathedral organist. 
About 1849 the Martin household moved to Clifton, near Bristol, where their new friends included John Addington Symonds, a physician, who cultivated Emma's literary, artistic, and musical tastes. She also struck up a correspondence with the American poet Longfellow, which continued until his death. In March 1850 she was baptized into the Church of England by James Marshall (1796-1855): this may have been the prelude to her marriage, on 5 October 1854, to his son Hugh ('c'.1825-1899), a clerk in the West of England Bank. In 1855, when Marshall was appointed manager of the West of England branch there, the young couple moved to Wells. Seven of their nine children were born in Wells, but Emma Marshall's 'almost passionate maternity' (Marshall, 65-6) did not prevent her from embarking upon a career as a novelist; 'Happy Days at Fernbank' (1861) was the first of nearly 200 tales. The story of the moral education of two little girls, it drew on Emma Marshall's own experience of everyday family life, as many of her works were to do. From 1868 she reached a wide audience with contributions to the evangelical periodicals edited by the Revd Charles Bullock (1829-1911), such as 'Home Words' and the 'Fireside News'. 
In 1869 Hugh Marshall got a new post at Exeter and the family moved again. Here Emma Marshall began to visit the penitentiary every week to read to the girls and women there, and with the assistance of Jennetta Temple, sister of the bishop of Exeter, she established lectures for the higher education of women. It was at Temple's house that she met Charles E. Moberly (died 1893), a master at Rugby School, who later featured as Mr Buchanan, the unusually elderly hero of 'Life's Aftermath' (1876). In 1874 the Marshalls moved to Gloucester, following Hugh Marshall's appointment to a post there. Emma Marshall continued to arrange lectures for women (lecturers included T. H. Ward and J. A. Symonds) and enjoyed the triennial music festivals. Family finances had been tight for some time, following some unlucky investments, but upon the failure of the West of England Bank in 1878, Hugh Marshall lost his job and was left with large debts. Friends undertook to fund the education of the Marshall children, and the family moved to lodgings in Weston-super-Mare. 
Emma Marshall, determined to clear the debts, now wrote at 'a white heat' (Marshall, 151). In 1880 she published the first of her historical romances, 'Memories of Troublous Times', in which the civil war reminiscences of the imaginary royalist Dame Alicia Chamberlayne were interspersed with the genuine seventeenth-century autobiography of a Quaker ancestor, Mary Penington. This literary experiment was not well received, and Emma Marshall returned to the publication of domestic tales until her leading publisher, Richard Seeley, suggested a romance based on the life of the seventeenth-century Bristol philanthropist Edward Colston. Published in 1884, this established the pattern for a series of historical novels, such as 'Under Salisbury Spire' (1890) and 'Penshurst Castle' (1894). She regarded her historical romances as the most important of her publications, but the amount of time and effort which they demanded was made possible only by a continued output of her domestic tales. These seem to have remained the more popular of her works with her considerable adolescent following: her works were read in translation as far away as Russia, and Tauchnitz was to include thirty of her novels in his 'library'. 
In the early 1880s, after Hugh Marshall found clerical work, the family moved to Bristol. In this area Emma Marshall lived for the rest of her life. Several of her daughters attended Clifton High School for Girls, and Emma Marshall received boarders from the school. A keen promoter of women's education (her daughter Christabel ['see 'St John, Christopher Marie] read history at Somerville College, Oxford), she was also a supporter of women's suffrage: in 1886 she published a pamphlet entitled 'Thoughts on Women's Suffrage', in which she argued persuasively for 'the true womanly element' which a female voter could bring to bear on party politics. When the central conference of the National Union of Women Workers was held in Bristol in 1892, she chaired a meeting and attended other sessions. Emma Marshall died on 4 May 1899 at Woodside, Leigh Woods, near Clifton, after an attack of influenza; she was buried in Long Ashton parish churchyard, Somerset, on 9 May. Hugh Marshall died later that year and was buried beside her. 
For nearly forty years Emma Marshall was the consistently popular writer of tales for a range of juvenile audiences. The family sagas of C. M. Yonge were her strongest literary influence; like Yonge, she found her forte in depicting the moral education of a child or young adult within a family setting. Written in a straightforward and readable style, with plenty of incident, Marshall's tales lack in-depth psychological analysis of character. Her own liberal and optimistic religious faith prevented her from adopting fully the traditions of evangelical children's literature: bad ends, dramatic conversions, and pious deathbeds are few in Marshall's tales. Despite her ability to adapt to changing literary tastes (passages of moralizing grew fewer in her later works) and her keen eye for a topical theme -- such as women's education in 'Lady Alice' (1878) and the plight of street arabs in 'Eastwood Ho!' (1890) -- Marshall's central educative message remains much the same: self-knowledge and Christian care of others are portrayed as essential for a useful and happy life. 


@@@@@


doc= 18135


Marshall, Francis Albert (1840-1889), playwright, was born at 41 Upper Grosvenor Street, London, on 18 November 1840, the fifth son of William Marshall (1796-1872) of Patterdale Hall and Hallstead, Westmorland, and his wife, Georgina Christiana (died 1866), seventh daughter of George Hibbert of Munden, Hertfordshire. His father was MP for Petersfield (1826-30), for Carlisle (1835-47), and for East Cumberland (1847-65). Francis Marshall was educated at Harrow School, and matriculated from Exeter College, Oxford, on 14 June 1859, but did not take a degree. He was for some years a clerk in the Audit Office in Somerset House, but soon began contributing to newspapers and periodicals, and in 1868 resigned his appointment. 
By this time, Marshall had already gained some reputation as a playwright, and afterwards became theatre critic for the 'London Figaro'. His plays included farces, comic operas, comedies, and dramas, which were produced on the London stage between 1863 and 1887. His comedies 'False Shame' (1872) and 'Brighton' (1874) were among his best-known works. 'Biohn', a romantic opera in five acts, with music by Lauro Rossi (Queen's Theatre, 17 January 1877) featured his first wife, Imogene Fitzinman Marshall, as Elfrida, but was a failure. His first wife died on 19 February 1885. On 2 May 1885 he married Ada Cavendish (1839?-1895), a well-known actress. 
With William Gorman Wills, Marshall produced 'Cora', a drama in three acts (Globe Theatre, 28 February 1877). For his friend Henry Irving he wrote two pieces: a drama in four acts, founded on the history of Robert Emmet, and a version of 'Werner', adapted for the stage. The latter was produced at the Lyceum Theatre on the occasion of the benefit given to Westland Marston by Henry Irving on 1 June 1887. Marshall's 'Robert Emmet' was never produced. 
During his last years Marshall edited, with assistance from many scholars, a new edition of the works of Shakespeare, called the 'Henry Irving Edition', to which Henry Irving contributed an introduction. Marshall died of cirrhosis of the liver and jaundice at his home, 8 Bloomsbury Square, London, on 28 December 1889. 


@@@@@


doc= 18136


Marshall, George (fl. 1554), poet, is known only by one work, 'A compendious treatise in metre declaring the firste originall of sacrifice, and of the buylding of aultares and churches, and of the firste receavinge of the Christen fayth here in Englande', published at London by John Cawood, on 18 December 1554. Only the author's initials are on the title-page, but his full name is given by an acrostic in the preface. The work is dedicated to Mr Richarde Whartun esquire, who is described as a soldier and a good Catholic. This is presumably Richard Wharton, esquire, of Suffolk, who served in Mary Tudor's forces during her successful bid for the throne in 1553, and subsequently appeared on the Suffolk commission for the peace. The poem itself (fifty-nine eight-line stanzas rhyming 'aabccbdd') celebrates England's Catholic past and the restoration of Catholicism under Mary (who is likened to Judith and Esther). It excoriates the heresies of Wyclif and Luther, blames them for the recent prevalence of disease in England, and crows over the fate of Thomas Cromwell and John Dudley, who '
are to us example and warning 

To serve our lorde God, and obeye the Kynge. 
(Marshall)' Although the author describes himself as 'empty of learning' (Marshall), he refers to Bede, Josephus, and Eusebius, mentions Luther, Oecolampadius, Melanchthon, Bullinger, and Karlstadt, and alludes to the refutation of John Wyclif by William Woodford. Together with his reference to Henry VII, whose 'noble workes in Cambrydge you may se' (ibid.), this suggests that he may have been an educated man. In that case, while his name is hardly uncommon, it is tempting to identify him with the George Marshall who was allowed to graduate BA at Cambridge in 1532 after twelve terms of study at Oxford and Cambridge, and whose subsequent East Anglian connections are shown by his appointment as rector of Cockley Cley (Norfolk) on 18 July 1554. If he may also be identified with the George Marshall instituted to Long Stanton St Michael in 1555 on the presentation of the local gentleman Thomas Burgoyne (this parish usually went to a Cambridge graduate), then he was dead by 3 December 1558, when the benefice went to Dr William May. 


@@@@@


doc= 18137


Marshall, Henry (1775-1851), military surgeon, was born on 23 November 1775 at Kilsyth, Stirlingshire, the son of John Marshall, a farmer. He studied medicine at Glasgow College, and in May 1803 was appointed surgeon's mate in the Royal Navy. In January 1805 he left the navy and became assistant surgeon to the Forfarshire regiment of militia; in April 1806 he moved to the 89th regiment. With the latter he served in Buenos Aires, at the Cape of Good Hope, and in Ceylon. 
In 1809 Marshall was gazetted as assistant surgeon to the 2nd Ceylon regiment, and in 1813 he was promoted surgeon of the 1st Ceylon regiment. He served in the Second Kandyan War (1815-18), and in 1817 his botanical observations on Ceylon's main export, cinnamon, were read before the Royal Society by Sir Joseph Banks. This work was characterized by the accurate observation and attention to detail common to his later publications on military matters. In 1821 he published a book on the medical topography of Ceylon, and that same year he returned home and served as staff surgeon in Edinburgh and at Chatham. In 1825 he supervised the medical inspection of recruits at Dublin. He was promoted to the position of deputy inspector-general of hospitals in 1830, shortly before his retirement. In 1832 he married Anne (1801-1890), eldest daughter of James Wingate of Westshiels, Roxburghshire. 
Marshall was deeply interested in statistics, and many of his writings were concerned with comparative statistical analyses of disease and mortality among the troops of different military stations. He used statistics to highlight the conditions of service endured by the common soldier. In 1835, with A. M. Tulloch, he made an investigation of the health of the troops in the West Indies, the findings of which laid the foundation for improvements in the sanitary conditions of the troops. Marshall became known as the father of medical statistics. In 1828 he published his 'Hints to Young Medical Officers of the Army on the Examination of Recruits', in which he described forms of malingering and feigning of disease popular among the troops. The 'Edinburgh Medical and Surgical Journal' recommended this book to all medical officers in the army. Four years later Marshall wrote another book dealing with the enlistment and pensioning of soldiers. He argued that the conditions of the army actively encouraged malingering. Soldiers were enlisted for life and the only means of discharge was through disability. He thus urged the implementation of a new scheme where soldiers could obtain pensions through good conduct and length of service. This new attitude towards the soldier was reflected in the pension warrant of 1833 and in subsequent warrants. Marshall was elected a fellow of the Royal Society of Edinburgh in 1839. 
Marshall was instrumental in improving the conditions of the soldier both in service and in retirement. He campaigned for shorter service, better general and sanitary education of the troops, and the reduction of brutal punishments such as flogging and branding. His work in this area gained widespread attention in 1847, when a soldier died from injuries received as a result of whipping. Marshall was not just a medical reformer, but an army reformer. In 1847 he received an honorary MD degree from the University of the State of New York. He contributed regularly to the 'Edinburgh Medical and Surgical Journal' and the 'United Service Journal'. He died in Edinburgh after a prolonged illness on 5 May 1851, and was buried in Dean cemetery, Edinburgh. 


@@@@@


doc= 18138


Marshall, James (1796-1855), Church of England clergyman, was born at Rothesay, Bute, on 23 February 1796, the son of Hugh Marshall, a doctor, and his wife, Elizabeth Wilson. When Dr Marshall died, in 1806, the family removed to Paisley. James was educated at Paisley grammar school and subsequently at the universities of Glasgow and Edinburgh. On 2 September 1818 he was licensed to preach by the presbytery of Glasgow, and after assisting his mother's friend Dr Robert Balfour at the Outer High Church, Glasgow, succeeded to Balfour's charge at his death in 1819. Marshall married in 1822 Catherine Mary, daughter of Legh Richmond, rector of Turvey, Bedfordshire. Sir James Marshall (1829-1889), convert to Rome and colonial judge, was their son. In 1828 Marshall was appointed by the Edinburgh town council to the Tolbooth Church, Edinburgh. Marshall was an effective preacher, and as a young man he attracted the favourable notice of Thomas Chalmers in that capacity. His calm demeanour in the pulpit strikingly contrasted with the vehemence commonly characteristic of the Scottish clergy. 
Although for some years Marshall generally sympathized with the opponents of the establishment in the controversy which led to the Disruption in 1843, he disliked the extremities to which what became the Free Church party seemed to be committing itself. Ultimately he embraced episcopacy, which (encouraged perhaps by his wife's family) he had convinced himself was the only scriptural form of church government, and severed his connection with the Scottish church. He sent his resignation to the presbytery of Edinburgh on 29 September 1841, and, after being confirmed by the bishop of Edinburgh, was ordained on 19 December 1841 by the bishop of Durham as curate to Canon Gilly at Norham. He took priest's orders on 6 February 1842, and was appointed to the rectory of St Mary-le-Port, Bristol. In 1845 Marshall became secretary to the newly founded Lay Readers' Association, which he energetically developed for many years. In May 1847 he was appointed by the Simeon trustees to the living of Christ Church, Clifton, which he held until his death. 
Marshall published, besides sermons and addresses, 'Inward Revival, or, Motives and Hindrances to Advancement in Holiness' (1840) and 'Early Piety Illustrated in the Life and Death of a Young Parishioner' (n.d.), both of which had a large circulation. He also edited 'The Letters of the Late Mrs Isabella Graham of New York' (1839), his aunt. After three years' ill health Marshall died on 29 August 1855 at his house in Vyvyan Terrace, Clifton, and was buried on 4 September in the Clifton parish church burial-ground. 


@@@@@


doc= 18139


Marshall, Sir James (1829-1889), colonial judge, the son of James Marshall (1796-1855), vicar of Christ Church, Clifton, Bristol, and his wife, Catherine Mary Richmond, was born at Edinburgh on 19 December 1829. The loss of his right arm through a gun accident prevented his joining the army, and, after graduating from Exeter College, Oxford, in 1854 he took holy orders almost immediately, and for two years held a curacy. In November 1857 he joined the Roman Catholic church, and as his physical handicap debarred him from being a priest he became procurator and precentor in the church at Bayswater, London. Later he was for a time a private tutor, and in 1861 he became classical master at Birmingham Oratory School, where he became a friend of Cardinal Newman. In 1866 he was called to the bar at Lincoln's Inn. He joined the northern circuit, and eventually settled in Manchester. 
In May 1873 Marshall was appointed chief magistrate of the Gold Coast and assessor to the native chiefs. When the Second Anglo-Asante War broke out in 1873, he negotiated the agreement of the chiefs to the recruiting of their people, and was of great use throughout the campaign in raising levies. He received the special thanks of the secretary of state, and later the Ashanti medal. In 1875 he was stationed at Lagos, and in November 1876 he was promoted to be senior puisne judge of the supreme court of the Gold Coast. In October 1877 he married Alice, the daughter of C. Guillym Young of Corby, Lincolnshire. In 1879 he became chief justice, and on his retirement in 1882 he was knighted. In 1886 he was executive commissioner for the west African colonies at the Indian and Colonial Exhibition and was created CMG. The following year he once more went abroad to Africa for a few months, as chief justice of the territories of the Royal Niger Company. He died at Margate on 9 August 1889. 


@@@@@


doc= 18140


Marishall, Jean (fl. 1765-1788), novelist and playwright, was born in Scotland. She began writing in London, hoping to surpass typical circulating-library novels. Between her first novel and her second, a sister died, her only brother (a lieutenant) left for the East Indies with the Queen's Royal regiment of highlanders, and a stroke disabled her father from business. When Francis Noble gave only 5 guineas for 'The History of Miss Clarinda Cathcart and Miss Fanny Renton', she negotiated an unlimited number of wholesale copies for sale to friends and successfully laboured to win a dedication to the queen; sturdily independent but extremely deferential to her social superiors, she was embarrassed by the royal gift of 10 guineas. Published in October 1765 (2 vols.; new edns 1766, 1767), 'Clarinda Cathcart' is a sprightly epistolary novel in the Richardson tradition. The 'Critical Review' noted some plot inconsistencies but it was favourably reviewed. Despite a cavil at her occasional Scotticisms ('Monthly Review', July 1767, 76), so was her next novel, 'The History of Alicia Montague' (2 vols., 1767), which she published by subscription, a distasteful effort that cleared about 100 guineas. (It was also published, presumably pirated, in Dublin in 1767.) Despite Lord Chesterfield and Lord Lyttleton's polite praise, neither Garrick nor Coleman produced her play, 'Sir Harry Gaylove, or, Comedy in Embryo'. Foote at the Edinburgh Theatre offered encouragement but not performance, so she published it with an aggrieved preface (1772): the distinguished list of nearly 800 subscribers shows vigorous Scottish support for a native writer. In London, Marishall also attempted a periodical paper; in Edinburgh she taught and boarded pupils. An epistolary novel addressed to a former pupil, 'A series of letters, by the author of Clarinda Cathcart; Alicia Montague; and the comedy of Sir Harry Gaylove' (2 vols., 1789) is also her apologia. Although her name is sometimes Anglicized as Jane Marshall, the writer signs her dedication 'Jean Marishall'. Blending precept with lively anecdote, she boldly defends her choices: her tradition of didactic fiction and its exemplar, Richardson's 'Sir Charles Grandison'; the propriety of women writing; women choosing to remain unmarried where financial independence permits. Reproving her pupil's libertinism, she criticizes the morals of Chesterfield's famous letters to his son but denies ingratitude. In letters 31 and 32 Marishall brilliantly describes a determined Scotswoman's struggle to become a writer in London. 


@@@@@


doc= 18141


Marshall, John (bap. 1762, d. 1825), schoolmaster and poet, was baptized in All Saints' Church, Newcastle upon Tyne, on 11 March 1762, the only child of John Marshall (died 1780), master mariner, and his wife, Eleanor Pembroke (died 1777). He was educated at the Newcastle Free School, where he received a classical education under the guidance of the Revd Hugh Moises. His father, who was a member of the Guild of Trinity House, died in January 1780 and was buried next to his wife in St Nicholas's Church, Newcastle. He left his son substantial wealth, for he had owned property in Newcastle as well as ships and shares in ships. This wealth soon dissipated and Marshall lost what he referred to in his poem 'The Village Pedagogue' as 'his summer friends'. He was admitted into the Guild of the Freemen of Newcastle as master and mariner in 1782, probably through patrimony. He pursued a life at sea for a time but by 1804 he was again searching for work. 
In his autobiographical work 'A walk from Newcastle to Keswick', Marshall described how he left Newcastle on a 'fine morning' in August 1804 to walk towards Cumberland. Following a recommendation from his only acquaintance in Cumberland, Mr Crossthwaite, proprietor of the Museum of Natural and Artificial Curiosities in Keswick, who had formerly commanded a ship in the service of the East India Company, Marshall was appointed teacher at the vestry school in Newlands, near Keswick. He commenced teaching on 13 August 1804 at a salary of $10 per year and then in 1805 he became schoolteacher at Loweswater with an increased salary of $15 per year. It is not known how long he remained there, but in November 1807 he was teaching at Murton School, North Shields. 
It was in 1810 that Marshall published the first edition of ''The Village Pedagogue', a Poem, and Lesser Works', his only published work. His poetry demonstrated his erudition and intimate knowledge of classical literature nurtured during his formative years, while his autobiographical prose piece 'A walk from Newcastle to Keswick' showed his love of lakeland scenery and his bonhomie. Of his lesser works, 'On viewing Percy Main colliery, Westoe, and Jarrow from the heights near Howdon on the River Tyne' gives a fascinating glimpse of Tyneside before heavy industrialization. By 1817 Marshall was running a school at Newburn, Newcastle. It was also in this year that the second edition of his works was published with a few amendments from the first edition. By 1819 his teaching career was over and on 23 December 1819 he was appointed to one of the lesser rooms of the Peace and Unity Hospital in Newcastle. This hospital together with the Freemen's Hospital had been established to care for impoverished freemen and their dependants. He went to the Freemen's Hospital on 22 January 1821 and died there, unmarried, from a lingering illness on 19 August 1825. He was buried in All Saints' churchyard, Newcastle, on 21 August. Although he lost his family wealth and suffered hardship and poverty, Marshall was well thought of by his contemporaries. John Sykes, compiler of 'Local Records', collected together some of Marshall's autobiographical notes after his death and published them in the 'Newcastle Magazine' as a tribute. 


@@@@@


doc= 18142


Marshall, John (1784?-1837), naval officer and author, himself recorded that he went to sea at nine years of age, and served throughout the French Revolutionary and Napoleonic wars in vessels of a class to which no schoolmaster was allowed, that is, in sloops, cutters, or other small craft. He was therefore probably born in 1784, and first went to sea in 1793. At the conclusion of the war he was promoted to the rank of lieutenant, on 14 February 1815, but had no further service in the Royal Navy. 
In 1823 Marshall began the publication of 'Royal Naval biography, or, Memoirs of the services of all the flag-officers... post captains, and commanders whose names appeared on the Admiralty list of sea officers at the commencement of the present year (1823), or who have since been promoted'. The work was continued until 1835, extending to twelve octavo volumes. This collection of biographies had no pretensions to literary merit, and the author seldom attempted any critical judgement of the conduct he described. Many of the lives were evidently contributed by the officers themselves; though events were thus sometimes described in too favourable manner, entries commonly included copies of official or private letters, and other documents, which added value to the work. Marshall died early in 1837 at Haslar Royal Naval Hospital, Gosport, Hampshire. 


@@@@@


doc= 18143


Marshall, John (1782/3-1841), writer on statistics, was for many years a supernumerary at the Home Office. He compiled 'An account of the population in each of six thousand of the towns and parishes in England and Wales, as returned to parliament at each of the three periods 1801, 1811, and 1821' (1831) while he was employed on the commission to inspect the boundaries of the cities and boroughs, for purposes of the 'Reform Bill', and made some disingenuous efforts to secure the enfranchisement of a few very small places. Marshall was subsequently made an inspector of factories. He produced 'A digest of all the accounts relating to the population, productions, revenues, financial operations, manufactures, shipping, colonies, commerce of the United Kingdom' (2 vols., 1833). Three thousand copies of this book, on the motion of Joseph Hume, were bought by the government at 2 guineas each and distributed among the members of both houses of parliament, who treated them with the disrespect incidental to parliamentary papers. He also compiled topographical and statistical details of Berkshire (1830), the palatine of Lancashire (1832), and London (1832). He compiled a report, 'Mortality of the Metropolis, 1629-1831' (1832), made a study of the returns made to parliament since the start of the nineteenth century (1835), and supervised a 'remodelled edition' of Brookes's 'London General Gazetteer' (1831). Marshall died on 11 March 1841 in Stamford Street, Blackfriars. 


@@@@@


doc= 18144


Marshall, John, Lord Curriehill (1794-1868), judge, son of John Marshall of Garlieston, Wigtownshire, and his wife, Marion, daughter of Henry Walker, was born in Wigtownshire on 7 January 1794. His family were poor, and he walked from his home to Edinburgh in order to attend the university there. He was in November 1818 called to the Scottish bar, and the proceeds of an extensive practice enabled him in course of time to purchase the estate of Curriehill, near Edinburgh, Midlothian. On 25 July 1826 he married Margaret Todd Bell (died Nov 1866), daughter of Andrew Bell of Kilcunean, minister of Crail, Fife. In March 1852 he was elected dean of the Faculty of Advocates, and on 3 November in the same year he became a judge of the court of session, with the title of Lord Curriehill. He was notably well versed in the laws relating to heritage (inheritance), and employed a literary style in the court room. In October 1868 he retired from office, and died on 27 October at Curriehill. His son, John Marshall, born in Edinburgh on 15 October 1827, was educated at the Edinburgh Academy and the universities of Edinburgh and Glasgow. He was called to the Scottish bar in 1851, became a judge of the court of session, also with the title of Lord Curriehill, in October 1874, and died on 5 November 1881. 


@@@@@


doc= 18145


Marshall, John (1818-1891), surgeon and teacher of anatomy, was born on 11 September 1818 at Ely, Cambridgeshire, the second son and third child of William Marshall (1776-1842) and his second wife, Ann Cropley ('c'.1793-1861), also of Ely. William Marshall was a successful solicitor, whose eldest son, also William (1815-1890), took over the legal practice. The Marshalls were a long-established Ely family, and even after John settled in London, he often brought his family back for extended holiday stays there. 
The law being chosen for the elder son's career, medicine became John's option. He received his schooling in Hingham, Norfolk, and was then apprenticed to a Mr Wales, a surgeon and general practitioner in Wisbech. In 1838 he enrolled in University College, London, where he enjoyed a distinguished career as a student, winning a gold medal in physiology under William Sharpey, and becoming a private assistant to the surgeon Robert Liston. He also obtained the post (1842) of curator of the anatomy museum, which was followed in 1845 by a demonstratorship in anatomy. He assisted Richard Quain in producing the 1848 edition of 'Elements of Anatomy' ('Quain's Anatomy', the early editions having been written by Jones Quain, Richard Quain's brother). 
In 1844 Marshall set up in practice in Mornington Crescent, where he befriended Ford Madox Brown, the first of a number of artists who became his friends and patients. In the same year he became MRCS, and the fellowship in the Royal College of Surgeons followed in 1849. By then he was an assistant surgeon (1847) at University College Hospital. He was subsequently full surgeon and in 1866 he succeeded Eric Erichsen to the chair in surgery, a post for which Joseph Lister also applied. Marshall, who was elected FRS in 1857, retired from University College Hospital and the Brompton Hospital, where he was also surgeon, in 1884. On 12 October 1854 he married Ellen Rogers (1831-1919), daughter of Charles Williams (1792-1865), with whom he had two sons and two daughters. One son died young. Except for a period when they rented a villa in what was then the airy suburb of Kentish Town, so that the children might have more space, the family lived at 10 Savile Row, near Piccadilly. Shortly before Marshall's death, he bought a fine house in Cheyne Walk, Chelsea. 
Marshall was a competent but traditional surgeon, much of whose private practice was more of the nature of general practice. He pioneered the surgical excision of varicose veins and was an early advocate of Listerian antisepsis, but he contributed little to the surgical literature. His most successful publications were intended for more general audiences. 'A Description of the Human Body' (1860, 4th edn, 1882) summarized anatomy and physiology for schoolteachers and their pupils, especially those intending to study medicine. 'Outlines of Physiology: Human and Comparative' (1867) was aimed at medical students, but its morphological approach was soon superseded by the newer experimental physiology. 'Anatomy for Artists' (1878, 3rd edn, 1890) grew out of his long-standing interest in artistic anatomy, a subject he taught at the government school, first at Marlborough House, and then at South Kensington. He became professor of anatomy at the Royal Academy in 1873, his candidacy being supported by one of his patients, Dante Gabriel Rossetti. He lectured on artistic anatomy to classes of men and women, and also pioneered the teaching of physiology at University College, London, to mixed classes. Consistent with his liberal principles, he encouraged his daughters to attend classes at University College, London. 
Marshall also published a few original papers in anatomy and embryology. He was a keen microscopist who appreciated continental developments in cellular pathology and germ theory. An advocate of the public health movement, Marshall and Henry Whitehead produced in 1854 a report on the Broad Street pump (more famously associated with the work of John Snow). He examined the water microscopically, and he and Whitehead reached similar conclusions to Snow about the role of contaminated water in the spread of cholera. Marshall designed a circular hospital ward, believing that their shape would improve ventilation, cleanliness, and light, as well as improve nurse efficiency. He attended the openings of several circular wards in British hospitals and visited one in Antwerp that had been designed and built independently of Marshall's well-publicized advocacy. 
In these and many other ways, Marshall espoused the liberal, progressive values of a scientifically based medical profession. He was an excellent committeeman, serving on the councils of the Royal Society and the Royal College of Surgeons, whose president he became in 1883. He was also an experienced examiner, both for the University of London and the Royal College of Surgeons. He sat for many years on the General Medical Council and was its president at the time of his death. He played an important role in the introduction of the 'Conjoint exam' in 1886, administered jointly by the royal colleges of physicians and surgeons, and aimed at giving general practitioners broadly based medical and surgical qualifications (LRCP and MRCS). 
Marshall was nominally an Anglican, but religion was not especially important to either him or his wife. He suffered increasingly from winter bronchitis, and died at his home, Belle Vue House, 92 Cheyne Walk, probably from bronchopneumonia, on new year's day 1891. He was buried in the public cemetery in Ely on 6 January 1891. 


@@@@@


doc= 18146


Joshua Marshall (bap. 1628, d. 1678), master mason, the eldest and sole surviving child of Edward Marshall and Anna James, was baptized on 24 June 1628. He probably received his training from his father, and like him he held office in the Masons' Company of London of which he was twice warden in the 1660s and twice master in the following decade. In 1667 he followed John Stone as master mason at Windsor Castle and from 1673 he combined the office with that of master mason in the central office of works to which he had succeeded on his father's retirement. In addition to his work for the crown he was active privately as a mason-contractor, being much involved with the rebuilding of the City of London after the great fire. He worked on St Paul's Cathedral and Temple Bar and built the monument and six of the City churches. He also found time to produce memorial sculpture, though in this field he showed no special talent, having a tendency to mass-produce designs which were themselves heavily dependent on his father's work. Joshua Marshall married Catharine (1649/50-1716), daughter of John George of London, with whom he had five children, two of whom survived him. He died on 6 April 1678 and was buried six days later at St Dunstan-in-the-West, Fleet Street. His wife survived him by thirty-eight years. 


@@@@@


doc= 18147


Marshall, Nathaniel (bap. 1680, d. 1730), Church of England clergyman and religious writer, the son of John Marshall (1660-1730), rector of St George's, Bloomsbury Way, and his wife, Anne, daughter of Dudley Ryder, was born in London and baptized on 20 October 1680 at St Andrew's, Holborn. He was admitted to Emmanuel College, Cambridge, on 8 July 1696 and was awarded the degrees of LLB, in 1702, and DD, by royal mandate, in 1717. On 2 March 1700 he married Margaret Wood at St Pancras parish church, Middlesex. They had eight children, the eldest of whom, John (died 1731), became rector of St John the Evangelist, Bedford Row. Marshall was ordained on 3 June 1705 and his first clerical appointment was in 1706, as vicar of St Pancras, a position he held until 1716, when he became rector of the united parishes of St Vedast, Foster Lane, and St Michael-le-Querne. His other clerical appointments were rector of Finchley (1707-30); lecturer at Aldermanbury church and curate of Kentish Town (1715-30); canon of Windsor (1722-30); and lecturer at St Lawrence Jewry and St Martin Pomeroy, Ironmonger Lane (1727-30). William Whiston's intimation, in his 'Life of Samuel Clarke', that Marshall was inclined to Arianism was not widely subscribed to and appears unfounded. 
Marshall was the author of several religious works, the first of which was 'The Penitential Discipline of the Primitive Church' (1714), which was republished in 1844 as part of the 'Library of Anglo-Catholic Theology'. In this work, described as an 'excellent and most serious book' (Whiston, 99), Marshall demonstrated an extensive knowledge and keen understanding of the history of the early Christian church, a level of scholarship that he maintained in his annotated translation, in 1717, of the works of St Cyrian, archbishop of Carthage, who died in AD 258. These studies earned him a reputation as an authority on Christian antiquity. A more controversial work was 'A defence of our constitution in church and state, or, An answer to the charge of the non-jurors accusing us of heresy and schism, perjury and treason' (1717). This drew replies from some leading latitudinarians and nonjurors, including Arthur Ashley Sykes, Matthew Earbury, and Hikiah Bedford. Marshall was also the author of numerous occasional sermons on such subjects as the union of England and Scotland (1707), the death of Queen Anne (1714), and charity schools in London (1724), as well as funeral sermons for friends and colleagues, including those for the Revd John Rogers (1729) and the surgeon Richard Blundell (1718). 
Marshall died on either 4 or 5 February 1730 and was buried at St Pancras. His collection of books and manuscripts was sold by auction in 1732. His widow published a collection of his sermons under the title 'Sermons on Several Occasions' (3 vols., 1731), dedicated to Queen Caroline; a fourth volume was published in 1750. 


@@@@@


doc= 18148


Marshall, Stephen (1594/5?-1655), Church of England clergyman, was born in Godmanchester, Huntingdonshire, the son of a poor glover. He was educated at Queen Elizabeth Grammar School in Godmanchester and matriculated as a pensioner in Easter term 1615 from Emmanuel College, Cambridge, which exercised patronage over his school. He graduated BA in 1618. 
That year Marshall left university and became chaplain to the Barnardiston family at Clare Priory, Suffolk, probably acting as lecturer at Clare and attending the informal graduate seminary run by the puritan minister Richard Blackerby at nearby Ashen, Essex. In 1619 he succeeded the puritan Richard Rogers as lecturer at Wethersfield, Essex. This seems to have been on the recommendation of his former tutor, John Garnons. He was ordained deacon in London on 19 December 1619, when he was described as aged twenty-four, and priest on 12 March 1620. His preaching was very successful; he lodged with William Wiltshire, whose conversion he had effected, and he was given a library worth $50 in return for a promise he would stay at Wethersfield. 
However, when Thomas Pickering, the vicar of Finchingfield, Essex, died, the patron, William Kemp of Spains Hall, hoped for Marshall as Pickering's successor. The cure was offered to Marshall and he took his scruples to a committee of puritan ministers who judged that his promise was not binding and authorized Marshall to accept the offer, noting the attractions of the security of tenure attached to a vicarage. He was instituted as vicar of Finchingfield on 25 October 1625, and there he established his reputation as a puritan minister in several ways. He became renowned for his preaching, delivering moving sermons in a direct fashion with rather more passion than rhetorical decoration. His hostile biographer describes him as 'of middle stature, thick shouldered, swarthy Complexion, his eyes always rowling in his head... His deportment was clownish, like his breeding: his garb slovenly... his Gate [gait] shackling, and the Furniture within not unlike the outside' ('Godly Man's Legacy', 27). His style proved popular, however, and he was a regular visitor to many pulpits across Essex. 
Marshall also met with success in his pastoral duties, in particular in bringing his patron out of his withdrawn, silent state and back into society. In addition, he was very active in remodelling the vestry and town meeting in his parish, providing a campaign to reform the morals of the town, closing down unruly alehouses and conducting attempts to reduce vagrancy and to reduce numbers of illegitimate children. A 'privie watch' was established to keep an eye on those townspeople suspected of being disorderly. On a more positive side, the vestry provided emergency housing, wood and grain, and other relief for the poor and generally improved the local amenities with no clear boundary between civil and ecclesiastical business. 
Marshall's role in the reformation of manners was partly to act as a broker, on the one hand communicating local concerns to the magistracy and enlisting the help of local and country gentry in improving town life, and on the other propagating from the pulpit the ethical basis of vestry actions and informing the community or the particular townspeople of the consequences. In this work his connections with the puritan gentry, the 'noble professors', were crucial. He maintained his relations with the Barnardistons, and in 1633 preached the sermon at the funeral of Katherine, Lady Barnardiston, at St Michael Cornhill in London. In Essex his connections were more diverse. By 1628 he was a favourite in the Barrington household, receiving gifts from Joan, Lady Barrington, in the 1630s. He also won the respect of different branches of the Rich family. He preached at Maldon in 1628 before the parliamentary election in support of Sir Nathaniel Rich and was noted as foremost among 'those ministers who gave their voices for [Robert Rich] my lord of Warwick' and those who 'preached often out of their parishes' before the election for the Short Parliament in the spring of 1640 (Webster, 'Marshall', 17). These connections took Marshall's influence beyond the east of England; for instance, he was consulted by the godly Herefordshire gentleman Sir Robert Harley over a minister whose godly credentials seemed suspect. His connections also assisted in Marshall's career. In 1629, in the process of arranging his BD exercise, in which he preached orthodox anti-Catholicism, questions were raised regarding his MA and it became necessary to acquire a royal mandate to allow him to gain his degree. The mandate was gained at the recommendation of Sir Nathaniel Rich through his kinsman Henry Rich, earl of Holland, who was chancellor of the university. About this time Marshall married a wealthy widow, Elizabeth, daughter of Robert Castell of East Hatley, Cambridgeshire, and Woodham Walter, Essex, and his wife, Elizabeth Alleyn. Her brother was Edmund Castell (bap. 1606, d. 1686), another graduate of Emmanuel College, who went on to hold livings in Essex and Cambridgeshire. 
Marshall's contacts with, and respect from, the noble professors was matched by a similar place among puritan ministers. In the early years of his ministry Marshall was introduced to this network through Emmanuel College, through Richard Blackerby, and then through the similar spiritual exercises organized by Thomas Hooker, lecturer at Chelmsford, Essex. Marshall was one of forty-nine beneficed and 'conformable' ministers putting their names on 10 November 1629 to a petition in favour of Hooker when he was under threat of discipline for nonconformity. In the same year Marshall was among a number of divines suspected of helping a Cambridge printer to distribute the subversive tracts of William Prynne. He may well have been the force encouraging a donor from Finchingfield for the feoffees for impropriations, an organization promoting puritan preachers. 
As he matured, Marshall's prestige, combined with his organizational skills, placed him in a more central role in godly affairs. Lady Barnardiston had left provision in her will for $200 to be distributed in godly causes at Marshall's advice. $50 was given to Anthony Thomas to support preaching in Welsh in the principality, while $150 was given in support of John Durie's scheme for spiritual union between Lutherans and Calvinists. Marshall had been involved in the latter project, an evangelical effort partly conceived to bolster orthodoxy against the advance of Laudianism, which since at least 1630 had been seen by puritans as theologically suspect. About April 1631 Durie canvassed a meeting in London and left with a testimony subscribed by thirty-eight of the leading puritan ministers committing themselves to the task of compiling the manual of practical divinity which featured in his scheme. Marshall represented Essex alongside John Rogers, the elderly lecturer of Dedham. He helped to organize a nationwide network of ministers, offering his own current work on free grace and also employing his contacts, clerical and lay, to raise funds for the cause. An unintended compliment lies within Archbishop William Laud's visitation report for 1636, in which close observation of Marshall was recommended as 'he governeth the consciences of all the rich Puritans in those partes, and in many places far removed' (Webster, 'Marshall', 17). His interest in Durie's work continued through the 1640s and as late as 1654 Marshall worked with presbyterians and Independents, intending to lend credibility to his plans. 
Marshall's standing as a minister rose in the 1630s as many of his puritan colleagues were silenced or fled to the Netherlands and New England. Marshall skilfully walked the difficult line which allowed him to keep his preaching post without compromising to an extent which would lower his godly credit. When Laud, then bishop of London, conducted a visitation in 1631, godly ministers met to discuss 'whether it was best to let such a swine to root up God's plants in Essex, and not to give him some check' (Webster, 'Marshall', 9). Marshall was also present at the resulting demonstration but was one of the less vociferous in his protest. When he was questioned about his conformity he showed a willingness to compromise and escaped with merely a warning. He was closely watched but his circumspection was remarkably successful. In 1632 Robert Aylett, the bishop's commissary in Essex and Hertfordshire, reported that Marshall 'onely preacheth on the holy days and is in all very conformable' (Webster, 'Marshall', 10). In 1637 Sir Nathaniel Brent reported that he was 'held to be a dangerous person but exceeding cunning. Noe man doubteth but he hath an inconformable heart, but externally he observeth all' (ibid.). As Thomas Fuller's less than complimentary observation puts it, he 'was of so supple a soul, that he breake not a joint, yea, sprained not a sinew, in all the alteration of the times' (Fuller, 'Worthies', 52-3). Marshall established his priorities: he was not prepared to place uncompromised nonconformity regarding ceremonies he regarded as 'adiaphorous', or things indifferent, before the prime goal of fervent godly preaching. 
Marshall's survival within the established church allowed him to enhance his prestige as a prominent preacher around the county, to procure ministers for other vacant pulpits, and to maintain the tradition of practical divinity in the region. His reputation helps to explain how he came to the centre of parliamentarian politics in the early 1640s. In 1640 he was nominated as a preacher to the Short Parliament, renowned as a 'painful' (i.e. painstaking) preacher but not notorious for nonconformity and thus unlikely to put a strain on the fragile alliance of conservatives and reformers. Parliament was dissolved before he had a chance to preach at a fast, but he was also nominated when parliament returned later in the year and became one of the preachers before the Commons at a solemn fast at St Margaret's, Westminster, on 17 November 1640. This was the first of many such sermons, many of which were printed. He played a crucial role in exhorting the houses to godly reform and religious conviction in their struggle with royalist forces. Between 1640 and 1653, when he delivered his last sermon to the Barebone's Parliament, sixteen such sermons were printed by order of the houses. His passion was disseminated by more than print. His most famous sermon, 'Meroz Cursed', first delivered to the Commons in February 1642, a characterization of passive moderates as just as guilty as active royalists, was apparently preached over sixty times. 
Marshall became a popular preacher across London and occupied many of the most prestigious pulpits in the capital, performing at Westminster Abbey and St Paul's Cathedral as well as Marylebone, Spitalfields, and St Olave's. In early 1642 the Commons sanctioned the wish of the congregation of St Margaret's, Westminster (many of them included), to have him as one of seven ministers preaching daily in rotation at 6 a.m. with a salary of $300 apiece. The Finchingfield parishioners petitioned against the arrangement and, although the petition was rejected, Marshall remained vicar of Finchingfield, with a Mr Letmale taking on most of the parochial duties as an assistant. 
Marshall's contribution to the cause of godly reform was by no means limited to the pulpit. From November 1640 a group of godly ministers including Marshall, Cornelius Burges, John White, Matthew Newcomen, Thomas Young, and William Spurstowe had been meeting regularly at the home of Edmund Calamy senior in Aldermanbury. This group played an important role in advancing the cause. Marshall was crucial in the ministers' 'petition' and 'remonstrance', signed by more than 700 clergymen and delivered to the Commons on 23 January 1641. He was named among the ministers accused by Edward Hyde, later earl of Clarendon, of having taken signatures from one document and attaching them to a different one. There was some truth in this, in that the final petition was an amalgamation of several petitions forwarded to the central committee, with specific grievances drawn together into a remonstrance comprising nearly eighty articles. There was, as Hyde later claimed, a complaint from ministers but this was merely that the length of the remonstrance would try the patience of the house. 
Out of the same circle emerged some of the most famous pamphlets of the ecclesiological debate. Marshall's initials provided the first two letters of the authorial acronym Smectymnuus, the rest belonging to Calamy, Young, Newcomen, and Spurstowe. 'An Answer' (1641) was an engagement with the work of Joseph Hall, then bishop of Exeter, which had defended 'jure divino' episcopacy. 'An Answer' is similar to the 'petition' and the 'remonstrance' in that it pleads for reform. It is, however, more a vigorous critique of Laudian-style episcopacy, delivered in caustic and lengthy prose, than an alternative model. At this stage Marshall was more of an advocate for a reformed, 'primitive' episcopacy and liturgy than a presbyterian. The 'middle-ground' outline of reduced episcopacy being cautiously circulated by James Ussher, bishop of Armagh, fed into this common area. The hopes for moderation could be seen in Marshall's being summoned by John Williams, bishop of Lincoln, to join a 'committee for innovations' that he was chairing. The committee, appointed by the Lords on 1 March, met six times at Westminster Hall and was quite amicable, despite the presence of Hall and three of the Smectymnuans. On 12 May the committee broke up over the Commons' proposal to abolish deaneries and chapters, a sign of diminishing shared ground. 
On 27 May the root and branch bill, for the 'utter abolishing' of the existing episcopacy, was introduced in the Commons. On 10 June Marshall was among those present at a conference where it was decided to push the bill forward. The following day he was at the house, hurrying Simonds D'Ewes (and presumably others) into the house to contribute to the debate. Marshall was becoming more hostile to episcopacy as it stood but was not yet a 'full-blooded' presbyterian. This can also be seen with the second Smectymnuan treatise, 'A Vindication', which appeared at the end of June. Much of the earlier work is reiterated and expanded and there are passages that seem to advocate something akin to presbyterianism but no more than that. He was testing the water very carefully: on 12 July he joined a number of English ministers dispatching a letter to the general assembly in Scotland exploring Scottish responses to Independency. He was more resolute by 22 July, joining with other ministers in writing to the general assembly again, this time expressing a desire for 'the Presbyterian Government, which hath just and evident Foundation, both in the Word of God and religious reason' ('Acts and Proceedings of the General Assemblies', 1863, 1.328). In November 1641 he was party to an agreement of puritan ministers meeting at Calamy's house to minimize ecclesiological debate within the disparate supporters of parliament in order to present a united front against episcopacy. The agreement held sway for a relatively short period. 
As hostilities moved from rhetoric to military action Marshall became chaplain to the regiment of foot of Robert Devereux, third earl of Essex, preaching to the soldiers and on 23 October 1642 riding among the troops at the battle of Edgehill, persuading the forces that God was behind them; he later wrote an account of the event. Clarendon charges him and Calibute Downing with absolving the 150 prisoners taken by the royalists at Brentford on 23 October of their oath, when released, not to bear arms against the king, although Oldmixon, with good cause, questions this story and Marshall denied this and similar allegations in print the following year in 'A Copy of a Letter' (1643). He certainly justified the struggle but presented the cause as the legitimacy of parliament contesting the dangerous faction surrounding the king. However, the usual distinction between the party and the person of the monarch, which he employed, was enhanced by the starker emphasis of religion in that 'the question in England is whether Christ or Antichrist shall be Lord' (Marshall, 'A Sacred Panegyric', 1644, 21). 
On 12 July 1643 Marshall was among the first to be summoned to join the Westminster assembly of divines. Shortly afterwards he was dispatched to Scotland with Philip Nye as one of the assembly's commissioners. They landed at Leith on Monday 7 August and on 20 August Marshall preached in the Tron Kirk in Edinburgh to general acclaim. They both took part in the unanimous acceptance of the solemn league and covenant and returned to London in September. Marshall's stature among the puritans is further reflected in his selection as the minister to deliver the funeral sermon for John Pym in December 1643, published as 'Threnodia' (1644). 
In his work in the assembly over the following years Marshall contributed a reasonable amount of theological knowledge but mainly operated as a careful pragmatist, holding the Erastians at bay while constantly seeking, as far as was possible, accommodation with those in favour of Independent church government. On 16 December 1643 he was appointed chairman of a subcommittee of five who were to meet the Scottish delegates and prepare a directory for public worship. He drafted the section on 'preaching of the word' which was accepted despite some reservations from the Scottish commissioners. He used his political acumen to make the resolutions as accommodating as possible. For instance, he joined with John Lightfoot to remove the prohibition on feasting on the sabbath and with George Gillespie to prevent the catechism from being too prescriptive. He drafted 'Certaine Considerations to Diswade Men from Further Gathering of Churches', a declaration issued by the assembly on 23 December 1643, discouraging the formation of Independent churches but retaining a respect for the rights of particular congregations. By early March 1644, perhaps as a response to fears of the ecclesiological melange in London, he made a clear statement of 'jure divino' presbyterianism. However, he was still willing to respond on 20 September when the parliamentary 'committee of accommodation' chose him to appear on a subcommittee of six clerics to devise a modus vivendi between presbyterians and Independents. Negotiations were suspended when the presbyterians demanded their own legal establishment as a preliminary to the offer of toleration for others. Marshall worked for a more accommodating system in what Robert Baillie called 'a middle line of his own' ('Letters and Journals of Robert Baillie', 2.230). An openness to the Independents threatened relations with the stricter presbyterianism of the Scottish delegates. 
A certain moderation is also evident in Marshall's sermons. At a conservative estimate he must have preached well over 1000 times between 1640 and 1649. His normal routine, even at the height of his 'political' activism, was to preach three times a week. From February 1644 he was one of the daily speakers to parliament, leading prayers from 7.30 to 8.00 every morning. He used this opportunity to deliver a series of lectures on the sacraments, among the fruits of which were 'A Sermon of the Baptising of Infants' (1644) and 'A Defence of Infant Baptism' (1646). As is evident, his sermons to parliament are far from being solely the 'blood and thunder' calls to war that might be expected. The strongest themes are pleas for unity and an appetite for religious reform at the personal and national levels. The most renowned call to war contains a more peaceful tone, one which might serve as Marshall's motto: 'The Church is the common storehouse to which all our wealth must be carried. Salus Ecclesiae Suprema Lex.... All our blessednesse stands or falls with the blessednesse of the Church' (Marshall, 'Meroz Cursed', 1641, 18-19). 
Parliament appointed Marshall as one of the ministers to wait on William Laud between 4 and 10 January 1645, the time between his sentencing and execution, and Marshall seems to have been present on the scaffold. Between 30 January and 18 February he attended the Uxbridge conference as a chaplain to the parliamentary commissioners and preached to them in the large room of their inn. The 'jure divino' presbyterianism espoused by Marshall and his colleague Alexander Henderson left no ground for compromise with the episcopalians. Once he had returned to London, on 7 July he was chosen by the assembly to deliver the draft of church government to the Commons, and he performed the task with considerable aplomb, being careful not to test the patience of the house or to tread on sensitive Erastian toes. On 9 November the 'committee for accommodation' was revived, and held meetings until 9 March 1646. Negotiations broke down, with the presbyterians complaining that the Independents called for a broader liberty of conscience than was appropriate; the Independents themselves could be accepted but the more extreme groups were judged to be beyond the pale. 
On 14 March 1646 the Commons approved an ordinance naming lay commissioners in every shire and city charged with establishing presbyterian structures. Six days later Marshall presented the ordinance to a meeting of the assembly. With rare unanimity, they endorsed his view that the proposal was unacceptable and that it subverted their authority. Indeed, most of them agreed with his statement that the divines could not accept the system envisaged by the ordinance, and could not continue in the ministry with a clear conscience if it was implemented. He presented their response in a petition to the Commons on 23 March but after a lengthy debate it was judged to be a breach of privilege. He was the main force behind the petition of 29 May signed by 300 ministers of Suffolk and Essex defending clerical authority against the Erastianism of the ordinance. 
Marshall seems never to have lost sight of the fundamental necessity of a solution which could be effected at parish level. If 'jure divino' presbyterianism was not the way to achieve national salvation, then it could be sacrificed in good conscience to the greater need of practical reformation. He was not reconciled to Erastianism, although his practical experience at Finchingfield and his early fast sermons showed him to be inclined to allow the secular arm a role in reformation in partnership with the clergy. Not until near the end of his life, in a work published as 'The Civil Magistrate' (1657), was he prepared to argue, from 'Isaiah' 49: 23 and 60: 10, that as the 'Old Testament' provided examples of reform led by the magistracy, so the current regime should undertake such a mission. In 1653, as in the 1640s, this was probably little more than an accommodation with the 'status quo', aided by a moderate confidence in the Cromwellian regime. Once the more Erastian system of presbyterianism was established in Essex by the end of 1647, Marshall and his assistant joined their patron in the tenth or Hinckford classis. 
In the next two years Marshall was most visible in various parliamentary duties. He received the thanks of the assembly for his book against the Baptists. He accompanied the commissioners to Newcastle in January 1647 with Joseph Caryl, with whom he went on to act as a chaplain to the king at Holmby House, Northamptonshire, the ministers receiving $500 each. The king refused to attend their sermons, and when Marshall launched into prolonged prayer before dinner expressed his impatience by saying his own grace and beginning to eat. Between February and March 1648 Marshall returned to Scotland as part of an attempt to repair the Scottish alliance, making his last recorded appearance at the assembly on 21 June when he was placed on the committee for selecting the proof texts for 'jure divino' presbyterianism. He played an active role in the ecclesiological debates in the Isle of Wight from September to October, taking on the episcopalian clergy on the royalist side. 
Marshall's part in the denouement of the revolution is ambiguous. He preached the sermon to the Commons two days after Pride's Purge, but Hamon L'Estrange's allegation that he was one of the justifiers of the king's execution seems groundless. More reliable is the assertion of Giles Firmin that he was 'so troubled about the king's death' that on Sunday 28 January 1648, he interceded with the heads of the army, 'and had it not been for one whom I will not name, who was very opposite and unmovable, he would have persuaded Cromwell to save the king. This is true'. 
Marshall was never so central a figure after 1649 although it cannot be said that he withdrew from politics. Indeed, he preached at least once to the Rump Parliament and in April 1649 he was employed along with Caryl, Nye, and others in an unsuccessful attempt to persuade the members excluded to resume their places in parliament. In the following year, temporarily at least, his attention turned to lesser duties. He established funds for his earlier haunts in giving a 'messuage and tenement' with 'Boynton meadow, containing three acres' worth $2 a year to pay for wood for the poor of Finchingfield and gave 'Great Wingey, a nominal manor' to fund a lecture at Wethersfield. It is as though he was 'closing his accounts' in Essex, and, for reasons which are not quite clear, he did indeed leave Finchingfield in 1651, becoming town preacher at Ipswich, Suffolk, based in St Mary's at the Quay. On Easter Monday 1652, however, he was again in London, preaching to the lord mayor and aldermen; when the sermon was published he was still described as minister at Finchingfield. 
In November 1653 Marshall met with Cromwell and others in an attempt to persuade Blackfriars millenarians to moderate their language. Three days later he preached to the Barebone's Parliament with an ecclesiology well suited to his congregation. Late in 1653 he was one of the commissioners appointed by parliament to draw up the 'fundamentals of religion' as part of the loose-limbed ecumenism of the 1650s. On 20 March 1654 he was appointed as one of the 'triers', men given the task of assessing and accepting or rejecting candidates for ministerial posts. He was working with a fairly broad spectrum of ministers, from reconciled presbyterians like himself to baptists such as Henry Jessey. 
Marshall's health was declining -- he was beginning to suffer from gout. About the middle of 1655 he lost the use of his hands to the disease and started to suffer from consumption. He died at Ipswich on 19 November 1655 with Giles Firmin at his side. He was given a prestigious funeral and resting place, being buried on 23 November in the south aisle of Westminster Abbey with great solemnity. He rested for only six years in this grave as his remains were taken up on 14 September 1661 and cast into a pit at the back door of the prebendary's lodgings in St Margaret's churchyard. 
Marshall's wife, who had predeceased him, had exercised her power of disposal of her estate to their children. Their only son had drowned at Hamburg, and of their six daughters, three died before their father, including Elizabeth (died 1654), who had married John Nye (bap. 1620, d. 1686?), nephew of Marshall's colleague Philip Nye. Their daughters Mary, wife of Thomas Langham, and Susanna proved the will. 
Many of the surviving accounts and appraisals of Marshall date from immediately after the Restoration, so it comes as no surprise that the vast majority are negative. Writers such as Peter Heylyn, Anthony Wood, Laurence Echard, and Zachery Wood have clear reasons for animosity, while more rigid presbyterians such as Robert Baillie regarded him as a traitor. Clarendon, despite his own, more graceful, invective, gives a rather more careful assessment, particularly in his remark that 'the archbishop of Canterbury had never so great an influence upon the counsels at court as Dr [Cornelius] Burges and Mr Marshall had then upon the Houses' (Clarendon, 'Hist. rebellion', 1.401). In contrast, Samuel Pepys, taking a certain satisfaction that they had fallen so low, reported that two of Marshall's surviving daughters had become actresses at the king's theatre; while the women in question were indeed daughters of a clergyman called Marshall, they were not the daughters of Stephen Marshall. His first biographers emerged in the charged atmosphere of the exclusion crisis, and were heavily influenced by news of history then current. 'The Godly Man's Legacy to the Saints' (1680) is written by someone who evidently knew Marshall from his career as a minister in Essex and has some trustworthy biographical details albeit ones with an attached anti-fanatic twist. The response, by Marshall's close friend Giles Firmin, 'Vindication of Stephen Marshall', is rarely guilty of idolization but still has to be read in the political climate of the early 1680s and its debates on the consequences of the civil war. The fact that biographies, hostile and sympathetic alike, should be produced in this context is testament to Marshall's stature. He occupied an important place in the religious politics of the 1640s and remained a useful figure for laudatory accounts of godliness and hostile accounts of fanaticism more than two decades after his death. 


@@@@@


doc= 18149


Marshall, Thomas (1621-1685), dean of Gloucester and philologist, the son of Thomas Marshall (died 1628), an illiterate blacksmith, and Helen James, was born at Barkby, Leicestershire, on 13 January 1621. Educated by Francis Foe, vicar of Barkby and alumnus of Lincoln College, Oxford, Marshall matriculated as a servitor of that same college on 23 October 1640. On 31 July 1641 he was elected to a Robert Trappes scholarship which he held until 1648. An ardent royalist, in 1644 Marshall joined at his own expense the university regiment commanded by Henry, earl of Dover, for which he was excused payment of the normal fees at his graduation as BA in 1645. Before his expulsion for absence by the parliamentary visitors on 14 July 1648 he went to Holland and in 1650 became chaplain to the Company of Merchant Adventurers in Rotterdam. In 1656 he moved with the company to Dordrecht where he resided until his return to England in 1672. 
At Oxford, Marshall developed a taste for theology and philology, undoubtedly inspired by the orientalist Edward Pococke and James Ussher, archbishop of Armagh, whose sermons he attended and whom 'he made the pattern for all religious and learned actions in his life' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 2nd edn, 1721, 2.782-3). In Holland, Marshall continued to cultivate and expand his knowledge of theology as well as of ancient languages, and met leading scholars such as the Arabist Jacob Golius, the polymath Isaac Vossius, and the philologist Francis Junius. In the late 1650s or early 1660s Junius requested Marshall to edit the Anglo-Saxon gospels, which he intended to publish with the Gothic translation facing. In the following years Marshall produced this edition and two volumes of commentary: 'Observationes de versione Gothica' and 'Observationes in versionem Anglo-Saxonicam'. The whole was published in 1665 as 'Quatuor D.N.J.C. Evangeliorum... versiones'. The 'Observationes' were the first manifestation of Marshall's scholarly versatility, combining his knowledge of the 'Bible' with both Germanic and oriental languages. They incorporate the truly humanist combination of theology with philology and grammar that was so characteristic of his work. 
Junius, Marshall's teacher of Gothic, stimulated his interest in Germanic languages, and provided him with material. Marshall briefly collected notes for an Old English and a Gothic grammar, both of which he abandoned prematurely, but made serious attempts to produce an edition of King Alfred's Old English translation of Orosius. His annotations to an incunable edition of Old Frisian law reveal his interest in Anglo-Saxon canon law. Marshall also pioneered the study of Icelandic, and possessed seventeen Middle Dutch manuscripts, mostly religious texts. His Germanic studies are characterized by sagacity and precision, and differ from Junius's in their deliberate attention to grammar. 
In the course of the 1660s Marshall's contacts with Oxford show his increasing occupation with oriental studies. He corresponded with English orientalists such as Thomas Smith, Robert Sheringham, Edward Bernard, and Samuel Clarke, whom he supported by procuring manuscripts and books, including Apollonius's 'Conics', from the Low Countries. In Holland he bought some of his Coptic manuscripts, as well as several Armenian books. Marshall presumably edited Abudacnus's 'Historia Jacobitarum, seu, Coptorum in Egypto' (1675), to which he supplied a preface announcing his forthcoming edition of the Coptic gospels. Collations and transcripts of Coptic, Greek, Arabic, and Ethiopic gospels, as well as his Coptic vocabulary are the preliminaries to a project that never materialized. Together with Thomas Hyde, Marshall supervised the publication of the gospels and 'Acts' in Malay (1677), to which he wrote the preface. Marshall's publications never matched his erudition. His most important contribution to oriental studies consists of his generous assistance to others. 
Marshall also contributed to the development of the Oxford University Press by procuring types on the continent, including Junius's matrices of Old English letters, at the request of Bishop John Fell. He was furthermore involved in the compilation of Richard Parr's life of Ussher, and published anonymously 'The Catechism Set Forth in the Book of Common Prayer' (1679). 
After the Restoration Marshall took his BD in Oxford 'in absentia' by the licence of Archbishop Sheldon. Still in Holland, he was elected fellow of Lincoln College (17 December 1668), and received his DD (28 June 1669). On the resignation of Nathaniel, Lord Crewe, Marshall was elected rector of Lincoln (19 October 1672), after which he returned to Oxford for good. He was made a royal chaplain and held the rectorship at Bladon from May 1680 to February 1682. In 1681 he became dean of Gloucester. Marshall, who never married, died in Lincoln College on 18 April 1685, and was buried in All Saints' Church. He bequeathed 453 books and 159 manuscripts to the Bodleian Library, and 1040 books and 77 volumes of civil war pamphlets to Lincoln College. Marshall's executor John Kettlewell inherited his Socinian books, on condition that they 'not come into the hands of others, that may be corrupted by them'. The remainder of his estate was sold and most of the proceeds were left to Lincoln College to provide financial support for 'poor schollars'. 'Marshall's scholars' were regularly elected from 1688 to 1765, when the scholarships ceased to be distinctively designated. 


@@@@@


doc= 18150


Marshall, Thomas Falcon (1818-1878), painter, was born at Liverpool in December 1818. His prolific practice chiefly lay in Manchester, and in Liverpool where he lived until 1847. After 1836 he exhibited regularly at the Liverpool Academy and, after 1839, at the Royal Academy in London. In 1840 he was awarded a silver medal by the Society of Arts for an oil painting of a figure subject. In total he exhibited sixty works at the Royal Academy, forty at the British Institution, and forty-two at the Suffolk Street Gallery in London, remaining well represented at the Liverpool and Manchester exhibitions throughout his life. A versatile artist, he undertook portraits, landscapes, genre, and history paintings. 'The Parting Day' and 'Sad News from the War' were probably his best-known works. He died on 2 April 1878 at 31 Ducie Street, Chorlton upon Medlock, Lancashire. He was survived by his wife, Amelia Jane, and at least one son. 


@@@@@


doc= 18151


Marshall, Thomas William (1818-1877), Roman Catholic controversialist, was the son of John Marshall, government agent for emigration to New South Wales. After attending Archdeacon Burney's school in Greenwich, in October 1835 he was admitted to St John's College, Cambridge; he migrated a year later to Trinity, from which he graduated BA in 1840. After ordination the same year he was appointed curate of Swallowcliffe and Anstey, Wiltshire, and on 8 July 1845 he married Harriet, the daughter of the Revd William Dansey, rector of Donhead St Andrew, Wiltshire. 
Marshall and his wife were received into the Roman Catholic church at Wardour in November 1845. Poverty drove them abroad for a time, but in 1848 he was appointed an inspector of schools, with responsibility for Catholic schools in the southern counties of England and Wales. The ill feeling aroused by his pamphlet 'Christianity in China' (1858), which subjected protestant missionary methods to ridicule, led to his resignation in 1860. His major work, 'Christian Missions', published in three volumes in 1862, though partisan, was thoroughly researched and widely acclaimed. Subsequently Marshall made several lecture tours in the United States, where his forceful and incisive style was much appreciated. In 1873 he received the honorary degree of LLD from Georgetown University. On his return from America he continued his career as a polemical writer and journalist, attacking the Church of England in abrasive style. He died at Surbiton, Surrey, on 14 December 1877, and was buried at Mortlake. He was survived by his wife, son, and daughter. His brothers Frederick and Arthur were also converts to Roman Catholicism. 


@@@@@


doc= 18152


Marshall, Walter (1628-1679), clergyman and ejected minister, was born on 15 June 1628 at Bishopwearmouth, co. Durham, the son of Walter Marshall, the curate there from 1619 to 1629. In 1639 at the age of eleven he was elected a scholar of Winchester College. At New College, Oxford, he graduated BA on 28 April 1652; he was a fellow from 1648 to 1657. On 10 May 1654 he was admitted to the rectory of Fawley, Hampshire, and in the same year acted as an assistant to the commissioners into the ministry in the county. On 28 November 1656 he was admitted to the living of Hursley, 4 miles from Winchester, but did not get on well with the patron, Richard Major, Richard Cromwell's father-in-law. On 15 December 1657 he was also elected a fellow of Winchester. 
Marshall resigned from Winchester in 1661. In August 1662 he was ejected from Hursley following the 'Act of Uniformity', but soon after he settled as minister of an Independent congregation at Gosport. He was presented at the assizes in autumn 1662, for taking a service without reading from the 'Book of Common Prayer'. Marshall was still living at Hursley in November 1667, but appears in the episcopal returns of 1669 as preaching at Winchester and Alton. In 1672 he was living under the protection of Richard Norton, patron of the donative cure of Southwick in Hampshire, and obtained a preaching licence there as a congregationalist on 10 August. It is reported that Marshall was continually troubled by an unquiet conscience and even consulted Richard Baxter about it. When he made his will on 24 July 1679, Marshall was living in the parish of Alverstoke. He named his wife, Rebecca, as executor, gave to his son, Walter, most of his books and the reversion of a living granted him by Winchester College, and left $80 to Anne, one of two daughters. By 1 August he was dead. His funeral sermon was preached by Samuel Tomlyns of Andover. It was published with a preface dated 23 August 1680 and dedicated to Lady Anne Constantine, Mrs Mary Fiennes, and the inhabitants of Gosport. Marshall's 'The Gospel Mystery of Sanctification' was published posthumously in 1692. James Hervey stated in a preface to the sixth and many subsequent editions that, if banished to a desolate island with only a bible and two other books, he would choose this work as one of them. 


@@@@@


doc= 18153


Marshall, William (d. 1540?), printer and translator, may have been the William Marshall who in 1527 was a clerk to the chief baron of the exchequer and a protege of Sir Thomas More. If so, he and his patron soon parted ideological company. By 1533 Marshall had developed an enthusiasm for evangelical religion, and was trying to persuade Thomas Cromwell to put his talents to use in the service of the regime. In that year he completed a translation into English (the first such) of Marsilio of Padua's early fourteenth-century political treatise, 'Defensor pacis'. Cromwell promised to lend him $20 towards the publication costs but the money was not forthcoming until 1534, and the edition did not eventually arrive until 1535. If Cromwell had misgivings about the project, they seem to have been justified. Two years later, Marshall was pleading his inability to repay the loan on the grounds that the 'Defensor pacis', although 'the best book in English' against the papacy, had sold poorly ('LP Henry VIII', vol. 11, no. 1355). 
This edition was the centrepiece of an array of continental reformist and antipapal propaganda which Marshall published in 1534-5. He does not seem to have established himself firmly in the book trade: his premises in Wood Street are not recorded on any of his colophons, and he used a wide range of printers. His output was dominated by his own translations (notably of Lorenzo Valla's attack on the donation of Constantine) but also included translations by others, for instance one by William Turner of a Latin version of the Swiss reformer Joachim Vadianus's treatise 'Vom alten und neuen Gott' (1534). He may also have been planning to write against religious conservatism in the University at Oxford, as he asked a correspondent for details of 'unreasonable' statutes and the 'griefs' with which students were encumbered ('LP Henry VIII', vol. 7, no. 308); both his sons were studying there at the time. His interests extended beyond narrowly religious matters: he produced an edition of the new poor-relief ordinance of Ypres in 1535, and may have been the author of a comprehensive and radical set of proposals for reforming poor relief drawn up for Cromwell at much the same time. 
If the 'Defensor pacis' failed to spark public interest, Marshall's 1535 translation of a Latin version of Martin Bucer's treatise against images, 'Das einigerlei Bild', faced the opposite problem. The book provoked an immediate reaction, perhaps because of the additions which Marshall made to the text, such as a call for images to be burnt. Cromwell's agent Thomas Broke and Lord Chancellor Audley both warned Cromwell that Marshall had gone too far, claiming that the book was already causing disquiet and urging that it be banned. Cromwell was more sanguine; the book was permitted to remain, and indeed was in such demand that it was reprinted later the same year. The Yorkshire rebels of 1536 paid Marshall the compliment of naming him as one of five English authors whose heresies should be stamped out. 
Marshall's most influential publication, however, was a primer, printed in 1534 and 1535. It was not the first time this traditional devotional text had been recast for evangelical use (his text borrowed freely from George Joye and Martin Luther), but it was the first English primer to have official backing. The semi-official doctrinal formulary of 1537 (the so-called 'Bishops' Book') drew heavily on Marshall's text. More significantly, the litany which Marshall introduced in the 1535 edition was the model for Archbishop Cranmer's English litany of 1544, which passed over almost unchanged into the 1549 and 1552 prayer books. 
Marshall's personal commitment to these projects is unmistakable. However, Cromwell at least encouraged him, and other scholars vying for government patronage saw Marshall as one of Cromwell's favoured clients. He may also have been connected with Anne Boleyn, to whom he dedicated one of his translations. After 1535 his publishing career petered out: he produced an anonymous translation of a tract by Luther in 1536, and a third edition of his primer in 1538. Perhaps Anne Boleyn's fall sidelined him, or Cromwell may have come to doubt the propaganda value of such heavyweight translations. Marshall did remain in Cromwell's circle; he continued to send reports to the minister, and in 1536 he was one of those sent to persuade the London Carthusians to accept the royal supremacy. He presented them with twenty-four of his unsold copies of the 'Defensor pacis'; they burnt one copy and returned the rest unread. 
Thereafter Marshall fell on hard times. By 1539 he could no longer afford to support his son Richard at Oxford. Richard Marshall was born in 1517, and there was another son, Thomas; nothing is known of the marriage or of any other children. He is likely to be the William Marshall of St Alban's Wood Street whose death and probate administration is recorded for 1540. 


@@@@@


doc= 18154


Marshall, William (fl. 1617-1649), engraver, was the most prolific of his profession working in London during the reign of Charles I. Nothing is known about his life apart from what can be deduced from the more than 250 plates he engraved. The catalogue compiled in 1964 by Margery Corbett and Michael Norton shows that the great majority of these were made on commission for members of the London book trade, whether as engraved title-pages or portrait frontispieces. Since many of these books were the first editions of classics of English literature (among them works by John Donne and John Milton), Marshall's fame is assured despite the generally low quality of his work. 
Marshall's earliest datable plate is the frontispiece to 'A Solemne Joviall Disposition Briefly Shadowing the Law of Drinking' by Richard Brathwaite, published in 1617 with its second part, 'The Smoaking Age with the Life and Death of Tobacco'. This, like the vast majority of Marshall's works, is too crude to reveal with any clarity who might have trained him. But it is more closely related to the style of the recent incomers from the Netherlands, Simon de Passe and Francis Delaram, than it is to the native tradition of Renold Elstrack. The quality of Marshall's plates was always dependent on his model, as can be clearly seen in his title-page to Philemon Holland's 1632 translation of Xenophon's 'Cyrupaedia'. The portrait of Charles I in it is copied from Willem de Passe and preserves something of the high quality of the original. But the figure of Cyrus, for which no model was available to copy, and which Marshall must have designed himself, is wretched. 
Marshall never published any plates himself, and only occasionally was commissioned to make single sheet prints for print publishers (as opposed to plates for the book trade). He seems to have worked for only two print publishers. One was William Riddiard, for whom he made portraits of Charles I and of Thomas Scott. The other was Thomas Jenner, for whom he made three portraits (of Charles II as a baby, Gustavus Adolphus, and the earl of Hamilton) in the 1630s, and two sets of allegorical figures of the four temperaments and the four elements. To these can be added a newly discovered set of emblems which was used for trenchers. A few other plates bear the address of Peter Stent, but most if not all of these were reprints. 
Marshall's best-known plate is his frontispiece to the 'Eikon basilike: the Pourtraicture of his Sacred Maiestie in his Solitudes and Sufferings'. This book, which purports to be written by Charles I himself, appeared within a few days of his execution in January 1649, and became a best-seller despite the efforts of the puritan government to suppress it. So great was the demand that the book was reprinted in various forms fifty-seven times, and the frontispiece had to be re-engraved seven times by Marshall himself, and once by Robert Vaughan copying Marshall's design. Also well known are his illustrations to Francis Quarles's 'Emblemes' of 1635 -- a book whose fame is largely dependent on its being, with George Wither's 'A Collection of Emblemes', the earliest emblem book published in England. Marshall's last datable plates were produced in 1649, and there is no sign of any later activity; presumably he died late in that year. His prints are not rare, and many are held in the British Museum, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 18155


Marshall, William (bap. 1745, d. 1818), agricultural writer and land agent, was baptized on 28 July 1745 at Sinnington, North Riding, Yorkshire. The younger son of a yeoman farmer, according to his own account he could trace his blood through the veins of agriculturists for upwards of four hundred years. At the age of fifteen, however, he was apprenticed in the linen trade in London, and after forsaking this for insurance he spent some years engaged in commercial activities in the West Indies. 
In 1771, after returning to London, a sudden and severe illness made Marshall decide to take up farming. He had already been in the habit of spending his leisure hours in studying agriculture, and a legacy of $500 received on the death of his father in 1772 helped him to pursue his new career. In 1774 he undertook the management of a farm of 300 acres at Addiscombe, near Croydon in Surrey. Marshall's first work was written there in 1778 and entitled 'Minutes of agriculture made on a farm of three hundred acres of various soils near Croydon... published as a sketch of the actual business of a farm'. Marshall swam against the tide of opinion in advocating the use of oxen instead of horses, and believed in keeping his farmworkers under strict control. 
In 1778 Marshall's partner, who held the lease of the Addiscombe land, became bankrupt, and Marshall was obliged to leave. He published 'Experiments and Observations Concerning Agriculture and the Weather' in the following year, and he put forward his long-advocated plan for the establishment of government-supported agricultural colleges. An approach to the Society of Arts for funds to enable him to reside in six or seven different agricultural districts and record their farming practices was rebuffed. This reverse he blamed on Arthur Young (1741-1820), who was becoming the best-known agricultural authority of the day, and whose method of collecting information by visiting leading landowners and farmers on lengthy tours Marshall had attacked. 
In 1780 Marshall accepted an appointment as agent to Sir Harbord Harbord of Gunton, Norfolk, a minor figure in the promotion of agricultural improvement, but left this post after only two years following a disagreement with his employer. He returned to Yorkshire before visiting Gloucestershire in 1783. In all his country visits Marshall compiled notes with a view to achieving his aim of publishing a series of volumes on regional farming practices. In 1783 he contributed to Dodsley's 'Annual Register' for 1783 a pioneering study of the black canker caterpillar, responsible for destroying turnips in Norfolk. 
Then, in 1784, Marshall became agent to Samuel Pipe-Wolferstan, agreeing to manage land at Statfold, near Tamworth, and to act also as adviser on landscaping the estate. But after a series of quarrels with Pipe-Wolferstan, arising in part from Marshall's independent and irascible temperament, he left Statfold in 1786. For some years he then resided in London during the winters and examined farming in a variety of regions during the summers. His stay at Statfold had proved fruitful, however, in providing him with a new career in landscape gardening, and it was there that he had completed his book entitled 'Planting and Ornamental Gardening' (1785). 
In 1787 Marshall published the first of his major studies of the farming practices of six different regions of England, 'The Rural Economy of Norfolk'; this was followed by studies on Yorkshire (1788), Gloucestershire (1789), the midland counties (1790), the west of England (1796), and the southern counties (1798). To a second edition of the last he added in 1799 a 'Sketch of the Vale of London'. Many of these works were translated into French and published in Paris in 1803. 
In his 'Rural Economy of the midland counties' Marshall proposed the establishment of a board of agriculture, a suggestion which the influential Sir John Sinclair (1754-1835) persuaded Pitt to adopt in 1793. Marshall was greatly angered that his old rival, Arthur Young, was chosen for the post of secretary to the board, rather than himself. However, the board adopted his plan of provisional surveys, though on a county rather than his favoured regional basis, and his own work, 'Central Highlands', appeared under the board's auspices. After this Marshall took no further part in the board's publications, preferring to continue with his own 'Rural Economy' series; in addition he published 'On Planting and Rural Ornament' (1796), and 'On the Appropriation and Inclosure of Commonable and Intermixed Lands' (1801). Marshall was highly critical of the procedures and consequences of the current modes of enclosure, and advocated a general enclosure act to regulate the matter. The 'General Enclosure Act' of 1801, however, proved a half-measure which did not meet his views. He next wrote an important work on estate management, 'On the Landed Property of England', which appeared in 1804. It was some consolation for his disappointments over the board of agriculture that in 1792 he had been appointed reviewer of agricultural books for the 'Monthly Review'; in 1796 he had also become agricultural reporter for the 'Monthly Magazine'. 
Marshall had been assisted in the preparation of his 'Rural Economy' series by his visits in 1791 to Sussex as a guest of the earl of Egremont, and to Devon and Cornwall as adviser to Sir Francis Drake on the improvement of his estate at Buckland Abbey. In 1792 Marshall visited the Scottish highlands as adviser on estate management and garden landscaping to the earl of Breadalbane at Taymouth in Perthshire, and from this visit resulted his 'General View of the Agriculture of the Central Highlands of Scotland' (1794). 
Marshall did not marry until 1807, when already in his sixties. His bride was a distant cousin, Elizabeth Hodgson, a woman of considerable property, of Middleton, near Pickering, in the North Riding. Marshall now went to Middleton to live, and he remained there until after his wife's death in 1816. He then moved to Beck Isle House at Pickering, where he had inherited various pieces of land following the death in 1811 of his brother John, a successful local farmer. At Pickering, Marshall built a large schoolroom on to one end of Beck Isle House, a first stage in his plan for founding an agricultural college. Its design was one he had first advocated forty years before, and had also elaborated on in 'Proposals for a Rural Institute or College of Agriculture' (1799). But on 18 September 1818, before his college could become a reality, Marshall died at Beck Isle House. His estate was sworn for probate at $6600. His monument in Pickering church stated that 'he was indefatigable in the study of rural economy', and that 'he was an excellent mechanic, and had a considerable knowledge of most branches of science, particularly of philology, botany, and chemistry'. Marshall had been the first to form a collection of words peculiar to the Yorkshire dialect. The vocabulary appended to the 'Rural Economy of Yorkshire' contains about eleven hundred words, and his 'Yorkshire Words' was reprinted by the English Dialect Society. 
In 1808 Marshall had begun his tremendous self-imposed labour of compiling and commenting on abstracts from the board of agriculture's county reports, rearranged on a regional basis, a project which filled his declining years. It gave him much scope for attacking the inadequacies of the board's authors and their views, and he lived to see it completed; the fifth and final volume of 'The Review and Abstracts of the County Reports to the Board of Agriculture' appeared in 1817. The whole was republished in 1818, the year of his death. 'The registry of the existing practices of England, at the commencement of the nineteenth century', he wrote -- the 'leading object' of his life for forty years -- 'IS NOW FINISHED' (Horn, 39). 
Modern agricultural historians have generally held that Marshall's works on English farming are superior to those of his rival, Arthur Young, as they are more systematically arranged and based on a more thorough knowledge of a district by personal residence there. Unlike Young, Marshall was cautious about experimentation, preferring rather to advocate the best practices approved by experienced farmers. On the other hand, he lacked Young's pithy and more readable style, and acquired fewer close contacts with the leading farming figures of the time. Marshall's career, indeed, suffered in some degree from his native bluntness and acid tongue, his pride, and his sensibility to slights. Nevertheless, from the independence of his views arose his remarkably early support for agricultural education, and his belief in the necessity of studying agriculture on a regional basis, both of which were ideas well before their time. A portrait of him in the National Library of Scotland, Edinburgh, is reproduced in Pamela Horn's work, 'William Marshall (1745-1818) and the Georgian Countryside' (1982). 


@@@@@


doc= 18156


Marshall, William (1748-1833), composer and servant, spent his life near Fochabers, Moray, where he was born on 27 December 1748, one of at least three children of Francis Marishal and his wife, Isabel Innes. At the age of twelve, after 'some instruction from his father' and 'six months at a grammar-school' (MacGregor, 1), he gave up the idea of joining the army and went into service with the duke of Gordon at nearby Gordon Castle, where he advanced to head butler and house steward. He married Jean or (Jane) Giles (1740/41-1825), eight years his senior, on 31 May 1773 in Fochabers. Four of their sons received commissions in the army. The deaths of Alexander (1773/4-1807), John ('bap'. 1782, died 1829), and George ('c'.1782/3-1812) occurred during active service, while William (1779-1870) lost his right arm at Waterloo but survived to die aged ninety. Francis ('bap'. 1776, died before 1857) became a jeweller in London, and Jean 
(Jane; 1778-1873)
married locally, had a large family, and died aged ninety-five years and ten months. 
'Self-taught in... mechanics and other... natural sciences' (Glen, vii) as well as on the violin, Marshall is best-known as the composer of more than 280 Scottish dance tunes for the fiddle, his two-part 'A Collection of Strathspey Reels' (Edinburgh, 1781) preceding those of Niel Gow and his son Nathaniel. The tunes Marshall wrote were all based on the Scottish dance music tradition, with each one being quite short and many able to be played in less than a minute. He 'did not write music for bunglers' (Alburger, 84) but provided technical challenges of key and position then unusual in Scottish fiddle music. His slow airs and strathspeys ('slow, when not danced' (Marshall, 'Scottish Airs', 3), reflecting a shift among his audience from dancing to listening) are still particularly influential. 
'... Above middle size, [Marshall] was compactly built, and considered handsome in his youth. In his old age he was portly and venerable... [and] particular in his dress' (MacGregor, 7). Marshall was also skilled in fishing, falconry, and shooting, and an excellent athlete. Meticulous in penmanship and speech, he was 'a capital dancer' (ibid., 2) and 'a very accurate performer... [who] stamped the instrument and semi-tones with correctness' (Grant, 2). Two of his violins and bows are in Edinburgh University's Reid Collection of Historic Musical Instruments, while a long-case clock (Fochabers Museum) and a sundial (Bourtie House, Inverurie, Aberdeenshire) show him to have been proficient in clockmaking and astronomy. 
Marshall left Gordon Castle in 1790 after thirty years' service, ostensibly because of poor health but possibly as a punishment after he was robbed of $100 17's'. 11died belonging to the duke while in London in May 1789. Marshall spent two years farming at Burnside before being installed by the duke at his farm at Keithmore. Rehabilitation was completed when in 1794 Gordon appointed Marshall estate factor. In that post he built roads and bridges and served as a justice of the peace; the Gordons also allowed his trips to Edinburgh to work with the printers and publishers of his music. He had retired by 1823 to Newfield, a cottage he had designed and built by Craigellachie, Banffshire, where he was able to devote more time to preparing his collection 'Marshall's Scottish Airs, Melodies, Strathspeys, Reels, &c.', published in Edinburgh in 1822. Marshall included a composition by the duke of Gordon in the work and was supported by other members of the Gordon family: the marchioness of Huntly ordered 700 copies for herself and her husband. 'Volume 2nd of a Collection of Scottish Melodies, Reels, Strathspeys, Jigs, Slow Airs &c.' was published in 1845, after Marshall's death, and enhanced his reputation for strong and characterful melodies. 
'A man of rare integrity', Marshall died at Newfield on 29 May 1833, 'his mental faculties... entire to the last' (MacGregor, 6). An informative tombstone marks his burial place in the parish churchyard of Bellie, in Fochabers. 


@@@@@


doc= 18157


Marshall, William (1806-1875), organist and composer, was born in Oxford, the son of William Marshall, a local music-seller. He was sent to London at an early age and gained his musical education as chorister of the Chapel Royal under John Stafford Smith and William Hawes. In 1825 he was appointed organist to Christ Church and St John's College, Oxford, and for some time he also officiated as organist at the church of All Saints. He took the degree of MusB on 7 December 1826, and that of MusD on 14 January 1840. His published compositions were 'Three Canzonets' (1825) and 'Cathedral Services' (1847), and in collaboration with Alfred Bennett he edited 'A Collection of Cathedral Chants' (1829). His most important work, however, was 'A Collection of Anthems used in the Cathedral and Collegiate Churches of England and Wales' (1840), to which an appendix was added in 1851, and which reached its fourth edition in 1862. He also wrote 'The Art of Reading Church Music' (1842). 
At the urging of his friend Thomas Legh Claughton, then professor of poetry at Oxford and for a long period vicar of the parish church of Kidderminster, Marshall was persuaded in 1846 to leave Oxford and become organist and choirmaster to St Mary's, Kidderminster. He spent most of the rest of his life in the town and devoted his spare time to giving instruction in music. He was spoken of as a fine organist, and as being specially admirable as a teacher and conductor. On various occasions he conducted the rehearsals of the Philharmonic Society in London with great success. He continued to be involved in music throughout his life, for he was professionally engaged in Liverpool only a month before his death, which took place at Handsworth, Birmingham, on 17 August 1875. 
William's younger brother 


@@@@@


doc= 18158


Marshall, William (1807-1880), minister of the United Presbyterian church, was born in the hamlet of Meadowmore, Perthshire, early in 1807. He was educated at the village school at Tullybelton and at a superior school in Perth, where he attended a single session. In 1820 he went on to Glasgow University for two years, spending a further two years at Edinburgh University. He entered the Divinity Hall of the United Secession church in Glasgow in 1824, where he studied under Professor John Dick. In 1829 he was licensed, and in December of the following year was ordained to the church at Coupar Angus in Perthshire, where he was to remain for almost fifty years. 
Marshall took a prominent role in the 'voluntary' controversy, a national debate sparked off by a sermon by Andrew Marshall in 1829 which argued the case against ecclesiastical establishments. He edited a monthly magazine, 'The Dissenter', in 1833 and also became secretary of the Voluntary Church Association. He was the public champion of other causes in concert with his colleague, Dr David King, particularly in anti-slavery agitation and opposition to the corn laws. His views were so outspoken that 'The Times' called attention to one speech in 1842 on the latter topic, suggesting that the lord advocate might prosecute him for sedition. 
Marshall was a keen supporter of the union between the Relief and United Secession churches, which came about in 1847. He was also well-disposed towards the abortive union negotiations between the United Presbyterian and Free churches. In 1865 he was moderator of the United Presbyterian synod and in that same year was honoured with the degree of DD from both the University of New York and the Presbyterian College of Hamilton, Canada. In 1872 he was presented with $1500 collected by his friends. By this time he was ailing, and a colleague was appointed to assist with the church while Marshall devoted more time to writings of a local historical nature. He did, however, consent to preach at Dysart, and it was while he was on this visit that he was taken ill. He died at the United Presbyterian manse there on 23 August 1880, and was buried at Coupar Angus. 
Much may be deduced about a man's character on the basis of the charges from which he is defended. In his funeral sermon Dr David Young rejected the view that Marshall had been sour, narrow, bigoted, or tending to contention for contention's sake. He contrasted this view with the enlightened causes, such as anti-slavery, missions, and church union, which Marshall had espoused. However, his praise was highly qualified, and even the denomination's own historian acknowledged that 'for much of the awe he inspired as a debater he owed more to the roughness of the weapon than either to the strength or the skill of the arm that wielded it' (Small, 2.569). 


@@@@@


doc= 18159


Marshall, William Calder (1813-1894), sculptor, was born on 18 March 1813 in Gilmour Place, Edinburgh, the eldest son of William Marshall, a goldsmith, and his wife, Annie Calder. He was educated at the high school, Edinburgh, and at Edinburgh University, and attended the Trustees' Academy from 1830. In 1834 he went to London, where he worked in the studios of Francis Chantrey and Edward Hodges Baily; on 21 April 1834, on the recommendation of Chantrey, he entered the Royal Academy Schools, and the following year he gained the academy's silver medal. Like most sculptors of his generation, he was intent on completing his education in Rome, and he went there in 1836, via Paris. He befriended the British sculptors John Gibson and Lawrence Macdonald and designed several 'ideal' works based on his studies of the antique. 
Marshall received few commissions while in Rome, and had to rely on his family for financial support; on his return to Britain in 1838 he worked for a short time in Edinburgh, and in 1839 settled permanently in London. He married twice: first to Marianne Lawrie in 1842 (she died in the same year) and second in 1845 to Margaret Calder; he and Margaret had four sons and two daughters. Following the exhibition held in Westminster Hall in 1844, Marshall was selected to execute statues of lords Clarendon (1852) and Somers (1855) for the new houses of parliament. He gained many commissions for public statues in the following years, including those for the poet Thomas Campbell (1848) for Westminster Abbey and the inventor Samuel Crompton (1862) for Bolton, Lancashire. His greatest success in public competition was in 1857, when his model for the proposed monument to the duke of Wellington in St Paul's Cathedral was awarded first prize out of eighty-three entrants. However, the commission, amid much controversy, went to Alfred Stevens, whose design was considered more suitable for the intended setting. Marshall subsequently made three biblical reliefs (1863) for the cathedral. 
Marshall did not restrict his production to commemorative monuments; he also designed schemes of architectural sculpture (for example, the pediment figures for Bolton town hall, 'c'.1870) and several church monuments. His group symbolizing 'Agriculture' (1864) is included on the Albert memorial in Kensington Gardens, London. He also showed some 120 'ideal' and narrative works at the Royal Academy between 1836 and 1891, probably the largest contribution of any Victorian sculptor. These encompassed the broad range of themes popular with artists of the period, including classical, biblical, and literary subjects, as well as some quite novel areas -- mirroring those of contemporary painting -- such as ancient history and Pompeian genre. Despite its variety, his work seldom showed any great originality of conception and usually adhered to conventional classicizing types. He adopted a businesslike approach to his art, which brought him considerable wealth: at his death his estate was valued at $48,709. 
Marshall was described by the painter George Dunlop Leslie as 'rather quiet, and very Scottish and shrewd' (Leslie, 171); a portrait of the sculptor by Patrick Allan-Fraser is at Hospitalfield House, Arbroath, Forfarshire, and a plaster self-portrait bust showing him as a young man is in the Scottish National Portrait Gallery, Edinburgh. He was elected an associate of the Royal Scottish Academy in 1840 but resigned in 1844 and was made an honorary member in 1861; he became an ARA in 1844 and RA in 1852, and was made a chevalier of the Legion d'honneur in 1878. Marshall died at his home, 115 Ebury Street, Chester Square, London, on 16 June 1894, and was buried in Kensal Green cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 18160


Marsham, Sir John, first baronet (1602-1685), antiquary, was born on 23 August 1602 in St Bartholomew's Close, west Smithfield, London, the second surviving son of Thomas Marsham (1556-1625), alderman of London, descended from a Norfolk family, and his wife, Magdalen (1567-1618), daughter of Richard Springham, merchant, of London. He attended Westminster School from 1617, and in 1619 matriculated from St John's College, Oxford, graduating BA and MA in 1623 and 1625 respectively. 
Marsham travelled widely from 1625 to 1627, first in England and then in France, Italy, and Germany. In 1628 he was admitted a student at the Middle Temple, but in 1629 was again abroad, travelling in the Netherlands and France. He was present at the siege of Bois-le-Duc by the prince of Orange, and in September of that year was in attendance on Sir Thomas Edmondes, sent to Fontainebleau to ratify a peace treaty between France and England. 
In 1630 Marsham purchased Whorne's Place in Cuxton, near Rochester in Kent, and on 13 January 1631 married Elizabeth Hammond ('bap'. 1612, died 1689), daughter of Sir William Hammond of St Albans, Nonington, Kent. They had ten children. During the 1630s Marsham purchased other properties in the Rochester area. In February 1638 he was appointed one of the six clerks in chancery, and later the same year was presented with the freedom of the city of Rochester. 
The civil war of the 1640s caused a reversal in Marsham's fortunes. He followed the king to Oxford, with the result that he was deprived by the parliamentarians of his chancery post and had his estates sequestrated -- losing, according to his son Robert, around $60,000. He was eventually allowed to compound for his estates for the sum of $356 6's'. 2died and retired to Cuxton, devoting himself to his antiquarian studies. 
Marsham was MP for Rochester in the Convention Parliament which restored the monarchy in 1660. He was knighted on 5 July 1660, was able to resume his position in the six clerks' office, and was created a baronet in August 1663. 
Years of private study at Cuxton had already borne fruit in Marsham's 'Diatriba chronologica', a treatise on the dating of the 'Old Testament', published in London in 1649. About 1665 he brought out a much longer work, incorporating most of the 'Diatriba', entitled 'Chronicus canon Aegyptiacus, Ebraicus, Graecus et disquisitiones', dealing with the dating of ancient history. A note in a surviving copy states that 500 copies of this edition were destroyed in September 1666 in the fire of London, in which Sir John's library also suffered. Marsham profited by this setback to enlarge his work. An expanded edition of the 'Chronicus canon' came out in 1672. The 1672 version subsequently appeared in two foreign editions, one at Leipzig in 1676 and the other at Franeker, in Friesland, Netherlands, in 1696. 
Another early work had been the preface, entitled 'Propulaion', to the first volume of Sir William Dugdale's 'Monasticon Anglicanum' of 1655. The seriousness of the seventeenth-century scholar is here underlined by the copious references, of which there are more than three hundred in a mere thirty-two pages. Marsham was admired by many European scholars for his knowledge of history, chronology, and languages: all three of his published works, and several left in manuscript at the time of his death, were written in Latin, with the occasional note or comment in Greek. His 'Pandectae nostri temporis', annals for the years 1600-85, is in the Bodleian Library. 
But Sir John's interests were not limited to antiquarian matters. The family archive contains papers bearing on the education of his sons, and towards the end of his life Marsham was concerned in a scheme to provide the towns of Rochester, Strood, and Chatham with fresh water. This required a channel to be cut, partly through his own lands; 2 miles of this had been completed and an act of parliament obtained for the remainder, when the scheme was brought to a sudden end by Marsham's death. This occurred on 25 May 1685 at Bushy Hall in Hertfordshire, the home of his younger son, Robert. Sir John's body was brought back to Cuxton and buried in Cuxton church on 3 June 1685. Of his many children only two sons and a daughter survived him. The elder son, Sir John, the second baronet, inherited Whorne's Place and an interest in history, particularly English history, although he never published. Robert, the younger son, succeeded to his father's position as one of the six clerks in 1680 and was knighted in 1681, becoming in 1696 the fourth baronet and ultimately father of the first Baron Romney. 


@@@@@


doc= 18161


Marsham, Thomas (1747/8-1819), entomologist, possibly of China Row, Chelsea, London, received a good education and was later employed at the Exchequer Loan Office, and then engaged as secretary to the West India Dock Company for several years. Marsham began the first authoritative work on British insects based upon the Linnaean system, entitled 'Entomologia Britannica', of which only one volume, 'Coleoptera Britannica', was published in 1802. In this work he described 1307 species native to Britain. Nine papers on various entomological subjects were read by him before the Linnean Society and published in its 'Transactions', and he was also author of 'A system of entomology', in Hall's 'Royal Encyclopaedia' (1788). 
Marsham was a co-founder of the Linnean Society; he was appointed secretary at the first 'fellows' meeting' on 26 February 1788. The other two primary co-founders, Samuel Goodenough (1743-1827) and Sir James Edward Smith (1759-1828), became treasurer and president, respectively, and the first general meeting was held on 8 April 1788. By September 1796 Marsham was staying at Upper Berkeley Street, London, from where he wrote to Smith about his worries for the society's future. Marsham was secretary of the Linnean Society until 1798, the year he was elected treasurer. 
By 1802 Marsham was married to a Miss Symes of Ufford, Northamptonshire; the couple had two daughters. In that year he joined the volunteer corps as an officer. Several months later, on 14 November, Alexander MacLeay wrote to William Kirby: 'I do not believe that I have seen our friend Marsham four times since the beginning of the war... [and] Mrs Marsham says she is more bored with soldiering than she ever was with insect hunting' (Jarvis, 92). 
Marsham was treasurer of the Linnean Society until his resignation in 1816, after it became apparent that the society's funds had been mismanaged. Marsham had incurred heavy losses from the publication of his book and, having used society funds to clear his debts, found himself unable to repay the moneys. He died in stricken circumstances on 26 November 1819, having parted with his collections shortly before. He was survived by his wife. The specimens of British Coleoptera which featured in Marsham's book were acquired by James Francis Stephens (1792-1852). 


@@@@@


doc= 18162


Marshman, John Clark (1794-1877), journalist and historian, eldest son of Joshua Marshman (1768-1837) and his wife, Hannah Marshman, nee Shepherd (1767-1847) ['see under 'Marshman, Joshua], Baptist missionaries, was born on 18 August 1794 at Broadmead, Bristol. He accompanied his parents to Serampore, India, in 1799, and from 1811 made increasingly important contributions to the various undertakings of the Serampore missionaries, including their expansion in 1816 of Bengali elementary schools, which he superintended and for which he wrote the textbooks. He helped to found and manage a savings bank. Marshman became in effect the business manager of the Serampore mission, and his own earnings helped to provide for a body of missionaries, catechists, and Indian Christians. But as the dispute developed between Serampore and the Baptist Missionary Society in conjunction with their missionaries in Calcutta, he became a particular object of their suspicion, until in 1837 agreement was reached for the BMS to take responsibility for the Serampore mission. Meanwhile Marshman managed the press and also a paper-mill at Serampore, for many years the only one in India; and he emerged as a significant pioneer of Indian journalism. He founded with his father, and edited, the first newspaper in Bengali, the 'Sumachar Durpun', on 23 May 1818 (continuing until 1841) and he established, also with his father, the first English magazine, the 'Friend of India', as a monthly in 1818, then as a quarterly. In 1835 he re-established it as a weekly, editing it until 1852; subsequently it was incorporated into 'The Statesman', which still continues. 
Marshman published a series of law books, one of which, the 'Guide to the Civil Law' (1845-6), was widely used and highly profitable. The profits of his undertakings were largely devoted to promoting education, which he regarded as a forerunner of Christianity. He was closely associated with Serampore College for education in arts, science, and theology from its foundation in 1818 until his departure from India in 1855. Through the 'Friend of India' he supported Bentinck's policy (1835) of funding English education, but also called for some continued patronage for classical Indian literature, and consistently warned against the neglect of vernacular elementary education. His advice influenced Sir Charles Wood's adoption of a grants-in-aid system in 1854. His concern for education was linked to his advocacy of the appointment of qualified Indians to responsible posts in the administration. 
Marshman accepted the post of official Bengali translator to the government and he worked to promote the economic development of India, not least through articles and pamphlets: on the cultivation of cotton and tea and the mining of coal; on communications and public works including roads, the railway system, and the Ganges Canal; and on forest conservation. He became chairman of the Red Sea Telegraph Company. Generally he took the view that government and private enterprise each had complementary roles. 
An earnest student of Indian history, Marshman produced the first, and for years the only, history of Bengal (1848), and he was long engaged on his 'History of India', which he finished and published after his return to England (1863-7). He was critical of aspects of British rule especially in its earlier stages, including the permanent settlement of Bengal which, he argued, left the peasants at the mercy of the 'zemindars' (landholders). But he commended the reforms of governors-general such as Bentinck and particularly Dalhousie, and believed British rule to be providential for India. Other historical and political works included 'The life and times of Carey, Marshman, and Ward, embracing the history of the Serampore mission' (2 vols., 1859); 'Memoirs of Major-General Sir H. Havelock' (1860); and the pamphlets 'How wars arise in India: observations on Mr. Cobden's pamphlet entitled 'The origin of the Burmese War'' (1853) and 'Letter to J. Bright, esq., MP, relative to the recent debates in parliament on the India question' (1853). 
Marshman's reading was very wide, and he was a distinguished oriental scholar. He studied Chinese, knew all the great Sanskrit poems, and gave much attention to Persian. He published an English-Bengali dictionary (1828) and various Bengali textbooks; also articles in the 'Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society', the 'Calcutta Review', and other periodicals. In England, however, he was not recognized. He was refused a seat in the Indian council, and although his services to education were, at the instigation of Lord Lawrence, eventually recognized by the grant of the Star of India in 1868, he had to seek occupation as chairman of the committee of audit of the East India Railway. He made three unsuccessful attempts to obtain a seat in parliament, for Ipswich in 1857, Harwich in 1859, and Marylebone in 1861. 
Marshman was married twice: to Margaret Anderson in 1831, and, in 1846, to Alice Sparrowe, who survived him. He died at 2 Redcliffe Square North, Kensington, London, on 8 July 1877. His daughter Florence married Lieutenant-Colonel Frederick Bailey; their son was Lieutenant-Colonel Frederick Marshman Bailey (1882-1967), Indian army, Indian political service 1906-38. 
Marshman was respected for the independence of his character, his strong convictions, and his knowledge of Indian affairs. Precocious as a young man, he matured as an unostentatious philanthropist with a remarkable range of interests and achievements. 


@@@@@


doc= 18163


Marshman, Joshua (1768-1837), orientalist and missionary, son of John Marshman, weaver, who was said to be descended from an officer in the parliamentary army, and Mary Couzener, of Huguenot ancestry, was born at Westbury Leigh, Wiltshire, on 20 April 1768. After some scanty education at the village school, he was apprenticed at fifteen to a London bookseller named Cater, a native of Westbury Leigh, but after five months Joshua returned to assist his father at weaving. Both in London and at home he read omnivorously, mastering, it is said, more than five hundred volumes before he was eighteen. He usually had a book before him on the loom. On 8 August 1791 he married Hannah Shepherd ['see below']. 
Weary of weaving, Joshua Marshman became in 1794 master of the Baptist school at Broadmead, Bristol, and studied classics, Hebrew, and Syriac at the Bristol Baptist college. The accounts which he read of the labours of William Carey (1761-1834) in India led him to offer himself to the Baptist Missionary Society, and in company with William Ward and two others he sailed from Portsmouth for India on 29 May 1799. He arrived at the Danish colony of Serampore, near Calcutta, where Carey soon joined them, on 13 October. At that time the East India Company did not allow missionaries into their territory, so Marshman and Carey lived there under Danish protection, translating the 'Bible' into various languages. They preached and taught in Serampore and travelled throughout the surrounding country; in a few years they established several stations, and rendered the scriptures, in whole or in part, into Bengali, Oriya, Sanskrit, Telugu, Punjabi, Hindustani, Marathi, Hindi, Sikh, and other languages including Chinese. Marshman took the foremost part in this work, and he also handled many of the often difficult negotiations with the British authorities, notably in obtaining their acquiescence for new recruits to mission work in India. In 1811 he received the degree of DD from Brown University in the USA. 
Marshman took the main responsibility for the educational work of the Serampore mission, pioneering an important development in Indian elementary education in the vernacular. In 1816 he published 'Hints Relative to Native Schools'; within a year funds had been raised for the establishment of 100 schools conducted according to the then fashionable monitorial system, with a relatively broad curriculum. Textbooks compiled by the missionaries, which included elements of Western learning, were accepted also in pre-existing indigenous elementary schools. To crown this work for education, in 1818 Marshman drew up the prospectus of a missionary college 'for the instruction of Asiatic Christian and other youth in Eastern literature and European science', which was built at Serampore on the banks of the Hooghly, and which, as Serampore College, continues to exist. In 1827 he received a charter for the college from King Frederik VI of Denmark. 
In 1818, in conjunction with his son, John Clark Marshman, and other missionaries, Marshman established the first newspaper ever printed in any Eastern language, the 'Sumachar Durpun, or, Mirror of News', and in the same year he commenced the publication of the 'Friend of India', a monthly magazine. In 1820 Marshman vigorously asserted the divinity and atonement of Christ in a controversy with the Hindu reformer Ram Mohan Roy. In 1827 the connection between the Baptist Missionary Society and the Serampore missionaries was severed, owing to differences about administration, and a painful and protracted controversy took place, Marshman acting as the representative of the missionaries. Like Carey he suffered at times from melancholia. He died at Serampore on 5 December 1837 and was buried in the mission cemetery on the following day. 
Marshman was undoubtedly one of the ablest orientalists and most earnest missionaries that worked in India. He published several works on the Chinese language and a Chinese version of the 'Bible', the first complete edition printed in that language and the first Chinese book printed from moveable metal type, which took him fourteen years. He also assisted Carey in the preparation of his Sanskrit grammar. 
His wife 


@@@@@


doc= 18164


Marston, John (bap. 1576, d. 1634), poet and playwright, was baptized on 7 October 1576 at Wardington, Oxfordshire, the son of John Marston (died 1599), lawyer, and Maria (died 1621?), daughter of Andrew Guarsi, possibly a descendant of Katherine of Aragon's Italian physician, Balthasar Guarsi. His parents married at Wardington on 19 September 1575, where his maternal grandmother, Elizabeth Grey, had resided since her marriage to her second husband, John Butler. 
Marston's father belonged to the Middle Temple but retained strong midlands connections. He was appointed counsel to the city of Coventry (22 September 1585) and its steward (13 April 1588), and he acted as lawyer to Thomas Greene, Shakespeare's 'cousin' and solicitor to the corporation of Stratford upon Avon. Marston senior's grant of arms (29 November 1587) describes him as 'late of the Middle Temple... now of the city and county of Coventry' although the family retained property in Wardington and Cropredy as well as acquiring a new house in Cross Cheaping, Coventry. By 1592 the Middle Temple records were listing Marston senior as 'of Coventry' and his son, who matriculated at Brasenose College, Oxford, in February 1592, described himself as a gentleman from Warwickshire. Marston junior may in fact have been at Oxford since 1591 and he graduated BA in February 1594. Although he continued at Oxford until 1594 he was also 'specially' admitted to the Middle Temple (on 2 August 1592) by his father during his term as reader. By November 1595 Marston resided at the Temple (he and his father stood surety for Thomas Greene as a new entrant) studying under the tutorship of John Armitage and probably sharing chambers with his father. 
As the son of a prosperous and prominent lawyer, Marston was expected to follow his father into the law but in 1598 he published the Ovidian erotic poem and Juvenalian verse satires 'Metamorphosis of Pigmalion's Image and Certaine Satyres', and later in the same year his 'The Scourge of Villanie' appeared. His father's will (written 24 October 1599) shows that although he had 'hoped that my son would have profited in the study of law', he feared that his son might even sell his precious law books as he took 'delight in plays and vain studies and fooleries'. These lines, cancelled in the final version, reveal that Marston had theatrical interests some time before 1599; they may also show that the burning of his poems under the bishops' ban on 4 June 1599, often assumed to have caused Marston to adopt a dramatic career, probably occurred after he had begun to write plays. Unfortunately, the opening work of Marston's dramatic career cannot be determined, and although it has been generally accepted that he began with the revision of an older play, 'Histriomastix' (published 1610), possibly written for the inns of court for Christmas 1598, the evidence remains far from convincing. 'Histriomastix' was never attributed to Marston during his life and, indeed, the attribution (only made by Richard Simpson in 1878), rests on limited internal evidence complicated by the poor state of the text and the likelihood of further revision. 
It is possible, then, that Marston's dramatic career began as early as 1598, although the auspices, exact date, and even the title, remain unknown. By September 1599 his literary fame was sufficient for Henslowe to employ him as a jobbing writer for the public stage although most of his earlier work was written for the Paul's Boys, one of the new 'private' children's companies. Marston produced 'Jack Drum's Entertainment' (1600), 'Antonio and Mellida' (1600), and 'Antonio's Revenge' (1601) for this company, combining Italianate settings, romance, and Senecan and revenge elements with witty satire of contemporary literary and social fashions and his particular, extravagantly inventive vocabulary. Throughout his career Marston's work is characterized by an acute awareness of new literary fashions and styles, drawing on Aretino (possibly directly from the Italian), Montaigne through John Florio's translation, and upon the fashionable, intellectual cultures of the inns of court. By 1601 Marston was an established literary figure, praised as a satirist by Francis Meres ('Paladis tamia', 1598), while for John Weever he 'enharbour[ed] Horace vein', and he merited enough attention to be one of the central targets of the Cambridge satirical play, 'The Return from Parnassus, Part Two' (1601-2). Extracts from his plays appear in the commonplace book of Edward Pudsey, a Warwickshire gentleman who recorded the fashionable plays he had seen about 1600-01 (including 'Merchant of Venice' and 'Every Man in his Humour'), and Marston also contributed to Robert Chester's 'Love's Martyr' (1601) along with others of the 'best and chiefest of our modern writers' (as they were described on the title-page). 
Marston was notoriously quarrelsome. John Manningham's 'Diary' (21 November 1602) records his gratuitous rudeness to Alderman More's wife's daughter (he first commended her beauty and then when she saluted him as a poet, he retorted 'poets feign and lie, and so did I... for you are exceeding foul'), although this rebarbative tone also belongs to Martson's poetic persona. In 'Certaine Satyres' he signed himself as 'Kinsayder', a punning name ('kinsing' is the castration of a dog) alluding to the dog-like barking of satire which, though rough and cynical, can equally fawn and flatter. In 'The Return from Parnassus, Part Two', Marston's poetic mask is criticized as merely 'lifting up your [his] leg and pissing against the world' (I.ii, ll. 266-70) while the braggart Furor Poeticus imitates Marston's poetic violence and linguistic experiments. Furor's 'roister doister' 'cuts, thrusts and foins at whomsoever he meets' (I.ii, ll. 272-3), and encapsulates Marston's fractious relations with contemporary satirists, such as Joseph Hall (who may have authored the 'Parnassus' plays), who had angered Marston due to his attack on 'Pigmalion'. 
Marston's other famously difficult relationship was with his poetic rival and sometime collaborator, Ben Jonson. Jonson told William Drummond in 1619 that he had beaten Marston and taken his pistol from him (an incident that underlies Jonson's 'Epigrams', 68), although in 'On Playwrights' their relations are characterized by sly admiration for Marston's folly and perseverance. This epigram implies that the two writers continuously compared themselves and debated each other's work. The relationship exploded into public disagreement during the 'War of the theatres' ('c'.1600-02), when Jonson attacked Marston, first in 'Every Man out of his Humour' (1600) (through Clove and Orange) and in 'Cynthia's Revels' (1600) (as Hedon) and then at greater length in 'Poetaster' (1601), where the idiotic, effeminate Crispinus is forced to vomit up his Marstonian fustian. The precise occasion of this public spat remains opaque but Marston may have satirized Jonson in 'Histriomastix' (as Chrisoganus, if the attribution is accepted) and possibly again in his farce-like 'Jack Drum's Entertainment' (as Brabant Senior). Although many of the motives for the 'war' are unclear, Weever's comparison of both Jonson and Marston as the heirs of Horace, and Thomas Dekker's devastating satire on Jonson as a false Horace in 'Satiromastix' (1601), may suggest a genuine debate over the role and method of the satirist, perhaps combined with or fuelled by the commercial rivalries between the boy companies. Marston's unjustly neglected play, 'What You Will' (1601), dramatizes the failure of the railing Lampatho Doria to achieve moral reform of the debauched 'duke' of Venice. Indeed, even the play's epicurean philosopher Quadratus fails to appeal to the duke's sensual side sufficiently. The incapacity of both satirist and philosopher presents a bleak view of the inability of writers to reform their society, while the play's depiction of Lampatha Doria as both Jonsonian and Marstonian (he is called a 'Don Kinsayder') suggests the failure of both approaches to social satire. 
Despite the antagonism and violence in their relationship, Jonson and Marston had much in common. Certainly Marston admired Jonson, writing a prefatory poem to 'Sejanus' (1605) and dedicating 'The Malcontent' to his fellow writer and 'amico suo candido et cordato'. This published dedication to a living person, unique in Marston's 'oeuvre', conveys the primacy of Jonson's role in shaping Marston's sense of himself as a writer. In contrast to Jonson, Marston's independent means allowed him to disdain the search for patronage that preoccupied his rival. Instead, Marston offered his works to 'the most honourably renowned Nobody, bounteous Maecenas of Poetry' ('Antonio and Mellida') or 'to the world's mighty monarch, Good Opinion' ('Certaine Satyres') and 'To Everlasting Oblivion' ('Scourge of Villanie'). 
Some time in 1603-4 Marston exchanged the Paul's Boys, now devoted to developing a more citizen-oriented market, for another 'private' company, the Children of the Blackfriars (also briefly known as the Children of Queen's Revels after 1604), at some point also becoming a shareholder in the company. It was for this company, notorious for a 'railing' style that constantly tested the authorities' patience and the limits of privilege granted by their connection to Anne of Denmark's court, that Marston produced his two most successful and sustained plays, 'The Malcontent' ('c'.1603; revised 'c'.1604 by Webster for the King's Men) and 'The Dutch Courtesan' ('c'.1604-5). In particular, 'The Malcontent', a harsh comedy that debates both the possibility and desirability of revenge and political and social reform, became Marston's trade-mark play. The appeal to a 'reformed muse' may echo the hopes for political reform at the outset of the Jacobean regime, but the restless, darkly cynical humour embodied in its central figure, Malevole, also suggests a stark realization of the unlikelihood of its achievement in a pervasively corrupt world. 
In 1605 Marston collaborated with George Chapman and Jonson on 'Eastward Ho', a play that satirized both citizen mores and their literary taste for romance, repentance narratives, and moral dramas, while also not sparing the pretensions to gentility of the impecunious knight, Sir Petronel Flash, and his deluded search for fabulous wealth in Virginia. Although the play appears to have been performed in 1605, during the court's summer progress, it attracted the attention of the authorities. One copy of the play retains a cancel leaf with a vicious satire on colonial enterprises, borrowing from Thomas More's 'Utopia' to describe Virginia's fantastical plenty, where the dissolute adventurers may also 'live freely... without sergeants, or courtiers, or lawyers, or intelligencers -- only a few industrious Scots' (III.iii, ll. 42-4). The authors were 'delated to the king' by Sir James Murray, brother of John Murray, a member of the king's bedchamber, and Chapman and Jonson were imprisoned for 'writing something against the Scots' ('Conversations with Drummond', ll. 273-7, in 'Ben Jonson', ed. C. H. Herford and P. E. Simpson, 11 vols., 1925-52, vol. 1). Marston appears to have escaped. The precise cause of the offence (Chapman and Jonson claimed it was 'but two clauses' and shuffled the blame on the actors) and the exact sequence of events remain unclear but the offence seems to have either been mitigated or explained away. In 1606 Marston produced his 'Parasitaster, or, The Fawn', widely held to satirize King James, even though, as the printed text suggests, he may have done this from a safe distance from London. However, 'The Dutch Courtesan' was staged during the king of Denmark's visit in July and August 1606 and Marston wrote some Latin verses for the king's ceremonial entry into London on 31 July. The presentation of a holograph copy of these verses to James VI and I (BL, Royal MS 18 A.xxxi) might suggest that Marston either had arrived back in favour or was seeking forgiveness. 
During 1605-6 Marston finally parted company with Jonson as the prefatory epistle to 'Sophonisba, or, The Wonder of Woman' (1606) criticizes Jonsonian pedantry by its refusal 'to transcribe authors, quote authorities, and translate Latin prose orations into English blank verse', a pointed critique of Jonson's 'Sejanus'. 'Sophonisba', a heroic tragedy set in the Carthaginian wars, prefigures Fletcherian drama and marks an increasingly serious temper in Marston's writing. By 1607 he had left the professional stage, his final work (published 1613, although it may have been begun as early as 1603-4), 'The Insatiate Countess', was left unfinished and was completed by William Barkstead and Lewis Machin ('c'.1608-13). The only other work which can be certainly attributed to Marston, 'The Entertainment at Ashby' (1607), is a country-house masque, written to be performed at the home of the earl and countess of Huntingdon to celebrate the arrival of Alice, dowager countess of Derby (the countess of Huntingdon's mother). The masque circulated in manuscript among the midlands gentry who had commissioned and performed the piece (such as Sir Gervase Clifton of Nottinghamshire, the addressee of Marston's one extant holograph letter) and the manuscript, Huntington Library, MS EL 34 B9, originates from the Egerton (Bridgewater) Library. None of the other later works attributed to Marston, such as 'The Mountebank's Masque' (1616) or the satires on the duke of Buckingham ('c'.1628), can confidently be ascribed to his authorship. 
Although Anthony Nixon's 'The Black Year' (1606) suggests that Marston was 'sent away westward for carping both at court, city and country', in 'The Dutch Courtesan', and perhaps 'Eastward Ho', there is no evidence that Marston was compelled to leave the stage. It may be that the furore created by 'Eastward Ho' or financial exigency impelled him to give up writing for the public stage by late 1606, but a more likely reason was his marriage to Mary (died 1657), daughter of William Wilkes, one of James VI and I's favourite chaplains. Documentary evidence for the marriage date has not survived but in his will (6 May 1630), Wilkes forgave Marston 'all that is or may be due unto me for lodging and diet, for himself, his wife, his man and maid which he had of me eleven years'. As Marston left the Wilkes household some time in 1616, the 'eleven years' lodging implies a marriage in 1605. Marston also sold his shares in the Blackfriars company to Robert Keysar some time between 1606 and 1608 (probably in 1606 or 1607) and in 1609 when he supplicated to read at the Bodleian Library in Oxford he stated that he had been studying philosophy for the past three years. Although it has been conjectured that he was the John Marston condemned to Newgate in 1608, the extant extracts from the privy council registers omit any offence and do not identify the prisoner precisely. E. K. Chambers and others incorrectly identified and dated the author of a letter to Lord Kimbolton with the playwright rather than with the radical Canterbury cleric of the same name and argued that Marston could have written the infamous 'Scots Mine' play (or plays) that precipitated the closure of the Children of Blackfriars. There is, however, no evidence to suggest that Marston was either in prison or responsible for this dramatic satire. 
By 1609-10 Marston had transformed himself into a cleric. He was ordained deacon on 24 September 1609, joined St Mary Hall, Oxford, and became a priest on 24 December. This conversion caused some comment at the time and Thomas Floyde, in a letter to William Trumbull in Brussels, received in February 1610, noted that 'Marston the poet is minister and hath preached at Oxon'. In 1619 Jonson wryly observed that 'Marston wrote his father in law's preachings, and that his father-in-law his comedies' ('Conversations with Drummond', ll. 273-7, in 'Ben Jonson', ed. C. H. Herford and P. E. Simpson, 11 vols., 1925-52, vol. 1), while more contemporary comments convey the surprise at Marston's change of direction. John Davies ascribed the translation to 'malcontentedness' over 'Time mis-spent' ('The Scourge of Folly', 1610, epigram 217, 'To acute Mr. John Marston') while Francis Beaumont's verse epistle to Jonson (before 1616, possibly 'c'.1610-11) comments on Marston's 'wretched' 'state' '
ordained to write the grin 

After the fawn and fleer. 

' By 18 June 1610 Marston appears as 'clerk' (priest) at Barford St Martin, Wiltshire, presumably acting as a curate to his father-in-law who held the living, and in October 1616 he was preferred to the living of Christchurch, Hampshire, the first fruits of which were paid in 1617. 
After 1616 Marston fades into obscurity. In 1621 he inherited lands from his mother and in 1624 his only son, John, died. In 1631 he resigned his living and returned to London. His only activity connected to his former literary career was to lobby, through William Whalley, to have his name removed from the title-page of the 1633 collected edition of his plays printed by William Sheares. He died in London on 24 June 1634 (his will was dated 17 June) and was buried in Middle Temple Church, where the inscription on his tomb read 'Oblivioni sacrum'. His wife died in 1657. 


@@@@@


doc= 18165


Marston, John Westland (1819-1890), poet and playwright, was born on 30 January 1819 at Boston, Lincolnshire, the son of Stephen Marston, an Anglican priest who converted to the Baptist church, and ministered to congregations in Boston, and later at Grimsby. After schooling at Grimsby, Marston proceeded to London in 1834, and was articled to his uncle, a solicitor with offices near Gray's Inn. While Stephen Marston had a 'horror of playhouses' and saw actors as 'legitimate children of Satan' (Moulton, 'Five friends', 96), his son was fascinated as early as the age of twelve by plays and the theatre, and once in London soon found his way to Sadler's Wells. With nights spent at the theatre and days spent in the company of mystic writers such as James Pierrepont Greaves and John A. Heraud, to whose periodical 'The Sunbeam' he contributed, Marston's law studies suffered, although he may have persevered and been called to the bar around 1838 (Wood, 8). In that year he was appointed secretary of Greaves's Pestalozzian Association, and published a pamphlet entitled 'Poetry as an Universal Nature'; in 1839 another lecture, 'Poetic Culture', appeared, and he helped edit a new periodical, 'The Psyche'. 
Inevitably, it was among the followers of the mystic Greaves, centred in Cheltenham, that Marston met his future wife, Eleanor Jane Potts (1807/8-1870), eldest daughter of James David Potts, the proprietor of 'Saunders's News-Letter'; they were married on 18 May 1840, though Marston's feeble prospects were panned by the Potts family, who opposed the match. She was a woman 'of much cultivation, -- a good critic, a fine linguist, a loving reader' (Moulton, 'P. B. Marston', 11) and the marriage was a happy one. Marston transformed his own courtship into 'The Patrician's Daughter', a play published in pamphlet form in 1841, and sent in October to William Charles Macready. By the spring the Marstons, settled in London, were acquainted with the Macready circle, and had met Thomas Carlyle, John Forster, Charles Dickens, and Robert Browning at the actor's dinners. On 29 March 1841 Marston was baptized in the Church of England at St Clement Danes, Westminster. His next volume, 'Gerald, a Dramatic Poem, and Other Poems' (1842) betrays the influence of another new friend, Philip James Bailey, the author of 'Festus' (1839). Thus when 'The Patrician's Daughter' appeared at Drury Lane in December of 1842, with Helen Faucit in the title role and with a prologue by Dickens spoken by Macready, the twenty-three-year-old Marston's rise to literary eminence would seem to have been certain. Marston's blank verse play with a contemporary and domestic setting quite naturally put him in the company of his friend Browning, also enamoured of the poetic drama; R. H. Horne's and Elizabeth Barrett's 'A New Spirit of the Age' (1844) grouped the two young writers together, and Barrett's 'Lady Geraldine's Courtship' betrays the influence of Marston's play. Controversy erupted over the behaviour of the central character of Mordaunt, but 'The Patrician's Daughter' was an undoubted success, and might have been a larger one had Marston taken Macready's advice and made the ending a happy one. 
In 1846 Marston became a contributor to 'The Athenaeum'; he continued for about twenty-five years, and reviewed many important figures, including Tennyson, Thackeray, Browning, and Dickens. His first child, Cicely, was born in 1846, and a second daughter, Eleanor, in 1848. Marston's second play, the prose comedy 'Borough Politics', opened at the Haymarket on 27 June 1846 (claims that it was first published as a pamphlet in 1838 remain unsubstantiated); the manager, Benjamin Harrison, would go on to present two other plays by Marston, 'The Heart and the World' (1847) and 'Strathmore' (1849). The first, a comedic flop, was withdrawn after a week; however, 'Strathmore', a historical drama about the covenanters with Charles and Ellen Kean in the leading roles, enjoyed a great success. The plot is a more even-handed reworking of Scott's 'Old Mortality', with the complication of misallied love versus duty. Marston thought it his best play, and in the quality of its blank verse as well as its fairly well constructed plot, it is certainly above the average for its time. 
In the 1850s Marston was a central fixture of literary London, and in one of the theatre's least memorable epochs the chief author of serious dramatic literature that actually reached the stage. He was an early and enduring friend of Dante Gabriel Rossetti (he was visiting Rossetti when the painter had his final stroke in 1882) and acted in his friend Dickens's amateur theatricals. When his only son, Philip Bourke Marston (1850-1887), was born, his godparents were the poets Philip Bailey and Dinah Mulock (later Craik, better known as a novelist). A steady stream of plays appeared on the London stage: 'Philip of France' and 'Marie de Meranie' in 1850, then another domestic drama 'Anne Blake' (1852, again starring the Keans), and 'A Life's Ransom' (1857), which puts domestic blank verse into the era of the revolution of 1688. The prose 'A Hard Struggle' was praised by Dickens and proved to be a success at the box office. But Marston, still only in his thirties, was spreading his efforts and energies in many directions; in addition to book reviewing, he helped found and was the initial co-editor (with John Saunders) of the 'National Magazine' in 1856, which published spasmodic and pre-Raphaelite writers and artists, and he also began writing fiction, although he possessed no gift in that genre. He even found the time to pen the second-best newspaper poem on the charge of the light brigade. 
In the 1860s Marston moved with his family to a fine house in Northumberland Terrace, Regent's Park, and he and his wife began to hold Sunday evening open houses for literary London, as well as for those with interest in spiritualism. Marston had corresponded with Elizabeth Barrett Browning about spiritualism as early as 1853, and his entire family shared his strong interest in it. Visitors report him as a fluent conversationalist, tending towards the epigrammatic, and as an exceptionally good listener. In 1863 he was made an honorary doctor of laws by Glasgow University, and was henceforth usually addressed as Doctor Marston. One of his most durable plays, 'Donna Diana', was staged at the Princess's Theatre in 1864; a comedy, it was adapted from Moreto's 'El Desden con el Desden', and it was frequently performed in Britain and in the United States for the next thirty years, which was not the case for 'Life for Life', another neo-Elizabethan drama produced in 1869. 
In 1870 Marston's wife died, and her death affected him deeply. He gave up the house in Regent's Park, and turned to a collaboration with the melodramatist W. G. Wills, 'Broken Spells' (1872). The play is aptly titled, for the spell that allowed audiences to enjoy neo-Elizabethan verse dramas was also gone. Marston's two-volume 'Dramatic and Poetical Works' (1876) is a self-conscious capstone to his career, and he seems to have taken delight chiefly in the successes of his son, who had overcome his blindness and become a poet. His daughter Cicely died, however, in 1878, followed in 1879 by Eleanor, who had married the poet Arthur O'Shaughnessy in 1873. 
Marston's last play was acted at the Vaudeville Theatre on April fool's day 1885. It was titled 'Under Fire', and 'The Graphic' laconically reported that 'tokens of disapprobation were unpleasantly numerous' (Wood, 50). A harder blow, however, came with the death of his son on 14 February 1887. Despite a modest civil-list pension, Marston's last years were spent in straitened circumstances; his lodgings were modest, his meals taken in cheaper foreign restaurants. His friends, led by Sir Henry Irving, attempted a rescue with a benefit performance of Byron's 'Werner' at the Lyceum (1 June 1887), realizing $928. Marston repaid the acting profession in the next year with the publication of the two-volume 'Our Recent Actors', which is now an indispensable primary source for Victorian theatre history. In his last year he suffered from ill health, and lost much of what had been a portly figure. He died in his lodgings at 191 Euston Road, London, on 5 January 1890, and was buried four days later in Highgate cemetery, Middlesex, alongside his wife and children. A few years later, Bernard Shaw, in a review of 7 November 1896 of what for him was an alarmingly powerful revival of 'Donna Diana', spoke of it as a 'pure-bred drama engendered solely by the passion of the stage-struck, uncrossed by nature, character, poetry, philosophy, social criticism, or any other alien stock'; in the age of Ibsen, Marston's was indeed an 'obsolete play' ('Shaw's Dramatic Criticism', 188). The artificial theatricality of Marston's best work, as well as its deployment of blank verse, has doomed him to a murky corner of theatre history, though any new accounts of serious mid-Victorian drama should begin with a rediscovery of his work. 


@@@@@


doc= 18166


Marston, Philip Bourke (1850-1887), poet, was born at 123 Camden Road Villas, Camden Town, London, on 13 August 1850. He was the son of John Westland Marston (1819-1890), a trained solicitor who abandoned this career for the theatre and poetry, and his wife, Eleanor Jane Potts (died 1870). The poet Philip James Bailey and the novelist Dinah Mulock Craik were his godparents, and a popular poem by Craik, 'Philip, my King', is addressed to him. 
When Marston was only three years old his sight became impaired, a loss attributed variously to an infection following an accidental blow, to the use of belladonna against scarlet fever, and to cataracts. For many years he could still see, in his own words, 'the tree-boughs waving in the wind, the pageant of sunset in the west, and the glimmer of a fire upon the hearth'; but by the time he was twenty he was completely blind. Nevertheless, his contemporary biographers all commented on his large, beautiful, dark brown eyes. As a consequence of his disability, he never learned to read, and his poetry was always dictated. 
Some work done when Marston was only fifteen was included in 'Song-Tide and Other Poems' (1871). It was dedicated to his mother, who had helped him prepare it for the press, but who had died in 1870. In November 1871 he was devastated by the death of his fiancee, Mary Nesbit, and in 1874 his close friend Oliver Madox Brown also died. 
Marston had grown up in a house whose regular visitors included Algernon Charles Swinburne and Dante Gabriel Rossetti, and their reception of his work was very favourable: Rossetti famously declared some of his lyrics worthy of Shakespeare. Their compliments remained a source of pride until the end of his life, and he maintained a wide literary circle. After Mary's death his sister Cicely acted as his eyes, and they lived together in London. They made frequent trips together to France, and one to Italy. In 1875 he published 'All in All', which, though dedicated to his father, consisted mainly of poems to Mary. In that anthology, the single poem dedicated to Cicely begins with the line 'What were I, dear, without thee?' She died of consumption, very suddenly, in 1878. Marston and his father were in France at the time and could not be reached; they returned to find that they had missed even her funeral. Eleanor, the surviving sister, was by then an invalid and she died early the next year, followed by her husband, the poet Arthur O'Shaughnessy (1844-1881). Rossetti, Marston's lifelong mentor, died in 1882. 
Deeply grieved by these losses, Marston had also, in 1880, run out of money. His friends, in particular Dinah Mulock Craik, raised enough to support him on that occasion, but his living was always precarious. Although he still lived in London with his father, the main market for his writing was in the United States. Marston's short stories were published in 'The Cornhill', and he was a regular contributor to 'Harper's'. He did not particularly enjoy writing these potboilers, though the best of them was, he felt, 'Miss Stotford's Speciality'. 
In 1883 'Wind-Voices' appeared -- the last of Marston's works to be published within his lifetime -- and from then his health began to decline and he became an alcoholic. From that time, too, he established a literary club, 'The Vagabonds', which met monthly at his home at 191 Euston Road. In early 1887, while on a summer tour in Brighton with his father, he was taken ill, and he died at home of apoplexy on 14 February. According to his own wishes, he was buried in unconsecrated ground without a religious service at Highgate cemetery in London on 18 February. 
Marston's remembrance was secured largely by his two friends, the American poet Louise Chandler Moulton, and William Sharp. She published two posthumous collections of his poems, 'Garden Secrets' (1887) and 'A Last Harvest' (1891). She also produced, in 1892, 'The Collected Poems of Philip Bourke Marston, with Biographical Sketch and Portrait'. Sharp collected his short stories under the title 'For a Song's Sake and other Stories' (1887). Marston's poem 'After' was set to music by Edward Elgar, and Swinburne dedicated a sonnet to his memory. Throughout, Marston's works are characterized by a melancholy which has been attributed to the many tragedies of his life, particularly to the number of bereavements that he experienced. The mournful quality of his writing, however, was ultimately criticized by his contemporaries as repetitive, if beautiful. 


@@@@@


doc= 18167


Marten, Sir Henry (c.1561-1641), civil lawyer and judge, was the eldest son of Anthony Marten, citizen and grocer of London and gentleman of Berkshire, and his wife, Margaret, daughter of John Yate of Lydford, Berkshire. Henry was born at Stoke Poges, Buckinghamshire ('Brief Lives', 1.43), although he was described as of St Michael Bassishaw, London, at the time he entered Oxford University (ibid.). He was educated at Winchester College and at New College, Oxford, where he matriculated as the son of a commoner on 24 November 1581, aged nineteen, and was admitted a fellow the following year. He graduated BCL in 1587, proceeded DCL in 1592, and was admitted a member of the college of advocates (Doctors' Commons) on 16 October 1596. With his wife, Elizabeth (1573/4-1618), whom he married in August or September 1597, he had two sons, Henry Marten (1601/2-1680) and George, and three daughters, Elizabeth, Jane, and Mary. 
Marten had a long and distinguished career under the first two Stuarts but like many public officials who served both he found himself somewhat more comfortable with the former than with the latter. His legal career developed with notable speed and success. He had distinguished himself in the profession sufficiently to be invited to participate in the disputations before King James at Oxford in 1605 and three years later made a presentation against the use of prohibitions before the privy council. Perhaps as a consequence of those performances, he was named king's advocate on 3 March 1609. Appointments to a succession of important offices followed in due course: in 1616 he was named chancellor of the diocese of London; in January 1617 he was knighted at Hampton Court and in October that year he was appointed judge of the high court of admiralty; in 1620 he was named to high commission; and in 1624 he was made judge of the prerogative court of Canterbury and dean of the arches. As a civilian he had by 1625 reached the pinnacle of his profession. As James I once remarked to him, he was now 'a mighty monarch, in his jurisdictions over land and sea, the living and the dead' ('DNB'). Clearly he had also established a personal rapport and a significant level of trust with James I. The king sent him on a mission to the Palatinate in 1613 to help negotiate the marriage of his daughter Elizabeth to the Elector Frederick. Six years later Marten was asked to serve as a commissioner in the trade negotiations between the English and Dutch East India companies, and his success in securing a treaty no doubt led James to call on him again in 1624 when relations between English and Dutch merchants deteriorated disastrously in the so-called Amboyna Affair. The seemingly unprovoked and senseless massacre of English subjects by principals of the Dutch East India Company created a diplomatic nightmare for James on the eve of England's entry into the Thirty Years' War, when the alliance with the Dutch took on singular importance, and Marten's attempts to finesse the crisis were no doubt of considerable help. 
Marten's political career began in 1625 when he was elected to parliament as a member for St Germans, Cornwall -- an election he owed to fellow Cornish MP Sir John Eliot. He served again in 1626 (St Germans), 1628 (Oxford University), and in the Short Parliament of 1640 (St Ives). He started in parliament rather inauspiciously by criticizing the duke of Buckingham for his failed 'ambassadorship' in Spain the previous year, but his criticism was particular and did not reflect anything like ideological opposition to the crown. Marten can be found days later supporting the king's requests for supply, suggesting, quite logically, that since parliament had pressured the king into the war they were morally obliged to offer him financial support -- 'let us take heed how we discontent a prince whom we have put into a course of war' (Gardiner, 'Commons Debates', 121-2). In the 1626 parliament Marten again became involved (this time inadvertently) in the parliamentary proceedings against the duke of Buckingham. As judge of the admiralty court he had frequently crossed swords with the duke as lord admiral, and MPs had come to focus on one such incident involving cargo in a French ship called the 'St Peter'. The ship had been taken as prize along with a number of others in September 1625, and its cargo, including nearly $10,000 in gold and silver, had been sequestered on orders from Buckingham. King Charles subsequently ordered the gold and silver to be confiscated to the government's use -- ostensibly as contraband -- and the remaining goods sold at auction, this without investigation, proper due process, or any decree from the court of admiralty, and over the protests of Marten. In the event the sale did not go forward, the goods were restored, and the ship eventually released, only to be suddenly rearrested a week later on orders from Buckingham when relations with France took a sudden turn for the worse. The matter was eventually resolved, but Buckingham's (and the king's) cavalier treatment of the French vessels and their merchants' interests had provoked retaliation against English merchants in France and the episode was seized upon by the duke's enemies as further evidence of his venality and incompetence. Marten was caught in the middle and was forced to stage a vigorous defence of his own part in the matter in the House of Commons. The episode did little to improve relations between Marten and the lord admiral. The following year Buckingham again attempted to interfere with Marten's deliberation's in the court of admiralty on matters of prize and in so doing provoked a bitter quarrel which led to Marten's resignation. The quarrel was resolved very quickly, but Marten returned to his place only after he had been reassured (albeit implicitly) of his future independence as an officer of the court. 
This incident seems to have accentuated Marten's growing concerns about Charles I's government. He took an active role in the 1628 parliament, and while he cannot in fairness be described as an 'opposition' MP -- he staunchly defended the king's discretionary right to declare martial law -- he did play an active and important role in the passage of the petition of right. Together with John Glanvill, a prominent common lawyer, Marten was chosen to draft and present the Commons' objections to the Lords' so-called 'saving clause', a proposed amendment to the petition which reserved to the king the discretionary exercise of his 'sovereign power'. Marten's speech in conference on 23 April pointed out the logical inconsistency of the Lords' amendment, suggesting that it contradicted the language of the petition and hopelessly undermined its intent by robbing its specific provisions of any persuasive power -- 'Sovereign Power', he claimed, 'is a transcending and a high word' (Levack, 119). His speech certainly contributed to the decision to drop the saving clause and it was later printed for public consumption. 
During the years that followed Marten also found himself increasingly at odds with Charles I's religious policies. A confirmed moderate, he often used his position as dean of arches (and, before that, as official of the archdeaconry of Berkshire and as chancellor of the diocese of London) to mitigate the harsh treatment meted out to puritans for religious nonconformity. In 1628 he publicly supported a parliamentary bill which would have prevented prosecution for 'gadding to sermons' and claimed that as dean of arches he had in the past assessed damages against prosecuting ordinaries and 'would ever do it' (Levack, 191). He also became the focal point of the notorious controversy surrounding the position of the communion table. In 1633 the parishioners of St Gregory's, London (a peculiar of St Paul's), appealed to the court of arches to overturn the decision of the dean and chapter to remove their communion table to the east end of the church and rail it in 'altarwise'. Marten was sympathetic to their position and ordered the table to be returned to the chancel but before he could pronounce sentence the king himself intervened -- at the urging of Bishop William Laud -- and removed the case for hearing before the privy council. The king eventually declared his support for the ordinaries' decision (and for their authority to determine such matters) and consequently ordered Marten to reverse himself and declare against the parishioners. The incident left Marten embarrassed and clearly out of step with official policy and, perhaps not surprisingly, he was summarily removed as dean of arches later that year when Laud replaced George Abbot as archbishop of Canterbury. 
Marten found himself at odds with Laud again in the autumn of 1640 when he appeared before the council to argue against the controversial canons of 1640. His opposition on this occasion had less to do with doctrinal matters than with professional concerns. A number of the new canons were designed to circumscribe the jurisdiction and powers of diocesan chancellors and officials in favour of their bishops. These offices were almost always filled by civilians and Marten, together with Sir John Lambe -- ironically his replacement as dean of arches -- staged a spirited, if ultimately unsuccessful, defence of their professional class. 
Despite these disagreements Marten appears to have remained in good standing with the king. He retained his membership on the high commission until its abolition, and kept his posts in both the prerogative court of Canterbury and in the admiralty until his death in London on 26 September 1641 'in the yeare of his Age 81' (Ashmole, 1.160). He was generally admired for his professionalism and his integrity, though as with other members of Charles I's administration his behaviour came under intense scrutiny during the Long Parliament. Marten was fined $250 by the House of Lords for his part in the high commission prosecution of Sir Robert Howard, and proceedings in at least a half-dozen other cases in the admiralty were being reviewed in the upper house at the time of his death. Marten was reportedly one of the wealthiest men in Doctors' Commons -- he lent the king $3000 in 1639 -- and he left substantial properties in Berkshire to his eldest son, the future regicide Henry Marten. He was buried at Longworth, Berkshire. 


@@@@@


doc= 18168


Marten, Henry (1601/2-1680), politician and regicide, was the eldest son and heir of Sir Henry Marten (c.1561-1641), civil lawyer and judge, and his wife, Elizabeth (1573/4-1618). He was born in his father's Oxford house opposite Merton College chapel and had a younger brother, George, and three sisters, Elizabeth, Jane, and Mary. 
After attending school in Oxford, Henry (or Harry as he was known by friends) matriculated, aged fifteen, on 31 October 1617 as a gentleman commoner from University College, graduating BA in 1620. He may have been the Henry Marten admitted to Gray's Inn in August 1618 and was certainly admitted to the Inner Temple in November 1619. In the 1620s he toured Europe and enjoyed much high living accompanied by, among others, Mildmay Fane, later earl of Westmorland. During his time in France he was much impressed with the French stoical philosophers. 
Many details of Marten's life, particularly during his early years, remain unclear. He probably married twice. On 25 September 1627 he married a woman named Elizabeth ('c'.1612-1634), with whom he appears to have had three children: Margaret ('bap'. 1629), Mary ('bap'. 1632), and Elizabeth ('bap'. 1634). His wife died shortly after the birth of her third child and was buried on 28 April 1634 at Hurley in Berkshire. On 5 April 1635 Marten married Margaret Staunton (died 1679), widow of William Staunton and daughter of the London silkman and grocer Francis West (fl. 1624-1634) ['see under 'West, Francis (d. 1652)]. The union was the idea of his father and according to John Aubrey, Henry acceded 'something unwillingly' ('Brief Lives', 193). The couple had three children, two daughters and a son, Henry ('bap'. 1639). 
Marten earned a reputation for licentiousness as both a womanizer and a drunkard early in his career. Aubrey describes him as 'a great lover of pretty girles' and he is said to have cost his father $1000 a year for the upkeep of his wild lifestyle ('Brief Lives', 193). Much of his own money was also rumoured to have been frittered away on women and wine. This reputation allegedly earned him the ire of Charles I. Upon seeing Marten at a race meeting in Hyde Park the king is said to have exclaimed 'Let that ugly Rascall be gonne out of the Parke, that whore-master, or els I will not see the sport. So Henry went away patiently, 'sed manebat alta mente repostum' [but it lay stored up deep within his heart]. (ibid.)' Marten's business affairs are obscure during this period. In the 1630s he was described as merely a 'farmer' of Hinton Waldrist, Berkshire (now Oxfordshire). During the latter part of the decade he and his brother managed their father's considerable estate, which stretched along the south bank of the Thames and the River Cole and centred on the village of Shrivenham. The brothers had run up considerable debts by the outbreak of the civil wars. 
In April 1640 Marten was returned to the Short Parliament as a member for Berkshire. The following November he was returned for the same seat to the Long Parliament. Prior to the civil wars he developed a reputation as an assiduous committee member. He was part of the group that drew up the protestation of May 1641 and regularly attended the important committee of safety created in July 1642. In that year he and his brother George used contacts to elicit information about the activities of the court. Marten was subsequently paid $500 towards intelligences and later bequeathed $2000 to the 'service of the Commonwealth' ('JHC', 2, 1640-42, 408). He offered his merchant vessel, 'The Marten', as part of the naval summer watch and, commanded by George, it was part of the parliamentary fleet whose mutiny secured the appointment of the earl of Warwick as lord admiral. It is reported that when the king issued a commission of array for Berkshire, Marten tore up the document in front of his tenants. On the outbreak of war in August 1642 he subscribed $1200 to the parliamentary cause and was named governor of Reading, but abandoned his post when the royalists marched on Oxford. He then raised a regiment by commandeering horses. During summer 1643 he chaired the committee for the general rising in London and although a plan to raise the whole country was not implemented, it formed part of the pressure against the aristocratic leadership of the parliamentarian army. Throughout his parliamentary career Marten enjoyed good living, but seems to have had little stomach for alcohol and was soon drunk. Yet he was capable of using this reputation as a political tool, pretending to sleep in the Commons chamber until, seizing his opportunity to make a rapier intervention, he would leap up from his feigned slumbering. 
As early as 1641 Marten confessed to his friend Sir Edward Hyde that he did not believe that one man was wise enough to rule a whole nation. By 1642 he was identified as a key figure among those Sir Simonds D'Ewes referred to as the 'fiery spirits' who used language disparaging towards the royal dignity. Having proclaimed kingship to be forfeitable he was excluded from pardon for life or estate by Charles I in the same year. In support of the puritan divine John Saltmarsh, the author of a pamphlet proposing the deposition of the king, Marten stated in the Commons on 16 August 1643 that 'it were better one family be destroyed than many' ('Mercurius Aulicus', 19 Aug 1643). On being challenged to reveal to whom he referred he added without hesitation that he meant the king and his family. He was immediately imprisoned in the Tower of London and barred from the Commons. His imprisonment was to last fourteen days but his parliamentary ban was to span almost three years. Despite his non-attendance in the house he claimed to have signed the solemn league and covenant, although in retrospect he admitted doing so on grounds of political expediency rather than conviction. He commanded a troop in the Berkshire-trained bands and was appointed governor of Aylesbury on 22 May 1644. During the winter of 1645-6 he acted as commander-in-chief, under Colonel Dalbier, of the infantry at the siege of Donnington Castle. 
The narrative of Marten's return to the Commons is unclear. On 6 July 1646 the house voted to erase from the 'Journals' the sections referring to the Saltmarsh affair. The following business was the disablement for delinquency of the Abingdon MP, Marten's brother-in-law, Sir George Stonehouse. Marten may first have stood for Abingdon and then transferred to the county seat. His close political ally and friend, William Ball of Barking, was then elected as a recruiter MP for Abingdon. Ball wrote pamphlets in a similar vein to Marten, and, when Ball died in 1648, his writings continued to appear in the presses, possibly edited or reissued by Marten. Marten subsequently helped Henry Nevile to the Abingdon seat. 
After his return to the Commons, Marten emerged as the chief political ally of Thomas Chaloner. Chaloner questioned the involvement of the Scottish commissioners in the peace negotiations with the king, which were taking place at Newcastle upon Tyne. In October 1646 he made a speech in the house, subsequently dubbed the 'Speech without Doors', which called for peace to be settled without reference to the Scots or their wishes. Marten wrote several pieces in support of Chaloner, some published and others that remained in manuscript. His published pieces were issued anonymously, as befitted their extreme statements of hostility towards Charles Stuart, the barely hidden imputation of which was that Charles should be executed for murder. The aim of these tracts was to reduce Charles Stuart to the status of an ordinary citizen, and thus make him as liable as any Englishman to the same punishment for any crime he committed. The main pieces to appear in the press were 'A Corrector of the Answerer to the Speech out of Doores' (1646) and 'An Unhappie Game at Scotch and English' (1646). Marten's hostility towards the Scots continued and in 1648 he published two pieces of invective against the Scottish commissioners, arguing that the peace of England ought to be settled without reference to either the Scots or the king. The first of these was 'The Independency of England Endeavoured to be Maintained'. He was instrumental in pushing through a vote of no addresses on 3 January 1648, by which the parliament agreed to cease sending overtures for peace to Charles. He explained this move in 'The Parliaments Proceedings Justified in Declining a Personall Treaty'. 
Marten developed a close working relationship with the Leveller leaders during the late 1640s. He was closest to John Wildman, who was to marry Lucy Lovelace. Wildman was named with Marten in a cipher outlining sympathetic individuals and regiments, as well as identifying opponents, during the army agitation of summer 1647. Throughout their lives Marten and Wildman retained their cipher letters as pen-names for each other. John Lilburne also trusted and respected Marten. The latter chaired the committee charged with examining Lilburne's imprisonment, a committee that was unable to secure Lilburne's release, and in 'Rash Oaths Unwarrantable' the Leveller published an invective against Marten. Marten was hurt by Lilburne's personal attack and drafted a reply, 'Rash censures uncharitable', but did not publish it. The two seem to have mended their relationship and developed a mutual respect. Marten also knew several minor Leveller figures. He took part in negotiations to draw up an 'Agreement of the People', and was praised by Lilburne as the only parliamentarian to actively do so in late 1648. Marten approved of the idea of a fundamental constitution and was later, with Edward Sexby, to assist the frondeurs in drawing up a similar agreement for the French rebels. 
In December 1647 King Charles signed the engagement with the Scots and this was to lead eventually to a second outbreak of war. Marten returned to Berkshire, and interpreted the Commons order to defend the counties as an opportunity to raise another regiment. This one was entirely unauthorized and its recruitment and actions were opposed both by the army commanders and by the Commons. He refused to answer for his conduct and moved his regiment around the midlands. It was called a regiment of Levellers and a combination of radical political views and a reputation for womanizing made the slur useful in denigrating both Marten's public and his private life. An ejected minister, William Turvil, sent news to London that appeared in a newsletter, 'Bloody Newes from the North'. This was a sensationalist but exaggerated account imagining the regiment's extreme actions in Leicestershire. The frontispiece depicted Marten and his soldiers committing atrocities, which helped to foster a reputation as a violent incendiary, but in reality the regiment passed peacefully through Market Harborough. It fought under the banner 'For the People's Freedom against all tyrants whatsoever', with soldiers drawn from Marten's tenants and those he could incite to desert other parliamentary forces. It was armed and provisioned by requisitioning the possessions of others. It was eventually recognized as part of the New Model, although it seems never to have fought as such. According to the Leveller Richard Overton the incorporation of the regiment was a means to neutralize Marten's political voice and bring the process of political reform to a halt. 
After Pride's Purge on 6 December 1648 Marten and Cromwell entered the Commons together. Marten made a speech in commendation of the lieutenant-general. This was a rare piece of co-operation between the two. The Scots were convinced that he hated Cromwell even more than he hated them, so much so that he would offer his regiment to assist Charles and the Scots rather than see Cromwell rise to power. Although he later claimed the purge to be a harbinger of Cromwellian military tyranny, at the time he supported the coup. He was named a member of the high court of justice to try Charles Stuart, and despite other constitutional commitments and attendance at the discussions on the 'Agreement of the People', he nevertheless attended regularly if intermittently. He signed the death warrant of Charles I; during the signing he and Cromwell allegedly splashed each other's faces with ink. 
Marten's political views remained unshakeable throughout his lifetime. He was always committed to a republican polity and was infamous in the early 1640s as the only person prepared to admit to such a view. He was a somewhat feckless man, starting a number of pieces in which he was to outline his political views but rarely completing them or sending them to the press. Either he got bored with writing them or political activity got in the way. Nevertheless, we can piece together a political philosophy based on two principles. Firstly, he argued that for a polity to be stable it must be in balance. This did not imply the Polybian balance between the three elements of monarchy, aristocracy, and democracy, but rather a pair of balance scales, in which the representative must always be in direct balance with those it represented. This was an expression of popular sovereignty, in which he argued that even if the Commons failed to act in the interests, or according to the wishes, of the people, the people could choose to create a 1500-member parliament to supersede a 500-member one. Secondly, he had a philosophy of the circularity of power, in which every element of the constitution must be directly represented and directly accountable to every other. Any alien element must be rigidly excluded. In particular this meant the House of Lords and the kingship. This circularity of representation was often interpreted in a nationalistic way, to describe the concept of English liberties, and thus, in Marten's political career, it was often used to pour scorn on the representatives of the kingdom of Scotland, and their insistence that they be part of tripartite peace negotiations that included Scottish commissioners, English commissioners, and the crown. 
Marten also had radical views about religion. He was accused of being an atheist, but he did make a statement which implied that he did not question whether God existed but that his viewpoint was of radical scepticism because mankind did not possess the faculties to know what or who God was. A third party called him a follower of the Stoic Epictetus. Marten's scepticism meant it was incumbent on mankind to allow total toleration of all religious viewpoints. People did not have the knowledge, or the authority that knowledge would have conveyed, to pronounce one opinion on religion more right than another. This was a viewpoint that Marten carried through his political career, arguing for liberty even for Catholics. One of the daughters from his second marriage, Mary, married the Catholic peer Thomas Parker, Lord Morley and Mounteagle. Marten also opposed the conquest of Ireland on grounds that the English could not seek religious freedom for themselves and then impose a religious settlement on others. He was constantly and vehemently hostile to the Presbyterian and Scottish covenanters' desire to impose a national church system. He supported the right of Huguenot worship in London. He also practised toleration on his own estates, being more concerned by whether the congregations accepted ministers, than by their religious views. Many radical groups, first the Levellers and later in the 1650s religious radicals such as the Quakers, met at the sign of the Mouth, in Aldersgate. He was probably present at the Levellers' meetings and, while denying being part of the Quakers' meetings there, defended their right to gather. 
For the first two years of the Commonwealth, Marten was at the centre of state affairs. He enjoyed life in the spotlight and in wealth and ease. During 1652 he bought Derby House, centre of the state committees, as his private London house. He received lands in recognition of his expenditure at the state's service. There was an award of $1000 a year, made on 3 July 1649, as well as lands in Eynsham, near Oxford, but the major awards consisted of the estates of Leominster Foreign, Herefordshire -- a patchwork of holdings formerly part of the priory of Leominster -- and Hartington, Derbyshire. The latter was a huge estate, running from Buxton in the north to Ashbourne and the Cheshire and Staffordshire borders in the south. Both estates proved difficult to manage. They were already encumbered by debts of fee-farm rents, non-payment of rents to the lord, and disputed possession, for which Marten's personal reputation, the manner by which he came by the estates, and his frequent absenteeism made him vulnerable to local royalist opponents, the most active of whom was Sir James Croft in Herefordshire. He was eventually brought down financially by the requirement to make back-payments to the new fee-farm rent farmer, Arthur Samuel. Marten attempted to alienate these lands in the 1650s to protect them from proceedings for debt and to provide for his family, but he was generally unsuccessful. He was assisted in managing his estates by a number of former Levellers, in particular John Wildman, Maximilian Petty, and William Wetton. 
Marten was the author of the key constitutional changes of state. On 4 January 1649 he issued the definitive statement of Commons sovereignty on behalf of the house. He designed the new great seal and sat on the committees to abolish kingship and the Lords and to declare England to be a commonwealth. He was named to the first council of state, and was one of those who attempted to have its oath, the engagement, tightened, to include approval of retrospective actions -- the regicide -- as well as future government -- the Commonwealth. He was a supporter of the government, pejoratively known as the Rump Parliament, which he later described as responsible for 'the best frame of lawes yett extant in the World' (University of Leeds, Marten Loder MS 93/40, fol. 4). At the time he drew on an arresting parallel to justify the perpetuation of the parliament: when Moses was found in the bulrushes, he argued, it was agreed that his own mother was the best person to care for him. Members of the Rump, the army council, and Cromwell did not agree with Marten, and fearing that the Rump designed to perpetuate its sitting, or to call fresh elections with minimal protection against the return of men committed to a monarchical restoration, Cromwell brought soldiers into the Commons chamber on 20 April 1653 and forcibly ejected the Rump. This was an action that would crystallize Marten's and Cromwell's contempt for each other. Cromwell accused Marten of drunkenness and whoredom in the speech with which he announced the dissolution of the parliament. In a series of unpublished pieces Marten railed against the ejection of the Rump, Cromwell's ambition, and the loss of republican government. 
Despite Cromwell's accusation there is little evidence of Marten's womanizing. His papers contain one claim to paternity, made in 1651. His reputation for whoring seems to have been generated by the flagrant way in which he breached conventional mores by openly living with a common law wife, Mary Ward, whose brother, Job, was parliamentarian commander of the fort at Tilbury. There is evidence that they were a couple from as early as 1649, when they lavishly entertained visiting dignitaries and kept liveried servants together. They may well have been a couple from Marten's earliest time in London in 1640. If so, this was a relationship that remained constant for forty years. It was, however, adulterous, and Marten was quite open about it. Mary referred to herself, and was referred to by others, as Mary Marten. There were frequent plays on the word 'leveller' to argue that Marten's radical political stance was in fact a synonym for the seduction of women, and satires on Mary to imply his possession of a 'creature', in the same way that his regiment and his political power were bought. The couple had three daughters: Peggy, Sarah, and Henrietta (Bacon-hog). 
Marten's ability to act publicly against the Cromwellian protectorate was stifled by the proceedings for debt against him. A combination of lavishly supporting the radical war effort, high living, the cost of supporting his family, investing in his brother's ambitions to be a Caribbean planter, and having been awarded lands which proved both underproductive and heavily encumbered, meant that he had amassed debts totalling approximately $35,000 by 1654. Now deprived of the legal protection of a parliamentary seat, he became prey to numerous creditors with long-standing grievances against him. His creditors sued him in the upper bench, Oliver St John issued a warrant for his arrest, and, when apprehended, he was first committed to the upper bench prison in Southwark, and then allowed to live in the area known as the Rules of Southwark, where prisoners could live on licence. There he resided with Mary Ward in the Southwark home of her sister Frances. His brother, meanwhile, continued to live on credit in Barbados, writing back to Henry expressing incredulity at his plight, and inviting Marten to join him in the Caribbean. 
It was from the Rules of Southwark that Marten was recalled in 1659 to rejoin the reconstituted Rump Parliament. He did not have the power that he had formerly commanded, but he managed to secure the appointment of Edmund Ludlow as commander of the army in Ireland, and the use of Somerset House as a chapel for French protestant immigrants. At the restoration of Charles II royalists were first convinced that Marten had fled to the continent. He did, in fact, submit himself, on 20 June 1660, according to royal order. He was imprisoned first in the Tower of London, where, with other regicides, he awaited the decisions of the royal court and the parliament on their fates. At his trial in October 1660 he argued that they had spelt his name wrongly -- Henry Martyn rather than Harry Marten -- on the indictment and that he could not therefore be the same person who signed Charles's death warrant. He was nevertheless found guilty but famously saved from execution. This may have been because influential royalists were reluctant to create a martyr from someone of his personal notoriety. It may also have been because he was active in arguing for the lives of royalists when supporters of the high court of justice of the Commonwealth wanted retribution for war crimes that extended beyond solely the figure of Charles Stuart. 
Marten was sent into internal exile, the usual fate of those who had taken an active role in the Commonwealth but had been opponents of Cromwell. He was sent first to either Holy Island or Berwick Castle. In 1662 the letters that he had written to Mary from the Tower were seized and published as 'Coll. Henry Marten's Familiar Letters to his Lady of Delight'. He was transferred to Windsor Castle in May 1665, but Charles II ordered him removed from such close proximity to himself. From Windsor he was moved in 1668 to Chepstow Castle, where he remained for twelve years, in a suite of rooms in Bigod's Tower (now Marten's Tower), with liberty, at least initially, to travel around outside the castle. Mary shared his imprisonment in Chepstow, while his wife remained in the family home, Longworth Lodge, Berkshire. Their daughter Anne, who remained unmarried, looked after her. Anne died in 1671 and Margaret died, intestate, in 1679. Marten died at Chepstow on 9 September 1680, having choked while eating his supper. He was buried there in the Anglican church. 
Marten's reputation, both for licentiousness and for radical politics, lived on after his death. In 1682 a pamphlet lampooned his supposed lasciviousness and applied it to his political radicalism. A character called Harvey was 'not so much for levelling the Men, as 'Martin' the Women' and 'all the Women in the City are with Child by 'Martin', and so longed for Levellers' (Menippeus, 'The Loyal Satirist, or, Hudibras in Prose', 1682, 14, 18). Aphra Behn, who claimed to have met George Marten in Surinam, wrote a play called 'The Younger Brother, or, The Amorous Jilt' about the patriarch Sir Henry Marten, and his two wayward sons. Her political jokes, however, placed in the mouth of the Henry Marten character, were written out, considered dated by the time the play was published in 1688. Eighteenth-century pieces about him tended to dwell on his personal life, whereas in the nineteenth-century, revivals of republican thinking dwelt on his imprisonment for his political views. A modern biographer characterizes him as a 'sceptic and a republican... a landed proprietor who took risks and was prosecuted for debt, an adulterer who practised charity, and an ideologue who preserved a sense of humour' (Barber, xi). 


@@@@@


doc= 18169


Maria Marten (1801-1827), the daughter of a local mole-catcher. Maria had already borne an illegitimate, short-lived child fathered by William's brother, Thomas. William and Maria soon produced another child, which lived only two weeks. On his frequent visits to the house where Maria still lived with her parents, Corder was pressed to marriage by Maria's father and stepmother, Anne, and to this he agreed. His disreputable friends from London then embarrassingly turned up in Polstead. Corder convinced Maria that the police were searching for her in connection with the illegitimate children and that they must run away secretly to escape them. She dressed in male attire and took with her female garments. Both were seen leaving the Martens' house on 18 May 1827 separately in the direction of the barn where they had conducted their courting and which was to become notorious as the 'Red Barn'. There Corder murdered Maria, by shooting her with a pistol, stabbing her many times with a knife, and finally suffocating her with her own handkerchief. He continued to visit the Martens and put forward various and conflicting excuses for Maria's absence, saying she was the companion to a lady in Yarmouth or Ipswich and too busy to write, then that they were going to London to be married, and later that they were married and living in the Isle of Wight. Mrs Marten then began to have dreams that Maria's body was buried in the barn and a search in April 1828 revealed that this was indeed so. 


@@@@@


doc= 18170


Marshall, Richard (b. 1517, d. in or after 1575), dean of Christ Church, Oxford, and Roman Catholic priest, was born in Kent, probably the son of William Marshall (d. 1540?), the anti-Catholic polemicist. He entered Corpus Christi College, Oxford, in 1532, and was a probationary fellow from 1538 to 1540. He was one of a group of younger members of the college (called 'neo-Christiani' by their seniors) who supported Henrician religious policy, and in 1538 he caused offence by striking out the word 'papa' from the library's edition of the works of St Gregory: in 1535 the government had ordered the removal of the word from all service books, and college conservatives complained that the instruction did not apply to 'profane books' ('Miscellaneous Writings', 382). He was in trouble in 1539 for breaking the prohibition on eating meat in Lent. 
Marshall took his BA degree in 1537 and MA in 1540, but was in financial difficulties: in 1539 he asked Thomas Cromwell for assistance, reporting that his father could no longer afford to support him and enclosing his own Latin poem on adversity, 'Sustine et abstine'. Marshall was given an exhibition funded by the new Westminster Cathedral. In 1545 the exhibition was switched to the embryonic Christ Church, and at the foundation of the college in 1546 he was elected a senior 'student' (or fellow). He proceeded BD in 1544 and DD in 1552; he seems to have been a popular tutor, with six pupils in 1550. He was elected vice-chancellor of Oxford in October 1552, and is said to have been a reformer under Edward VI, but at some point he must have shown Catholic sympathies, and his career took off under Mary. He became chaplain to the earl of Arundel, dean of Christ Church, on 14 September 1553, canon of Winchester and then St Paul's, vicar of Pyrton, Oxfordshire, and rector of Westbourne, Sussex (an Arundel living). He served as vice-chancellor in 1554 and 1555: he presided at the Oxford disputation against Thomas Cranmer, Nicholas Ridley, and Hugh Latimer; appeared as a witness at Cranmer's trial; took part in the degradation of Ridley; and, as a commissioner at the burning of Ridley and Latimer on 16 October 1555, silenced Ridley's attempt to respond to the official preacher. Little is known of his rule at Christ Church, the Marian records of the house having been removed by Anthony Wood. He was described by a college contemporary as 'parum sobrius et furiosus' ('a raging drunkard'; Calfhill, sig. A3), and it was said that Marshall 'regnavit tyrannice' ('ruled tyrannically'; Humphrey, 81). Within a year he had provoked disobedience from the senior students of Christ Church. Later, on the orders of Cardinal Pole, he had the body of Peter Martyr's wife removed from her grave in the cathedral, and apparently reburied it in the deanery dunghill -- an event which brought opprobrium later. 
The accession of Elizabeth brought an end to Marshall's promising ecclesiastical career: he refused to recognize the authority of the royal visitors, and was deprived or forced to resign as dean by May 1559. Marshall then became an underground Catholic priest in the north of England, and stayed for a time with the earl of Cumberland and with Christopher Metcalf in Wensleydale. At some point he was arrested, and, on the orders of the privy council, sent to confer with Bishop Grindal: he was persuaded to subscribe to the 'Thirty-Nine Articles', probably on 21 December 1563. Earlier authorities (including the 'Dictionary of National Biography') declare that he died in prison in 1563: he did not. Presumably his subscription secured release, and by 1568 he was again operating as a Catholic priest, in Lancashire. In February 1568 the sheriff of Lancashire was instructed to seek out a number of recusant priests working in the area, including 'Marshall, once dean of Christ Church in Oxford', and from 1568 to 1570 'Marshall alias Bradfield' was listed among the priests. His name disappears from these lists in 1571; he seems to have gone into exile at Louvain, and to have moved to Douai by 1575. He probably died soon after. 
Marshall was castigated by Lawrence Humphrey in 1573 as 'homo versipellis' ('a chameleon'), and was later condemned as the turncoat dean who went from Romanist to reformer to Romanist to reformer. In fact, his public sympathies under Edward VI followed naturally from his youthful radicalism and, except for his subscription under pressure, he was a consistent Catholic from 1553. Marshall changed his adult religion only once, less than most of his contemporaries. He might have become an academic elder statesman, an Oxford Andrew Perne: instead, and perhaps surprisingly, he sacrificed his career for a secret pastorate and exile. 


@@@@@


doc= 18171


Martiall, John (1534-1597), religious controversialist, was born in Daylesford, Worcestershire, although when he arrived at Winchester College in 1545, aged eleven, the admission-book recorded him as a native of Defford in the same county. He went on to New College, Oxford, in 1549, and was made fellow there in 1551 and BCL on 8 July 1556. He became second master or usher at Winchester College about 1556, while Thomas Hide was headmaster. Upon Elizabeth's accession he went into exile in Louvain, and took his BA at the University of Douai in 1567. A year later he was among the first group of English Catholic exiles who formed the English College under the leadership of William Allen. 
It was during his time in exile that Martiall wrote 'A treatyse of the crosse gathred out of the scriptures, councelles, and auncient fathers of the primitive church' (1564). This was in part a contribution to the controversy prompted by John Jewel, bishop of Salisbury, in his 'challenge sermon', but was also a response to Elizabeth I's retention of a cross in her royal chapel. Martiall dedicated the work to Elizabeth, describing her as 'so well affectioned to the crosse... that youre Majestie have alwayes kept it reverently in youre chappel' (fol. 1'v'). The tone of the work was set by the terms of the controversy started by Jewel, dwelling on the examples from scripture and the primitive church which Martiall held supported the veneration of the cross. He stressed the merit of the cross as being more powerful and beneficial to believers than the written word: 'that which wordes could not print in their heades, the contemplation of this signe doth so printe in their mindes, that they triumph over the devil...' (fol. 116'v'), and pointed out that: 'every man can not reade scripture, nor understand it when he reade it: and every man can not al times so conveniently heare a good preacher, as he may se the signe of the crosse, if it might be suffred to stand. (fol. 117'r')' He denied that Catholics dwelt on signs to the exclusion of true faith, insisting that 'for answer we saye, that nothing can avayle, and profit man, unlesse he hath a stedfast faith in Christ, and faithful belieff in the merites of his passion', but arguing that the sign of the cross was something which could strengthen such faith (fol. 20'r'- 'v'). 
The book was attacked by Alexander Nowell in a court sermon of March 1565, but to Nowell's dismay the queen rebuked him for his excessive language in attacking Martiall. It was James Calfhill who wrote a refutation, which led to Martiall's second work, 'A Replie to M. Calfhills Blasphemous Answer Made Against the Treatise of the Crosse' (1566). In this work Martiall asked Bishop Grindal and his colleagues whether Calfhill's work reflected 'the doctrine of all your church of England', or whether it was 'the fansie only of one idle brayne' (sig. *ij'r'). He deplored, and listed, the abusive language Calfhill had employed, and in particular denied the charge that Catholics were subversive, comparing their work with some of the more radical protestant tracts. 'There is no blast blowen against the monstruous regiment of women. There is no libel set foorth for order of succession: there is no word uttred against dewe obedience to the soveraine' (sig. **'v'). The work reiterated the need for veneration of the cross, drawing a powerful comparison between secular and sacred modes of reverence: 'When we meete together we put of the cap, we bowe the knee, we humble the bodie, we offer to kisse the hand. In like manner when we receave the kinges letters, we put of our capps. When we come into the chamber of presence, and see the cloth of estate, we shewe a kinde of reverence and honour unto it, not respecting the paper and waxe, nor silken clothe, or golden chaire, but the prince that wrote it, and kinge that sate under that cloth of estate. Right so when we see the image of Christe, or any Sayncte, we put of our cappes, we make courtesy, we bowe, we cappe, we kneele, and shewe such external reverence, and honour, not because it is made of silver and gold, or curiouslye wroughte, or sette with pearle, or fynely paynted, but because it representh unto me Christ and his passion. (sig. ***iij'r'- 'v')' There was no protestant response to this until 1580, when William Fulke attacked Martiall and Thomas Stapleton together in 'T. Stapleton and Martiall (Two Popish Heretikes) Confuted'. Martiall also wrote a work entitled 'Treatise of the tonsure of the clerks', but this was left unfinished, and so never printed. 
After his time in Douai, with the backing of Owen Lewis, archdeacon of Hainault, and later bishop of Cassano, Martiall became a canon of the collegiate church of St Peter at Lille in Flanders. His installation was delayed by the civil unrest in the Low Countries, but finally took place in 1579. He served there for eighteen years, resigning the post in order to prepare himself for death, which came on 3 April 1597. He died in the arms of his friend William Gifford, later archbishop of Rheims and then dean of St Peter's Church, where Martiall was buried. He left a ring with a precious stone to adorn a piece of the true cross in the cathedral at Lille. 


@@@@@


doc= 18172


Alnwick, Martin (d. 1336), Franciscan friar, theologian, and philosopher, doubtless came from Northumberland. Possibly the Martinus occasionally recorded as participating in Oxford disputations in the last years of the thirteenth century, he was certainly at Oxford by 1300, when he was among the friars presented to the bishop of Lincoln for licence to hear confessions -- unsuccessfully in his case. He subsequently took the degree of DTh. About 1304 he became thirty-second regent master (or lector) of his order's Oxford schools. In 1311 he was summoned to Avignon to take part in the controversy over the issue of poverty between the conventual and spiritual Franciscans, as one of the four advisers of the general minister. He pleaded the cause of the conventuals, which eventually prevailed. On 1 October 1318 he was licensed to hear confessions in the diocese of York. A volume, now lost, containing his 'Determinacio' and disputations was later recorded in the library of the Augustinian friars at York. According to Bale, Alnwick died in 1336 and was buried at Newcastle. 
The last nineteen questions of the commentary on book 1 of the 'Sentences' attributed to William Ware are in reality the work of Martin Alnwick. These questions are found in incomplete gatherings in five manuscripts (Bordeaux, Bibliotheque Municipale, MS 163; Troyes, Bibliotheque Municipale, MS 501; Vatican City, Biblioteca Apostolica Vaticana, MS Vat. lat. 4871, MS Vat. Chigi B. VII. 114; and Vienna, Nationalbibliothek, MS 1424). They deal with the issues of God's knowledge, power, and will. Although most of these questions place him in the tradition of the Franciscan school, he seems to have been strongly influenced by the secular master, Henri de Gand, following him especially in his teaching that God has both speculative and practical ideas. At times, however, he opposes Henri, as when he denies Henri's affirmation of the possibility of the divine ideas being infinite. Recently some of Alnwick's logical teaching has been discovered, especially in the area of the 'Perihermenias' question concerning the truth and falsity of propositions. Other works once ascribed to him, such as the commentary on books 1 and 2 of the 'Sentences' conserved at the library of San Antonio in Padua, and a 'Universal Chronicle' printed in 1750, really belong to William Alnwick and Martinus Polonus respectively. 


@@@@@


doc= 18173


Marten, Anthony (c.1542-1597), courtier and author, was the son of David Marten (died 1556) of Westminster and Twickenham, Middlesex, and his wife, Jane Cooke (died 1563), of Greenwich, Kent. Apparently he had five sisters. David Marten had been senior clerk to the surveyor of the king's works since 1531, and in 1535 he became comptroller. Anthony Marten was at Trinity Hall, Cambridge, in August 1564 when Elizabeth I visited; he does not seem to have graduated, but entered the royal household. By 27 April 1570 he had become the queen's 'sewar'; on that night, having been 'at Whitehall... serving at... the queen's dinner', he was waylaid by George Varneham of Richmond, Surrey, 'with malice aforethought... and having a sword and buckler'. Forced to fight somewhat outside the palace, 'near the bridge towards Scotland Gate', Marten, though presumably without a buckler, wounded Varneham mortally (Jeaffreson, 1.65). Marten -- and also his servant, which might imply that the fight was less clear-cut than alleged -- had to give recognizances to appear at the next gaol delivery, but seems to have avoided further repercussions. 
In July 1579 Marten, styled the queen's steward, was granted the bailiffship of Ledbury, Herefordshire, but he surrendered it in March 1586. On 1 August 1587 he was present at Peterborough as sewer for the funeral of Mary Stewart. In August 1588 Elizabeth granted him a lease of a house at Richmond, and made him keeper of the royal library in the palace of Westminster for life at 20 marks per annum. In November 1591, as royal cup-bearer ('dapifer'), he was granted a monopoly for licensing exports of tin, being paid 4died per hundredweight. This apparently survived a competitive tender in 1595 by Edward de Vere, earl of Oxford, who claimed that through the licence to 'one Martin', 'being not diligently looked into, her majesty loseth very near half the custom due for want of entering the just weight' ('Salisbury MSS', 5.137). 
Both professional and religious considerations made it fitting for Marten to dedicate to Charles, Lord Howard of Effingham, the lord chamberlain, his translations of John Bernard's 'Tranquillitie of the Minde' (1570) and 'The Commonplaces of Peter Martyr' (1583), the first of which he rather mysteriously described as fulfilling 'my promise... in my former epistle made to your lordship' ('Tranquillitie', sig. *2'r'). By the second he felt some need to justify 'to the Christian reader' such an undertaking from one 'living in court, as it were in continuall peregrination, and as a Rechabit among the children of Israel' ('Commonplaces', sig. Ai'r'). Marten recommended the work of Pietro Martire Vermigli (known as Peter Martyr) for 'a particular discoverie of the Romaine Antichristian kingdome'; this provided the focus for his next publication, 'An exhortation, to stirre up the mindes of all her majestie's faithfull subjects, to defend their countrey' (1588). His sense of England as an Israel beleaguered by a new Sennacherib was not uncommon that year, but more eccentric was 'A second sound, or, Warning of the trumpet unto judgment, wherein is proved that all the tokens of the latter day are not onelie come, but welneere finished' (1589). His prediction that Antichrist's war against the professors of the gospel was now so far advanced as to indicate the end of the world within the next five years allowed him to fulfil a pretension already immanent in his earlier prefaces -- to preach theology and morality to bishops. He warned them against self-advancement 'by some corrupt and sinister meanes' and admonished them to eject 'unlearned pastors' and pursue England's moral reformation ('Second Sound', 27). 
The apotheosis of Marten's bishop-lecturing was his intervention in the presbyterian controversy with 'A Reconciliation of All the Pastors and Cleargy of the Church of England' (1590). It attracted the ire of Sir Francis Knollys, who accused not only John Whitgift but 'Mr Martyn the sewer, an ordynarye servant to hir majestie' of treason or 'praemunire' in denying her authority to be the origin of episcopal power (TNA: PRO, SP 12/233/62). Knollys's position as treasurer of the household seems to have provoked an over-sensitive reaction to the sewer's essentially adiaphorist view of episcopacy and presbyterianism, the latter as practised in Scotland being 'the harder and more dangerous course'. Marten's professed wish for reconciliation, involving the general abandonment of 'unprofitable wrightings', seems genuine, while his continued obsession with the threat of 'the bloudy beast of Rome' and his 'present expectation of Christ unto judgement' hardly made him a natural ally of Richard Bancroft or Adrian Saravia. In approving the latter's 'Latin labours' published 'when I had wellneere finished all these matters' and in attacking John Udall, Marten betrayed some confusion ('Reconciliation', sigs. 6'v', a'r', 3'v', 1'v', A4'r'). His 'position would appear to be little different from that of Knollys himself'; 'at heart a theologian 'manque'', his last work was affected by 'personal inability to think clearly' but was notable as 'almost the only Elizabethan defence of episcopacy to be written by a layman' (Thompson, 'Marten', 70, 46, 75). 
Apparently unmarried, Marten made his will on 21 August 1597. He died at Richmond, and was buried with his father at Twickenham church on 25 August. Besides the Richmond lease, he left $19 to charities -- $17 at Richmond ($10 for the relatively conservative object of a church bell), implying continued residence there, and only a token $2 at Twickenham -- and some $162 to individuals, mostly to the families of four of his sisters. 


@@@@@


doc= 18174


Bendal Martyn (1700-1761), composer, was born in London on 8 January 1700. Bendal attended Eton College, then King's College, Cambridge, where he was admitted as a scholar on 3 February 1719. He graduated BA in 1722, and was made a fellow of the college. He was also registered at the Middle Temple on 14 April 1721. Between 1736 and his death he held the post of secretary to the excise, and in 1740 he inherited a good estate from an aunt. He died on 20 December 1761 at Highgate. He was reputedly an excellent musician, and in 1763 fourteen trio sonatas, written by him, were published. 


@@@@@


doc= 18175


Martin, Benjamin (bap. 1705, d. 1782), lecturer on science and maker of scientific instruments, was baptized at Worplesdon, Surrey, on 1 March 1705, the third son of John Martin (died 1731) of Broadstreet, who farmed near Worplesdon, and his wife, Jane. Nothing is known about his childhood; it is presumed that he spent his youth working on the land, during which period he acquired (apparently through extensive reading) knowledge of a wide range of subjects. In his late twenties he established a school at Chichester, Sussex, where (according to his advertisements) he taught almost everything from writing to astronomy. In this venture he was assisted by his marriage in 1729 to Mary (died 1781), daughter of Joshua Lover, a recently deceased Chichester maltster. It was during Martin's residence at Chichester that he began to write, with the avowed intention of bringing down the price of books, especially for the benefit of those who were trying to educate themselves as he had done. 
Martin's first publication 'The Philosophical Grammar' (1735), consisted of an epitome of current knowledge in the various branches of natural philosophy presented in a single inexpensive volume. An enlarged second edition (1738) was reprinted six times up to 1778, and was translated into Dutch, French, and Italian. In 1737 he produced a complementary work on non-mathematical subjects, 'Bibliotheca technologica', which considered the literary arts and sciences under twenty-five headings, ranging from theology to heraldry; it was later translated into French and Italian. The 'Bibliotheca' was published by subscription, and the 564 names listed show that Martin by this time was becoming well known. Other volumes written at Chichester include 'Arithmetic' (1735), 'Trigonometry' (1736), 'Geometry' (1739), 'Logarithms' (1739), and 'Optics' (1740). Astronomy was presented in a large copperplate print, 'Synopsis scientiae Caelestis' (1739). 
Optics became a major field of interest and expertise for Martin. In 1738-9 he devised a portable compound microscope with a micrometer. Later known as drum microscopes, instruments of this pattern were produced commercially into Victorian times. Martin's own Chichester microscopes, however, made mainly of wood and cardboard, were hardly comparable with the products of professional instrument makers in London. In 1742 Martin moved to Reading, Berkshire, where he produced two quarto volumes, 'Micrographia nova' (1742) and 'A Course of Lectures in Natural and Experimental Philosophy' (1743). By then he was trying to earn a living by giving lectures and demonstrations on Newtonian experimental philosophy similar to those given in London for many years by J. T. Desaguliers FRS. 
Hoping to gain support for election to fellowship of the Royal Society, he wrote to Sir Hans Sloane and other members. This distinction, he told them, would be a great help in obtaining audiences for his lectures. His manner of approach was, however, somewhat inept, and he never acquired the coveted FRS after his name. 
In August 1743 Martin was lecturing in Bristol, and in 1744 he gave several courses in Bath. Early in 1745 he attempted to find audiences in London: this initial sortie into the metropolis was probably not very successful, and by September he was again lecturing in Bath, which remained his base for the next few years. In 1746 his 'Essay on Electricity', describing experiments 'as I daily shew in my Course of Philosophy', was published there. A little earlier a work on electricity by John Freke FRS had been published in London, which caused Martin some concern. However, having obtained a copy and found that (in his opinion) it was nonsense, Martin said so in the preface to his 'Essay'. This naturally upset Freke, who quickly produced a second edition in which he called Martin 'an unmannerly country show-man' and deplored the practice of giving lectures for money. Martin responded at once with a supplement containing a witty and devastating attack on Freke and his theories. 
In 1747 Martin produced 'Philosophia Britannica' (2 vols.), a greatly expanded version of his 'Lectures' (1743). An augmented three-volume edition appeared in 1759 (reprinted twice), and it was translated into German in 1772. A shorter 'Plain and Familiar Introduction to the Newtonian Philosophy', written primarily for people attending his lectures, was published in 1751 by William Owen in London; it reached a fifth edition in 1765. 
After 1746 Martin spent about ten years travelling in southern England and the midlands. Although his principal occupation was lecturing on experimental philosophy, he also found time to write 'Institutions of Language' (1748) and 'Lingua Britannica reformata, or, A New English Dictionary' (1749). The second edition of the latter (1754) incorporated numerous topographical entries -- Martin later claimed to have visited most of the principal towns of England. 
Martin's most ambitious literary project was 'The general magazine of arts and sciences, philosophical, philological, mathematical, and mechanical'. Designed to be published in about 120 sixpenny monthly numbers, beginning in January 1755, it was extensively advertised in London and provincial newspapers. A combination of a part-work encyclopaedia and a topical periodical, each number consisted of a few pages of five separate main works, with associated copperplates, plus a few pages of topical material, such as births and deaths, and prices of stocks. On completion of the project in 1764 the text and plates were bound into thirteen octavo volumes entitled: 'The Young Gentleman and Lady's Philosophy', 'The Natural History of England', 'A Comprehensive System of Philology', 'Mathematical Institutions' (all 2 vols.), 'Biographia philosophica' (1 vol.), and 'Miscellaneous Correspondence' (4 vols.). Only the last had any resemblance to a periodical: the others were complete works in themselves. 
In 1756 Martin abandoned travelling and settled in Fleet Street, London, near Crane Court, where the Royal Society then had its premises. Having obtained the freedom of the Goldsmiths' Company, he began to trade as an optician and instrument maker. He was now aged fifty and needed spectacles for reading. Initially for his own use, and then for general sale, he devised 'Visual Glasses', and used them for his shop sign. Unlike conventional spectacles, they had apertures partially blanked off by an annulus of horn, lenses tilted inwards, and glass tinted violet or green. Derided by established opticians, they nevertheless proved popular and were eventually copied by other traders. Martin explained their advantages in 'An Essay on Visual Glasses' (1756), the first of at least thirty tracts to be published from his Fleet Street address. 
Martin was assisted in his shop at first by both his wife, Mary, and daughter, Maria; the latter, who was born about 1738, became the second wife of Humphrey Jackson FRS, chemist, in 1763. In 1757 Martin acquired the globe plates and tools of the late John Senex FRS (died 1740). Globe manufacture and sale became an important part of his activities, but he also dealt in all types of scientific instruments, primarily as a retailer and wholesaler. To promote his business he issued priced catalogues of standard products, advertised frequently in the newspapers, and published descriptive tracts on individual instruments. These were novel activities at the time and were viewed with suspicion by established traders, but eventually they became the norm. In the mid-1760s, probably as a result of this aggressive marketing, he obtained substantial orders from Harvard College, Massachusetts, to replace the scientific instruments lost in a fire in 1764. 
It was characteristic of Martin that he felt he could improve whatever came under his scrutiny. In 1758 he produced 'New Principles of Geography and Navigation', which contained charts based on the true spheroidal shape of the earth. In 1766 he obtained his only patent, for a new form of bilge-pump; he hoped it would be adopted by the navy, but to his disgust the Admiralty rejected it. In the same year he published 'The New Art of Surveying by the Goniometer', and in 1770 reported a new form of pendulum and escapement in 'The Description and Use of a Table Clock'. 
During the winters from 1756 Martin gave continuous evening lecture courses in London on experimental philosophy. He was especially active as a lecturer around the time of the expected return of Halley's comet (1758 to 1759) and the transits of Venus (1761 and 1769). However, advancing age began to curtail his lecturing -- but not his writing -- activities, and from about 1778 he traded as 'Benjamin Martin & Son'. The latter, Joshua Lover Martin, had been formally apprenticed to him in 1758, but apparently lacked his father's business acumen. 
In January 1782 Benjamin Martin was declared bankrupt, and on 9 February he died at his home in Fleet Street, possibly as a delayed result of a suicide attempt. He was buried in St Dunstan-in-the-West, Fleet Street, on 14 February. His son made no attempt to continue the business, and is thought to have left England. Martin was one of the best known of the many popularizers of science of his day, remarkable for his successful versatility. As he died a bankrupt, all his effects were sold by auction: the sale catalogue reveals that, as one of the first true retailers in the scientific instruments trade, he held an astonishingly large and varied stock, which raised about $1000. 


@@@@@


doc= 18176


Martin, David (1737-1797), portrait painter and engraver, was born on 1 April 1737 in Anstruther Easter, Fife, the first of the five children of John Martin (1699/1700-1772), the parish schoolmaster of Anstruther Easter, and his second wife, Mary Boyack (1702?-1783). He was a pupil of the portrait painter Allan Ramsay, whom he joined on a tour of Italy in 1756-7. On his return Martin became a student at the academy in St Martin's Lane, London, where he gained premiums for drawings from life in 1759, 1760, and 1761. As the principal draughtsman in Ramsay's studio in the 1760s he helped produce many of the coronation portraits of George III and Queen Charlotte. 
Martin was a well-respected engraver and engraved in mezzotint Lady Frances Manners (1772; impression, British Museum) and in line William Murray, earl of Mansfield (impression, Lincoln's Inn Library), both after his own paintings; he also produced some landscape engravings. By 1770 he had his own studio and had painted his first self-portrait (National Gallery of Scotland), depicting himself with a clear fair skin and wavy ginger hair. His aquiline nose and small red lips were characteristics that dominated his later self-portraits. On 20 July 1771 he married Ann Hill (1743-1775); they had three children, all of whom died in infancy. Martin contributed works to the exhibitions of the Incorporated Society of Artists from 1765 to 1777 and was elected to the positions of treasurer, vice-president, and president between 1772 and 1777. He also exhibited portraits at the Free Society of Artists in 1767 and at the Royal Academy in 1779 and 1790. 
Martin produced more than 300 portraits, including the famous painting of Benjamin Franklin (1767) which hangs in the White House, Washington. His most influential works depict members of the Scottish Enlightenment, notably the philosopher David Hume (1770, priv. coll.) and the chemist Joseph Black (1787, Scottish National Portrait Gallery). He portrayed his sitters with integrity in an honest natural style, thereby consolidating a recognizably Scottish tradition of portraiture. His female studio style is epitomized in the portrait of the Hon. Barbara Gray (1787, priv. coll.). 
In 1780 Martin was admitted to the Royal Company of Archers, so signalling his return to Edinburgh. In a rare full-length portrait he painted the president of the company, Sir James Pringle of Stichill (1791-4, Royal Company of Archers, Edinburgh). In 1785 he was appointed principal painter to the prince of Wales in Scotland. Martin died on 30 December 1797 at his home, 4 St James Square, Edinburgh, and was buried on 3 January 1798 in Leith South churchyard. The contents of his home and studio were sold by auction over twenty-one days in 1799. 


@@@@@


doc= 18177


Martin, Edward (d. 1662), college head, was born in Cambridgeshire; he was perhaps the son of Thomas Martin, baptized at Grantchester on 19 September 1591. He matriculated as a sizar from Queens' College in Easter term 1605, graduated BA in 1609, and proceeded MA in 1612. Ordained priest at Peterborough on 21 September 1617, the same year he was elected a fellow of Queens', where for some time he was a geometry lecturer. He proceeded BD in 1621. It is not clear when he first came to the attention of William Laud: he voted against the duke of Buckingham's candidacy for the chancellorship in 1626. Nevertheless, by 1628, when Laud was bishop of London, Martin was serving as his chaplain, and he acted as the licenser of a number of books in the period November 1628 to February 1632. These included, in November 1630, the notorious Arminian work 'An Historicall Narration' (written by one 'J. A.' -- according to William Prynne either an active Roman priest or recent convert from Catholicism, but more likely John Andrewes, author of 'The Brazen Serpent') -- an act for which Martin was later criticized, and which was later raised among the charges at Laud's trial. 
Elected president of Queens' College in October 1631 (and created DD by royal mandate in the same year), Martin emerged as one of the most extreme and partisan of the Laudian college heads active in the vice-chancellor's court, both demanding the release from prosecution of a series of fellows accused of maintaining crypto-Catholic doctrines (including his chaplain, Peter Hausted), and insisting on the stiffest penalties for those accused of puritanism. The college cook reported Martin as saying that 'he would rather see his son in a whore house' than let him go to the puritan lecturers in Holy Trinity Church (BL, Harley MS 7019). He was sufficiently detached from the anti-Catholicism of the time to be entrusted by Secretary of State Francis Windebank with the delicate task of playing host to the secret visit to Cambridge of the papal agent Gregorio Panzani in July 1635. He escorted Panzani around the university, and, on showing the Italian a picture of a saint 'in abito Pontificale' exclaimed with a sigh, 'when will such splendour be restored to our church!' (TNA: PRO, MS 31/9/17B, Panzani to Barberini, 15/25 July 1635). In Queens' College, Martin seems to have done his best to work such a restoration. There was an extraordinarily large sum of money spent on refurbishing and cleaning up the chapel during his first year as president. An often highly critical 1636 report on religious practice at Cambridge, commissioned by Laud, praised the arrangements in the college, while 1638 saw further alterations and renovations in the college chapel, with the altar being raised. A critical parliamentary report of 1641 noted that the chapel at Queens' and the ritual practised there 'have been much changed since Dr. Martin came in to be Master there' (BL, Harley MS 7019). He also played an important role as a proctor in the 1640 convocation. During this period Martin also accumulated local livings at a constant rate: having been made vicar of Oakington in 1626, he served as rector of Uppingham from 1631 to 1637 before proceeding to the rectories of Conington, Huntingdonshire (1635) and Houghton Conquest, Bedfordshire (1638). 
Not surprisingly Martin proved to be a zealous royalist. In 1642 he gave $100 of his own money to the king, and also oversaw the delivery of college plate to a crown agent -- actions which resulted in his arrest by Oliver Cromwell's troops and the sequestration of his property. He remained under house arrest in London, implacably opposed to the parliament (stating in a mock petition that he would 'embrace any extremity of torture and death' rather than subscribe the covenant), until his escape in 1648, but was rearrested two years later and reimprisoned. He was released shortly afterwards and spent the rest of the 1650s abroad, generally in Paris with Lord Hatton, although he was resident at Utrecht in 1656. He later described these years as full of 'nothing but Prisons, Ships, wandrings, and solitude' when he was 'very well satisfied with one Meal a day, and at night a Crust of Bread, and a Cup of any Drink' (Twigg, 143). Unlike the experience of some divines Martin's time abroad did nothing to lessen his hostility towards foreign protestants. In a series of letters written from Paris in the years 1659-60 he bitterly attacked John Cosin's conciliatory gestures towards the Huguenots at Charenton. He particularly condemned the notion that the Church of England accepted the validity of foreign reformed ordination, and complained that by claiming that the Church of England was 'all one and the same church with the Huguenots here', men such as Cosin both enabled Roman Catholics to 'lay at our door all the Presbyterian durt, filth and prophanation', and made other English exiles in detestation of 'that accursed Genevian tyranny' turn to Rome ('Doctor Martin, Late Deane of Ely, his Opinion', 71-6). He was most determined to crush the suggestion that foreign presbyterians could be distinguished in any way from the rebellious English presbyterians. 
Such views made Martin an implacable opponent of compromise at the Restoration, when he returned as president of Queens' and applauded the college's rescue from its 'Babylonian captivity', making 'downright dishonest' claims about the college's financial mismanagement in the intervening years (Twigg, 142 and n. 13), and seizing a bequest for poor scholars to pay for repairs to the college chapel. He participated in both the Savoy conference and convocation, and was nominated dean of Ely in 1662. He never took up the post, however. Installed by proxy on 25 April he died in Cambridge three days later, and was buried in Queens' College chapel. 


@@@@@


doc= 18178


Martin, Elias (1739-1818), painter and engraver, was born in Stockholm, Sweden, and baptized there at St Gertrud Church on 8 March 1739, which was probably also the date of his birth. His parents were master joiner Olof Martin and Ulrica Haupt. He was the eldest of four brothers, one of whom was the engraver Johan Fredric Martin ['see below']. Elias Martin was educated in his father's joinery workshop and after that by Friedrich Schultz, a master of the Stockholm painters' guild. Between 1763 and 1765 Martin was at Sveaborg Castle in Finland, where he designed ornate figureheads for warships and taught military and topographical drawing. Carl August Ehrensvard was among his pupils and Martin was taught the techniques of engraving by Ehrensvard's father, commandant Augustin Ehrensvard. In 1766 Martin went to Paris where, with the help of Alexander Roslin, he began to study under Joseph Vernet at the Academie Royale de Peinture et de Sculpture. In 1768 he went to London and the following year became a student at the Royal Academy of Arts of which in 1771 he became an associate. On 31 July 1770 he married Augusta Lee ('c'.1753-1810) in London. 
The work of English landscape painters began to influence Martin's work. Painting to order, he worked, from 1771, in watercolours, probably under the influence of Paul Sandby although in terms of style he was nearer to J. R. Cozens and Richard Wilson. About 1772 or 1773 Martin altered his technique; rather than making outline drawings in wash which were then coloured he began to use direct juxtapositions of pigments in order to heighten the power of the colours in his paintings. The high skies and unbroken horizons of his landscape paintings are reminiscent of Canaletto's compositions. Martin was particularly interested in representing the meeting of town and country, for example in 'Stockholm from Mosebacke' ('c'.1795; City Hall, Stockholm). An important watercolour of the iron bridge at Coalbrookdale under construction in 1779 shows nature juxtaposed with heavy industry and, when rediscovered in 1997, threw important light on the construction of this pioneering industrial structure (Masreilez Rooms, Stockholm). 
Martin drew warm and sympathetic sketches of everyday life, and his portraits and caricatures are often very expressively rendered. However his figures, which were enlivened by his calligraphic style, were also exaggerated in their proportions, as for example in 'The Two Murderers in Macbeth' (1770s; National Museum, Stockholm), and led Horace Walpole to criticize Martin's technical ability in 1779. As an engraver he worked for, among others, the print publisher John Boydell. 
Martin returned to Sweden in 1780 and the following year he became a member of Konstakademien, the Swedish Royal Academy of Arts, and in 1785 professor of landscape painting there. He lived with his family at Regeringsgatan 74. Gustav III commissioned many paintings from him, for example 'Gustav III's Visit to the Academy of Arts' (1782; Drottningholm Palace, Bromma). 
In 1780 he planned a series of prints for wide circulation, Sweden's first 'voyage pittoresque' with Swedish views presented as coloured line etchings. They were etched by his brother Johan Fredric Martin, with whom he also collaborated on the publication of a number of other paintings and drawings. 
Between 1788 and 1791 Martin was again in England, resident mainly in London and Bath, but little is known of his activities during this period. Back in Sweden in the 1790s his Romantic landscapes became 'increasingly pantheistic with a sublime treatment of light and dark' (Mawer, 485), but he also did a series of paintings of folk-life. Another important theme during this period was the dramatic depiction of industrial processes in furnaces and foundries. His last-known works date from 1808. In the last ten years of his life his reputation diminished considerably and he fell into ever greater obscurity. A household inventory taken after the death of his wife shows their house still to have been comfortably furnished in 1810, but Martin was later reduced to poverty, his circumstances made worse by blindness. 
Martin took part in the Royal Academy's exhibitions of 1769-74, 1777, 1779-80, and 1790 and also in exhibitions arranged by the Society of Artists and the Free Society. Works by him were exhibited in the Swedish Academy of Arts exhibitions in Stockholm in 1794, 1799-1800, 1804, 1806, 1809, and 1822. From 1804 to 1809 he had permanent exhibitions in his home on Kungsbacken. Martin died at his home, Kungsbacken 19, Stockholm, on 25 January 1818. 
Martin brought to Sweden the English Romantic discovery of nature and in so doing broke the French stylistic hegemony over Swedish art; it was an approach that led his paintings to be described in Swedish as landscape portraits. His work has aroused conflicting assessments, but after being almost completely forgotten for a century his work became ever more highly prized in the twentieth century. The largest collections of Martin's works are to be found in Stockholm in the National Museum and the Royal Library, in Uppsala University Library, and in the Art Museum in Gothenberg. 


From 1785 Johan Fredric was economically and artistically independent of his brother. In 1792 he married Christina Charlotta Westerberg ('b'. 'c'.1774). In 1815 he was appointed professor in graphic arts in the Konstakademien in Stockholm. He died on 28 September 1816 at Regeringsgatan 74, Stockholm, having taken over the house from his brother in or after 1788; he was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 18179


Martin, Francis (1652-1722), theologian, was born towards the end of November 1652 in Galway. He was educated first at a local school and then at home. In 1670 he became a teacher, but in 1673 Archbishop Lynch of Tuam, a relative, sent him to Louvain. He matriculated on 19 December 1673 and graduated in the arts in 1674. In 1675 he began the study of theology. He applied for the lectureship in Greek at the Collegium Trilingue in 1681, obtaining it in 1683 through the intervention of powerful anti-Jansenists in the university and the government, and retaining it until his death. Throughout his study of theology he struggled with the view of grace then prevalent in the Louvain faculty, and after his appointment as a lecturer he openly attacked it. In 1684 he obtained the licentiate in theology and became lecturer at St Martin's, a house of Augustinian canons. Complaints in 1685 and 1686 that his lectures undermined the authority of Augustine and promoted extreme claims about papal power led to opposition within the faculty to his being awarded the doctorate in theology in 1688, but the intervention of the nuncio at Brussels enabled him to take the degree. 
Late in 1688 Martin wrote to the nuncio to the court of James II outlining a hypothetical scheme for the assassination of William of Orange, an abiding source of embarrassment after the letter was published in an anonymous Gallican pamphlet, 'Etat present de la faculte de theologie de Louvain' (Trevoux, 1701). In 1689 Martin obtained a position in Hovius College thanks to the anti-Jansenist master, Pierre Marcelis, under whose guidance he took part in a campaign to harass and discredit suspected Jansenists at the university, among other things by bringing a malicious suit before the council of Brabant. Throughout 1691 and 1692 Martin was professor of theology at the great seminary in Mechelen, appointed by Archbishop Precipiano due to his stand against Jansenism. His lectures again aroused complaints, and when a thesis on 'Genesis' in which he criticized Augustine was condemned his removal was petitioned. 
Towards the end of 1692 Nicolas du Bois, ageing regius professor of scripture at Louvain, applied to have Martin deliver lectures on his behalf. The following year the governor-general acceded to the request in the face of opposition from the faculty, and Martin returned to Louvain. In 1694 Precipiano appointed him ecclesiastical censor and synodal examiner, and on du Bois's death in 1696 Martin succeeded him as regius professor by royal letters patent, subsequently becoming, again through political patronage, a regent of the faculty of theology and a canon of St Peter's in Louvain. Until 1705 he was to combat Jansenism not only in his daily lectures and his writings (of which there is no systematic bibliography), but also by using his powers in the university to block the promotions of suspected Jansenists, and his position as censor to refuse them publication, while favouring their opponents. 
From 1705, growing increasingly distrustful of the Jesuits and of Molinism, and reading Pascal, Arnauld, and Dominican works on efficacious grace, Martin gradually drew closer to the Jansenists, openly aligning himself with them in 1710. Expediency may have played some role in changing his attitude. After the nadir of 1700-06, when the occupying French authorities had given full support to Archbishop Precipiano's anti-Jansenist measures, the allied victory at Ramillies (1706) inaugurated a brief period of Jansenist 'revanche' (Pirenne, 105). Martin seems to have become particularly outspoken after the death of his former patron Precipiano in 1711. In that year his former allies lodged a complaint against him in Brussels which was quashed at the intervention of the English minister, and in 1712 he propounded in his lectures theses which the then censor of books described as scandalous and which led to heated controversy. A further appeal to the Brussels internuncio to discipline Martin precipitated a dangerous dispute about secular, papal, and internal jurisdiction in the university which ended only when Martin submitted a retraction in 1713. His one constant conviction seems to have been absolute papal infallibility in doctrinal matters, so that the condemnation of Jansenism in the bull 'Unigenitus' (1713) led him to abandon his support for the Jansenist party. 
In 1714 the principal work of Martin's career was published, 'Scutum fidei contra haereses hodiernas', written to vindicate the Catholic faith from the attacks of John Tillotson, defending the infallibility of the church, the primacy of the pope, the sacrament of penance, transubstantiation, communion in one kind, adoration of the eucharist, the Latin liturgy, the use of images, and the invocation of saints, and denying Tillotson's charge that Catholic doctrine taught that the pope had the authority to depose secular rulers. On this last point Martin stressed that even those theologians who argued most forcefully for the opinion never claimed it was an article of faith, and commented on the irony of a whig expressing horror at the deposition of kings. 
Martin approached the internuncio in 1715 with a proposal for a book supporting the debated papal bull 'Unigenitus'. This was finally published in March 1720 as 'Motivum juris pro bulla Unigenitus orthodoxia'. Attacking the schism threatened both by appeals against 'Unigenitus' and by the 'secret machinations of the molinists' (p. 162), it was an attempt to reconcile conflicts within the church on an infallibilist basis which few would have been willing to accept. The very next year Martin published his 'Brevis tractatus' expanding on his view of the papal deposing power as touched on in the 'Scutum fidei' and 'Motivum juris'. Martin's contacts with the earl of Sunderland, who had visited Louvain in September 1717 when secretary of state, and with the bishop of Bangor convinced him that the main obstacle to the toleration of Catholics in Britain was fear of their disloyalty arising from the papal deposing power. While maintaining that the papal primacy was instituted by Christ in St Peter, Martin showed that the power of the pope to depose secular rulers was a theological opinion rather than an article of faith, and argued strongly that it was an opinion which occasioned harm to the faithful and no good to the church. By attacking the opponents of 'Unigenitus' while still fiercely opposing Molinism, and simultaneously upholding papal infallibility while denying papal authority over secular rulers, Martin was isolating himself within the university. 
In the summer of 1720 Martin struck a Dominican priest during an argument and was suspended from teaching. He initiated an appeal within the university, but also sought the intervention of the council of Brabant, and returned to teaching in 1721 with his internal appeal still pending. On 4 October 1722 Martin died while undergoing surgery in the hospital of St John in Bruges, and he was buried the same month in the hospital chapel. His memorial records his ample liberality to the poor. 
Martin's litigiousness, his violent temper, and his possibly opportunist shift from Molinism to Jansenism to an infallibilist opposition to both, led several contemporaries to describe him as quarrelsome, unstable, and inconsistent. His readiness to resort to civil tribunals or even political favour in university and ecclesiastical affairs, certainly in part opportunist but also foreshadowing Josephinist attitudes soon to be more widespread, was seen by some as dangerously undermining the separation of jurisdictions. When reporting Martin's death the internuncio wrote that he 'had often caused great harm to the authority of the Holy See in Flanders and had endangered the privileges of the entire University' (Giblin in 'Collectanea Hibernica', 5.104). 


@@@@@


doc= 18180


Martin, Frederick Joseph (1830-1883), writer, was born at Geneva, Switzerland, on 19 November 1830 and educated in Heidelberg, Germany. Nothing is known of his parents, other than the fact that his father was also called Frederick Joseph Martin. He moved to England quite young and worked as a teacher, and then from 1856 was secretary and amanuensis to Thomas Carlyle, whom he helped in his historical researches. On 17 January 1856 he married Susannah Styles ('b'. 1835), daughter of William Styles, a farmer; over the next decade they had two sons and three daughters. 
Martin started a short-lived biographical magazine called 'The Statesman', in which he began an account of Carlyle's early life, but as his subject did not approve, he discontinued it. He inaugurated the 'Statesman's Year-Book' in 1864, and in 1879 Benjamin Disraeli, the prime minister, struck by its usefulness, gave him a pension of $100 a year. He continued to supervise the 'Year-Book' until December 1882, when he was compelled by ill health to give it up and was replaced by J. Scott Keltie. In the intervening years he had produced an enormous amount of research, including a 'Life of John Clare' (1865), volume two of 'The National History of England' (1873), and a variety of histories and reference books in relation to finance and commerce. He wrote largely for various papers and was an occasional contributor to 'The Athenaeum'. Only a few weeks after his retirement from the 'Year-Book', Martin died at his home, 22 Lady Margaret Road, Kentish Town, London, on 27 January 1883. He was buried at Highgate cemetery on 1 February. 


@@@@@


doc= 18181


Martin, Sir George (1764-1847), naval officer, was the youngest son of William Martin (died 1766), captain RN, and his wife, Arabella, daughter of Sir William Rowley, admiral of the fleet. His grandfather Bennet Martin MD was a brother of William Martin, admiral of the fleet. Many members of his mother's family attained naval distinction, and by her second marriage, to Colonel Gibbs of Horsley Park, Surrey, Martin was half-brother of Major-General Sir Samuel Gibbs. From an early age he was on the books of the yacht 'Mary', but he seems first to have gone afloat in December 1776, when he joined the 'Monarch' as 'captain's servant' with his uncle Captain Joshua Rowley. On 27 July 1778 he was present in the action off Ushant, and following his uncle to the 'Suffolk', was in the battle of Grenada on 6 July 1779, and in the three actions off Martinique in April and May 1780. On 16 July 1780 he was promoted lieutenant of the 'Russell'. He was afterwards with his uncle in the 'Princess Royal' at Jamaica. On 9 March 1782 he was promoted to the command of the sloop 'Tobago', and on 17 March 1783 was posted into the 'Preston' (50 guns). He returned to England early in 1784. 
From 1789 to 1792 Martin commanded the 'Porcupine' (24 guns) on the coast of Ireland, and in 1793 the 'Magicienne' (32 guns) in the West Indies. In 1795 he was appointed to the 'Irresistible' (74 guns), and in her took part in the battle of Cape St Vincent on 14 February 1797. At the close of the battle Nelson, whose own ship, the 'Captain', had been disabled, hoisted his broad pennant on the 'Irresistible' for a few days. On 26 April two Spanish frigates, 'Ninfa' and 'Santa Elena', coming home from the West Indies and ignorant of the blockade, were chased by the 'Irresistible' and the frigate 'Emerald' into Conil Bay. The 'Santa Elena' went on shore and broke up, but the 'Ninfa' was captured and became part of the British navy fleet under the name of 'Hamadryad'. The skill and dash with which Martin took the ships past a dangerous reef that blocked the approach to the bay won for him the warm commendations of Lord St Vincent. 
In July 1798 Martin was appointed to the 'Northumberland' (74 guns), in which, on 18 February 1800, he assisted in the capture of the 'Genereux'. From May 1800 he had charge of the blockade of Malta, and on 5 September received the surrender of Valletta. In 1801 he was with the fleet on the coast of Egypt under Lord Keith. In 1803 he commanded the 'Colossus' in the channel, in 1804 the 'Glory', and in November 1804 was appointed to the 'Barfleur', in which he took part in the action off Cape Finisterre on 22 July 1805. On 9 November 1805 he was promoted rear-admiral. In 1806 he was second in command at Portsmouth, and in 1807 was employed on the blockade of Cadiz. He was afterwards in the Mediterranean under the orders of Lord Collingwood -- for the most part on the coast of Italy or Sicily. In June 1809 he took possession of Ischia and Procida. On 23 October, with the fleet off Cape St Sebastian, he was detached in pursuit of a small squadron under Rear-Admiral Baudin. Two days later two of the pursued ships of the line ran themselves on shore not far from Cette, and on 26 October were abandoned, set fire to, and blown up. One ship of the line and one frigate got into Cette harbour; another frigate escaped. 
On 31 July 1810 Martin was promoted vice-admiral, and was again employed on the coast of Sicily, and in co-operation with the army under Sir John Stuart, for which he received the order of St Januarius from the king of Naples. From 1812 to 1814 he was commander-in-chief in the Tagus, and in the summer of 1814 was knighted, when the prince regent visited the fleet at Spithead. 
Martin married first, on 3 April 1804, the youngest daughter (died 15 October 1806) of Captain John Albert Bentinck RN, grandniece of the duke of Portland. He married secondly, on 2 June 1815, A. Locke (died 1 March 1842), daughter of William Locke of Norbury Park, Surrey. Apparently there were no surviving children. On 2 January 1815 he was made a KCB, and a GCB on 20 February 1821. On 19 July 1821 he attained admiral, and from 1824 to 1827 was commander-in-chief at Portsmouth, with his flag in the 'Victory'. In January 1833 he was appointed rear-admiral of the United Kingdom, and vice-admiral in April 1834. He was made a GCMG in 1836, and was promoted admiral of the fleet on 9 November 1846. He died at his house in Berkeley Square, London, on 28 July 1847. 


@@@@@


doc= 18182


Martin, George William (1825-1881), music teacher and composer, was born in London on 8 March 1825. He began his musical studies as a chorister at St Paul's Cathedral, under William Hawes, and was one of the choirboys at Westminster Abbey for the coronation of Queen Victoria. He taught music at the Normal College for Army Schoolmasters in Chelsea, was resident music master at St John's Training College, Battersea, from 1845 to 1853, and became the first organist of Christ Church, Battersea, when it opened in 1849. In 1860 he established the National Choral Society, and subsequently for some years staged a successful series of oratorio performances at Exeter Hall. In connection with these performances he edited and published cheap editions of the oratorios and other works of the great masters then not readily accessible to the public. He was also the editor of a number of minor music periodicals. In 1864 he organized a choir of a thousand voices for the 'Macbeth' music at the 300th anniversary of Shakespeare's birth. He had a special aptitude for training choirs of schoolchildren, and conducted the Metropolitan Schools Choral Society and the National Schools Choral Festival at the Crystal Palace in 1859. As a composer his talent was for the madrigal and partsong, and the publication of his prize-winning glee 'Is she not beautiful?' in 1845 marked the beginning of a successful period, during which few years passed without his winning distinction from some of the leading glee and madrigal societies in the country. 'No composer since the days of Dr Callcott has obtained so many prizes as Mr Martin', commented 'The Times' in 1856. The tune 'Leominster', associated with Bonar's hymn 'A Few More Years Shall Roll', became one of his best-known compositions. 
It is reported by a contemporary that, owing to intemperance, Martin sank from 'a position which at one time gave him a claim to be regarded as one of the elements of musical force in the metropolis' ('Monthly Musical Record', 1 May 1881). He died, apparently destitute, in Bolingbroke House Hospital, Wandsworth, London, on 16 April 1881, and was buried by the parish in Brookwood cemetery, Woking. 


@@@@@


doc= 18183


Martin, Gregory (1542?-1582), Roman Catholic priest and biblical translator, was born at Maxfield in Guestling, Sussex. Little is known about his family and early life. Nominated in 1557 as one of the original scholars at St John's College, Oxford, by Sir Thomas White, the college's founder, Martin was an exact contemporary of Edmund Campion. Together they proceeded to the BA and MA degrees. They continued at St John's as fellows and lecturers: Campion in rhetoric (1564-70) and Martin in Greek (1564-8). In 1567 or 1568 Martin dedicated a manuscript on Greek pronunciation to Henry Fitzalan, earl of Arundel, who had visited Oxford (published in 1712 as 'Gregorius Martinus ad Adolphum Mekerchum pro veteri & vera Graecarum literarum pronunciatione'). The earl's son-in-law, Thomas Howard, fourth duke of Norfolk, subsequently offered Martin a position in his household as tutor to his sons, one of whom was Philip Howard, the future earl of Arundel. 
Martin resigned his St John's fellowship on 15 December 1568. Presumably religion played a role in Martin's decision: in Oxford pressure to conform to the established church was intense. There would be more freedom in the duke's household, where by word and example he encouraged the family to remain steadfast in the old faith. After the duke was arrested in 1569 as a result of the revolt of the northern earls, the household was forced to attend common prayers and services conducted by Church of England ministers. Martin fled to the continent. Before his departure, he exhorted Campion that he must not allow material worries to prevent him from following his religious convictions: 'if we two can live together, we can live for nothing; if this is too little, I have money; but if this fails, one thing remains: they that sow in tears shall reap in joy' (Gillow, 'Lit. biog. hist.', 4.485). 
William Allen welcomed Martin to the recently founded English College at Douai, and Campion joined him in the summer of 1570. Together they studied theology at the new University of Douai. Both received their bachelor's degree on 21 January 1573. Martin was ordained in Brussels on 21 March 1573, and Campion departed for Rome in the spring to join the Jesuits. Martin continued his studies and was awarded a licentiate in theology on 11 January 1575. In May 1576 he started lecturing in Hebrew at the English College at Douai. 
In February 1576 Allen and other English religious exiles had agreed to convert the English Hospice in Rome into a college for the education of clergy. The first group of students departed from Douai on 9 November under Martin's direction. Enrolled as a chaplain of the hospice, Martin both taught the seminarians and devised a programme of studies for them. He remained in Rome for nearly eighteen months, a rather turbulent time as English and Welsh students clashed at the new college. Informed of Martin's arrival in Rome, Campion recommended to Robert Persons on 25 June 1577 that they try to entice Martin into the Society of Jesus: 'Do let us conspire to deliver that good soul; it is good fishing' (Simpson, 119). A week later, on 3 July 1577, Campion wrote to Martin: 'since for so many years we had in common our college, our meals, our studies, our opinions, our fortune, our degrees, our tutors, our friends, and our enemies, let us for the rest of our lives make a more close and binding union, that we may have the fruit of our friendship in heaven. (Simpson, 126)' On 28 November 1578 Persons suggested that Allen had foiled their plans: 'Mr. Marten was called away herhence by Mr. D. Allen his letters, I think they were half afrayd of him what myght becum of hym' (Hicks, 2). Allen may have had a more innocent reason for recalling Martin: an English translation of the 'Bible'. In any case, Persons explained to William Good that the disturbances at the hospice had made Martin 'weary of Rome' (Hicks, 9). On 23 July 1578 Martin returned to the English College, recently transferred from Douai to Rheims. Oddly, no sources mention a reunion during Campion's sojourn at Rheims before his departure for England in June 1580. None the less, Martin commemorated his martyred friend with a Latin poetic eulogy first published in Allen's 'A Brief Historie of the Glorious Martyrdom of xii. Reverend Priests' (1582). 
In November 1578 Martin addressed a crucial problem for English Catholics in 'A Treatise of Schisme'. The Elizabethan 'Act of Uniformity' (1 Eliz. I c. 2) demanded that everyone attend services of the established church. Absentees could be punished by fines or imprisonment. Because of loyalty to their queen or fear of punishment, many Catholics considered passive attendance acceptable. The Council of Trent discussed the issue and condemned the practice. Citing scriptural and historical precedents, Martin justified Trent's decision and demonstrated, as his subtitle claimed, 'that al Catholikes ought in any wise to abstaine altogether from heretical Conventicles'. At the trial of William Carter, the work's printer, in 1584, Martin's exhortation that Catholics imitate Judith, who refused to dine with Holofernes, was interpreted as an appeal to assassinate the queen: Carter was condemned and executed. 
As Martin completed this controversial manual, he embarked on an English translation of the 'Bible'. Allen announced the project in September 1578. He, Richard Bristow, and William Reynolds were involved primarily as revisers: the work was Martin's. Between September 1578 and July 1580 Martin translated the entire 'Vulgate'. 'The New Testament of Iesus Christ' with Bristow's notes was published at Rheims in 1582. For financial reasons the 'Old Testament' did not appear until the two volumes of 'The Holie Bible' were published at Douai in 1609-10. The appearance of a Catholic 'Bible' in English undermined traditional protestant criticism that the Roman church kept scripture out of the hands of the laity. Instead protestant theologians such as Thomas Cartwright, William Whitaker, and William Fulke attacked the credentials of the translators and denounced their work as filled with error. Despite such criticism, revised versions of Martin's translation remained extremely popular throughout the English-speaking world for nearly four hundred years. 
Translating the 'Vulgate' made Martin even more aware that theological errors could be both the cause and the effect of faulty translations. On 13 February 1579 he informed Campion that he had nearly finished a manuscript on protestant corruption and abuse of scripture. 'A Discoverie of the Manifold Corruptions of the Holy Scriptures by the Heretikes of our Daies' (1582) accused protestants of doubting or denying the authority of books and passages not harmonious with their doctrine; of altering the text to justify their views; and of translating falsely to substantiate heretical ideas. The subsequent controversy involved Cartwright, Fulke, Whitaker, John Reynolds, and his Catholic brother William. 
Martin worked on a third manuscript between July 1580 and April 1581. 'Roma sancta' lauded the holiness and piety of contemporary Rome as evidence for the truth of Catholicism. Apparently the English College's poor finances prevented its publication. Sections were published in 'A Treatyse of Christian Peregrination' (1583), along with three letters to 'heretics': a married priest; Martin's sisters, raised in heresy and married to protestants; and Thomas Whyte, warden of New College, Oxford, who dissembled his Catholic beliefs to retain his position. The epistles were reprinted as 'The Love of the Soule' (1578, 'vere' England, 'c'.1597). 
At an unspecified date Martin began to suffer from a malady of the lungs, most probably consumption. On 30 April 1582 Allen sent him to Paris to consult doctors. Apparently it was too late for medical help. He returned to Rheims on 14 September and died on 28 October. Allen preached at Martin's funeral. Martin was buried in the parish church of St Etienne. The armies of the French Revolution destroyed the church and his monument. 


@@@@@


doc= 18184


Harriet Letitia Martin (1801-1891), author, was born in London on 5 July 1801. She travelled extensively in Europe and America and while staying with John Banim and his wife in Paris, she wrote a story entitled 'Canvassing'. This was published in 1835 and she went on to publish a novel, 'The Changeling, a Tale of the Year '47', in 1848. She died in Dublin on 12 January 1891. 


@@@@@


doc= 18185


Martyn, Henry (bap. 1665, d. 1721), essayist and economist, was baptized on 28 November 1665 at Aldbourne, Wiltshire, the eldest son of Edward Martyn of Upham, in that parish, and his wife, Elizabeth. His brother Edward Martyn ('b'. 1666), went on to become professor of rhetoric at Gresham College from 1692 to 1720; a younger brother, Richard Martyn, became a linen draper. After schooling at Eton College, he himself matriculated from Pembroke College, Oxford, on 13 March 1684, and graduated BA in 1687 and MA (from Oriel) in 1690. He went on to study at the Middle Temple, but due to ill health never practised as a lawyer, though he held the position of steward of the court that dealt with civil cases in Southwark. He married Sarah Bendall on 31 December 1698. 
Martyn wrote on trade and economics to advance whig political and financial interests. He is now known to have been the author of 'Considerations upon the East India Trade' (1701), a pamphlet whose free trade arguments for the importance of low-cost Indian goods were probably intended to be directed against the tory East India Company. Although reprinted in 1720 as 'The Advantages of East-India Trade to England', the pamphlet's advocacy of labour-saving machinery and division of labour was too radical and dangerous to be taken up by contemporaries. Its critique of protectionism impressed later writers, however, including T. B. Macaulay and J. R. McCulloch, and it was cited by Marx in 'Das Kapital'. Martyn's authorship was conjectured by McCulloch, and considered at length by the Indian economist Parakunnel Joseph Thomas, who rejected earlier attributions to Dudley North and indicated that the balance of evidence favoured Martyn (Thomas, 171-3). This conclusion was subsequently confirmed by correspondence between the publisher Awnsham Churchill and John Locke and by Locke's own library catalogue, which named Martyn as author (MacLeod, 223-4). 
Later, Martyn adopted a more conventional, protectionist line as one of the leading lights in the movement to set up 'The British Merchant, or, Commerce Preserved', a paper designed to focus opposition to a proposed trade treaty with France being negotiated at the Utrecht peace talks in 1713-14. The paper was thus in opposition to Defoe's 'Mercator'. According to another of the founders, Charles King, Martyn's work was instrumental in making a success of the paper and ensuring the rejection of the treaty. In recognition of his services the whig administration appointed him inspector-general of imports and exports, in which capacity he wrote various papers dealing with the financial affairs of the country. He prepared for the Board of Trade in 1717 or 1718 a report, 'Observations upon the Account of Exports and Imports for 17 Years Ending at Christmas 1714'. He has also been identified as the author of the memorandum 'An Essay Towards Finding the Ballance of Our Whole Trade Annually from Christmas 1698 to Christmas 1719', refuting the contention of Archibald Hutcheson's 'The Present State of Public Debts and Funds' (1718) that there was an adverse balance of payments. 
Martyn wrote for 'The Spectator' during 1711/12 and 'The Guardian'. He was almost certainly the Philarithmus of 'Spectator' number 180, and has been linked to articles in other issues of the paper including numbers 143 (Cottilus), 200, and 232. In issue number 555 Richard Steele praises Martyn highly, and acknowledges his indebtedness to his work, listing him alongside -- indeed, ahead of -- Alexander Pope, John Hughes, Henry Carey, Thomas Tickell, Thomas Parnell, and Laurence Eusden. He died at Blackheath on 25 March 1721. 
Henry Martyn's only son, 


@@@@@


doc= 18186


Martin, Hugh (bap. 1822, d. 1885), Free Church of Scotland minister, was baptized at St Nicholas, Aberdeen, on 11 August 1822, the son of Alexander Martin and his wife, Isabella Gray. He was educated at the grammar school and Marischal College, Aberdeen, where he graduated MA in 1839. He was a distinguished student obtaining, among numerous prizes, the Gray bursary, the highest mathematical reward at Marischal College. He went on to study divinity at King's College, Aberdeen. A speech by William Cunningham at the general assembly of 1842 won him over to the cause of non-intrusion, and he was licensed as a minister of the Free Church of Scotland the following year. He served as minister at Panbride, near Carnoustie, Forfarshire, from 1844 until his removal to Free Greyfriars, Edinburgh, in 1858. On 1 September 1846 he married Elizabeth Jane Robertson, with whom he had a family; their eldest son, Alexander Martin, was also a Free Church minister. 
Martin retired from the active ministry in 1865, on grounds of ill health. From 1866 to 1868 he acted as examiner in mathematics at Edinburgh University. He also continued to write books and articles, being a frequent contributor to the 'British and Foreign Evangelical Review' and the 'Transactions of the London Mathematical Society'. His books included 'Christ's Presence in the Gospel History' (1860), 'A Study of Trilinear Co-ordinates' (1867), 'The Atonement' (1870), and 'The Westminster Doctrine of the Inspiration of Scripture' (1877). Together with James Begg and through the medium of a monthly periodical 'The Watchword' he opposed moves to unite the Free and United Presbyterian churches. In 1872 Edinburgh University honoured him with the degree of DD. He died at home at Lasswade, near Edinburgh, on 14 June 1885. 


@@@@@


doc= 18187


Martin, James (fl. 1556-1588), philosopher, a native of Dunkeld, Perthshire, claimed to have begun studying philosophy at an early age, and may have been educated at Oxford. A James Martyn is listed as taking the degree of MA on 31 March 1522, and in 1591 Andreas Libavius referred to Martin as an Oxford philosopher. He taught philosophy at the University of Paris, where in 1556 he was proctor of the German nation, which in May of the following year chose him to negotiate with the king over an unpopular tax on the university. In 1577 he was described on the title-page of his 'De prima simplicium et concretorum corporum generatione... disputatio' as professor of philosophy at the University of Turin. This treatise, his major work, was dedicated to Girolamo della Rovere, archbishop of Turin. In 1588 he produced a new edition of Francisco Valles's work of the same year, 'In quartum librum Meteorologicorum Aristotelis commentaria'. The dedicatory letter (sigs. &dagger;2'r'-3'v'), addressed to Gregorio Lopez Madera, physician to Philip II of Spain, styles Martin as 'philosophiae professor ordinarius' ('ordinary professor of philosophy') at the University of Turin; and in it he refers to two other re-editions he had recently prepared for Madera: Fernando de Mena, 'Commentaria in libros Galeni de sanguinis missione et purgatione' (1587), and Francisco Valles, 'De urinis, pulsibus, ac febribus compendiariae tractationes' (1588). 
Martin's treatise on the primary generation of simple and compound bodies is directed against Aristotle, whose belief in the eternity of the world he maintains is both impious and inconsistent with the philosopher's own account of the infinite power of the unmoved mover. It was no doubt the anti-Aristotelian thrust of Martin's work which led Sir William Temple, the leading English proponent of the philosophical reform programme of Pierre de la Ramee, known as Ramus (1515-1572), to re-issue the treatise in Cambridge in 1584. In his prefatory letter, which gives a distinctly Ramist inflection to Martin's critique of Aristotelianism, Temple describes the Scottish philosopher as 'magno vir ingenio et exquisito judicio' ('a man of great intellect and meticulous judgement'), who argues against Aristotle with clarity (sig. PP4'r'). The treatise, together with Temple's preface, was reprinted in Frankfurt in 1589. Two years later a reply was published, also in Frankfurt, by the tireless polemicist Andreas Libavius ('c'.1560-1616), professor of history and poetry at the University of Jena. In 'Quaestionum physicarum controversarum inter Peripateticos et Rameos tractatus' (1591), Libavius took issue with both Temple and Martin, reserving his most contemptuous comments for the latter. Thus, adapting a phrase from Cicero, 'Pro Sestio', 72, he refers to Martin as 'ex vepreculis Taurinensibus progressa nitedula' ('a dormouse which has emerged from the thorn bushes of Turin'; sig. A7'v'); and he bemoans the 'stupidum Scoti ingenium' ('the dull mind of the Scot'), which has produced such a scandalously distorted picture of Aristotle's thought (pp. 28-9). Despite the polarization between Peripatetics, or Aristotelians, and Ramists indicated in his title, Libavius was aware that while Temple was a Ramist, Martin was simply an anti-Aristotelian. This distinction has been ignored, however, in modern scholarly literature, where Martin, through guilt by association with Temple, is regularly classified as a Ramist, for example, in Walter J. Ong's 1958 seminal study of Ramism. Similarly, W. S. Howell calls Martin's treatise a 'pro-Ramist work' (Howell, 196 n. 68); and the article on Libavius in the 'Dictionary of Scientific Biography' refers to Temple and Martin as 'two British disciples of Ramus' (p. 309). 


@@@@@


doc= 18188


Martin, Sir James (1820-1886), politician and judge in Australia, was born on 14 May 1820, at Midleton, co. Cork, Ireland, the eldest of the five children of John Martin, castle steward, of Fermoy, co. Cork, and his wife, Mary (1795-1876), the daughter of a farmer, David Hennessey, of Ballynona. The family moved to Australia in 1821, his father taking employment with Major-General Sir Thomas Brisbane, military commander at Fermoy, who had been appointed governor of New South Wales. James Martin was educated at the Commercial Academy and by other teachers in Parramatta, then at the Sydney College, which he left at the end of 1836. 
Precociously talented and self-confident, Martin had by then submitted articles to 'The Australian' newspaper and had come to the attention of its editor, George Robert Nichols, also a prominent lawyer. Under the latter's patronage he became acting editor of the paper in 1839 and an articled clerk to Nichols in the following year. Martin wrote for other papers as well, usually being critical of the government and promoting the causes of representative government and protectionism. He was admitted as a solicitor in 1845. In 1848 he stood successfully for the Cook and Westmoreland seat on the legislative council, but was unseated on petition. He won again in 1850. 
On 20 January 1853 Martin married Isabella (1832-1909), the eldest daughter of William Long, a wine and spirits merchant of Potts Point, Sydney. They had nine sons and seven daughters. They separated in 1882. 
In 1856 Martin was nominated to be attorney-general in the Cowper ministry, but this caused great controversy, as he was not a barrister. Part of the opposition grew from personal dislike of the 'vulgar fellow' (Nairn). Henry Parkes noted both Martin's 'absurd contempt for persons who did not agree with him' and 'his efforts to imitate the rich and privileged' (Parkes, 80). Martin served again as attorney-general in 1857-8, then in 1859 moved to the legislative assembly, on which he variously represented East Sydney, Orange, the Lachlan, and East Macquarie. In October 1863 he became premier, and proposed a protectionist programme. This was rejected by the council, and then by the public at the following election. Martin was again premier for two years from January 1866, and once more between December 1870 and May 1872. Under his leadership a number of measures to improve education and social welfare were passed. He was knighted in 1869. 
Martin was appointed chief justice of New South Wales in 1873, once more after controversy, which 'nearly brought down the first Parkes government' (Rutledge, 207). Yet he grew to be well regarded for his abilities in this post, gaining, according to the 'Sydney Morning Herald', 'a reputation for sagacity and ability which will not soon be forgotten' (Grainger, 149). He remained chief justice until his death, from heart disease, on 4 November 1886 at his home, Clarens, in Wylde Street, Potts Point, Sydney. He was buried at St Jude's Church, Randwick, Sydney, but was reinterred alongside his wife at Waverley cemetery in 1909. 


@@@@@


doc= 18189


Martin, Sir James Ranald (1793-1874), surgeon and medical administrator, was born on 12 May 1793, the son of the Revd Donald Martin of Kilmuir, the Isle of Skye. After the death of his mother, which occurred when he was very young, the family left for Inverness, where Martin attended school at the Royal Academy. His father and maternal grandfather desired that he should pursue a military career, but Martin showed an inclination towards medicine from an early stage and received instruction in pharmacy from two local doctors while still attending school. 
In 1813 Martin left Inverness for London, where he became a student at St George's Hospital, studying under the renowned surgeon Sir Everard Home. In 1817, having become a member of the Royal College of Surgeons, he secured a position with the East India Company, and left for India in June of that year. His first appointment was at the Presidency General Hospital in Calcutta, where he treated European civilians, but in 1818 he began military service with the company's army at Fort William. Promoted to the rank of assistant surgeon, Martin soon left Calcutta for Orissa, which was in a state of revolt. Here, he served in various engagements, coping not only with the injuries of war but with high levels of sickness among the troops. Martin also became embroiled in the controversy over flogging in the army, and successfully opposed the cruelties inflicted on Indian troops by some of the more vindictive British officers. 
Martin returned to Calcutta in 1819 as first assistant surgeon in the General Hospital but in 1820 resumed military duties, taking charge of the Ramgarh battalion during operations against hill tribes in northern Bengal. It was here that he contracted a fever which was to impair his health for the next ten months, but this experience led him to propose measures to prevent disease in the battalion, including the siting of camps in more elevated and 'healthy' positions. The campaign impressed on him the importance of the environment in the causation of disease and stirred a lifelong interest in medical topography. By 1821 Martin had returned to Calcutta, where he recommended improvements to the regimental hospital and barracks, as well as other sanitary measures -- most of which were adopted by the governor-general, the marquess of Hastings. But fever and arduous campaigning had taken its toll on Martin's health and he was ordered to the island of Mauritius to recuperate. 
Martin returned to Calcutta in 1823 but shortly afterwards was to serve in the First Anglo-Burmese War of 1824-6. Immediately after the war Martin married the daughter of Colonel Paton CB, the quartermaster-general of the Bengal army, and settled down in Calcutta where he rapidly established the city's largest civilian practice. A further measure of his standing was his appointment in 1828 to the post of presidency surgeon; a position which he combined with his private practice and the head surgeoncy of the Native Hospital in Calcutta. It was at this institution that he developed a radical -- and subsequently widely adopted -- cure for hydrocephalus by the injection of diluted tincture of iodine. Martin also continued to interest himself in sanitary matters, and in 1835 won the support of the governor-general William Bentinck in his appeal for more medical topographical reports of Indian stations. Two years later Martin published his own 'Medical Topography of Calcutta', a book which marks a turning point in Anglo-Indian medicine. It was here that Martin began to turn his attention from the effects of climate on health to the sanitary condition of Indian towns. Unlike earlier writers, Martin deplored Indian sanitary habits and drew heavily on James Mill's utilitarian critique of oriental 'superstitions'. The book epitomized a new feeling among British doctors and administrators that western medicine was essential to India's civilization and progress. 
Martin continued to practise in Calcutta until 1840, when his deteriorating health forced him to retire to England. He took a house in Grosvenor Street and then at Upper Brook Street, London, where he established a practice among friends and acquaintances from his time in India. He now devoted himself to devising numerous schemes for improving the health of soldiers and was employed as inspector-general of army hospitals and as president of the East India Company's medical board. He also published a series of lectures in 'The Lancet' on the diseases of tropical climates and edited the seventh edition of James Johnson's widely respected work, 'The Influence of Tropical Climates on European Constitutions', published in 1856. In 1857, following the Crimean War, Martin was appointed to the royal commission inquiring into the sanitary state of the British army and, in 1859, to a similar body investigating the health of the army in India. 
Martin was elected a fellow of the Royal College of Surgeons in 1845, and was made a CB in 1860 and knighted later that year. He is said to have been a handsome man, over 6 feet tall, strongly built, and with a military air and appearance. He became somewhat deaf in old age but discharged his official duties until his death from pneumonia at his home at 37 Upper Brook Street, London, on 27 November 1874. 


@@@@@


doc= 18190


Martin, John (1619-1693), Church of England clergyman, was born on 12 December 1619 in Mere, Wiltshire, the son of John Martin, a schoolmaster. He became a batteler of Trinity College, Oxford, where he matriculated in 1637, moving to Oriel College when he failed to obtain a scholarship. He graduated BA in 1640 and is recorded as having an MA by 1645. Martin was ordained by Bishop Robert Skinner of Oxford on 21 December 1645 and two days later was instituted vicar of Compton Chamberlayne, Wiltshire, by the presentation of Sir John Penruddock, who also granted him the endowed lectureship attached to the church, worth $30 a year. 
As a bronze monument placed in the chancel observed (Hoare, 5.87), Martin twice paid the price for his loyalty to the Stuart monarchy. The first occasion came with the civil war and its aftermath. Ejected from his benefice in 1647 for refusing the covenant, he rented a small grazing farm in nearby Tisbury, although there is reason to believe that he was reinstated before the Restoration. Martin was suspected of involvement in the unsuccessful royalist insurrection led by Colonel John Penruddock, the son of his late patron, at Salisbury in 1654, and was briefly imprisoned. After his release he sheltered Penruddock's children and, as trustee for his estate, preserved it from sequestration. Although nothing is known of his marriage, Martin may have been the father of a son John, who was born in Tisbury at this time and who later also became a clergyman. Martin welcomed the Stuart Restoration by printing a sermon, 'Hosannah: a Thanksgiving Sermon, June 28th 1660' (1660), dedicated to Bishop Brian Duppa, who had instituted him, the first of four published works. This exhibits his learning and loyalty, seeing the hand of God in the restoration of 'the cornerstone of our Church and State' (p. 32). 
Martin had moderate success in his career after the Restoration, and by combining several modest benefices was able to achieve an annual income of at least $120, above the $80 considered to be the minimum for a cleric at that time. In addition to Compton Chamberlayne, in January 1661 he was instituted as rector of Melcombe Horsey, Dorset, by the presentation of Thomas Freke. Bishop Seth Ward collated Martin to the prebend of Yatesbury in Salisbury Cathedral on 22 November 1668, moving him to the more valuable prebend of Preston on 5 October 1677. Martin was also rural dean of Chalke, but refused appointment as canon residentiary of Salisbury. In October 1675 he became chaplain to Charles, earl of Nottingham. His pluralism and failure to appoint a curate led to his presentment in 1674 for non-residence in Compton Chamberlayne. The absence of further complaints suggests that thereafter he fulfilled his promise to the churchwardens to reside and was on good terms with the congregation. Martin's attention to the siting of the pulpit and his decision to bar from communion two men embroiled in a legal dispute testify to his pastoral diligence, as does his publication of 'Go in Peace' (1674), a guide for young clerics visiting the sick which he dedicated to Sir George Howe, bt, whom he described as 'a Lover of the clergy'. 
Martin suffered for his loyalism a second time when he lost his living in Melcombe Horsey in February 1690 and his prebendal stall in 1691 after he refused to take the oath of allegiance to William and Mary. Bishop Gilbert Burnet allowed him to retain the benefice of Compton Chamberlayne, however, and also claimed that he paid Martin from his own purse the annual income of the prebend from which he had been deprived, citing this example to disprove George Hickes's allegations that the bishop had victimized nonjurors in Salisbury diocese. Burnet recognized that Martin's behaviour resulted from his consistent record of loyalty to the Stuarts rather than from the troublesomeness which he disliked among many of the lesser clergy, reporting that Martin had said that 'he would never join the Schism with the rest of the Non-Jurors, whose Principles and Practices... he detested' (Burnet, 62-3). Burnet perhaps also approved of Martin's emphasis upon pastoral visits and collation of scriptural passages in 'Go in Peace'. John Martin died on 3 November 1693 in Compton Chamberlayne, where he was buried. 


@@@@@


doc= 18191


Martin, John (1741-1820), Particular Baptist minister, was born at Spalding, Lincolnshire, on 15 March 1741, the son of John Martin (died 1767), publican and grazier, and Mary King (died 1756). Partly self-taught, he was also educated at school in Gosberton, and afterwards at Stamford, under Dr Newark. Soon after his mother's death in 1756 he went as office boy to an attorney at Holbeach, but developed religious melancholy, and in 1760 moved to London to attend Dr John Gill's meeting-house. On 11 July 1761 he married Elizabeth Jessup (died 1765), daughter of a farmer near Sleaford. 
In 1763 Martin became convinced of 'the duty of believers' baptism' and published a pamphlet, suggested partly by his work in London as a watch-finisher, entitled 'Mechanicus and Flavens, or, The Watch Spiritualised'. Soon afterwards he was baptized by the Revd Mr Clark in a garden at Blunham, afterwards joining the church at Gamlingay, Bedfordshire. His first charge as a minister was with the Independent congregation in Kimbolton, Huntingdonshire (1764-5), but in 1766 he was ordained to the pastorate of the Particular Baptist congregation in Shepshed, Leicestershire. Within the forward-looking Northamptonshire Association, to which Shepshed was affiliated, Martin promoted itinerancy and village preaching. 
In 1773 Martin surprisingly was called to the pastorate of the deeply split church in Grafton Street, Piccadilly, London; three years earlier he had refused to preach to them because of what he took to be their shameful treatment of their ageing minister, William Anderson. He was ordained to the pastorate in March 1774 with Benjamin Wallin, Abraham Booth, and John Macgowan all sharing in the service. One of the occasional hearers during this Grafton Street pastorate was Lord George Gordon of riot fame, who failed to persuade Martin to take office in the Protestant Association. Notwithstanding a serious secession in 1776, Martin built up the remaining congregation, for whom a new chapel in Keppel Street, Bloomsbury, was built in 1795, mainly at the expense of William Ashlin, one of Martin's wealthy deacons, who had earlier seceded from the Eagle Street congregation because of dissatisfaction with the ministry of Thomas Hopkins. 
Martin's approach to predestination and the freedom of the human will changed over time. In the 1770s, during his Shepshed pastorate, Andrew Fuller found him commending Jonathan Edwards and castigating the likes of John Gill and John Brine, notwithstanding the fact that he had worshipped with Gill's congregation in London in 1760. Indeed, Martin's Association letter of 1770 has been noted as a key document in concluding the period of the dominance of hyper-Calvinism, with its encouragement of all to approach Christ, among English Baptists. This evangelical stance Martin confirmed in his 1775 sermon on 'Romans' 10: 3, published under the title 'The Rock of Offence', which argued that human failure to submit to the righteousness of God was occasioned by 'want of will and want of love' (Fuller, title-page). His arguments in this sermon were an influence prompting Andrew Fuller to move beyond traditional Calvinist categories in his thinking, while Martin appears to have moved in the opposite direction. This was especially seen in his London years, when Martin showed himself very much more conservative, in theology as in politics, and became a foremost opponent of 'Fullerism', that system of evangelical Calvinism that Fuller developed in the light of what Jonathan Edwards had achieved in the USA and which lay behind the launching of the modern missionary movement. This Martin did in a printed debate with Fuller in the years 1789-91: his 'Thoughts on the Duty of Man Relative to Faith in Jesus Christ' provoked Fuller to reply in 'Remarks on Mr Martin's Publication', which took the form of five letters to a friend. 
Apart from theological issues Martin easily became isolated because of his conservative political positions. First, at a meeting of the General Body of Dissenting Ministers in December 1789 he both spoke in favour of the 'Test and Corporation Acts' and insulted a young Presbyterian minister who adopted the opposite stance. Samuel Stennett, from the chair, called upon Martin to apologize, but he refused and left the meeting. Although Martin's action caused him to lose support among his fellow dissenters, he found favour with the government. After Stennett's death in 1795, Martin in 1797 received a warrant from the government to succeed him in distributing the 'regium donum', though it was not long before he was in conflict with his fellow trustees about both process and product, a dispute that rumbled on from 1798 until 1806, when Martin's warrant was finally withdrawn. The third area of dispute was Martin's sermon, preached on a Sunday evening of January 1798 in Broad Street Chapel. There he alleged, with little sensitivity, that were the French to land in Britain many dissenters would 'unite to encourage the French and distress this country' (Ivimey, 4.77). Writing on behalf of the Baptist Board, Abraham Booth and other Baptist ministers begged Martin in vain not to publish the address, which ran to several editions. Martin not only confirmed his allegation but sought to justify his view, arguing 'That Dissenters are not less contaminated with French principles than other people appeared to be incontrovertible... can you doubt whether some of them... have wished to plant what they call the Tree of Liberty in Great Britain?' (ibid., 4.79). The managers of the evening sermon had little option but to exclude him as unfit to give further instruction under their patronage. The Baptist Board also judged Martin's castigation of his fellow dissenters untrue and 'highly calumnious' (ibid., 4.81), and expelled him from their counsels. Martin's 'exaggerated and unjust representation' (ibid., 4.81) was deemed not only unwise but unkind, and against the studied determination of the leaders of the Three Denominations to demonstrate dissenting loyalty by suggesting that many of their number were 'desirous of assisting the French Revolutionists to overthrow the monarchy and constitution of their country' (ibid., 4.81). The Baptist historian Joseph Ivimey seems to suggest that Martin's lack of judgement in part lay in failing to distinguish between dissenters' welcome to the outbreak of the revolution and what was appropriate once the revolution had developed its particular characteristics, especially when the revolutionary regime moved into conflict with neighbouring countries. 
On 13 March 1798 Martin was expelled from the London Baptist Board; attempts to effect a reconciliation between Martin and his brethren as late as 1805 proved ineffectual. His sermon of 1798 led to a large secession from his chapel, but he continued to preach with unabated vigour to those remaining until April 1814, when 'a stroke of palsy' destroyed his intelligence, causing his withdrawal from the ministry. He survived a further six years until his death in London on 23 April 1820; he was buried in Bunhill Fields. 


@@@@@


doc= 18192


Martin, John (1789-1854), artist, was born on 19 July 1789 at East Land Ends, Haydon Bridge, Northumberland, the thirteenth and youngest child (only five of whom, one of them a daughter, survived childhood) of (William) Fenwick Martin, who held several occupations including publican, coach builder, fencing master, and tanner, and his wife, Isabella, daughter of Richard Thompson of Lowland's End, Haydon Bridge. His brothers included Jonathan Martin (1782-1838), arsonist, and the eccentric and self-proclaimed philosopher William Martin (1772-1851). 
After apprenticeship to a coach-painter in Newcastle upon Tyne, Martin worked for a china painter, Boniface Musso, whom he accompanied to London in 1805. There he made a living painting china and glass. In 1809 he married Susan Garnett. Martin's art derived from the conventions of decorative embellishment; his subject matter, initially, was 'classical' landscape: Claudian topography with bystanders in togas. He first exhibited at the Royal Academy in 1811 ('Landscape Composition') but first made an impact the following year with 'Sadak in Search of the Waters of Oblivion' (St Louis Art Museum, Missouri), a painting remarkable for its juxtaposed incandescence and void, the combination that was to be Martin's speciality for the rest of his career. 
Martin's Sadak slipping from a rocky shelf, about to plunge feet first into nothingness, thereby purging himself of memories, is a key image of the Romantic sublime. Prototype that he was, Sadak was the forerunner of other heroes mostly destined to meet eye-catching fates, notably Cadmus the dragon slayer, Joshua in 'Joshua Commanding the Sun to Stand Still' (United Grand Lodge of England, London) and the bard, last of his race, high on a mountain, cursing the English army invading Wales. 
In 1817, the year of 'The Bard' (Laing Art Gallery, Newcastle upon Tyne), Martin was appointed drawing master and historical landscape painter to the prince regent's daughter, Princess Charlotte, and her husband Prince Leopold of Saxe-Coburg-Saalfeld, an imposing title that could have carried some weight had the princess not died in childbirth that year. Martin looked instead to the Royal Academy for advancement or alternatively to the British Institution where, in 1817, he was awarded a $100 premium for his 'Joshua'. With that encouragement, his aims as a painter were resolved: he would develop a factually spectacular epic genre involving vastness and multiplicity, with history relaxed into fiction or elaborated into legend. He began to prosper and in 1818 bought a house, 30 Allsop's Buildings, in the New Road, London. 

'The Fall of Babylon' (priv. coll.), exhibited in 1819 at the British Institution, was a panorama painting reduced to respectable (academy-worthy) proportions. Cycloramic in its vasty architecture and wide horizons, it shows diminutive troops swarming past the Tower of Babel and across the Euphrates to the ramparts and hanging gardens of the palace where the impious Belshazzar reigns. Moments later, in 'Belshazzar's Feast' (1820; priv. coll.), panic sets in as God's writing flares on the wall of the immense banqueting hall. This sequel won Martin a $200 premium at the Royal Academy exhibition of 1821. What Charles Lamb in his 'Essay on the barrenness of the imaginative faculty in the production of modern art' in 'Last Essays of Elia' (1833) described as a huddle of vulgar consternation proved amazing enough to attract a paying public when it went on show in a shop in the Strand. In the accompanying leaflet biblical and archaeological sources for the composite style of architecture -- part Egyptian, part Indian -- were cited. Martin the showman recognized the allure of 'authenticity' while relying on the pull of crude perspectives. As the German critic G. F. Waagen said, such paintings as 'Belshazzar' 'unite in a high degree the qualities which the English require above all in a work of art -- effect, a powerful invention, and topographical historical truth' (G. F. Waagen, 'Works of Art and Artists in England', 1838, 2.162). 
As he attained the height of his celebrity, Martin did all he could to emphasize the educational value of his pictorial spectacles. As in panoramas of the battle of the Nile, ancient Rome, and ruined Pompeii, flawless workmanship and top lighting were key elements. And the larger the painting the greater its capacity to overwhelm. 'The Destruction of Herculaneum and Pompeii' of 1822 was itself damaged in a flood at the Tate Gallery in 1929; the surviving fragment is sufficient to indicate that it did not have quite the impact of 'Belshazzar'. 
Martin was never accepted as a serious painter by the art establishment as constituted by the Royal Academy. He resolved to appeal over the academy's head, so to speak, to a broader public, and make a living by producing print versions of his successful paintings. Eventually, as John Constable remarked, Martin 'looked at the Royal Academy from the Plains of Nineveh, from the Destruction of Babylon' (Pendered, 180): vantage points attained largely on the strength of his printmaking. 
Mezzotint is a medium peculiarly suited to Manichaean fantasies: the black void of the prepared plate, blackness scraped away to create forms and highlights. 'Paradise Lost', illustrated in two sets of mezzotints for the publisher Septimus Prowett in 1825-7, was ideal material for Martin, who echoed Milton's solemnity while opening out his cadences in the imagery of groves and chases bathed in silvery light and an underworld where fires tongue the darkness and bridges span nothingness and Satan's armies infest the gloom. In mezzotint Martin's vision thrived. His subjects, biblical and Miltonic, lent themselves to vast generalizations dotted with microscopic particulars. 'The Seventh Plague of Egypt' (1823; Boston Museum of Fine Arts) and 'The Expulsion' ('c'.1825; Laing Art Gallery, Newcastle upon Tyne) translated readily from text to painting to engraving. 
Stressing what he conceived to be the reality underpinning myth, or revealed religion, Martin designed 'The Deluge' (1826; priv. coll.; mezzotint 1828) on a basis of contemporary theory. Baron Cuvier, the geologist, visited his studio while he was working on the composition and, according to Martin, approved his presentation of the event. 'The Fall of Nineveh' (1828; mezzotint 1829) was his largest and grandest 'Old Testament' spectacular with embankments breached along the Tigris and the emperor Sardanapalus preparing a funeral pyre of Babel proportions. Martin showed the painting in the Brussels Salon in 1833. It remained unsold. 
Like Jericho, Babylon, Herculaneum, and Thebes before it, Martin's Nineveh was an awful example to Londoners of what could befall them. In the 1820s an expanding London, the new Babylon as it was often referred to, lacked infrastructure to a frightening degree. The Thames, tidal and without river walls, was both water supply and sewer. Cholera broke out in 1830. From the late 1820s onwards Martin devoted much of his time and energy to schemes for metropolitan improvement. He designed embankments to prevent the Thames flooding, to contain sewers and (grander even than anything the builders of his Nineveh had achieved) to accommodate also an underground railway system. Martin's inventive proposals included a safety lamp for coalminers, double hulls for shipping, and coastal warning lights. He proposed glazed shopping malls and uninterrupted green spaces extending from Kensington to Whitehall. Such schemes chimed in with the themes of his paintings both in relation to disasters, impending or witnessed, and in the similarities of approach: the picturesque treatment of crisis and a punctilious attention to detail. 
None of Martin's schemes was given more than a polite hearing at the time, though in time virtually all of them were realized by others. Nor was his campaign for copyright protection immediately successful. His prints were pirated in Europe and the United States and while these helped spread his reputation their relative crudity encouraged the view that he was a clumsy eccentric, a view reinforced by association in 1829 when his brother Jonathan set fire to York Minster on religious grounds and was committed to Bethlem Hospital as a criminal lunatic. Another brother, William, wandered the streets of Newcastle upon Tyne selling pamphlets on subjects derived for the most part from John Martin's projects, sincerely burlesquing his ideas on safety lamps and perpetual motion machines. 
Martin's plans were a distraction at a time when his sort of sublimity was going out of fashion. His mezzotint 'Illustrations of the Bible' issued in parts in 1831-5 was a failure. Having cried woe as a painter and as a campaigning visionary, he was now caught up in his own destruction. His plans cost him, a friend estimated, $10,000; by 1837 he faced bankruptcy. 
By all accounts lively and enthusiastic, Martin was -- according to his friend Sergeant Ralph Thomas -- 'a deist in religion, a radical reformer in politics' (Pendered, 176). He was apt to hiss when the national anthem was played. Having lived in style for twenty years, he had to cut back. Large biblical paintings and mezzotints ('The Crucifixion', 'The Death of the First-Born') no longer appealed; he turned to painting pretty watercolour views of the countryside around London. 
Yet there remained seams of progressive satisfaction. In 1834 Martin illustrated for the palaeontologist Gideon Mantell 'The Country of the Iguanadon', realizing, from fossil bones, an artist's impression of extinct species. It served as the frontispiece to Mantell's 'Wonders of Geology' (2 vols., 1838). Imagining himself, or John Martin, as 'some higher intelligence from another sphere', Mantell described looking down on earth and seeing 'winged reptiles of strange forms', then after thousands of centuries returning to see the ocean gone and dry land again appearing (Mantell, 1.455). 'Above the cliffs a beautiful city appeared; with its palaces, its temples, and its thousand edifices' (ibid.). Mantell drew on Martin as Martin drew on Mantell: what had begun with 'Cadmus' and Joshua's Jericho had become a new reading of history. 

'The Coronation of Queen Victoria' (1838; Tate Collection) was a bid by Martin to attract patrons, in the shape of the members of the nobility invited to his studio to sit for the tiny portrait heads involved. He succeeded in impressing the prince consort who, in 1840, encouraged him to return to large-scale painting by reverting to an old theme. 'The Eve of the Deluge' (Royal Collection), 'The Deluge' (1834; Yale U. CBA), and 'The Assuaging of the Waters' (Fine Art Museums of San Francisco) restated his themes in a more richly worked manner. He also painted 'Pandemonium' (1841; Forbes Collection, New York) and 'The Celestial City and Rivers of Bliss' from 'Paradise Lost' again, with a view to re-establishing himself as a painter first and foremost. For the rest of his life he exhibited every year at the Royal Academy. 
Martin's obsessions persisted. He addressed the theme of the elimination of the human species. He had been friendly with William Godwin, father of Mary Shelley whose novel 'The Last Man' prompted him to produce a drawing of the last man as a Christ figure on a headland surrounded by corpses: potential fossils. A large version (Walker Art Gallery, Liverpool), was exhibited at the Royal Academy in 1850. 
In 1848 Martin moved to an apartment in Lindsay House by Battersea Bridge, a short distance downriver from 6 Davis Place, where Turner lived. There, having relinquished his directorship of the Metropolitan Sewage Manure Company -- another unsuccessful venture -- he planned 'The Last Judgement', a painting by himself and an engraving after it by Charles Mottram. Influenced by James Barry's 'Elysium, or, The State of Final Retribution' at the Society of Arts, he planted the heads and shoulders of great artists, thinkers, and philosophers on green slopes, watching as popes, emperors, lords, and a power-mad rabble, featuring a trainload of worldly fools, slide into the pit of oblivion. He then turned to utter destruction, first with 'The Destruction of Sodom and Gomorrah' (1852; Laing Art Gallery, Newcastle upon Tyne), then with one of a pair of pictures to flank 'The Last Judgement': 'The Great Day of his Wrath' (1852), in which the cities of Sodom and Gomorrah, Babylon, Nineveh, Rome, and London have risen into the air among the exploding mountains, poised to fall into the void, snuffing out gesticulating mankind. In the other he presented his vision of paradise regained in 'The Plains of Heaven' (1853; all three paintings are in the Tate Collection), where angels waft over rose bushes and lawns sloping towards blue seas and, looming over all, the white domes of the heavenly Jerusalem. 
Martin died at 4 Finch Road, Douglas, Isle of Man, on 17 February 1854 and was buried at Kirk Braddan cemetery, Douglas. Of his children his eldest son Alfred, who made a number of mezzotints for his father, became chief superintendent of income tax in Ireland; Charles was a portrait painter; Leopold Charles Martin wrote a memoir of Martin and worked in the Stationery Office; Jessie Martin married Joseph Bonomi, who after her death in 1859 became curator of Sir John Soane's Museum, where another daughter, Isabella, served as his assistant. 
An artist of poetic coincidence and stark contrasts, Martin invariably aimed to deluge the senses, to inspire wonder, to edify and amaze. His hold on the popular imagination was unparalleled in his day; as a showman painter -- taking the sublime to the general public of the 1820s -- he was both proficient and inventive. He was at best an adroit painter. As a printmaker he was altogether more formidable in that he worked in mezzotint, embellishing the imagery through successive revisions of the plate and printing with great subtlety using different mixes of inks to get the effects he wanted. His 'Deluge' and his 'Bridge over Chaos' are masterpieces of the medium and among the most astonishing images of the era. Martin's reputation, low when he died, declined steadily thereafter. The 'Last Judgement' triptych was exhibited as a special attraction for some years and toured the United States. The paintings hung for a while in Alexandra Palace in north London. Oblivion intervened: in 1935 they were sold at auction for just under $7. 'The Last Judgement' itself was cut into three strips and served as a fire screen; restored and reunited the three paintings, Martin's finale, are now in the Tate collection. Since the publication of Thomas Balston's biography of Martin in 1947 his work has been taken seriously enough for the epithet 'mad' to be dropped. Long before then, in D. W. Griffith's film 'Intolerance' (1916), the mezzotint of 'Belshazzar's Feast' was the basis of the enormous Babylon set. Martin's imaginative projections translated readily into cinematic terms. His epic vision was the link between panorama and cinema. 
Like Milton's Adam, or Satan, the solitary protagonists of so many of his compositions, John Martin stood tall in the face of stupendous failures, not only in his enlightened schemes for urban improvement but in his determination to organize natural disasters into magnificent spectacles. First man, last man -- or last woman -- out of Gomorrah: in every appalling circumstance, be it eclipse or pestilence, earthquake or invasion, Martin conjured wonders out of the void. 


@@@@@


doc= 18193


Martin, John (1791-1855), bibliographer, was born on 16 September 1791 in London, the son of John Martin of 112 Mount Street, Grosvenor Square. He was apprenticed on 1 October 1805 to William Ginger, a Westminster bookseller, but soon afterwards turned over on 6 May 1806 to John Hatchard of Piccadilly, the publisher and bookseller with whom he served the remainder of his apprenticeship. He gained his freedom of the Stationers' Company on 6 October 1812. By 1815 he had opened his own bookshop at 23 Holles Street, Cavendish Square, but about 1819 entered into partnership with John Rodwell at 46 New Bond Street. He retired from business in 1826, but continued his bibliographical pursuits. He edited Gray's 'Bard' (1837) and Gray's 'Elegy' (1836, 1839, and 1854) with illustrations from drawings by the Hon. Mrs John Talbot, and 'The Seven Ages of Shakespeare' (1840 and 1848), illustrated with wood-engravings. The production of these and other books illustrated by George Cruikshank, George Cattermole, and William Mulready was the means of introducing him to the leading artists of the day. He was a good friend of John Constable and a keen promoter of the use of original wood-engraving in book illustration. For many years, until 1845, he acted as secretary to the Artists' Benevolent Fund. 
In 1834 Martin published his important and still useful 'Bibliographical Catalogue of Books Privately Printed', a second edition of which was issued in 1854. The first edition contains an account of private presses and book clubs, which Martin omitted from the second edition, but at the time of his death he was preparing a separate volume, which was to contain this portion of the first edition with additions. His correspondence of 1828-55 about privately printed books is now in the British Library. 
Following the death of his wife, Elizabeth, in 1836 Martin was appointed librarian to the duke of Bedford at Woburn Abbey. For the rest of his life he lived at Froxfield, in the parish of Eversholt, near Woburn, in a house previously occupied by the writer J. H. Wiffen. Between 1845 and 1854 he visited nearly every church in Bedfordshire, and wrote a description of each in a series of articles which appeared over the pseudonym W. A. (for Woburn Abbey) in the 'Bedford Times' and 'Northampton Mercury'; the full text of each article is being reprinted in three volumes by the Bedfordshire Historical Record Society. Martin's articles promoted Tractarian ideals, drawing attention to widespread neglect and abuses in church worship and furnishings. Controversial and challenging, the series had a profound influence on churchmen in the county. Martin also played an active part in the local community, soliciting funds for a new school at Eversholt through the 'Gentleman's Magazine' in April 1841. 
Martin also wrote a 'History and Description of Woburn and its Abbey' (1845), a shortened and rearranged version of J. D. Parry's book published in 1831. At the request of Lord John Russell he compiled an 'Enquiry into the authority for a statement in Echard's History of England regarding William, Lord Russell', which was printed for private circulation in 1852 and published in 1856. It refuted the assertion that Lord Russell opposed the mitigation of the punishment of Viscount Stafford for high treason when sheriffs Bethel and Cornish presented their petition in the House of Commons on 23 December 1680. Martin also furnished some notes to Lord John Russell's edition of the 'Letters' of Rachel, Lady Russell (1853), and in 1855 he published a translation of Guizot's essay on 'The Married Life of Rachel, Lady Russell'. He left unfinished an edition of the 'Letters of the Earl of Chatham to his Nephew'. He was a fellow of both the Society of Antiquaries and the Linnean Society. 
Martin died on 30 December 1855 at Froxfield, and was buried in Eversholt churchyard on 4 January 1856. Three of his six children survived him. His eldest son, John Edward Martin (died 1893), became sub-librarian and afterwards librarian to the Inner Temple. In 1899 a stained glass window in memory of John Martin was put up by his grandchildren in the south aisle of Eversholt church. 


@@@@@


doc= 18194


Martin, John (1789-1869), meteorologist, practised for some time as a physician in London. He is better known as editor of 'An account of the natives of the Tonga Islands, in the south Pacific Ocean, with an original grammar and vocabulary of their language. Compiled and arranged from the extensive communications of Mr William Mariner, several years resident in those islands' (2 vols., 1817), reprinted in 1827 as volumes 13 and 14 of 'Constable's Miscellany'. A French translation appeared in Paris in 1817; a German translation was published in Weimar in 1819 and an American edition at Boston in 1820. 
William Mariner had been held in friendly captivity on the islands from 1806 until 1810. His experiences were generally corroborated by a sailor named Jeremiah Higgins, who had accompanied Mariner but who was able to leave there thirteen months before Mariner's departure. 
Little is known of Martin's subsequent career. Letters he wrote to his publisher, John Murray, during the period 1815-26, preserved in the firm's archives, deal mainly with the preparation and publication of Mariner's 'Tonga Islands'. By April 1823 Martin was in financial straits and declared to Murray his intention of giving a course of lectures in London on 'The inductive method of philosophy'. It is doubtful whether any lectures were given, as, in the following month, he signed the register as a witness to a marriage in Lisbon. In his letter of 20 April he wrote that friends had suggested he should sell 'Tonga Islands' to Constable for their 'Miscellany' and he asked Murray for his opinion. Murray must have agreed for, as already noted, this course was followed. Martin's stay in Lisbon was not a long one. In November 1825 he was committed to the Fleet prison for debt where he remained for six months. Shortly before his release he wrote to Murray thanking him for his recommendation to the Literary Fund Society for some financial help, and also for an unsolicited gift of $5. He returned to Portugal and in November 1844 he signed the minutes of a meeting of the Association of Factors, a body of British merchants. 
Martin's meteorological investigations were sent, in later life, to 'The Athenaeum', which noted: 'In our own pages we have had occasion to record his labours during the last twenty years in the observation of atmospherical phenomena, especially with reference to pressure, temperature, and moisture. Martin laid down meteorological charts representing the varying aspects of months, seasons, and years from daily observation. He also made careful observation with reference to ozone, as well as on the characteristics and circumstances affecting cholera and yellow fever. These labours are the more commendable as the work of an old man, executed in different colours with scrupulous neatness, and mostly at night after the fatigue of practice. ('The Athenaeum', 7 Aug 1869)' In the census of May 1861 Martin was listed among the British residents in Lisbon, where he died on 8 July 1869. 


@@@@@


doc= 18195


Martin, John (1812-1875), Young Irelander and politician, was born at Loughorne, in the parish of Donaghmore, near Newry, co. Down, on 8 September 1812. He was the second of nine children of Samuel Martin (died 1831), a gentleman farmer and linen manufacturer, and his wife, Jane, 'nee' Harshaw (died 1847). Like his parents, he was a Presbyterian throughout his life. He was educated at Dr Henderson's school at Newry, where he first met his lifelong friend John Mitchel, and subsequently at Trinity College, Dublin, where he graduated BA in the summer of 1834. He then began to study medicine, but abandoned his course before taking a medical degree because his uncle, also called John Martin, died in 1835, leaving him a small property at Loughorne, with an annual income of $400. He returned to Loughorne and the gentleman farmer and landlord was well liked among his tenants. In 1839 he travelled in America, and in 1841 visited the continent of Europe. 
Martin became a member of the Repeal Association in 1844 and advocated a regular publication of accounts, but without effect. In 1846 he joined the secession of the Young Ireland party, and was expelled from the Repeal Association, having been refused a hearing in Conciliation Hall. He subsequently took a prominent part in the meetings of the Irish Confederation, and occasionally wrote for 'The Nation', mainly on agriculture. However, he continued to reside in Loughorne, because he was strongly attached to his area and the local community. He was a sincere, thoughtful, straightforward, and gentle person with a keen sense of humour. Together with Mitchel, he tried to convince Irish protestants of the benefits of an Irish parliament, and to recruit Ulster people into the Irish Confederation. When Mitchel established his own paper, the 'United Irishman', in February 1848 Martin became a contributor to it, although the two friends did not always hold the same political views. Three weeks after the arrest of Mitchel and the seizure of his paper Martin reoccupied his friend's offices, and on 24 June 1848 issued from them the 'Irish Felon', a 'successor to the 'United Irishman'', with the avowed purpose of promoting the same principles which had been advocated in his friend's newspaper. A warrant for his arrest was issued and on 8 July Martin, who had kept out of the way until the adjournment of the commission which had been sitting in Dublin, surrendered himself to the police. From Newgate prison he wrote the letter which appeared, signed with his initials, in the fifth and last number of the 'Irish Felon' (22 July 1848), in which he exhorted the people to keep their arms in spite of the proclamation, and declared that the work of overthrowing the English dominion in Ireland 'must be done at any risk, at any cost, at any sacrifice'. On 14 August he was indicted for treason at the commission court in Green Street, Dublin. He was defended by Isaac Butt QC, Sir Colman O'Loghlen, Holmes, and O'Hagan. After a trial which lasted three days Martin was found guilty, and on 19 August he was sentenced by the lord chief baron to transportation overseas for ten years. The sentence came as a shock to his local community, where he was highly respected. He was shipped off to Van Diemen's Land in the 'Elphinstone', together with Kevin Izod O'Doherty, and arrived in November 1849. O'Doherty gave him the nickname John Knox. Martin resided in the district of Bothwell, where for some time he shared a cottage with Mitchel. In 1854 a pardon, on condition of his not returning to Great Britain or Ireland, was granted to him. He settled in Paris in October 1854, and in June 1856 received an unconditional pardon. However, he refused to live in Ireland again until 1858, when the sudden death of his brother Robert and his wife, Millicent, forced him to take up residence in Kilbroney, Rostrevor, to take care of his nephews and nieces. In January 1864 he established with O'Donoghue the National League, whose object was to obtain the legislative independence of Ireland. The league only lasted until 1867. Martin took a prominent part in the funeral procession through Dublin in honour of the 'Manchester martyrs' on 8 December 1867, and delivered an address to an enormous crowd outside Glasnevin cemetery. For his share in these proceedings he was prosecuted by the government in February 1868, but owing to disagreement among the members of the jury any further attempt to obtain a conviction against him was abandoned. On 25 November 1868 he married Henrietta Mitchel (died 1913), his friend's sister and the youngest daughter of the Revd John Mitchel and Mary Haslett, at Roslyn Hill Chapel, Hampstead, London. Henrietta, who had a similar political outlook, had also been involved in Young Ireland activities and had written articles for her brother's newspaper, the 'United Irishman'. They had no children. 
While on a visit to America in December 1869, Martin was put forward as a candidate in the nationalist interest at a by-election for County Longford. The local clergy had, however, already pledged themselves to support R. J. M. Greville Nugent, the Liberal candidate, and Martin was defeated by 1578 votes to 411. In May 1870 Martin joined the Home Government Association for Ireland, and at a by-election for County Meath in January 1871 was returned to parliament as a home-ruler by a majority of 456 votes over his Conservative opponent, G. J. Plunket. He spoke for the first time in the House of Commons in May 1871 during the debate on the second reading of the 'Protection of Life and Property (Ireland) Bill', when he declared that he did not 'intend to vote upon this bill nor indeed upon any other measure which the parliament may think proper to pass in respect to the government' of his country, and contended that it was 'the inalienable right of the Irish people to be a free people, and as a free people to be bound only by laws made by the queen and a free parliament of that kingdom' ('Hansard 3', 206.908-14, 1039-45). Martin was also involved in the formation of the Irish Home Rule League and was elected its secretary in 1874. In the same year he was again returned for County Meath at the general election in February 1874. Since he did not like to be paid for patriotic services, he resigned from his post of paid secretary, and accepted that of honorary secretary instead. He died on 29 March 1875 at Dromalane House, near Newry (the residence of Hill Irvine, Henrietta Mitchel's brother-in-law), from an attack of bronchitis caught while attending the funeral of John Mitchel. He was buried in the family plot at Donaghmore on 1 April. 
Martin was a sturdy and uncompromising politician, whose sense of honour and candour earned him the affectionate nickname of Honest John Martin. His death paved the way for Charles Stewart Parnell to enter the House of Commons for the first time, as the next MP for County Meath. 


@@@@@


doc= 18196


Johan Fredric Martin (1755-1816), copperplate-engraver and etcher, and brother of Elias Martin, was born in Stockholm and baptized there on 8 June 1755, which was probably also the date of his birth. From 1770 to 1780 Johan Fredric lived with his brother Elias in London, where he studied engraving with, among others, Francesco Bartolozzi and William Woollett. After returning to Sweden he worked on the portrait series 'Swedish Gallery' (1782-3) and the etchings of his brother's landscape sketches 'Swedish Views' (1805-12). His work consisted of about 300 prints, often in 'the manner of red chalk' (exhibition catalogue of the Society of Artists, 1774; Frolich, 69). 


@@@@@


doc= 18197


Martin, Jonathan (c.1705-1737), organist, was a chorister in the Chapel Royal under Dr William Croft, and studied the organ with Thomas Roseingrave. He deputized for Roseingrave at St George's, Hanover Square, and for John Weldon at the Chapel Royal, before succeeding the latter as organist on 7 May 1736; Weldon's post of composer to the Chapel Royal went to William Boyce. The only known composition by Martin is the song 'To thee, o gentle sleep' in Nicholas Rowe's 'Tamerlane'. Shortly before his death he gave a concert at the Stationers' Hall, where 'though he had scarcely strength to sit upright, he played two voluntaries on the organ, showing fine invention and masterly hand' (Hawkins, 3.893). He died of consumption on 4 April 1737 and was buried in the west cloister of Westminster Abbey. An inscription for his tomb was written by Vincent Bourne and included in Bourne's 'Miscellaneous Poems' (1772). 


@@@@@


doc= 18198


Martin, Jonathan (1782-1838), arsonist, was born at Highside House, near Hexham, the son of (William) Fenwick Martin, who held several occupations including publican, coach builder, fencing master, and tanner, and his wife, Isabella, 'nee' Thompson. John Martin, the artist, and William Martin were among his twelve siblings. Jonathan Martin was tongue-tied at birth; an operation in his sixth year enabled him to speak, though with some impediment. He was partly brought up by his grandmother, Ann Thompson, a woman of extreme protestant beliefs and a vivid sense of hell. As a boy he saw his sister murdered by a neighbour, Peggy Hobuck. He was sent to his uncle's farm to recover from the shock, worked with sheep, and was then apprenticed to a tanner. In 1804 he went to London and was seized by the press-gang for the navy. He served for about six years in HMS 'Hercules', seeing action at Copenhagen in 1807 and off Corunna in 1809. At this time he began to have violent and wonderful dreams. In 1810 he was paid off from the navy, resumed work as a tanner, and married for the first time. His son Richard was born in 1814. Martin was converted to Christianity; he joined the Wesleyan Methodist Connexion and became violently hostile to the Church of England. In 1817 he threatened the assassination of Edward Legge, bishop of Oxford, for which he was tried and committed to West Auckland Lunatic Asylum; he was later moved to Gateshead Asylum. He escaped from Gateshead on 17 June 1820, was recaptured, and, after going on hunger strike, again escaped on 1 July 1821. In the asylum he resumed painting (having painted intermittently since childhood); a witness at his trial in 1829 recalled his work as having 'extraordinary marks of uninstructed talent, mixed with frenzy and wildness' (Balston, 'Jonathan Martin', 30). Martin's wife died in 1821. After his escape he resumed work as a tanner and preached. The Wesleyans refused to have him back and the Primitive Methodists soon excluded him from their chapels. Even so, by his own account he converted several hundred people. At Lincoln in 1826 he published his autobiography (with further editions in 1828, 1829, and 1830). It was dictated to R. E. Leary of Lincoln and remains of much vivid interest: Martin had a sharp memory for dramatic incident. In 1828 he married again; his second wife was Maria Hudson, a woman twenty years his junior; they had no children. 
The Martins settled in York and seem at this time to have been fairly prosperous. Soon after his marriage, however, Martin suffered a further breakdown, which again took an anti-clerical form. He hung threatening placards -- which included his name and address -- on the railings of York Minster, but the authorities did not take them seriously. On 1 February 1829 Martin attended evensong in the minster, during which he was upset by a buzzing noise from the organ. Apparently on a sudden decision, he secreted himself in the minster (the cathedral watchman had recently been discharged), lighting a lamp in the bell-tower, which was disregarded by those who saw it. Late that night he set fire to the woodwork of the choir and escaped through a window. Next morning at about 7 a.m. smoke was seen coming from one of the doors. Only after it was discovered did the fire really take hold, the organ and the roof of the choir suddenly catching light at about 8 a.m. The fire was not brought under control until late in the afternoon and was not extinguished until the next afternoon. The roof of the central aisle was entirely destroyed from the lantern tower almost to the east window (a distance of 131 feet), as was most of the woodwork in the interior, including the organ and its screen, the tabernacle work, the stalls, galleries, bishop's throne, and the pulpit. It was one of the most spectacular consequences of arson in modern British history. 
Martin was arrested near Hexham on 6 February and was tried (on a capital charge) at York Castle; Henry Brougham acted as his defending counsel, probably paid for by John Martin. On 31 March 1829 he was declared not guilty on grounds of insanity (the judge reversing the jury's original verdict). Martin was described at the time of his trial as rather stout, about 5 feet 6 inches high, with large, bushy red whiskers. He was confined in St Mary's Hospital, London, where he died on 3 June 1838. His son Richard had been brought up mainly by John Martin, and committed suicide in John Martin's house three months after his father's death. 


@@@@@


doc= 18199


Martin, Josiah (1685-1748), religious writer, was born on 11 June 1685 in Sussex, the son of John Martin (died 1695) and his wife, Mary, 'nee' Rickman (1659?-1691). Martin was a member of the Peel monthly meeting of Friends. He became a good classical scholar and was spoken of by James Gough, in his 1772 translation of Madame Guyon's life, as a man whose memory was esteemed for 'learning, humility, and fervent piety'. Martin is best-known in connection with 'A Letter from One of the People called Quakers to Francis de Voltaire, Occasioned by his Remarks on that People in his Letters concerning the English Nation' (1741). It was twice reprinted, in London and in Dublin, and translated into French. It was a temperate and scholarly treatise and was much in favour at the time. He edited, and contributed a long preface to, 'The Archbishop of Cambray's Dissertation on Pure Love' (1735) and was one of the first of several Quakers who helped to make major works of the continental quietists available in English, thus contributing to the development of quietism in eighteenth-century English Quakerism. His other publications included a substantial appendix to an edition of Anthony Pearson's 'The Great Case of Tithes' (1730). Martin was one of a number of Quakers who, in 1736, met with Count Zinzendorf, founder of the Herrnhuter Brudergemeinde, to discuss religious views. He also corresponded with the Dutch Quaker historian Willem Sewel about his publications. 
Martin died, unmarried, on 18 February 1748, in the parish of St Andrew's, Holborn, London, and was buried in the Quaker burial-ground at Bunhill Fields. He left the proceeds of his library of 4000 volumes, sold by catalogue on 29 May 1749, to be divided among his nephews and nieces. The Quaker author Joseph Besse was his executor. 


@@@@@


doc= 18200


Martin, Leopold Charles (1817-1889), costume historian and numismatist, was born on 6 December 1817, and was baptized on 7 January 1818 at St Mary Street, St Marylebone, Middlesex, the second son of John Martin (1789-1854), painter, and his wife, Susan. He was the godson of Leopold, later first king of the Belgians. He became an excellent French and German scholar, a skilled artist, and an authority on costume and numismatics. His wife was the sister of the artist and cartoonist Sir John Tenniel, of 'Punch'. In 1836 Lord Melbourne presented him to a clerkship in the Stationery Office, which he held for many years. He died in London on 8 January 1889. 
With his elder brother, Charles (1810-1906), Martin published in 1842 two volumes entitled respectively 'Civil Costumes of England, from the Conquest to George III' (sixty-one plates, drawn from ancient manuscripts and tapestries, illuminated in gold and colours) and 'Dresses Worn at her Majesty's Bal Costume, May 1842'. He also wrote 'Contributions to English Literature by the Civil Servants of the Crown and East India Company from 1794 to 1863' (1865). In conjunction with Charles Trubner he issued in 1862 an elaborate work, 'The Current Gold and Silver Coins of All Countries' (2nd edn, 1863), the plates of which he drew himself. Martin was also author of the handbooks 'Cardiff' and 'Swansea and Gower' (1879). Shortly before he died he had begun to contribute to the 'Newcastle Weekly Chronicle' a series of 'Reminiscences', about his father, the first of which appeared in the number for 5 January 1889. 


@@@@@


doc= 18201


Martin, Martin (d. 1718), traveller and author, was probably born in Bealach, Isle of Skye, the third of the three children of Donald Martin, chamberlain of Trotternish, and Mary, daughter of Alexander, son of Donald MacDonald (Domhnall Gorm Og) of Sleat, first baronet. The Martins of Bealach (clann Mhartainn a'Bhealaich) were a minor but distinguished gentry family closely associated with the local chiefs, the MacDonalds of Sleat. Martin spent much of his adolescence away from his native island at Edinburgh, where he entered the university in 1679. After graduating in 1681 he served as tutor in turn to each of the heirs of the two major Skye chiefships, Donald MacDonald of Sleat, later fifth baronet (known as Domhnall a'Chogaidh), and Roderick MacLeod of Harris (Ruairidh Og). Following the death of the latter -- 'the kindest friend I had on earth' (NL Scot., MS 1389, fol. 74) -- on 24 June 1695, Martin departed on clan business to the Netherlands and thence to London. 
Once in London, with the support of fellow episcopalians such as George Mackenzie, Viscount Tarbat, and George Garden, Martin made contact with the virtuosi who were to prove so crucial to his future, above all David Gregory, Walter Curleton or Charleton, and Hans Sloane. For them, as well as for Robert Sibbald in Edinburgh, Martin undertook to collect curiosities from and observations concerning his native Western Isles. Despite the rather credulous nature of the 'observables', he dispatched to the Royal Society in August 1696, Martin was nevertheless voted financial encouragement to enable him further to prosecute his interests. He had also begun a degree in divinity; although he never completed his studies, it was through this that Martin was able to carry off his greatest coup, embarking 'at the Isle Esay in Harries the 29th. May, at Six in the Afternoon, 1697' (Martin, 'Late Voyage', 3) as assistant to the Revd James Campbell on a mission to pacify the recalcitrant inhabitants of the most remote island in the Hebrides. 
Martin subsequently went back to London, where he published 'Several observations in the western islands of Scotland' in 'Philosophical Transactions', 19 (October 1697), and wrote up 'The Late Voyage to St. Kilda', an account published to some success in May the following year. Despite his participating in the disastrous surveying expedition under the geographer John Adair that summer -- their ship eventually ran aground and had to be abandoned -- Martin's star continued to rise among the virtuosi. Sloane organized a subscription on his behalf on condition that he provide 'samples of such curiosities as he finds & useful remarks he makes in his travels' (BL, Sloane MS 4068, fol. 18). This, together with a $25 grant from the Treasury, allowed Martin to make a series of more protracted journeys throughout the Hebrides. He then spent over a year in London assembling his most celebrated work, the compendious 'Description of the Western Islands of Scotland', published in July 1703. Subsequently, however, he would come to regard the book as 'the most capital error as well as the greatest Misfortune of my life' (NL Scot., MS 1389, fol. 100), which had 'abated the Career of my thoughts from so much as thinking to trouble the press any more all my days' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Ashmole 1816, fol. 336). Despite being promised $60 by the exchequer the money remained unpaid. This apparently is the reason behind Martin's rather precipitate flight back to his native Skye 'where no books nor converse are to be looked for' (ibid.). There he spent the next four years rather restlessly as tutor to Donald MacDonald, the son of his old charge. Seemingly on the very day he heard the government money was finally disbursed Martin left Skye for good 'to push his fortouns in England' (NL Scot., MS 1307, fol. 247). 
Despite Martin's evident hope for a post under the new united parliament -- his second article in the 'Philosophical Transactions' for 1707, 'A relation of a deaf and dumb person', is something of a calling card -- he was disappointed. He spent the next two years as a tutor, mainly at Leiden University with George, son of the lawyer John Mackenzie of Delvine. Building upon a long-standing interest in medicine Martin himself studied at Leiden for a short time, having matriculated in March 1710 aged forty-one. On his return to England he began to practise as a doctor in Middlesex, where he passed the apparently unremarkable last years of his life. His final two years were taken up in an attempt to salvage the money owed by Sir Donald to his brother John Martin and lost with the forfeiture of the MacDonald estate following the 1715 rising. Martin himself, however, appears to have taken advantage of the renewed interest in the Scottish Gaidhealtachd by publishing a second edition of the 'Description' in 1716, an enterprise which may have given him enough funds to finally graduate MD at Rheims in October that year. Martin died 'of an Asthma' at his lodging in Knightsbridge, London, on 9 October 1718 (NL Scot., MS 1389, fol. 159). Three days later he was buried at St Martin-in-the-Fields. 
Martin's ambition to succeed as a 'British Gael' was not unusual among gentry of his generation from the Scottish Gaidhealtachd. His chosen path as collector of curiosities, natural historian, and ethnographer most certainly was. Martin ascribed his success to his 'regard of the Languadge [as a native Gael] & my Interest in those of the first rate in these places' (BL, Sloane MS 4037, fol. 127). We might add his evident energy and gifts in negotiating various clientage networks. Although his lasting value is as a chronicler of customs and beliefs even then fast disappearing, Martin himself was hardly sympathetic to them. For him their passing marked a milestone in islanders' progression to become a useful part of the British state: he was convinced that he had an important role to play in facilitating such development. Nevertheless, his naive style, his apparent credulousness, his eagerness to relate outlandish medical observations, and above all his belief in the second sight, led to his being ridiculed by literati such as Viscount Molesworth and John Toland. Despite widespread interest in his writings, Martin himself was little more than a curiosity among the metropolitan virtuosi. His ambition for economic and social independence could only be achieved in London; yet in doing so he had forfeited his erstwhile patrons. 


@@@@@


doc= 18202


Martin, Mary Letitia (1815-1850), philanthropist, was born on 28 August 1815 at Ballinahinch Castle, co. Galway, the only child of Thomas Barnewall Martin (1786-1847), MP for the county, and his wife, Julia Kirwan. Richard Martin (1754-1834), the well-known philanthropist and founder of the RSPCA, nicknamed 'Humanity Martin', was her grandfather. Mary Martin followed the family philanthropical tradition, devoting herself to improving the condition of her father's tenantry and earning the popular title of the Princess of Connemara. During the great famine, when the tenants were unable to pay rent, the Martins spent large sums on food and clothing for them, and gave continuous work to several hundred labourers. 
For Mary Martin's sake her father ill-advisedly broke the entail, mortgaged his large estates to the extent of $200,000 to the Law Life Assurance Society, and further burdened himself with the debts of his father and grandfather, liabilities dating as far back as 1775. When he died on 23 April 1847 the heavily charged estates passed to Mary. On 14 September 1847 she married her cousin, Arthur Gonne Bell of Brookside, co. Mayo, who assumed by royal licence the surname and arms of Martin. Around the time of her marriage she borrowed further large sums of money, with which to relieve her tenantry, both from private sources and from the Law Life Assurance Company; when she was unable to pay the instalments of her father's mortgages, the society insisted on the observance of the bond. The property was among the first brought into the encumbered estates court. Out of an estate of nearly 200,000 acres not a single rood remained to Mary Martin. She retired to Fontaine L'Eveque in Belgium, and attempted to support herself by her writing, publishing 'Julia Howard, a Romance' (1850), which is believed to contain much autobiographical material as well as information on the workings of the penal laws. It is set in the 1740s in the west of Ireland, where Julia Howard, the niece of a member of parliament, buys up an estate and engages in philanthropy. The hero, through no fault of his own, loses his estates, and becomes a soldier of fortune. Mary Martin also published 'St Etienne: a Tale of the Vendeam War' (1845) set in Napoleonic times, and contributed to the 'Encyclopedie des Gens du Monde' and other French periodicals. While emigrating to America she was prematurely confined on board ship, and died on 7 November 1850, only ten days after reaching New York. Her husband survived until 1883. 


@@@@@


doc= 18203


Martin, Matthew (1748-1838), natural historian and philanthropist, born in Somerset, was at first engaged in trade at Exeter. He married on 9 July 1773; his wife, Penelope, died on 9 August 1827. An early interest in natural history led Martin to publish at Exeter 'The Aurelian's Vade-Mecum' (1785), listing those plants on which caterpillars fed, 'aurelian' being the Latin term for a chrysalis, and 'Observations on Marine Vermes, Insects, &c' (1786). He had been a member of the Bath Philosophical Society, but moved to London and was living at Half Moon Street, Piccadilly, in 1794 when he was elected fellow of the Royal Society. 
In 1796 Martin began inquiring into the circumstances of beggars in the metropolis, encouraging several of these unfortunates to explain their circumstances to him. He became secretary to the Society for Bettering the Condition and Improving the Comforts of the Poor, founded in December 1796, and lived above its offices at 3 Parliament Street. Martin proposed a systematic inquiry into the nature and extent of begging in London, and in 1800 obtained a grant of $1000 from the Treasury. His report was published in 1803 as 'Letter to Lord Pelham on the State of Mendicity in the Metropolis' and reissued by the society in 1811. The institution in January 1805 of the Bath Society for the Investigation and Relief of Occasional Distress was partly due to his efforts. Martin appears to have undertaken a further inquiry, supported partly by a government grant and partly by contributions raised by his 'Appeal to public benevolence for the relief of beggars'. 
Probably about 1826 Martin obtained the post of secretary to a commission for adjusting San Domingo claims, set up to deal with the claims of merchants disadvantaged by the independence of Haiti from France, and he settled in a house adjoining Poets' Corner, near Westminster Abbey. He then retired to Blackwater Park, Charlton, Kent, which was probably where he died, on 20 November 1838, survived by three sons and two daughters. 


@@@@@


doc= 18204


Martin, Peter John (1786-1860), doctor and geologist, was born on 26 March 1786 in Pulborough, Sussex, the son of Peter Patrick Martin (1750-1840) of Edinburgh, who had set up in medical practice in Pulborough in 1774 and married Mary Backshell in 1778. The second-born in a family of nine children, Martin had five sisters and three brothers. Thomas (1779-1867), the eldest son, together with his father, were largely responsible for Peter Martin's early education. When Thomas entered medical practice in Reigate, Surrey, Martin moved with him, prior to taking up his own studies in medicine at the united hospitals of Guy's and St Thomas's in London and later, from 1805 to 1807, at the University of Edinburgh medical school. After completing his studies (MRCS 1813) Martin joined his father in practice in Pulborough, where he married his cousin, Mary Watson of Dunbar, in 1821. A family of four daughters and one son were born between 1822 and 1831; the son, Robert (1827-1891), became a physician at St Bartholomew's. 
Martin was reputed to have gained his interest in geology during his residency in Edinburgh, where he became partial to the 'Huttonian theory'. In any event, once he had joined his father in practice, he began to study the land around his native Pulborough. Between 1829 and 1857 he contributed several papers to the Geological Society of London (of which he was elected a fellow in 1833) and to the 'Philosophical Magazine'. His most important publication was, however, produced privately in 1828 -- 'A geological memoir on a part of western Sussex with some observations upon chalk-basins, the Weald-denudation and outliers-by-protrusion'. This thin quarto volume brought Martin into a county already investigated by other eminent geologists, including William Henry Fitton (whom Martin acknowledged in his preface) and in particular Gideon Mantell (1790-1852), the 'wizard of the Weald' and discoverer of the dinosaur 'Iguanodon'. It was a thinly disguised 'attack' (Martin to John Hawkins, 26 May 1828, London, Geological Society Archives) on Mantell in Martin's book which attracted some attention from contemporaries such as the Wernerian John Hawkins (1761?-1841), who regarded Martin as 'a sort of heaven inspired geologist' (Hawkins to Mantell 'c'.1832, in Steer). Yet Martin's work was also criticized for relying too heavily on the works of others, particularly Mantell's 1822 'South Downs' and later publications. 
Mantell himself hoped to chastise 'the over-weening vanity and dogmatism' (Mantell to Hawkins, 3 Jan 1832, Hawkins MSS, W. Sussex RO) which he unearthed in Martin's book. Ironically, one of Martin's lasting achievements was the coining of the term 'Wealden', describing certain strata in Sussex which Mantell had first determined as being of freshwater origin. In later years, as evidenced in Mantell's own journal, the two men became friendly despite these early quarrels, often exchanging visits, specimens, and letters. Ultimately however, Martin's own writings refer to the Huttonian school of thought for explanations of Wealden geology too frequently to be regarded as seminal by modern workers. His strengths as a geologist stemmed from his detailed and accurate local observations, rather than grander deductions and theories. 
Martin's interests extended far beyond geology. He contributed papers on tumuli and Roman roads to the 'Sussex Archaeological Collections', and on gardening to the 'Gardeners' Chronicle' (mostly between 1841 and 1845 and often under the initials 'P. P.'), as well as lecturing on literature to the Philosophical and Literary Society of Chichester (1833-4). He was a capable musician and was noted by obituarists as having great powers of memory and knowledge of the arts, and a delightful style of conversation. As a doctor, Martin was very popular and with a career spanning over forty years was much sought after for consultations and opinions. He published one medical paper, 'Case of hereditary ichthyosis', in the 'Transactions of the Medical and Chirurgical Society' in 1818. He died at Pulborough on 13 May 1860. 


@@@@@


doc= 18205


Martin, Sir Richard (1533/4-1617), goldsmith, whose early life is obscure, was sworn free of the Goldsmiths' Company of London in 1555. He subsequently took no fewer than forty apprentices and served four times as prime warden of the company. His standing as one of the most important goldsmiths of his day is further evidenced by his appointment both to the office of warden of the mint, and as a supplier to Queen Elizabeth I, to whom, he claimed in 1593, he was accustomed to purvey annually 'above $1000 worth of plate and chains of gold... and sometimes thrice so much' (Collier, 181). 
The occasion of Martin's going to the mint, which was in 1572, and not, as has commonly been stated, in 1559-60, was the reorganization of the administration there, consequent upon the demise of his fellow goldsmith Thomas Stanley. The system of direct management, which had operated since the start of the open debasement of the coinage in 1544, was replaced by the more traditional arrangements, whereby the master worker took responsibility for the production of coins at the correct weight and standard, and a number of royal officials, of whom the warden was the most senior, provided a control mechanism. It was the warden who formally accounted to the crown for production, and it was to the wardenship that Martin was appointed. The master worker, with whom he should have been able to deal harmoniously, was another goldsmith, John Lonyson, but, in the event, their relationship was marked only by discord. 
The point at issue was the exploitation of the remedy, or working tolerance, which allowed coin marginally deficient in weight or fineness nevertheless to pass current. Traditionally, far from being seen as a device to facilitate the manufacture of substandard coin, the remedy had been regarded simply as a safeguard to protect the master worker, in case, by sheer chance, his coins proved to be deficient. To Martin all this was perfectly clear, whereas to Lonyson it certainly was not. As it happened, Lonyson's indenture had not been as tightly drawn as it should have been, and thus, to him, so long as his coins were passed standard at the trial of the pyx, not only had he fulfilled his legal obligation, but he might pocket as profit all that arose from his coins' falling short of the prescribed standards, while still remaining within the remedies. When a detailed government inquiry found that technically Lonyson was correct, order was only restored by his being given higher coining allowances, which were to be paid for by officially reducing both the fineness and weight of all gold and silver coins made. Lonyson had won; but so too had Martin for, in addition to Lonyson's now being controlled in the extent to which he might benefit from the coinage above the levels set in his indenture, from September 1578 Lonyson was permitted to coin only by a series of short-term commissions, issued jointly to Martin and himself. In 1582 Martin completed his triumph when, on Lonyson's death, he himself secured the office of master worker. 
Despite the absurdity of a situation in which Martin in one capacity was allowed to be the official check on what he did in another, Martin continued to hold both his offices until 1599, and during that time was instrumental in stilling one of the most important debates the mint has ever known: namely, how the sterling standard was to be defined. Both Martin and his opponent, Thomas Keeling, assay master at Goldsmiths' Hall, were agreed that sterling was 11 ounces 2 pennyweight fine and that, when tested by fire assay, approximately 2 dwt (pennyweight) of silver, would drain away with the impurities into the cupel, giving a result which implied that silver was 2 dwt less than it actually was. What they were not agreed upon, however, was the figure from which the 2 dwt should be deducted: was it, as Martin said, from 11 oz 2 dwt of fine silver put in at the melting, and which would give an assay result of around 11 oz, or was it, as Keeling claimed, from 11 oz 4 dwt of fine silver which would result after the assay in a standard of 11 oz 2 dwt? Between 1583 and 1586 the debate, through words and practical demonstration, was intense, but in the end it was Martin's view that prevailed. 
In addition to trading as a goldsmith, and holding office at the mint, Martin owned a salt works, and became in 1568 a founder member of the Society of Mineral and Battery Works, from which he obtained leases on the wire works at Tintern, as well as, for a time, on the battery works themselves. It is said that in 1596 he owned, with two of his sons, Nathaniel and Richard, over one-third of all the paid-up shares in the society, of which two years previously he had become, with his son-in-law, Sir Julius Caesar, joint governor. Martin also had an interest in overseas trade, being mentioned in the charters of the Levant Company, as well as appearing as a founder member of the Turkey Company, and being three (possibly four) times governor of the Russia Company. The surviving portion of a double-entry journal for 1581 not only dispels doubts which have been expressed as to whether he actually did trade in merchandise, but shows clearly that he was also a moneylender. 
An alderman from 1578, sheriff in 1581, and lord mayor in 1589 (the year in which he was knighted) and 1594, Martin was, at the height of his influence, possibly the most active of all London's senior aldermen, not least through his being comptroller-general of hospitals from 1594 to 1602. In the latter year, however, he was declared bankrupt, and degraded from the aldermanry. Temporarily imprisoned, he was forced to sell for $10,200 his principal residence in Tottenham, his great messuage in Milk Street in the City of London, together with other property and leases in town and country. Martin found his position all the harder to bear because of yet another serious dispute at the mint, this time with Sir Thomas Knyvet, to whom he had relinquished the wardenship in 1599. In the course of a spirited defence designed to show, but in the end failing to substantiate, that he did not, as Knyvet alleged, owe the crown $8382, Martin produced a significant treatise on assaying which he dedicated to James I in 1603/4. 
Martin's first wife, whom he married before 1562, was Dorcas Ecclestone (1536/7-1599) ['see 'Martin, Dorcas], daughter of Sir John Ecclestone of Lancashire. A second marriage took place before 1616, when the younger Richard Martin bequeathed to his father and his lady $3 each for a ring; and it was this Lady Martin, Elizabeth, formerly Bourne (died 1627), sister of John Cottesford, goldsmith of London, who was able on Sir Richard's death successfully to claim payments in respect of his mint office. By the first marriage there were five sons and one daughter, Dorcas, who took as her second husband Sir Julius Caesar, master of the rolls. Two of the sons, Nathaniel and Richard, were associated with Martin at the mint, where Nathaniel was clerk from 1589 to 1594 and Richard was deputy master worker from 1588 to 1598 and then joint master worker from 1598 to 1607. Another son, Captain John Martin (died 1632), was a member of the council of Jamestown, Virginia. Sir Richard Martin died in July 1617, and was buried in Tottenham, where his first wife, Dorcas, had been interred in 1599. 


@@@@@


doc= 18206


Martin, Richard (1570-1618), barrister and politician, was born at Otterton, Devon, the son of William Martin of Otterton and Anne, daughter of Richard Parker of Sussex. He matriculated at Pembroke College, Oxford, as a commoner in 1585, and made his mark as a debater although he left without taking his degree. He entered the Middle Temple in 1590, but was temporarily expelled after leading a riotous Lord of Misrule festival in February 1591. Martin became part of the Mitre circle of poets and wits whose members included Ben Jonson, Fulke Greville, John Selden, John Hoskins, Arthur Ingram, and Lionel Cranfield, whose close friend and attorney he became. His mercurial temperament was suggested by an incident in February 1598 in which he was assaulted with a cudgel by Sir John Davies, who had earlier prefaced his 'Orchestra' with a dedicatory sonnet to him. 
Martin was elected MP for Barnstaple, Devon, in 1601, through the patronage of Robert Chichester. He made his maiden address on 10 November, was active in the debates against monopolists, and won attention by chiding Serjeant John Hele for suggesting that subsidies belonged to the monarch by right. On 8 December he was appointed to the committee for privileges. In 1602 he was called to the bar, and in 1603 he gave a speech of welcome on James I's accession at Stamford Hill which, published with the king's assent, earned him the sobriquet of London Oracle. Returned again to parliament in 1604 for Christchurch, Hampshire, possibly through the patronage of Sir Robert Cecil, he soon emerged as one of the half-dozen leaders of the House of Commons and a frequent spokesman in conferences with the Lords. In 1604 he took a prominent part in the Goodwin-Fortescue election dispute, served as a member of the committee that framed the apology and satisfaction that defended the Commons' privileges, and sharply objected to the speaker's forwarding petitions or bills to the king without the assent of the house. Martin remained similarly active throughout the four sessions of James's first parliament. He was prominent in the debates on the Anglo-Scottish union, supporting Sir Edwin Sandys's brief for a perfect union, and in 1607 he defended John Hare, who had denounced the abuses of purveyance; he joined Hoskins in attacking John Cowell's 'The Interpreter' for casting aspersions on the common law and the subject's liberties. In 1610 he assailed what he called 'an arbitrary, unlimited, and transcendent power to levy impositions' (Gardiner, 88), and chaired the committee that dealt with this issue. That same year he offered a bill to deprive ministers who exalted prerogative beyond its proper bounds and 'tread upon the neck of the law' (E. R. Foster, 2.328). In November he chaired the important debates over the adoption of the great contract. 
Despite the seeming popularity of many of his positions Martin retained his connections with Salisbury, and was praised by Lord Treasurer Sackville for his short and apt answers in conference. He kept up his academic associations, and in September 1611 took part in a philosophical feast at Brasenose College, Oxford. In February 1613 he organized the masque in honour of the marriage of Frederick V, elector palatine, and Princess Elizabeth at the Middle Temple. 
The London gossip John Chamberlain reported in 1614 that Martin was growing rich from his legal practice and was unwilling to jeopardize it by standing for parliament again; Francis Bacon also noted that 'Martin hath money in his purse'. He did appear before the House of Commons in May as counsel for the Virginia Company, which he had represented since 1612. Departing from his brief, however, he lectured the Commons on their slow proceedings and disorderly carriage, was censured by the house, and was forced to recant his remarks. This episode, too, does not appear to have done Martin lasting damage although the company's leading projectors, the earl of Southampton and the lords Sheffield and De La Warr, were furious with him. In 1616 he was Lent reader of the Middle Temple, and James commended him at Cranfield's suit to succeed Sir Anthony Benn as recorder of London in 1618. Installed on 1 October, he died some time between 31 October and 7 November 1618 and was buried in the Temple Church. His will was executed by the mayor of Exeter, and contained small bequests to the parish church of Otterton as well as to that of Culliton-Raleigh, Devon, where his country residence was located. 
Martin never married, although he was rumoured to be the father of a daughter by Lady Lake. His untimely death aborted a career still in the ascendant. He was admired by many of the leading figures of his time, and Ben Jonson dedicated his 'Poetaster' to him. Anthony Wood reports that Martin was a poet in his own right, although only a single verse epistle, to Sir Henry Wootton, appears to survive. His career should be seen in the context of the group of Middle Temple reformers, including Sandys, Hoskins, and James Whitelocke, that formed the core of the parliamentary opposition in the first two decades of the seventeenth century. The hundred he owned in Virginia still bears his name. It was the site of a massacre of colonists by local Indians in 1622. 


@@@@@


doc= 18207


Martin, Richard (1754-1834), animal welfare campaigner and social reformer, was born in February 1754, probably in Dublin, the eldest son of Robert Martin (1714-1794), landowner, of Dangan in Galway and his first wife, Bridget Barnewall (died 1762), third daughter of John Barnewall, styled eleventh Baron Trimleston, and his wife, Mary. Both his parents' families were of Catholic Anglo-Norman descent and he was the first family member to be brought up as a protestant -- a device planned by his father to entitle Richard Martin to enter parliament to fight for Catholic emancipation. He was sent to Harrow School where a senior master, Samuel Parr, criticized 'wanton barbarity' to animals, an attitude already impressed upon Martin by his mother. He matriculated at Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1773, was admitted to Lincoln's Inn in February 1776, and in June entered the Irish House of Commons where he sat until 1783 as member for Jamestown, co. Leitrim, and from 1798 to 1800 for Lanesborough in the same county. In 1781 he was called to the Irish bar and in the same year, he conducted his only case, that against George Robert FitzGerald, 'Fighting FitzGerald', who was convicted of unlawfully imprisoning his own father. FitzGerald, a notorious madcap, had already earned Martin's contempt for shooting a wolfhound belonging to Lord Altamont. Martin, friend of both dog and owner, eventually challenged FitzGerald to a duel with pistols in which both participants were slightly wounded. This was not Martin's only duel, and at least one was to prove fatal for his adversary. 
On the death of his father in 1794, Martin came into property which covered a third of co. Galway, some 200,000 acres of which were bog, mountain, and moorland in Connemara. He took up residence at Ballynahinch Castle, Connemara, at about this time, visiting Dublin, London, and Paris to pursue his political interest in parliamentary reform. In 1801 he was elected to the parliament in London as member for co. Galway which he continued to represent until 1826, speaking up for Catholic emancipation, opposing slavery, introducing a bill in 1821 to secure defence counsel for those on capital charges, and sharing with Sir James Mackintosh a campaign to abolish the death penalty for forgery. In Ireland, too, Martin was known for his humanitarian concerns, urging the pardoning of rebels, interceding on behalf of young men and women in trouble with their parents or the authorities, and for taking into his house and feeding the poor and hungry. So renowned was he for his philanthropy that the prince regent nicknamed him 'Humanity Martin', an epithet which became popularized as 'Humanity Dick'. 
Martin is best remembered for his robust championing of the protection of animals. On 18 May 1821 he published a bill proposing to make it an offence to 'wantonly beat, abuse or ill-treat' any 'horse, cow, ox, heifer, steer, sheep or other cattle' belonging to another person. This bill, amended to include mares, geldings, mules, and asses, passed through the Commons on 1 June but was defeated in the House of Lords. Undismayed, Martin reintroduced his bill and, with the help of Lord Erskine in the Lords, it received royal assent on 22 July 1822. This act, known as 'Martin's Act', was the first national parliamentary legislation in the world to penalize cruelty to animals. His repeated attempts to introduce further legislation to protect cats, dogs, and animals in slaughterhouses, and to ban dogfighting and bull-baiting, all failed. But Martin vigorously enforced his act, bringing horse dealers, drovers, and carters before the magistrates, often paying their fines out of his own pocket. On 16 June 1824 Martin, with William Wilberforce, Thomas Fowell Buxton, and other reformers, established the body which eventually flourished as the Royal Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (RSPCA), after a precarious early period in which Martin had to rescue its first secretary, Arthur Broome, from debtors' prison. Martin was among the first to propose that the society should employ inspectors. 
Besides his concern for the welfare of horses and farm animals, Martin also denounced vivisection as 'too revolting to be palliated by any excuse' (Greenwood, 82). He denied that he attacked the cruel sports of the poor while ignoring those of the rich, asserting that he was 'equally anxious to meddle with both when he found them opposed to the dictates of humanity' ('Hansard 2', 24 Feb 1825, col. 657). When he was once asked why he took so much trouble to defend animals, Martin allegedly retorted: 'Sir, an ox cannot hold a pistol!' 
Martin was described as 'a short, thick-set man, with evidence in look and manner, even in step and action, of indomitable resolution' (Fairholme and Pain, 47). His niece, Harriet Martin, recalled his 'large-hearted sympathy with suffering of whatsoever kind' (ibid., 47-8). In parliament, it was said, his sense of humour disarmed the opposition -- 'he holds the House by the very test of the human race, laughter, and while their sides shake, their opposition is shaken and falls down at the very same instant'. Yet, he could be formidable -- 'he lets drive at the House like a bullet, and the flag of truce is instantly flung out upon both sides' (ibid., 27-8). It was undoubtedly this combination of warmth, wit, and manly ebullience which enabled Martin to win some of his battles for reform. Anecdotes abound to testify to both his compassion and his pride. It was said that widows and children on his Irish estates would pray for his deliverance, that he had stopped a journey to investigate the reasons for a child's crying, and had comforted a shy girl at a grand function; yet he would also imprison malefactors and debt collectors at Ballynahinch. He was a friend of George IV but, typically, stood up for the estranged Queen Caroline. When the king asked him who would win a Galway election, Martin reputedly replied 'The survivor, Sire!' 
Martin was twice married. He married first, on 8 February 1777, Elizabeth (died 'c'.1795), daughter of George Vesey of Lucan, co. Dublin, with whom he had two surviving sons, Thomas Barnewall (1786-1847) ['see below'] and St George (1788-1800), and a daughter, Letitia (died 1858). Martin was deserted by his first wife in 1791. On 5 June 1796 he married Harriet (died 1846), author, the second daughter of Hugh Evans and widow of Captain Robert Hesketh; they had a son, Richard ('b'. 1797), who emigrated to Canada in 1833, and three daughters who never married, Harriet Letitia (1801-1891) ['see below'], Georgina ('b'. 1806), and Mary ('b'. 1810). Harriet Martin published at least two works after her marriage to Martin, 'Helen of Glenross' (1802) and 'Remarks on John Kemble's Performance of Hamlet and Richard III' (1802). 
Martin enjoyed the theatre and an active social life. He neither drank to excess nor gambled, yet his generosity with money so compounded his inherited debts that eventually he was forced to flee to France to escape his creditors. He died at 6 rue de l'Ecu, Boulogne, on 6 January 1834, his last thoughts being on the care of his family and his dog. Martin's grave was damaged in an air raid in September 1944 and his remains were reinterred in Boulogne's eastern cemetery in 1972, marked by a plaque paid for by the RSPCA. 
Martin's son 


@@@@@


doc= 18208


Martin, Robert Montgomery (1800x02-1868), author and civil servant, was born while his family were living at 106 Great Britain (afterwards Parnell) Street, Dublin, the younger son of law agent John Martin (died 1808) of Augher, co. Tyrone, and Mary Hawkins of Dublin. His father's family were 'loyal' Ulster, Anglican protestants, his mother's well-to-do tradespeople. His life was dominated by a self-appointed task -- the study of the British empire, which Martin saw in terms of a vast free-trade area of new territories in allegiance to the British crown. The early death of his father leaving him without support, Martin -- the better to pursue his imperial concerns -- trained as a doctor, and then served in Ceylon and with the Owen expedition on the east coast of Africa (1820-24) as an assistant surgeon and naturalist; in 1826 he arrived in Sydney, New South Wales, where he unsuccessfully sought official employment, before settling as a surgeon in Parramatta. He moved to Calcutta in 1828 once again as a surgeon, but his fortuitous rescue of Dwarkanath Tagore brought him into contact with Hindu reformers of the Brahmo Samaj, particularly Ram Mohan Roy, with whom he established, and for a short time edited, the 'Bengal Herald' (1829). 
After returning to Ireland in 1830 Martin became associated with Daniel O'Connell and edited the repealist 'Irishman', but by 1833 the protestant Martin had turned pro-union, publishing his 'Ireland as it Was, Is, and Ought to Be'. The overseas empire was, however, always in his mind, as evidenced in a lifetime of publication: in 1834-5 came his pioneering, five-volume 'History of the British Colonies', followed by such related works as 'Statistics of the Colonies of the British Empire' (1839). In 1833 Martin published 'Taxation of the British Empire'; this was followed by studies of the poor laws and the hand-loom weavers. Influenced by his friend Edward S. Cayley MP, with whom he edited the 'Agricultural and Industrial Magazine' (1834-5), Martin was active in organizations concerned with economic and social reform, particularly the Central Agricultural Society, whose journal, 'The Agriculturist', he co-edited in 1836. Consistent with the principles of the Birmingham school, he advocated the establishment of colonial banks which would forge the financial links of empire -- in the case of the proposed Bank of Asia in defiance of Indian government policies (1840-43). Martin opposed repeal of the corn laws and stood unsuccessfully as protectionist candidate in the 1846 by-election at Bridport, Dorset. 
Martin's writings, though drawing on official sources, were influenced by his practical Christianity and by his association with leading intellectuals. He was a founder member of the Statistical Society of London (1834), the Colonial Society (1837), and the East India Association (1867). He opposed duelling, suttee, and slavery, advocated the abolition of flogging, and was active in the work of the Aborigines Protection Society. 
Martin sought patronage, but his contribution was questioned, particularly by the formidable Sir James Stephen, the permanent under-secretary of the colonial department. Naively he allowed interviews with William IV and Princess Victoria (1832) to feed his expectations. It was his work on Ireland and his assumed financial literacy which, in 1844, eventually led the colonial secretary, Edward G. Stanley, to appoint Martin treasurer of Hong Kong. By then Martin, with his background as a publicist, was temperamentally unqualified for a civil service position. His tenure was brief and controversial. Concluding that Hong Kong was unsuitable as a base for British operations in the East, Martin left his post in 1845 to present his views to the government. This was considered an act of resignation, a view which Martin contested, unsuccessfully, for three years, while publishing his own views in his 'British Position and Prospects in China' (1846) and 'China: Political, Commercial and Social' (2 vols., 1847). 
Martin's Irish background and Indian experiences brought him into contact with Marquess Wellesley, whose correspondence he edited (1836). Martin subsequently embarked on a biography, which was never completed, of Arthur Wellesley, first duke of Wellington; however, as a virtual private secretary to the second duke, he devoted some twelve years to collecting and collating material for the authoritative 'Supplementary Despatches... [of the] Duke of Wellington' (15 vols., 1858-72). Martin was concurrently publishing materials relevant to his activities in the promotion of colonial steamship, mining, and banking ventures, as well as updated editions of his earlier works. He continued, unsuccessfully, to propose projects to the colonial and foreign departments. His work with the second duke of Wellington had, however, provided him with financial security, and in 1861 he was able to withdraw to Sutton, Surrey, where he served as justice of the peace from 1863 to 1868. 
In 1826 Martin had married Jane Avis Frances Keith ('b'. 'c'.1808); the marriage was dissolved (10 Vict. c. 72) in 1847, thus enabling him to marry Eliza Barron ['see 'Phillips, Eliza (1822/-1916)], his solicitor's niece, on 11 November the same year. As Martin was then in debt, his success in obtaining a private act of parliament must be ascribed to 'access' in the broadest sense rather than to wealth. Martin died at Wellesley Lodge, Reigate Road, Sutton on 6 September 1868, and was buried at Sutton parish church. 
At a time when some questioned the value of the empire, Martin was its spokesman. He favoured a reformed colonial policy and, as a proprietor of the East India Company (1838-43), debated both at India House and through journal articles. But his lack of financial backing and his tendency to rush to judgement were factors minimizing his effectiveness; the former led him to seek 'ex post facto' official recompense for activities freely entered into, the latter lost him support at key moments. Martin, however, had a ready pen and his importance lies primarily in his chronicling of empire and his exposition of political and social issues, particularly in the context of non-Ricardian economics. The very diversity of his activities and writings -- 267 printed works and 580 surviving unpublished letters and memoranda -- underlines his significance. 


@@@@@


doc= 18209


Martin, Samuel (1817-1878), Congregational minister, was born on 28 April 1817 at Woolwich, the son of William Martin, shipwright, and his wife, Mary Pool (died 1829). His mother died when he was twelve years old and that left a lasting impression upon him. He received his early education from Thomas James, the minister of Salem Chapel, Woolwich, and later at the school conducted by the Revd Richard Cecil at Turvey, Bedfordshire. In 1829 he joined a firm of architects in the City of London but abandoned his training there and entered the Western College, Exeter, in October 1836. His ambition to serve the London Missionary Society in India was thwarted when the society decided in 1839 that he was not strong enough physically for the work. In 1839 he was ordained at Highbury Chapel, Cheltenham, and on 2 October of the same year he married Mary (died 1880), the daughter of John Trice of Tunbridge Wells. They had at least three sons. In July 1842 he moved to Westminster Chapel, London, the new church built by the Metropolitan Chapel Building Association the previous year. His ministry there was extremely successful and in 1863 the chapel had to be pulled down and a new one, capable of seating up to 3000 people, was opened in 1865. In 1862 he was chairman of the Congregational Union of England and Wales. His last years were dogged by ill health and in 1876 Henry Oliver joined him as co-pastor. He delivered his last sermon in June 1877 and died on 5 July 1878 at 19 Belgrave Road, Pimlico, London. He was buried at Abney Park cemetery, London, on 10 July after services conducted by his fellow congregationalist J. C. Harrison and by A. P. Stanley, the dean of Westminster. 
Samuel Martin made Westminster Chapel one of the foremost nonconformist preaching stations in London, although his preaching style was quiet and simple with no dramatic rhetorical flourishes. He had modified the strict Calvinism of his father and propounded an evangelicalism that was both practical and devotional and which centred on God's universal beneficent rule. His numerous publications exemplify the way in which the horizons of evangelicalism were broadening during the Victorian era. Many of these were lectures delivered at meetings of the Young Men's Christian Association (YMCA) and reveal his concern for young people. These covered a large number of topics, such as history in 'Anglo-Saxon Christianity' (1862), morals in 'Gambling' (1856), politics in 'Christianity, Pure Socialism' (1851), science in 'Michael Faraday' (1867), and economics in his twelve lectures, 'Money' (1850). He was one of the first vice-presidents of the YMCA, and his lectures attracted a wide audience among the shop assistants of West End stores. Above all he was a gifted and attractive pastor, sensitive to people's needs and predicaments, and radiating a warm sympathy with all who sought his ministrations. 


@@@@@


doc= 18210


Martin, Sir Samuel (1801-1883), judge, was the son of Samuel Martin of Culmore, Newtownlimavady, co. Londonderry. He graduated BA at Trinity College, Dublin, in 1821 (MA in 1832) and received an honorary LLD on 2 September 1857. In May 1821 he entered Gray's Inn, and in 1826 the Middle Temple, where he was called to the bar on 29 January 1830, after practising for the previous two years as a special pleader. He was a pupil of Sir Frederick Pollock, afterwards lord chief baron of the exchequer, and subsequently became close friends with him on the northern circuit, where he rapidly acquired an extensive commercial practice. In Easter term 1843 Martin was made queen's counsel, and on 28 August 1838 he married Frances (Fanny) Homera (died 1874), eldest daughter of Sir Frederick Pollock. They had one daughter, Frances Arabella, (died 1903), who later married Sir Edward Macnaghten. 
In 1847 Martin entered parliament as Liberal MP for Pontefract, and made his maiden speech on the 'Crown and Government Security Bill' of 1848. On 6 November 1850 he succeeded Baron Rolfe in the court of exchequer. He was created serjeant-at-law the following day, and was knighted on 13 November. He was a judge of unusual strength. Though adept in the refinements of special pleading and the intricate procedure of the time, he was not a pedantic stickler for forms, and tried to prevent their being used unfairly. His knowledge of business and quick mastery of the essential points made his judgments terse and precise. As a criminal judge he did not shrink from imposing heavy sentences, but his natural kindness often led him to find mitigation. Increasing deafness led Martin to retire early from the bench on 26 January 1874. On 2 February he took the privy council oath but his deafness meant he took no part in the proceedings of the judicial committee. 
Martin was a keen horseman and was said to have been a good judge of horses; in 1874 he was elected an honorary member of the Jockey Club. He died at his rooms, 132 Piccadilly, on 9 January 1883. 


@@@@@


doc= 18211


Martin, Sarah (1791-1843), prison visitor, was born in June 1791 at Caister on the Norfolk coast. She was an only child and her father, a local tradesman, and her mother both died in her infancy. She was brought up by her widowed grandmother, a glove maker, and attended Caister village school. From the age of twelve Sarah Martin read well-known classics obtained from a local library; from the age of fourteen she walked to work at Great Yarmouth, 3 miles away, as a dressmaker, an occupation which maintained her for most of her life. At the age of nineteen she heard a sermon at a Church of England meeting-house in Yarmouth and, though previously having a deep distrust of religion, she became a dedicated convert, and by 1811 had learned much of the 'Bible' by heart. In 1826 her grandmother died, leaving her about $250, which produced an income of $10-12 per year. Sarah Martin left Caister to live with a poor widow in Great Yarmouth. From 1811 she had been teaching in the local Sunday school and reading the 'Bible' in the local poor-house infirmary. 
Great Yarmouth borough gaol and house of correction was severely criticized by James Neild in his 1812 survey of English prisons. The prison, which consisted of seven underground dungeons and a day-room, was filthy, disease-ridden, and infested with vermin. The poorly fed prisoners were unsupervised and allowed to tyrannize over each other; the prison lacked heating and medical care, and the regime indulged those with funds in gambling, drunkenness, and vice, eschewing any of the protective or rehabilitative programmes which, following the work of John Howard in the late eighteenth century, had become received wisdom in prison government. 
From 1810 Sarah Martin had reflected on the prison which she passed daily on her way to work. In August 1819, however, she heard that a woman had been committed there for cruelty to her child and she visited her. The meeting was painful, for the woman was very distressed at injuring her own child, but Martin persevered in her visits and began to meet the male prisoners also. They were at first contemptuous towards her, but her regular visits became accepted by staff and prisoners as well as by the borough councillors of Great Yarmouth who, embarrassed by James Neild's revelations, were initially most reluctant to allow her access. She was to continue work at the prison until her death a quarter of a century later. 
Sarah Martin's methods involved a combination of biblical instruction, personal friendship, and practical aid. She was a persistent visitor of individual prisoners, with whom she would talk about their own human needs, the evil of crime, and the consolations of religion, building up many deep and abiding relationships. She would make contact with prisoners' families outside, either by visits or correspondence, to prepare for release, and she would fund prisoners, from her own income or later charitable donations, who had no food or resources to get them home. This was at times problematic: as Great Yarmouth was a seaport, families would arrive from far away searching for their menfolk, or released prisoners who were sailors would need a great deal of help to get a vessel to take them home. Sarah Martin aimed to appeal to the heart of the prisoner and was frank in her expectation that promises to desist from criminality would be kept after release, on occasion making simple contracts with prisoners to that effect. On every Sunday she held at least one collective religious service in the prison at which 'Bible' reading and a sermon were a major element. In addition she taught selected prisoners to read and write using children's books and religious literature which she obtained from the Society For Promoting Christian Knowledge. In particular she taught them to memorize scripture as she had memorized it as a young woman. She also taught women prisoners her own needlework skills and provided useful work, such as bookbinding or making of bone spoons, for the men: the articles thus made were sold and the profit given to each prisoner on discharge. Martin would also find work for prisoners on release. Finally she would visit or correspond with former prisoners. Central to all her methods was constant reference to the Christian faith. 
In 1824 the council extended the prison adding improved accommodation above ground. Sarah increased her attendance until, by the late 1830s, she was at the prison every day. Up to 1838 Sarah depended on her own trade and local donations to resource this work; she refused all offers of finance from the borough until 1841, when $12 a year was granted her. She also received funds from Elizabeth Fry's British Ladies' Society. By now her work was becoming well known, as the inspector of prisons appointed under the 1835 'Prison Act' for the north and east, Captain William John Williams, had viewed her activities with astonishment and recorded her progress in detail: these reports were published as part of the annual reports of the prison inspectors. By this time she was receiving assistance from the Hon. Revd Pellew, chaplain to the borough; just after her death a prison chaplain and schoolmaster were appointed. 
Sarah Martin's theology -- inseparable from her mission -- emphasized three tenets. Firstly she insisted that there was an inseparable connection between sin and sorrow, arguing that vice and crime, however alluring, invariably led to sorrow and pain. Secondly she insisted on a similar indissoluble connection between goodness and happiness. Thirdly she urged with great passion that by the sacrifice of Christ on the cross atonement and redemption were available to all and that by faith in Christ even those most sunk in sin could find peace and salvation. All were lost to the temptation of sin, she argued, unless they turned to Christ to be reborn spiritually and thus delivered from the wrath of God. She believed most strongly that where love and charitable bonds failed, the malice and corruption of Satan instantly entered in. 
Sarah Martin provided an unyielding and dedicated model of the prison missionary, persisting in visiting those who rebuffed her or fell back on old ways. She believed that even the most hardened would soften when shown love and compassion in the context of Christian consolation, and was especially attentive to the women and children in prison. Her innermost beliefs were revealed in her religious poetry, which emphasized the all-protecting offer of life eternal to the faithful and the demonic snares of Satan awaiting all who reject their Saviour. A persistent theme in her poetry is the suffering of sin and the importance of the missionary rescuer. 
Towards the end of her life Sarah Martin also superintended a school for pauper children and set up classes for factory women on two nights a week in St Nicholas' Church, Great Yarmouth. She became ill in the winter of 1842, although she continued to visit the prison until April 1843. Thereafter she suffered intense agony and did not leave her sickbed, consoling herself writing appropriate poetry. This, with other verse, was published after her death as 'Selections from the Poetical Remains of Miss S. Martin' (1845). She died on 15 October 1843 at Great Yarmouth and was buried at Caister by the side of her grandmother. 
Sarah Martin is difficult to classify. She was plainly closely in tune with the Quaker and Anglican evangelical approach to the reform and the consolation of prisoners represented by Elizabeth Fry and the London-based Prison Discipline Society, and yet she was far from the wealthy banking network of Mrs Fry's family and friends. She began her work at about the same time as Elizabeth Fry and cannot be regarded as a mere imitator. She did not move on any national stage, for she was intensely bound to Caister and Great Yarmouth and never ventured more than a few miles from them. Of humble birth, she left no mission or movement. She was remembered, however, for the depth of her faith and for the genuine unostentatious love she held for prisoners and other neglected groups. A woman of great feeling, she appears to have had a remarkable capacity for entering into the sufferings of others. Practical and energetic, she wanted prisoners to be busy learning new skills and active rather than slothful and despairing. 


@@@@@


doc= 18212


Martin, Thomas (1697-1771), antiquary, was born on 8 March 1697 in the Free School House of the Suffolk parish of St Mary's, adjoining the Norfolk town of Thetford. He was the seventh of nine children of William Martin ('c'.1650-1721), rector of Great Livermere in Suffolk, and curate of St Mary's, and his wife, Elizabeth Burrough, the only daughter of Thomas Burrough of Bury St Edmunds. He was educated at the free school, where for some time he was the only scholar and left to his own devices. He hoped to study at Cambridge, but about 1715 he was placed against his wishes as an articled clerk with his elder brother Robert, a Thetford attorney. 
From an early age Martin was fascinated by the antiquities of his locality and kept notebooks of his visits. When only twelve or thirteen years old he was recommended to Peter Le Neve, Norroy king of arms and president of the Society of Antiquaries, as the most knowledgeable person to act as a guide to the antiquities of the town. The subsequent friendship between the young man and the elderly antiquary was to have a far-reaching effect on the direction of Norfolk historiography for the remainder of the century. Martin was admitted a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries about 1719 on Le Neve's recommendation and remained an enthusiastic and influential member until his death. 
About 1721 or 1722 Martin achieved a degree of financial independence by marrying a widow, Sarah Cropley (died 1731), the daughter of John Tyrell or Thorold; their first child was born in Thetford in 1722. Soon afterwards the couple moved to Palgrave, in Suffolk, where he practised as an attorney. They had eight children, two of whom died young. Sarah died on 15 November 1731, ten days after giving birth to twins. 
Throughout his life Martin was a compulsive collector of books and manuscripts, and a great compiler of catalogues. According to Sir John Cullum's preface to Martin's 'History of... Thetford', he was also a 'skilful and indefatigable' antiquary and 'had the happiest use of his pen, copying, as well as tracing, with dispatch and exactness, the different writing of every aera, and tricking arms, seals, &c, with great neatness'. In September 1724 Eton College paid him $30 for setting the muniment room in order and compiling a digest of records. This was followed by a brief tour into Wales, but thereafter he seems to have spent most of his time in East Anglia. 
Peter Le Neve died in 1729, having appointed Martin, together with Thomas Tanner, chancellor of Norwich, and his young widow, Frances ('nee' Beeston), as executors of a complex and idiosyncratic will. Over the next two years Martin spent much time at Le Neve's former home in Great Whitchingham helping the widow to isolate the latter's enormous collection of Norfolk and Suffolk materials from his other book and manuscript collections, which were to be auctioned. Le Neve's Norfolk collection was described by Richard Gough as 'the greatest fund of antiquities for his native county that ever was collected for any single one in the kingdom' (Gough, 2.2). It was intended by the collector to be deposited after his death in an unspecified public repository in Norwich. However, the appointment of Tanner to the see of St Asaph in December 1731, followed by Martin's marriage to Frances Le Neve in January 1732, meant that the terms of the will were never carried out. The couple soon afterwards moved with the collection to Martin's home in Palgrave. 
Martin's malversation in respect of the Le Neve manuscripts dismayed Tanner and other members of the Norfolk antiquarian community, such as Benjamin Mackerell, but no one was willing to contest the issue. After Tanner's death in 1735 the matter was quietly forgotten, but it was doubtless why he decided to leave his own manuscripts to the Bodleian Library rather than combine them with Le Neve's collection, as originally intended. Soon afterwards Martin appears to have acquired and relished the seemingly ironic sobriquet Honest Tom, which he retained for the remainder of his life. 
Martin and his second wife had eight children, four of whom did not survive infancy, before Frances died in 1751. Martin continued to enjoy rude good health until old age, in spite of the many colourful accounts of his inordinate drinking bouts and boisterous conduct while under the influence of alcohol. Yet his company was always sought, and his friendship valued, by far more sober and respectable men. However, his continuing obsession with collecting historical antiquities of all kinds, coupled with an increasing neglect of his profession and his dissipated habits, ultimately took their toll of his fortune. By 1762 he was forced to dispose of some of his substantial book and coin collections to meet the increasing demands of his creditors, and this process continued throughout the last decade of his life. 
Martin partially redeemed his illegitimate custody of the Le Neve collections by his willingness to make them available to interested scholars, or to provide visitors and correspondents with the benefit of his substantial knowledge and assistance. Thus he was an important figure in the compilation and production of several historical works relating to East Anglia and his assistance is frequently noted. He played a crucial role throughout the prolonged and complex gestation of Francis Blomefield's 'History of Norfolk' between 1731 and 1775, although he did not live to see it completed. He had encouraged Blomefield to undertake the task and put at his disposal all the Le Neve materials. After Blomefield's death in 1752, Martin purchased many of the author's manuscripts, including the priceless Paston letters, and assisted his widow to dispose of the unsold copies of his history. He then encouraged Charles Parkin to complete the work. Following Parkin's death, he persuaded the King's Lynn bookseller William Whittingham to publish the work and recruited the young antiquary John Fenn to see it through the press. 
Martin never published any work during his lifetime in spite of repeated stated intentions of doing so. The history of Thetford bearing his name was compiled after his death from his notes, largely by a Mr Davis, a dissenting minister in Diss. Proposals for this work were issued in 1774 by John Worth, a chemist, who purchased many of Martin's collections. Five sheets were printed in Norwich before Worth's own death brought an end to the project. 
Martin died on 7 March 1771, and was buried in the porch of Palgrave church. He still retained a large and valuable collection of printed books and manuscripts at his death, which were disposed of in a complex series of public auctions and private sales. The collection was utterly and irrevocably dispersed within five years of his death. In spite of his disreputable past and dissolute character, Martin was esteemed by the new generation of East Anglian antiquaries. In 1772 John Ives wrote and privately printed 'A Pastoral Elegy on the Death of Thomas Martin' and paid for an engraved portrait of him. Richard Gough purchased Martin's notes relating to Thetford together with the manuscript by Davis, which he further revised before publishing it in 1779, together with a memoir by Sir John Cullum and Ives's portrait. John Fenn read an account of Martin's life to the Society of Antiquaries in November 1780 and later left money for a monument to him in Palgrave church. 


@@@@@


doc= 18213


Thomas Barnewall Martin (1786-1847), politician and landowner, was born on 4 October 1786 at Ballynahinch Castle, co. Galway. He was member of parliament for Galway from 1832 until his death of 'famine fever', caught when visiting his tenants in the Clifden workhouse, on 23 April 1847. The Law Life Assurance Society subsequently took possession of the Martin estates and sold them. His half-sister 


@@@@@


doc= 18214


Martin, Sir Thomas Byam (1773-1854), naval officer, born at Ashtead House, Surrey, on 25 July 1773, was the third surviving son of Sir Henry Martin, baronet (died 1794), for many years naval commissioner at Portsmouth and afterwards comptroller of the navy, and his wife, Eliza Anne Gillman, 'nee' Parker, of Hilbrook, co. Cork. His father's half-brother, Samuel Martin (died 1789), was treasurer to the dowager princess of Wales. Thomas was educated privately at Freshford, near Bath (1780), Southampton grammar school (1781), and Mr Coles's boarding-school in Guildford (1782-5). Through the influence of Henry Martin, and in accordance with the irregular custom of the day, Thomas, before he was eight, was entered on the books of the 'Canada' (Captain William Cornwallis) in 1780-81; in 1782, of the 'Foudroyant' (Captain Sir John Jervis); and in 1783, of the 'Orpheus' (Captain George Campbell). He entered the Royal Naval Academy at Portsmouth in August 1785. He first went afloat in April 1786, as 'captain's servant' on the 'Pegasus', with Prince William Henry (afterwards William IV), whom in March 1788 he followed to the 'Andromeda'. He was afterwards for a few months in the 'Southampton', and on 22 November 1790 he was promoted lieutenant of the 'Canada'. Despite his powerful patronage he still served afloat for four years before receiving his commission. For the next two years (from 1790/91) he served in the 'Inconstant' and the 'Juno'; and on 22 May 1793 he was promoted to command the 'Tisiphone', fitting out for the Mediterranean, where, on 5 November 1793, he was posted to the frigate 'Modeste' which had been seized at Genoa by Admiral Gell only the month before. 
In 1795 Martin was appointed to the 'Santa Margarita', employed on the coast of Ireland, where he captured many privateers, and on 8 June 1796 he took the 'Tamise', a prize from the English two years before. She had now a heavier armament and more numerous crew; but against superior discipline, seamanship, and gun-training she was powerless and could kill only two and wound three on the 'Santa Margarita', while she herself lost thirty-two killed and nineteen wounded, several mortally. 
In 1797 Martin commanded the 'Tamar' in the West Indies and in five months captured nine privateers with an aggregate of 58 guns and 519 men. In 1798 he returned to England in command of the 'Dictator'; he was then appointed to the 'Fisgard', a powerful frigate captured from the French only the year before. On 20 October, off Brest, he fell in with, and after a sharp action captured, the 'Immortalite', sailing homeward from the destruction of Bompard's squadron on the coast of Ireland. In addition to her complement, the 'Immortalite' had on board 250 soldiers, and her loss was consequently very great. Otherwise the two frigates were nearly equal in force, and the 'Fisgard's' victory was considered one of the most brilliant frigate actions of the war. In 1798 Martin married Catherine, daughter of Captain Robert Fanshawe, for many years naval commissioner at Plymouth. They had three daughters and three sons, the eldest of whom was Sir William Fanshawe Martin, baronet (1801-1895). Their second son, Sir Henry Byam Martin, died an admiral in 1865; and the third, Lieutenant-Colonel Robert Fanshawe Martin, died in 1846. 
For the next two years the 'Fisgard' was employed actively off the coast of France under the orders of Sir John Warren and, in company with different ships of the squadron, captured or destroyed several warships, privateers, coasting craft, and batteries. From 1803 to 1805 Martin commanded the line-of-battle ship 'Impetueux' in the channel and on 24 November 1804 helped save many lives from the wreck of HMS 'Venerable' in Tor Bay, Devon. In 1807 he commanded the line-of-battle ship 'Prince of Wales', also in the channel, and in 1808 the 'Implacable' in the Baltic. On 26 August 1808, while attached to the Swedish fleet under the immediate orders of Sir Samuel Hood in the 'Centaur', he brought to action the Russian ship 'Sewolod' and had a large share in her capture. In his official letter Hood assigned much of the credit to Martin, and Gustaf IV Adolf, the king of Sweden, conferred on him the cross of the order of the Sword. He was again in the Baltic in 1809. On 1 August 1811 he was promoted rear-admiral, and in 1812, with his flag in the 'Aboukir', he took part in the defence of Riga against the French army under Davoust. He was afterwards second in command at Plymouth until 1814. In September 1813 he was sent on a mission to Wellington's headquarters in Spain to resolve the difficulties then arising in the transport service. He did this to the satisfaction of all concerned. 
On 2 January 1815 Martin was made a KCB and on 11 November was appointed deputy comptroller of the navy. On 24 February 1816 he became comptroller and held the office until 2 November 1831. Chosen by Lord Melville for his combination of administrative ability and sea experience, Martin dominated the post-war policy of the navy during his long term in office. On his advice the fleet was reconstructed around a nucleus of large and very powerful new ships, while maintaining a high level of skilled labour in the royal dockyards, to meet any sudden emergency. He worked closely with the naval architect and structural engineer, Sir Robert Seppings, to improve the quality and durability of British warships. Although his office was normally considered apolitical Martin was a tory, and he became closely identified with government policy at a time when naval policy became a political question. The whig reform ministry of 1830 took office committed to making large savings on defence spending in order to fund other aspects of their political programme. Bolstered by his long service and high rank Martin publicly criticized government policy in the House of Commons, though his office made him a member of the ministry. Unable to control him, or even remove him from his government seat, Sir James Graham and Earl Grey secured the consent of Martin's old shipmate, Prince William Henry (now William IV), to dismiss him on grounds of insubordination. The Navy Board was abolished the following year. 
From 1818 to 1831 Martin sat in parliament as member for Plymouth. On 12 August 1819 he was made vice-admiral, a GCB on 3 March 1830, admiral on 22 July 1830, vice-admiral of the United Kingdom in 1847, and admiral of the fleet on 13 October 1849. After his dismissal as comptroller of the navy he was twice offered command of the Mediterranean Fleet, but his wife's ill health and his large pension were always against a return to active service in peacetime. Frequently called on to advise the government, he was still serving the state in 1854, outlining the strategy for naval operations in the Baltic and reporting on Lord Cochrane's plan to use poison gas. He died at the admiral-superintendent's house in Portsmouth on 21 October 1854. Sir William Hotham recorded that: 'his capacities for business and thorough knowledge of the state of the navy marked him as a fit man to be at the head of its civil department. He added to a strong understanding and quick perception great personal application and activity, and transacted arduous business without any trouble to himself and satisfactorily to others; exceedingly amiable in his family and much beloved by those who knew him well. (Hotham MSS)' During his long and distinguished career Martin formed the views that directed his policy after 1815. Although a natural, and political, conservative, he never opposed the development of new technology, but merely required new technologies to demonstrate their advantages. He was the last and most able comptroller of the navy. In a period of retrenchment he reconstructed the fleet, providing a sound base for British diplomacy and deterrence, modernized the infrastructure, and provided sound guidance in the early years of naval technical development. His working relationship with Melville and Seppings forms a high point in the history of British naval administration. 


@@@@@


doc= 18215


Martin, William (c.1696-1756), naval officer, appears to have been the eldest son of Tutchen Martin (died 1702) of Stepney and his wife, Bennet Garsh, or Gage, although another account states that his father was Commodore George Martin (died 1724). Confusion also exists as to his early service, but he seems to have entered the navy as a volunteer per order, or king's letter boy, on 26 August 1708 on the 'Dragon'. When the 'Dragon' went to Newfoundland in May 1710 Martin was put on shore at Plymouth 'for his health'. He appears to have taken passage to the Mediterranean in the 'Ranelagh' almost immediately, for on 30 July 1710 he was promoted second lieutenant of the 'Resolution' by Sir John Norris. On 4 January 1712 he was appointed by Sir John Jennings, also in the Mediterranean, to the 'Superbe', in which he continued until July 1714. Between 1715 and 1718 he transferred from the 'Cumberland', flagship of Sir John Norris in the Baltic, to the 'Rupert'; and to the 'Cumberland', again with Norris. On 9 October 1718 he was promoted captain in the 'Cumberland', and took post from that date. On 9 February 1720 he was appointed to the 'Blandford', which between 1720 and 1721 was attached to the Baltic fleet under Norris, and was afterwards employed in American waters in the suppression of piracy. On 16 August 1726 he married Mary Atkins of Twell, Gloucestershire; they had no children. 
From 1727 to 1732 Martin commanded the 'Advice' in the fleet supporting Gibraltar and then in the channel, under Sir Charles Wager; and later the 'Sunderland' on the home station, at Lisbon, or in the Mediterranean (1733-7). In May 1738 he was appointed to the 'Ipswich', one of the fleet in the Mediterranean under Rear-Admiral Nicholas Haddock. In January 1741 he hoisted a broad pennant in command of a detached squadron off Cadiz, and in July 1742 was sent by Admiral Thomas Mathews to enforce the neutrality of Naples. With three ships of the line, two frigates, and four bomb-vessels he sailed into Naples Bay on the afternoon of 9 August, and sending his flag captain Merrick De Langle, on shore, requested an immediate and categorical answer to his demands. The Neapolitans attempted to make conditions, and De Langle returned to the ship with their deputy. Martin replied that he was sent 'as an officer to act, not a minister to treat', and desired De Langle to insist on a prompt answer. Martin's force was small, but superior to any the Neapolitans could raise against it, and they yielded to the pressure put on them. 
Martin was subsequently employed in protecting Tuscany from any attempt on the part of the Spaniards, and in February 1743 was sent to Genoa to require the destruction of Spanish magazines. He was later involved in the sinking of a Spanish ship of the line, the 'San Isidro' at Ajaccio. 
Towards the end of the year Martin returned to England, and on 7 December he was promoted to the rank of rear-admiral. In February 1744 he commanded in the Channel Fleet under Sir John Norris, and on 19 June 1744 he was advanced to vice-admiral, and was second in command in the fleet which went to Lisbon under Sir John Balchen. Balchen during this period asked Martin to report on the state of the contract hospitals; the report was so critical that it strongly influenced the decision to establish medical centres solely for the navy. On Balchen's death Martin was appointed to the chief command, which he held during 1745. In December he and his squadron were sent to the Downs under Admiral Edward Vernon, and on Vernon's dismissal he succeeded to the command. Following the collapse of the Jacobite threat he took the squadron back to its usual station, and commanded the principal fleet, until in July 1746 he sought and was granted leave to retire for health reasons. He had served almost continuously since 1738, and had already warned the Admiralty that he needed a respite. 
During this command Martin conducted his squadron diligently and carefully. However, owing to the lack of a settled policy, the Admiralty's practice of reacting to any information received by ordering the squadron hither and thither to meet the need, and its necessary visits to port to replenish its provisions, a number of French squadrons was able to make their departure. No blame for the escapes was laid on him, and the ample notice he gave of his wish to retire seems to dispel the suggestion that he was piqued by George Anson's assumption of the command, although he might have been irked by public criticism. On 15 July 1747 he was promoted admiral of the blue. Charnock described him as a handsome and learned man who spoke several languages with ease, and who, when in command, was said to live in 'the greatest splendour, maintaining his rank in the highest style' (J. Charnock, 'Biographia navalis', 6 vols., 1794-8, 4.69). He retired to Twickenham where he died on 17 September 1756 'being about sixty years old' (ibid.). 


@@@@@


doc= 18216


Martin, William (1767-1810), naturalist and actor, was born at Mansfield, Nottinghamshire, the son of Joseph Martin, a hosier, and Ann Mallatratt ('c'.1746-1819), both from Mansfield. About 1769 he and his mother were abandoned; Joseph Martin moved to Ireland as an actor, adopted the name Booth, and, after extraordinary new careers as portrait painter, inventor (of the polygraphic process for copying oil paintings), and patentee (of new methods of making cloth and linen), died in London in 1797. Martin's mother, forced to support herself and son, likewise chose an acting career, and tried to educate her son at the best schools available to her itinerant lifestyle and straitened circumstances. 
William Martin took to the stage aged five. About 1778, he took drawing and writing lessons from James Bolton (1735-1799) of Stannary, near Halifax. Bolton took great interest in, and published much on, natural history. He proved a crucial influence on Martin. In 1782 Martin settled with Stanton's company of actors in the Peak District of Derbyshire where, in 1785, he first met fellow naturalist White Watson (1760-1835). Martin's first scientific publication, on ants, appeared in 1788. Although he continued to dabble in zoology, some time before 1789 -- inspired by the geologist Abraham Mills FRS ('c'.1750-1828) -- he started to study the fossil and mineral riches of the Peak District. In May 1789 he issued the prospectus of a joint work with Watson, which he would engrave, on the minerals, spars, and fossils of Derbyshire. But their collaboration proved impossible when Watson, who was to contribute the minerals, failed to deliver. The first five parts, of an intended fourteen, of Martin's own 'Figures and Descriptions of Petrifactions... in Derbyshire', appeared between 1794 and 1796, with all text and most of the drawing, etching, and colouring of the twenty-nine plates by him. These were the first coloured illustrations of British fossils and Martin was elected fellow of the Linnean Society in 1796, when his paper on fossil brachiopods was also read. 
On 17 April 1797, at Stoke-on-Trent, Martin married Mrs Mary Adams, 'an unfortunate but interesting young widow... and actress' (Hull, 560). Martin's full-time acting career was soon part-exchanged for a new career as writing-master, from 1798 at Burton upon Trent, then from 1800 in Buxton, and finally from 1805 at Macclesfield, also at the King's School there. In 1800 Martin was sending fossils and minerals to James Sowerby (1757-1822), who illustrated many of them. In the same year, he bought a fourth share in the Buxton theatre (where he continued acting in their midsummer season until 1809). 
Martin's book 'Outlines... of Extraneous Fossils', the first systematic study of general palaeontology and of fossilization in English, was published in April 1809. Its publication led to Martin's election as corresponding member of the Manchester Literary and Philosophical Society and, in June, honorary membership of the Geological Society of London. The book also inspired John Farey (1766-1826) to visit Martin at Macclesfield in April 1809. Farey offered to collaborate in preparing a detailed geological map, in an attempt to improve the stratigraphic knowledge of Derbyshire fossils. However, their second meeting (intended for September 1809 at Sir Joseph Banks's house at Overton) had to be abandoned, as Martin was seriously ill with consumption. Nevertheless, Martin's second book, dedicated to Banks, 'Petrificata Derbiensia', was published in August 1809. It completed his earlier work and described the Carboniferous limestone and other fossils of Derbyshire, and was illustrated with his own engravings. Owing to his illness, the intended second volume, on fossils (especially plants) from coal strata, never appeared. Martin died on 31 May 1810 at Back Street, Macclesfield, leaving no provision for his widow, six young children, or his aged mother. He was buried on 3 June at Christ Church, Macclesfield. Subscriptions were made to support his dependants, one of whom was William Charles Linnaeus Martin (1798-1864). Martin was honoured with the brachiopod genus 'Martinia' named after him in 1844, as was one of the most characteristic Derbyshire fossil corals, 'Lithostrotion martini', in 1851. 


@@@@@


doc= 18217


Martin, William (b. 1753, d. in or after 1836), painter, was born in August 1753 and baptized on 15 August in the parish of St Peter Mancroft, Norwich, the son of William Martin and his wife, Margaret. He displayed an early aptitude for painting, and in 1766 was awarded a gold palette for a historical painting by the Society of Arts. He entered the Royal Academy Schools on 15 October 1772 and began exhibiting there in 1775. His address in that year was given as that of G. B. Cipriani RA, and it is possible that he lodged there until as late as 1791. He showed at the Royal Academy up to 1816, and his output was a mixture of historical subjects and portraits. His practice did occasionally extend to landscapes, for which he won a premium in 1780. About 1800 he was engaged on decorative paintings at Windsor Castle for George III, exhibiting three small, related sketches at the Royal Academy in that year. In 1807 he moved to Marylebone and in 1810 appeared credited as 'Historical Painter to His Majesty'. 
His contributions to the Royal Academy ended after 1816, although he continued sending works to the British Institution until 1831. He was still in correspondence with a Norwich patron, James Bennett, until 1836; it is assumed that he died, unmarried about this time. His ties to his home city remained strong. In 1787 he presented 'The Death of Lady Jane Grey' and 'The Death of Queen Eleanor' (engraved F. Bartolozzi RA) to the corporation of Norwich and they both hang in St Andrew's Hall there. Bartolozzi also engraved his 'Imogen's Chamber'. 'The Barons Swearing the Charter of Liberties at Bury St. Edmunds' (engraved W. Ward) is in the University of Oxford collection; 'A Cottage Interior' (engraved C. Turner) is in Norwich Castle Museum. 


@@@@@


doc= 18218


Martin, William (1772-1851), eccentric and self-proclaimed philosopher, was born on 21 June 1772 at the Twohouse, Haltwhistle, Northumberland, the eldest of four sons of (William) Fenwick Martin (died 1813), who held several occupations including tanner, publican, coach builder, and fencing master, and his wife, Isabella (died 1813), daughter of Richard Thompson, a farmer. The second son, Richard, a quartermaster in the guards, served through the Peninsular War and was present at Waterloo. The youngest sons were Jonathan Martin (1782-1838), arsonist, and John Martin (1789-1854), artist. There was one daughter, Ann. William's early years were spent with his maternal grandparents near Haydon Bridge, and he accompanied them when they moved in 1775 to a farm in Kintyre. When his grandparents died he went to live with his father, then foreman of a tannery at Ayr. In 1782 father and son returned to Northumberland. Martin is next heard of working in a ropery at Howdon Dock, and in the following year he joined the Northumberland militia at Durham. Discharged in 1805 Martin, an able mechanic, was granted a patent for improvements to shoes, and began taking an interest in perpetual motion machines. He ridiculed the colliers of the north-east because they were still running their wagons on wooden rails, rather than on iron rails as in the midlands, not understanding that the local cost of iron was uneconomically high. 
In 1808 Martin went to London where he exhibited his Eureka perpetual motion machine, which was apparently simply a pendulum driven by a concealed current of air. In the following year he returned to his modest trade of rope making, and in 1810 to the militia. In Ireland with his regiment he learned the elements of line engraving. Apart from his quackery and noisy absurdities Martin's skill brought him in 1814 the Isis silver medal of the Society of Arts for his spring weighing machine with circular dial and index. In the same year he married, describing his wife only as 'an inoffensive woman, respected by rich and poor, and a celebrated dressmaker' (W. Martin, 'Philosopher's Life', 1833, 33). They settled first at Newcastle upon Tyne, then at Wallsend, where, supported by her earnings, he was able to concentrate on his multifarious inventions until her death on 16 January 1832. 
He founded the Martinean Society, based on opposition to the Royal Society, and particularly hostile to the Newtonian theory of gravitation, against which he harboured a growing antagonism, which ultimately embraced all men of science. Styling himself 'anti-newtonian', Martin began giving lectures, first in the Newcastle district and from 1830 throughout England. Throughout these years his voice was heard at many meetings, ranting against scientists in general. He was inevitably drawn to the annual gatherings of the British Association for the Advancement of Science, the butt of his polemic 'The defeat of the eighth scientific meeting of the British Association of Asses, which we may properly call the rich folks' hopping, or the false philosophers in an uproar' (1838). Newton remained his chief hate, but Herschel, Faraday, Sedgwick, and Lardner attracted his wrath. Declaring himself a staunch supporter of the Church of England he also denounced papists, bishops, Puseyites, Unitarians, and all those he considered to have left the true path. In a torrent of pamphlets he heaped abuse on impostors, false philosophers, and those who had converted his inventions to their own gain, continuing the while to work on further mechanical projects. In 1835 he proposed a new form of miners' safety lamp, and when it was rejected because of its fragility and uncertain performance he denounced the discoveries of George Stevenson and Humphry Davy in these fields as dishonest, claiming that they had stolen his ideas. Martin was a familiar figure in and around Newcastle: J. B. Langhorne described him as 'a stout, portly man, perfectly cracked but harmless. He used to strut about wearing the Society of Arts medal round his neck' ('N&Q', 134). From 1849 Martin lived with his brother John at Chelsea, where he died on 9 February 1851. 


@@@@@


doc= 18219


Martin, William (1801-1867), children's writer, was born at Woodbridge, Suffolk, the son of Jane Martin, an unmarried laundress who worked for officers of the garrison stationed at Woodbridge during the Napoleonic wars. Reputedly, his father was Sir Benjamin Blomfield. After attending a dame-school at Woodbridge, in 1815 he became an assistant to Thomas Howe, a woollen draper at Battersea, Surrey. Howe's wife was a close friend of Elizabeth Fry, the Quaker social reformer, and under the guidance of these two women Martin improved his education sufficiently to obtain the post of master in a school at Uxbridge. He remained there until 1836, when he returned to Woodbridge and earned his living by delivering lectures and writing. 
After beginning by producing articles for magazines, Martin began to undertake more substantial books for purchase by schools and parents. He wrote 'The Christian Philosopher' (1832), 'Every Boy's Arithmetic' (1833), with J. T. Crossley, edited the 'Educational Magazine' (1835), which was 'short-lived and uninteresting' (Darton, 223), 'The Parlour Book, or, Familiar Conversations, on Science and the Arts' (1835?), 'The Book of Sports, Athletic Exercises, and Amusements' (1837?), and 'The Moral and Intellectual School Book' (1838). He more famously took on the pseudonym used by Samuel Griswold Goodrich of New England, whose first Peter Parley book, 'Tales of Peter Parley about America', appeared in 1827, and which was followed by a series of similar, highly successful tales at the rate of five or six volumes a year. Darton notes that 'in thirty years over 7,000,000 copies of some 116 'genuine' Parleys were sold' and that Goodrich was therefore eminently 'worth pirating' by English authors and publishers (ibid., 227). Martin was one of several English 'Peter Parleys' to take up the idea of short, explanatory, and entertaining narratives for the school and home tutoring market. Others were the writer George Mogridge ('Sergeant Bell and his Raree-Show', 1839) and the publishers Thomas Tegg, Charles Tilt, Edward Lacey, and Samuel Clark. Martin, however, was regarded by Goodrich in his memoirs as the most successful -- or troublesome. Martin wrote 'Peter Parley's Tales for Boys and Girls at Home and Abroad' ('c'.1835) and produced many numbers of 'Peter Parley's Magazine' for the publishers Darton and Clark, who began this as a monthly publication in 1839, and then bound it up in a gift book at Christmas as 'Peter Parley's Annual: a Christmas and New Year's Present for Young People' (1840). The magazine ceased publication in 1863, while the annual continued until 1892 under different editors and various imprints. Other Parley titles attributed to Martin include 'Peter Parley's Tales for Youth' ('c'.1844) and 'Peter Parley's Tales about Kings & Queens' (1848). 
Martin also continued with educational publishing, editing the 'British Annals of Education' (1844) and producing several successful schoolbooks, among which were 'The Intellectual Expositor and Vocabulary' (1851), 'Intellectual Reading Book' (1851), and 'The Intellectual Grammar' (1852). He used another pseudonym, Old Chatty Cheerful, for 'The Boy's Own Annual' (1861) and a series of 'Household Tracts for the People' with titles that included 'Household Management, or, How to Make Home Comfortable' (1861); 'How to Rise in the World to Respectability, Independence and Usefulness' (1861), and 'Men who have fallen from wealth, fame and respectability, to poverty, shame and degradation, from a want of principle' (1861). His range and versatility in writing and editing popular works for adults and young people gave him the reputation of 'a very capable, all-round hack' (Darton, 224). He was also considered to have been a man of dissipated habits and loose morals in his later years, giving his friends some anxiety. He died at his home, Holly Lodge, Woodbridge, Suffolk, on 22 October 1867, and was buried in the cemetery there. He married three times, and was survived by his third wife, Harriet Agnes, and two sons. 


@@@@@


doc= 18220


Martin, Sir William (1807-1880), judge in New Zealand, the son of Henry Martin, a manufacturer, and his wife, Mary, was born in Birmingham and baptized there on 22 May 1807. He attended King Edward VI's Grammar School, Birmingham, and in 1825 matriculated from St John's College, Cambridge, whence in 1829 he graduated as twenty-sixth wrangler and fourth classic and took the second chancellor's medal. In 1831 he was elected fellow of his college and in 1832 proceeded MA and was admitted at Lincoln's Inn; he was called to the bar in 1836. Having resigned his fellowship in 1838 he went to London to practise law. 
At college Martin had been a close friend of George Augustus Selwyn, who was to become the first bishop of New Zealand, and at Selwyn's prompting he accepted the office of chief justice of New Zealand in January 1841. On 3 April 1841 he married Mary Ann Parker ['see below'] at St Ethelburga, Bishopsgate, London, where her father was rector; however, Martin sailed alone for New Zealand only three days later. 
In New Zealand, Martin's first task was to impress on the Maori their rights and responsibilities under British law, to which they were subject after the treaty of Waitangi. This he managed more effectively than he did his second task, the setting up of a system of courts and procedures for the new colony. His ideas for these closely followed British practice and were over-complex for a young colony. 
Martin worked closely with Selwyn in setting up schools and establishing a scheme for church administration. He and Selwyn consistently defended the rights of the Maori, particularly in 1847 when they protested against certain clauses in the proposed new constitution which they felt broke faith with the Maori. 
Always in poor health, Martin returned with his wife to England in August 1855 on leave. He spent the winter of 1856-7 in Italy and in 1857 resigned his post. That same year an honorary DCL was conferred on him by the University of Oxford and the New Zealand government granted him a pension. In 1860 he was knighted. 
In 1859 the Martins returned to New Zealand and settled in Auckland. Martin's poor health prevented his accepting a seat in 1860 on the new council for native affairs, but his interest in the Maori continued and he did his utmost to prevent war with the Maori in the 1860s. His pamphlet 'The Taranaki question' (1860) defended the stand taken by Wiremu Kingi Te Rangitake at Waitara, and later works argued for a respect for the Maori based on the principles of the treaty of Waitangi. Martin protested against the 'Native Lands Act' of 1865 and in 1871 helped to draft amendments to it. 
In 1874 the Martins left New Zealand for the last time. They went first to Lichfield to live in the bishop's palace, where Selwyn was bishop, and later moved to Torquay. An able linguist, who knew Hebrew, Arabic, and Melanesian and Polynesian dialects, Martin published 'Inquiries Concerning the Structure of the Semitic Languages' (2 vols., 1876-8). He died at Matlock Terrace, Torquay, on 18 November 1880. 
Martin was praised for his ability and integrity even by those who disagreed with his views. Those views and his works all sprang from his deep Christian faith. 
Martin's wife, 


@@@@@


doc= 18221


Martin, William Charles Linnaeus (1798-1864), writer on natural history, was baptized on 23 February 1798, at Burton upon Trent, Staffordshire, the son of William Martin (1767-1810), the naturalist, and his wife, Mary, an actress whose former married name was Adams. From October 1830 to 1838 he was superintendent of the museum at the Zoological Society of London. 
Martin's earliest works were 'A Natural History of Quadrupeds', of which only 544 pages were issued in 1840, 'A General Introduction to the Natural History of Mammiferous Animals' (1841), 'The History of the Dog' (1845), and 'The History of the Horse' (1845). These were followed, between 1847 and 1858, by a series of works on fish, poultry, cattle, pigs, and sheep, which appeared either separately or as volumes in the 'Farmer's Library', 'Books for the Country', and 'The Country House'. In 1857 the writer Samuel Sidney edited and rewrote Martin's 'The Pig'. 
Martin was also author of a number of ornithological works: 'An Introduction to the Study of Birds... with a Particular Notice of the Birds Mentioned in Scripture' (1850), and 'A General History of Humming-Birds... with... Reference to the Collection of J. Gould' (1852). He also edited a fourth edition of Robert Mudie's 'Feathered Tribes of the British Islands' (1854) for Henry George Bohn's 'Illustrated Library' and, in conjunction with Francis Trevelyan Buckland and others, contributed papers to 'Birds and Bird Life' (1863). Forty-five papers were also read by Martin before the Zoological Society, and appeared in its 'Proceedings'. 
Martin died on 15 February 1864, at his home, 10 Dacre Park Terrace, Lee, in Kent. He was survived by his wife, Mary Jane. 


@@@@@


doc= 18222


Martin, Sir William Fanshawe, fourth baronet (1801-1895), naval officer, son of Sir Thomas Byam Martin (1773-1854) and his wife, Catherine, daughter of Captain Robert Fanshawe RN, was born on 5 December 1801. He entered the navy in June 1813, served under his father's flag off the Scheldt, and in January 1816 was appointed to the 'Alceste', then going to China with Lord Amherst. After his return he was in the yacht 'Prince Regent' with Sir Edward Hamilton, and in the frigate 'Glasgow' with Captain Anthony Maitland in the Mediterranean. On 15 December 1820 he was promoted lieutenant of the 'Forte', and a few months later was moved into the 'Aurora', going out to the South American station, where, on 8 February 1823, he was promoted commander of the sloop 'Fly'. In her he rendered valuable assistance to the British merchants at Callao in a time of civil war, and was afterwards known in the navy as Fly Martin. He attained post rank on 5 June 1824. From 1826 to 1831 Martin commanded the frigate 'Samarang' (28 guns) in the Mediterranean. On 25 July 1827, he married Anne Best (died 1836), daughter of the Hon. William Best, the first Baron Wynford. They had two sons who died young, and two daughters. On 21 May 1838 he married Sophia Elizabeth (died 12 Nov 1874), daughter of Robert Hurt of Wirksworth; they had five daughters and one son, Richard Byam Martin, who succeeded to the baronetcy. Up to 1831 Martin's career was driven by the powerful position filled by his father, thereafter he spent the 1830s on half pay while the whigs held office. The ill health of his first wife, who died on 1 April 1836, and the care of his children also kept him from the sea until he had remarried. 
In 1844 and 1845 Martin was flag captain at Sheerness, and in 1845-6 he commanded ships in the squadrons of evolution, demonstrating his strong antipathy towards those designed by Sir William Symonds. From 1849 to 1852 he was commodore in command of the Lisbon squadron, where he carried out a series of trials that demonstrated the suitability of the screw propeller as an auxiliary source of power in large sailing ships, which led directly to the decision to build an all-steam navy, taken in 1852. On 28 May 1853 he was promoted to the rank of rear-admiral. From 1853 until his promotion to vice-admiral on 13 February 1858, he was superintendent of Portsmouth Dockyard, an appointment that reflected the esteem in which his father was still held. Here he demonstrated great ability, having to administer the largest dockyard at a critical period, meeting the twin demands of the Crimean War and the Anglo-French naval race. Between March 1858 and June 1859 he was senior naval lord in Lord Derby's second ministry, a post that recognized both his standing in the service and his strong tory politics. Although he refused to take a seat in the House of Commons, Martin dominated the board, especially in the all too frequent absence of the first lord, Sir John Pakington. He stopped Pakington's scheme to remove naval patronage from the board to the first lord's private office, by threatening to resign. An advocate of heavier artillery, Martin led the discussions that culminated in the order for the first British seagoing ironclad, HMS 'Warrior', part of a reconstruction of the navy to reflect the experience of the Crimean War and the strategic impact of new technology. In 1860 he was appointed to the command of the Mediterranean station, primarily to develop steam tactics, an area where the prime minister, Lord Palmerston, believed that the navy was falling behind the French. His systems of evolution, practised on a small scale, and then tried at sea, were meant to train the officers of the fleet to understand the limitations of their equipment, and ensure that they could execute the relatively simple manoeuvres required in battle with speed and precision. He held this post for three years, and in that time effected a major reform of naval discipline. Many of the ships of his fleet were manned by 'bounty' men and were bordering on mutiny. Martin none the less made the fleet into an excellent fighting force. His insistence on obedience was not always agreeable to captains and commanders, but if not loved, he was feared, and the work was done. 
On 28 June 1861 Martin was made KCB, and on 14 November 1863 became an admiral; on the death of his cousin, Sir Henry Martin, third baronet, he succeeded to the baronetcy on 4 December 1863. From 1866 to 1869 he was commander-in-chief at Plymouth. In April 1870 he was retired under the scheme introduced by Hugh Childers. On 24 May 1873 he was made a GCB, and in September 1878 appointed rear-admiral of the United Kingdom. In 1879 he published a small pamphlet, 'Cyprus as a Naval Station and a Place of Arms', an exposition of Mediterranean strategy. In his later years he resided mainly at Upton Grey, near Winchfield, Hampshire, and he died there on 24 March 1895. 
After a career made by his father, and from whom he took his politics, his professional ideas, and much else, Martin proved a worthy beneficiary of his rapid advancement. Although a bitter partisan of the tory party Martin was a thorough professional, who earned the respect of all who served with him. One of the most important flag officers of the era, he was a critical architect of the thoroughly professional service. 


@@@@@


doc= 18223


Martindale, Adam (1623-1686), nonconformist minister, was born in September 1623 at High Heyes, Windle, in Prescot parish, Lancashire, and baptized at Prescot parish church on 21 September, the youngest child among the four sons and two daughters of Henry Martindale ('c'.1578-1658), yeoman, and his wife, Jilian or Julia Dombill (died 1632). 
In January 1630 Martindale attended the free school at St Helens. His own account, found in 'The life of Adam Martindale written by himself', composed towards the end of his life, presents a picture of a somewhat haphazard education under the tutelage of incompetent teachers and the companionship of boys less able than himself. Subsequently he studied under a former schoolmaster from the school at Winwick. In retrospect, Martindale found him equally unsatisfactory -- 'he was a very silly and unconstant man, always making new laws, in-so-much that if a boy had beene absent a day or two, he knew not how to behave himself for feare of transgressing some new ridiculous order or other' (Martindale, 13). Martindale later attended schools at Rainford and received tuition from various other schoolmasters. By mid-1639 he had acquired sufficient education for him to consider Oxford. However, 'the university was not so readie for me; warres being coming on, that soone after turned Oxford... into a garrison, and many scholars into souldiers' (ibid., 28). 
After failing to gain university entrance, Martindale entered the household of one Mr Shevington of Booths in Eccles parish, as tutor to his children. In addition, he apparently undertook the duties of secretary until his dismissal at Christmas 1641. He returned to his father's house, and subsequently, for about three months, taught at a school at Holland in Wigan parish. He recorded this as an unsuccessful experience owing to a shortage of pupils 'in those days of constant alarms', his lodgings among papists, drunkards, and quartered soldiers, and his reputation as a 'roundhead' which he could not 'cleare myself from... by swearing and debaucherie but would have been quiet and meddled on no side' (Martindale, 34-5). There followed a period of schoolteaching in Rainford. About this time Martindale heard a sermon preached at St Helens by Mr Smith, presumably Timothy Smith, minister of Rainford Chapel in Prescot parish, who was later described by the Commonwealth church survey of Lancashire in 1650 as 'an orthodox preaching minister' (Fishwick, 79). This sermon influenced Martindale greatly, and he seems to have experienced a conversion: 'I was rouzed to purpose and this proved a sharp needle, drawing after a silken thread of comfort in due season, so as if I may, without presumption, lay claim to a work of grace' (Martindale, 36). 
Martindale found teaching unprofitable, and turned instead to employment as clerk to Colonel John Moore, MP for Liverpool and governor of the parliamentarian garrison in 1644. Having again failed to prosper, he became clerk to a foot regiment, where his literacy enabled him to assist the quartermaster. The army gave him the opportunity of discussion with devout puritans, who read scripture and prayed together. About this time he took the solemn league and covenant with the rest of his regiment. There he continued until Liverpool was taken by Prince Rupert in June 1644, which led to his imprisonment for about nine weeks and the loss of most of his possessions. On release he became schoolmaster at the free school at Over Whitley in Great Budworth parish, Cheshire. There he embarked on an impressive programme of self-education, and resolved to enter Oxford or Cambridge University should the opportunity present itself. Martindale's determination to defend his rights led to his steadfast refusal to provide free education to a family who had been born in another parish. This in turn led to an argument during which he and the father came to blows. Martindale stayed at Over Whitley until April 1646, when, being of the age for ordination, he accepted an invitation to Gorton Chapel in the parish of Manchester, having apparently gained preaching experience at Middleton and St Helens. 
The move to Gorton gave Martindale the opportunity to observe the lively debate over church government between the presbyterians Richard Hollinworth of Manchester, John Harrison of Ashton under Lyne, and Thomas Johnson of Stockport and the Independents Samuel Eaton and Timothy Taylor, ministers of Duckinfield Chapel in Stockport parish. Martindale was reluctant to accept the Scottish model of presbyterianism advocated by such men as Hollinworth, Harrison, and John Tilsley, minister of Deane, Lancashire. He disapproved of the Independent gathered churches, considering them harmful to the common good, as was 'the preaching of gifted brethren not intending the ministrie' (Martindale, 66). He was, however, firmly of the opinion that the doctrine and liturgy of the English church would benefit from a thorough reformation. In Manchester on 31 December 1646 Martindale married Elizabeth ('b'. 1620/21, died in or after 1686), second daughter of John Hall of the Clock-House, Droylsden, and his wife, Elizabeth Low, who had in 1626 married James Jollie. Elizabeth Martindale was therefore half-sister to the future nonconformist ministers Thomas Jollie and John Jollie. The Martindales had four sons and four daughters born between 1648 and 1665. 
Towards the end of 1646 or at the beginning of 1647, Martindale approached the veteran puritan minister John Angier with a view to ordination by the newly formed Manchester classis. At a meeting of the classis on 4 March, Martindale presented himself for examination for ordination. The classis signified its approval of him, but -- since Angier was deputed to ask the reason for Martindale's non-attendance for ordination -- it appears that he had last-minute doubts. Meanwhile his work at Gorton was apparently attracting attention. During 1647 and 1648 Martindale was invited by six parishes in Yorkshire and five in Cheshire to leave Gorton and minister to them. One such was the large Cheshire parish of Rostherne, the living there being vacant following the death of the incumbent, William Shenton, in September 1647. However, some of the parishioners, 'thinking themselves undervalued, and not liking a man of my kidney' (Martindale, 78), attempted to block Martindale's appointment by enlisting the help of the patron, Peter Venables, Baron Kinderton, who had served in the royalist armies. The Manchester classis was informed that Martindale's appointment was not universally popular, and on 21 November 1648 it agreed to delay his ordination until the parish sanctioned the appointment. Martindale and his supporters retaliated by petitioning the committee for plundered ministers, who on 26 March 1649 appointed him to the parish. Again in June and July 1649, Martindale's supporters and opponents made their various views known to the classis. Impatient of the delay, Martindale signified that he would no longer trouble the Manchester classis with his ordination. He travelled to London, where he was examined and ordained by the eighth London classis on 25 July 1649. While in London he obtained a licence to publish his tract 'Divinity Knots Unloosed', written 'for the strengthening of the younger sorts of christians of our parish' (ibid., 85-6), in which he examined the nature of scripture and exact doctrine in the light of the antinomianism and anabaptism, which, he feared, were rife in Rostherne and surrounding parishes. 
In 1650 Martindale took part in a debate, conducted at a meeting of ministers at Warrington, as to the legality of taking the engagement to the Commonwealth government. Biblical precedent was searched for an answer to a question that deeply troubled Martindale. Could he, in all conscience, take the engagement? Should ministers pay allegiance to usurpers? The question continued to exercise him until 'A Discourse Concerning the Engagement, or, The Northern Subscribers Plea' was published later in 1650. This treatise 'by a friend to the commonwealth' examined arguments for and against the engagement and concluded that, being far from the centre of influence and action, and lacking information, ministers should in conscience subscribe and thereby defuse a potentially dangerous situation. These arguments appear to have reassured Martindale, and when called on to subscribe, he did so, although the matter continued to trouble him. 
From his appointment to Rostherne parish in 1649 until his ejection in 1662, Martindale tackled his duties as parish minister with an enthusiasm not always appreciated by his parishioners. Not only did he attend to the normal parish duties, but he preached regularly in the parish, and also in its chapels. In addition, he attended and preached on the exercise circuits in Cheshire, Staffordshire, and Lancashire. 
In common with his presbyterian colleagues in Lancashire and Cheshire, Martindale showed a willingness to shoulder an impressive workload in the effort to bring godly reformation to the church. A direct challenge to this ambition was posed by alternative strands of puritan ideology. Both Martindale and his fellow presbyterian Henry Newcome, then minister of Gawsworth, east Cheshire, left accounts of the activities of the followers of Samuel Eaton of Duckinfield Chapel. Eaton was respected as a godly minister, episcopally ordained and formerly rector of West Kirby, on the Wirrall. However, the practice of lay preaching among his followers was not welcomed, particularly when carried on in the parish regarded by Martindale as his own preserve. The latter entered into public debate with those Independents who were frequently preaching at Tabley Chapel in the parish, with little success. The lay preachers were as determined to pursue their course as Martindale was to prevent it. In an attempt to counter the Independent threat, Martindale preached at Tabley, where he 'answered all the material arguments I had met with for the preaching of gifted men, not intending the ministry, showed the irregularity of such men's thrusting their sickle into my harvest' (Martindale, 107) and asked that such intruders be discouraged. 
As a result of these differing notions as to doctrine, the dissemination of radical ideas by the army, and the growing influence of the Quakers, Martindale published 'An Antidote Against the Poyson of the Times' (1653), a catechism intended to provide his parishioners with a clear account of orthodox doctrine. As a defence against rising sectarian activity, a number of ministers met at the exercise day in Knutsford on 20 October 1653 when it was agreed to form the voluntary association of Cheshire. Martindale subscribed to the association, which was drawn up along the lines proposed by Richard Baxter's model of the Worcestershire association. In the Cheshire association ministers had no power over each other's parishes. The rules and conditions were advisory rather than compulsory. Interpretation of the conditions as to parish discipline and the appointment of elders seem to have been left to the discretion of the individual minister. To Martindale 'these termes were approved as rationall and moderate by many, onely the proud, the grossely ignorant, (especially if ancient) and the scandalous liked not these termes' (Martindale, 114). Although Martindale referred to this association as the classis, it had none of the organization or authority of the formally convened Lancashire classes. Cheshire men seeking ordination had to request the authority of the Manchester classis or that of Wirksworth (Derbyshire) or Bridgnorth (Shropshire) classes to give them legitimacy. 
In the summer of 1655 Martindale entered into public debate on Knutsford Heath with the Quaker missionary Richard Hubberthorne, a formidable opponent from an area of growing Quaker strength. In contrast to the ill-thought-out and irrational argument that he had encountered in other public debates with radical sectarians, Hubberthorne was, Martindale found, 'the most rationall calme-spirited man of his judgment that I ever publicly engaged against' (Martindale, 115). The rising influence of the Quakers in the north-west led the Lancashire presbyterians and Independents to form the Accommodation of Ministers in 1659. Although the Cheshire ministers did not subscribe to the accommodation, Martindale bemoaned the fact that there had not been more attempt to reach agreement in preceding years, particularly in the debate between presbyterians and Independents that he had witnessed at Gorton in 1646. 
The late 1650s were a period of uncertainty for presbyterians in the north-west. The ill-fated Cheshire rising on behalf of Charles II led by Sir George Booth in September 1659 implicated many of the presbyterian clergy. Apparently Martindale was aware of plans for Booth's rising, and sympathetic to its aims, but he did not join it, although he considered reasons for and against so doing. In later years, and perhaps with the benefit of hindsight, he wrote that although he had feared that supporting a restoration of the monarchy would result in his ejection from his ministry, such a risk was an improvement on the uncertain political climate and insecure government that prevailed. When the monarchy was restored in May 1660 Martindale welcomed it, 'that I might be freed from the yoke of usurpers' (Martindale, 143), and despotism thwarted. 
As Martindale's appointment at Rostherne had been occasioned by the death of the previous incumbent, the 'Act for Settling Ministers' confirmed his appointment as vicar. Following the Fifth Monarchist rising in January 1661, Martindale was ordered to read orders for the suppression of conventicles to the congregation. By dint of searching the text for loopholes, he persuaded himself that he need not comply. On 25 February he appeared before the justices, where he was 'secured as a countenancer of seditious meetings' ('CSP dom.', '1660-61', 515). He was imprisoned at Chester, but released upon a bond of $1000 before 30 April 1661, when Henry Newcome wrote to Richard Baxter: 'Blessed be God Mr. Martindale is a freeman now, and returns you hearty thanks for your kindness to him' (Keeble and Nuttall, 2.14). 
Martindale welcomed the Restoration, but deplored the return of traditional custom and ritual. When on 1 May 1660 local youths set up a maypole, he preached that 'many learned men were of the opinion that a May-pole was a relique of the shamefull worship of the Strumpet Flora in Rome' (Martindale, 157). To reinforce his message he invited Thomas Brooke, minister of Congleton, to preach. Elizabeth Martindale solved the problem in a more practical manner when one night, assisted by some women friends, she took a saw to the maypole. 
The winter of 1661-2 saw Martindale once more in trouble. He was indicted for refusing to read the 'Book of Common Prayer', but he appears to have avoided punishment by proving that although he had not read it, he had not refused to do so because no copy of the book had been supplied to the church, the churchwarden having neglected this responsibility. It was a short reprieve, for on 29 August 1662 he was deprived of his living by the bishop of Chester under the 'Act of Uniformity', having conducted his last services twelve days earlier. 
After ejection Martindale moved, with his family, to a house at Camp Green, not far from the vicarage. He returned to teaching and taking in scholars, which with income from other sources allowed him sufficient income to support his family. In the early days he formed the habit of hearing the sermons of Benjamin Crosse, his successor as vicar. These he would repeat to sympathetic supporters, adding a discourse of his own. He began to fear that he would be prevented from taking in scholars, following an anti-nonconformist sermon preached by the bishop of Chester at nearby Bowden. He therefore considered a change of career. He was encouraged to learn physic, but prudently decided, 'the time would be long, practice uncertaine, and above all, the lives of men were not to be jested with' (Martindale, 175). He decided on the study of mathematics, encouraged and helped by Lord Delamere (the former Sir George Booth), who subsequently presented him to the school at Warrington. 
In 1665, following the passing of the 'Five Mile Act', Martindale moved his family to Birkenheath, in Rostherne parish, while he went to Manchester to teach mathematics at the grammar school. In 1668 he published 'The Description of a Plain Instrument', in which he described the uses of a scientific instrument designed for geometric and navigational measurement. In August 1668 Henry Newcome learned that 'certificates from the bishop were issued' ('Calamy rev.', 343) against Martindale and Edmund Jones, formerly minister of Eccles parish in Lancashire, for preaching at Gorton. Martindale may have been referring to this when he recorded being brought before the sessions of the peace in the late 1660s. On this occasion he had a good advocate, and the jury returned a verdict of not guilty. 
About 1670 Martindale was invited to be private chaplain to Lord Delamere at Dunham Massey, an appointment that lasted until Delamere's death in August 1684. Under the declaration of indulgence of 1672 he was licensed to be a presbyterian teacher at the house of Henry Peacock at Rostherne. Following the retraction of the declaration he continued as chaplain to Delamere, in 1674 moving his family to Millington to bring them nearer to Dunham. About this time he wrote 'The Country Almanack', three editions of which were published in 1675 and 1677. 
Throughout the period from ejection until his death, Martindale travelled widely to meet sympathetic and like-minded friends, on several occasions visiting Hoghton Tower, Lancashire, where dissenting clergy frequently met under the patronage of Sir Charles Hoghton. The 1670s and the 1680s were in large part overshadowed by his worries regarding his children, only four of whom had survived infancy. In 1673 his eldest daughter, Elizabeth ('b'. 1648), died. His eldest son, Thomas ('b'. 1649), whose extravagant lifestyle in London had been a severe worry to his father, died in 1680. The youngest daughter, Hannah ('b'. 1665), was struck down by a crippling illness. In May 1681 the surviving members of the family moved to Hough Heath in Mere, where Martindale wrote his 'Country Survey Book' (1682). In Calamy's 'Account of the Ministers' he 'appears to have been a judicious divine, by a little book which he published relating to the Arminian controversy intitled 'Truth and Peace Promoted' (1682)' (Calamy, 'Abridgement', 2.135). In May 1684 the family moved for the final time, to Leigh in Rostherne parish, to a tenement that Martindale had purchased in 1655 as a home for his wife and family should he predecease them, the rents from which had supplied some of his income since ejection. 
Martindale was imprisoned at Chester in June and July 1685 on the groundless suspicion of involvement in Monmouth's rebellion. Later in 1685 he was involved in litigation as a witness in a civil action. He died at Leigh in September 1686 and was buried at Rostherne on 21 September. Thomas Jollie recorded that: 'the loss of soe faithfull a brother must needs bee grevious to mee and the rather becaus his day was not soe cleer in the evening thereof as might bee desired, he dyed in the close of his great climatericall year (63) which is accounted most dangerous, I dout he had too deep apprehensions thereof. (Jolly, 78-9)' He was survived by his wife and two daughters, Martha ('b'. 1657) and Hannah. The 'Life' was edited from a manuscript in the British Museum and published in 1845. 


@@@@@


doc= 18224


Martindale, Miles (1756-1824), Methodist minister, son of Paul Martindale, who emigrated to the West Indies, was born at Moss Bank, near St Helens, Lancashire. He had only a slender education but taught himself French, Latin, and Greek, the last in order to read the 'New Testament' in the original. When quite young he had a vivid mystical experience; he was then influenced by Voltaire and Rousseau and became an agnostic, but by 1780 was attracted to Methodism. In 1776 he moved to Liverpool and in the following year married Margaret King (died 1845). From 1786 to 1789 he was a local preacher in the Wirral, where he found the people to be 'the most ignorant he ever laboured among'. From 1789 until 1816 he served as an itinerant Methodist preacher, being chairman of the Newcastle and York districts. In that year he was appointed governor of Woodhouse Grove School near Bradford, founded in 1811 as the Methodists' second boarding-school. In this position he was astute and effective, a matter acknowledged by the Wesleyan conference. He was a pioneer in the teaching of English language. Beside sermons, Martindale published an elegy on the death of Wesley (1791) and a 'Dictionary of the Holy Bible' (1810), and translated from French works by John Fletcher and Abbe Besplas. 
Martindale died of cholera on 6 August 1824, while attending the Wesleyan conference at Leeds. He was survived by his wife, who died in 1845, and their three daughters: Sophia, who married the Revd John Farrar, a noted Wesleyan theologian; Margaret, who married the Revd James Brownell; and Maria, who became matron of Wesley College, Sheffield. 


